CHARACTER
ANALYSIS

THIRD, ENLARGED EDITION

‘WILHELM REICH

NEWLY TRANSLATED BY
VINCENT R. CARFAGNO

EDITED BY
MARY HIGGINS AND
CHESTER M. RAPHAEL, M.D.

 
CHARACTER
ANALYSIS

THIRD, ENLARGED EDITION

WILHELM REICH

NEWLY TRANSLATED BY
VINCENT R. CARFAGNO

EDITED BY
MARY HIGGINS AND
CHESTER M. RAPHAEL, M.D.

o
=
 


The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your personal

use  only.  You  may  not  make  this  e-book  publicly  available  in  any  way.

Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy of this

e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify

the publisher at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.                                  Contents






                                      Title Page

                                  Copyright Notice

                                        Epigraph

                                      Editor’s Note

                            Preface to the Third Edition

                            Preface to the Second Edition

                              Preface to the First Edition



                            PART ONE: TECHNIQUE


              I. SOME PROBLEMS OF PSYCHOANALYTIC TECHNIQUE


      II. THE ECONOMIC VIEWPOINT IN THE THEORY OF ANALYTIC THERAPY


  III. ON THE TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION AND OF RESISTANCE ANALYSIS

      1. Some typical errors in the technique of interpretation and their

                                      consequences

              2. Systematic interpretation and resistance analysis

                      3. Consistency in resistance analysis


                IV. ON THE TECHNIQUE OF CHARACTER ANALYSIS

                                    1. Introduction                2. Character armoring and character resistance

                    a) The inability to follow the basic rule

              b) Where do the character resistances come from?

          c) On the technique of analyzing the character resistance

d) The technique of dealing with individual situations as derived from the

                        structure of the character resistance

          e) The breaking down of the narcissistic defense apparatus

  f) On the optimal conditions for the analytic reduction to the infantile

                    situation from the contemporary situation

      g) Character analysis in the case of abundantly flowing material

                    3. A case of passive-feminine character

                                    a) Anamnesis

        b) The development and analysis of the character resistance

    c) Linking the analysis of the contemporary material to the infantile

                                      4. Summary


            V. INDICATIONS AND DANGERS OF CHARACTER ANALYSIS


                  VI. ON THE HANDLING OF THE TRANSFERENCE

                  1. The distillation of the genital-object libido

  2. Secondary narcissism, negative transference, and insight into illness

                    3. On the handling of the abstinence rule

    4. On the question of the “dissolution” of the positive transference

                  5. A few remarks about counter-transference



      PART TWO: THEORY OF CHARACTER FORMATION


VII. THE CHARACTEROLOGICAL RESOLUTION OF THE INFANTILE SEXUAL CONFLICT

                    1. Content and form of psychic reactions                      2. The function of character formation

                    3. Conditions of character differentiation


        VIII. THE GENITAL CHARACTER AND THE NEUROTIC CHARACTER

                          1. Character and sexual stasis

  2. The libido-economic difference between the genital character and the

                                  neurotic character

                                a) Structure of the id

                            b) Structure of the superego

                                c) Structure of the ego

        3. Sublimation, reaction formation, and neurotic reaction basis


              IX. CHILDHOOD PHOBIA AND CHARACTER FORMATION

                          1. An “aristocratic” character

2. Overcoming of childhood phobia by the formation of character attitudes


                  X. SOME CIRCUMSCRIBED CHARACTER FORMS

                            1. The hysterical character

                            2. The compulsive character

                        3. The phallic-narcissistic character


                          XI. THE MASOCHISTIC CHARACTER

                                1. Summary of views

                  2. The armoring of the masochistic character

        3. Inhibited exhibitionism and the passion for self-deprecation

4. Unpleasurable perception of the increase of sexual excitation: the specific

                        basis of the masochistic character

                  5. Observations on the therapy of masochism


XII. SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE BASIC CONFLICT BETWEEN NEED AND OUTER                                        WORLD



      PART THREE: FROM PSYCHOANALYSIS TO ORGONE

                                      BIOPHYSICS


                XIII. PSYCHIC CONTACT AND VEGETATIVE CURRENT

                                        Preface

        1. More about the conflict between instinct and outer world

                        2. Some technical presuppositions

                    3. The change of function of the impulse

                        4. The intellect as defense function

                  5. The interlacing of the instinctual defenses

                                  6. Contactlessness

                                7. Substitute contact

                  8. The psychic representation of the organic

                              a) The idea of “bursting”

                              b) On the idea of death

                9. Pleasure, anxiety, anger, and muscular armor

                        10. The two great leaps in evolution


                  XIV. THE EXPRESSIVE LANGUAGE OF THE LIVING

                  1. The function of emotion in orgone therapy

        2. Plasmatic expressive movement and emotional expression

                  3. The segmental arrangement of the armor

4. The emotional expression of the orgasm reflex and sexual superimposition


                            XV. THE SCHIZOPHRENIC SPLIT

                  1. The “devil” in the schizophrenic process

                                    2. The “forces”              3. The remote schizophrenic expression in the eyes

4. The breakthrough of the depersonalization and first understanding of the

                                  schizophrenic split

        5. The interdependence of consciousness and self-perception

                  6. The rational function of the “devilish evil”

                  7. Anorgonotic regions in the catatonic state

                8. The function of self-damage in schizophrenia

                                9. Crisis and recovery


                            XVI. THE EMOTIONAL PLAGUE



                                          Notes

                                          Index

                                  By Wilhelm Reich

                                      Copyright 


      Love, work and knowledge are the wellsprings of our life. They should also govern it.

                                      WILHELM REICH                        EDITOR’S NOTE






This new translation of the third, enlarged edition of Character Analysis has

been prepared from the original German language book and manuscripts with

the exception of the preface to the third edition and the chapter on “The

Schizophrenic Split” which were written in English by the author.

  It was discovered that, except for a few minor changes, the note preceding

“The Masochistic Character” that was previously signed by a translator was,

in fact, written by Reich himself. It is, therefore, presented in its original form

in this translation.

  It should also be noted that the chapter entitled “The Emotional Plague,”

written  in  1943  and  slightly  revised  by  Reich  before  its  inclusion  in

Character  Analysis,  has  been  placed  at  the  end  of  the  book  so  that  its

terminology will be comprehensible within the context of this work and, also,

to enable the reader to follow without interruption Reich’s development from

character analysis to orgone biophysics.


                                                                Mary Higgins, Trustee

The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund

New York, 1972            PREFACE TO THE THIRD


                                  EDITION






The second edition of this book (1945) was soon sold out, and the great

demand for it could not be satisfied for more than two years. Our press was

busy with publications devoted to the newer field of orgone biophysics (The

Discovery  of  the  Orgone,  Vol.  II: The  Cancer  Biopathy,  1948,  etc.).

Furthermore, I hesitated to issue a new edition of Character Analysis. This

book still uses psychoanalytic terminology and a psychological description of

the neuroses. In the fifteen years since the publication of the first edition, I

had to redesign and rewrite our picture of emotional disease. During this

time, many important developments took place: “character” became a term

signifying  typical biophysical  behavior.  The  “emotions,”  more  and  more,

came  to  mean  manifestations  of  a  tangible bio-energy,  of  the  organismic

orgone energy. Slowly, we learned to handle it practically by what is now

called  “medical  orgone  therapy.”  In  the  preface  to  the  second  edition,  I

pointed  out  that  “character  analysis”  is  still  valid  in  the  realm  of  depth

psychology,  where  it  originated  and  where  it  still  belongs.  We  no  longer

practice character analysis as described in this book. However, we still use

the  character-analytic  method  in  certain  situations;  we  still  proceed  from

character attitudes to the depths of human experience. But in orgone therapy,

we proceed bio-energetically and no longer psychologically.

  Why then publish a third edition of this book, in its original form? The

main reason is that one cannot easily find one’s way toward an understandingof orgonomy and medical orgone therapy without being well acquainted with

their development from the study of human emotional pathology of twenty or

twenty-five years ago.

    Character analysis is still valid and helpful in psychiatry, but it is far from

being sufficient to cope with the bio-energetic core of emotional functions. It

is indispensable for the medical orgone therapist who, without having studied

psychoanalysis,  comes  directly  to  the  orgone  biophysics  of  the  40’s.  The

psychiatrist who has not studied the bio-energetic functions of the emotions is

apt to overlook the organism as such and to remain stuck in the psychology

of  words  and  associations.  He  will  not  find  his  way  to  the bio-energetic

background and origin of every type of emotion. The orgone therapist, on the

other hand, trained to see a patient first of all as a biological organism, may

easily forget that, besides muscular armoring, bodily sensations, orgonotic

streamings, anorgonotic attacks, diaphragmatic or pelvic blocks, etc., there is

a vast field of functioning such as marital distrust, specifically distorted ideas

about genital functions in puberty, certain social insecurities and anxieties,

unconscious  intentions,  rational  social  fears,  etc.  Although  the  “psychic

realm” of the emotions is much narrower than their “bio-energetic realm”;

although certain diseases, such as vascular hypertension, cannot be attacked

by psychological means; although language and thought association cannot

possibly penetrate more deeply than to the phase of speech development, that

is,  about  the  second  year  of  life,  the  psychological  aspect  of  emotional

disease remains important and indispensable; however, it is no longer the

foremost aspect of orgonomic biopsychiatry.

  The third edition of Character Analysis has been considerably enlarged. I

have added “The Emotional Plague,” previously published as an article in the

International Journal of Sex-Economy and Orgone Research, 1945. Also, a

paper on “The Expressive Language of the Living,” not previously published.

It deals with the realm of biophysical emotional expressions, the main realm

of medical orgone therapy. Finally, an extensive case history of a paranoidschizophrenia will introduce the student of human nature to the new field of

biopathology which was opened up only a few years ago by the discovery of

the organismic orgone energy (= bio-energy). This case history will convince

the reader that the organismic orgone energy is the physical reality which

corresponds  to  the  classical,  merely  psychological,  concept  of  “psychic

energy.”

  The old term “vegetotherapy” has been replaced by “orgone therapy.”

Otherwise, the book remains unchanged in its main structure. It represents the

essential first step, taken from 1928 to 1934, from psychoanalysis toward the

bio-energetic study of the emotions (orgone biophysics) and deserves to be

preserved as such.

  The  discovery  of  the  atmospheric  (cosmic)  orgone  energy  has  forced

major  revisions  in  our  basic  physical  as  well  as  psychological  concepts.

These are not dealt with in this book. It will take many years of painstaking

work to elucidate the main trends which have developed since the discovery

of the orgone. Such things as a “psychic idea,” for example, appear today in

an  entirely  different  light,  as  a  result  of  disclosures  made  by  orgonomic

experiments.  But  this  should  not  distract  the  psychotherapist  and  orgone

therapist from his everyday task with emotionally sick people. At present, it

is  mainly  the  natural  scientist  and  the  natural  philosopher  who  are  being

challenged by the disclosure of a universal primordial energy: orgone energy.

                                                                                    W. R.

December 1948        PREFACE TO THE SECOND


                                  EDITION






In  the  twelve  years  since  the  first  publication  of Character Analysis,  the

character-analytic  technique  has  developed  into  vegetotherapy.  In  spite  of

this, no changes have been undertaken in the present edition. There is a good

reason for this.

  The  character-analytic  technique  was  clinically  worked  out  and  tested

between 1925 and 1933. At that time, sex-economy was still in its infancy.

The individual and social importance of the function of the orgasm had been

recognized  only  a  few  years  earlier.  Naturally,  this  recognition  had

considerable  influence  on  the  theory  and  technique  of  psychoanalytic

therapy. Today, as twelve years ago, character analysis definitely belongs

within the framework of Freudian psychoanalysis. It was in this framework

and only in this framework that this book was written and can still claim

validity  today.  It  was  intended  for  students  as  well  as  practitioners  of

psychoanalysis. I do not want to change its original purpose and intention.

Hence, I have not added anything, nor have I made any revisions.

  Yet,  as  time  went  on,  the  analytic  conception  of  the  human  character

structure,  particularly  the  pathologically  and  therapeutically  so  important

“character armor,”  continued  to  develop.  Character  armor  represents  the

point of departure of present-day orgone biophysics and of the therapeutic

techniques corresponding to it, vegetotherapy and orgone therapy, the basic

features of which are set forth in Vol. I of my book The Discovery of theOrgone,  1942,  and  in  various  essays  dealings  specifically  with  orgone

physics. It is interesting and important for every psychiatrist to comprehend

how  the  original  psychiatric  problem  of  the  encrustation  of  the  human

character  opened  the  road  to  biologic  energy  and  biopathies.  Orgone

biophysics did not refute the character-analytic contentions set forth in this

book.  Quite  the  contrary,  it  provided  them  with  a  solid  natural  scientific

foundation.

  The appendix to the present edition of Character Analysis contains the

last paper I delivered to the International Psychoanalytic Association at the

13th Congress in Lucerne, 1934. This paper represents the transition from

Freud’s  depth  psychology  to  biology  and  then  to  orgone  biophysics.  The

problems of the orgone are not dealt with in this book. However, the reader

who is familiar with my later writings will have no difficulty in discovering

those  passages  in  which  orgone  biophysics  picks  up  the  thread  of  the

problems of character structure. Through the insertion of footnotes, I have

attempted to point out those passages in which we find the transition from

depth psychology to orgone biophysics.

  The burden of drawing the line of demarcation which led to the exclusion

of sex-economy and the theory of the orgasm from official psychoanalysis

lies with those members of the International Psychoanalytic Association who

were  responsible  for  my  expulsion.  Later,  they  began  to  feel  pricks  of

conscience and tried to make it appear as if I had been the one who had

detached  my  theories  from  psychoanalysis.  However,  this  much  must  be

made  quite  clear  here:  sex-economy  never  sought  to  detach  itself  from

Freud’s basic scientific findings. It was false  social considerations, which

have become meaningless as a result of the social revolutions of the past ten

years, that caused the psychoanalytic movement to detach itself from sex-

economy.  Sex-economy  is  not  a  rival  of  psychoanalysis  any  more  than

Newton’s  law  of  gravitation  is  a  rival  of  Kepler’s  law  of  harmony.  Sex-

economy  represents  the  continuation  of  Freudian  psychoanalysis  andprovides it with a natural scientific foundation in the sphere of biophysics and

social sexology. Today, it is sex-economy which can claim the success of

having led to the discovery of the biologic energy, orgone, which, governed

by definite physical laws, lies at the basis of the human sexual functions first

described by Freud. The “biopathies” which orgone biophysics was able to

detect in the organic sphere are the correlate of Freud’s “psychoneuroses” in

the psychological sphere.

    Summing up, I should like to say that “character analysis” is still valid

within  the  theoretical  frame  of  reference  of  depth  psychology  and  the

psychotherapeutic techniques which pertain to it. It is also still valid as an

indispensable auxiliary technique in vegetotherapy and orgone therapy. But

as  time  goes  on,  we  continue  to  move  forward:  the  sex-economist  and

vegetotherapist  is  essentially  a biotherapist,  and  no  longer  merely  a

psychotherapist.

                                                                                    W. R.

New York

November 1944PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION






The psychoanalytic investigations of the human character which I am setting

forth  in  this  book  tie  in  with  the  problems  of  the  Vienna  Psychoanalytic

Clinic which, nine years ago, I attempted to outline in the introduction to my

book Der triebhafte Charakter, without, however, offering even a tentative

solution. Those familiar with psychoanalytic research will not be surprised

that well-nigh a decade has had to elapse between the formulation of the

problem and its partial solution. When I suddenly undertook to treat several

impulsive psychopaths at the clinic, I was immediately faced with a number

of therapeutic problems. To be sure, the insights into the impulsive type’s

fragmentary  ego-structure  were  more  or  less  adequate  to  cope  with  these

problems. Yet, it was possible even then to surmise that a genetic-dynamic

theory of the character, a rigid differentiation between the actual content and

the form of the resistances with which the “personality” attempts to thwart

the exposure of what is repressed, and a well-founded examination of the

genetic  differentiation  of  character  types  would  be  of  importance  for  the

theory and therapy of the instinct-inhibited character neuroses which, at that

time, I contrasted to the impulsive character neuroses.

  The  explanations  of  therapeutic  technique  and  the  dynamic-economic

conception of the character as a totality are, in the main, the fruits of my vast

experiences  and  countless  discussions  in  the  Seminar  for  Psychoanalytic

Therapy at the Vienna Psychoanalytic Clinic. I was the head of this seminar

for a period of six years, during which I enjoyed the active cooperation of a

number of enthusiastic young colleagues. Even now, however, I must cautionthe reader to expect neither a complete elucidation of the problems under

consideration nor their complete solution. Today, as nine years ago, we are

still  a  long  way  from  a  comprehensive,  systematic  psychoanalytic

characterology. Yet, in all modesty, I feel that the present volume is no mean

contribution toward this end.

  The chapters on technique were written in the winter of 1928–29, and

their validity could be verified over a period of four years. There were no

essential changes to be made. The chapters on theory, up to Chapter III (Part

II), are enlarged, in part revised, reprints of papers of mine which, over the

past  years,  have  appeared  in  the Internationalen  Zeitschrift  für

Psychoanalyse.

  For a number of reasons, one of them being lack of time, I was not able to

comply with the wishes of my colleagues, who wanted me to write a book

dealing with all phases of analytic technique. In this regard, I had to confine

myself  to  a  description  and  substantiation  of  the  principles  of  technique

which follow from character analysis. Besides, the analytic technique cannot

be learned from books—practical application is vastly too complicated for

that. One becomes intimate with it only through a thorough study of cases in

seminars and in monitored sessions.

  However, we shall have to deal more thoroughly with a serious criticism

(an obvious one which is to be expected from a certain quarter), for on first

impression  it  gives  one  pause  for  thought  and  makes  one  question  the

necessity of the effort and expenditure involved in such a publication as this

one.  It  runs  as  follows:  doesn’t  this  publication  as  such  constitute  an

extravagant  and  one-sided  overvaluation  of  individual  psychotherapy  and

characterology? In a city the size of Berlin, there are millions of neurotic

people, people whose psychic structure and capacity for work and pleasure

have been severely impaired; every hour of every day fresh thousands of

neuroses are produced by family education and social conditions. In view of

the present lack of interest in such matters, is there any point in printingdetailed material on individual analytic technique, relations between various

psychic  structures,  character  dynamics,  and  similar  matters?  And  this

question is all the more pointed in view of the fact that I have no immediately

applicable  advice  for  a  mass  therapy  of  neuroses,  for  short,  certain,  and

quickly effective treatments. For a long time I myself was not able to shake

off the strong impression of such an objection. Finally, I had to tell myself

that this was a shortsighted standpoint—in the long run, even worse than the

present-day obsession with questions of individual psychotherapy. From a

social point of view, the position of individual psychotherapy is a hopeless

one.  It  might  even  be  regarded  as  a  typical  dialectical  ruse  that  it  was

precisely  this  insight,  i.e.,  that  neuroses  are  socially  produced  on  a  mass

scale, which led to an even more thorough, even more intensive concern with

the problems of individual therapy. I have endeavored to demonstrate that

neuroses are the results of a home atmosphere that is patriarchal and sexually

suppressive;  that,  moreover,  the  only prophylaxis  worthy  of  serious

consideration is one for the practical implementation of which the present

social system lacks every prerequisite; that it is only a thorough turnover of

social institutions and ideologies, a turnover that will be dependent upon the

outcome  of  the  political  struggles  of  our  century,  which  will  create  the

preconditions for an extensive prophylaxis of neuroses. Hence, it is clear that

a  prophylaxis  of  neuroses  is  out  of  the  question  unless  it  is  prepared

theoretically; in short, that the study of the dynamic and economic conditions

of human structures is its most important prerequisite. What does this have to

do  with  the  technique  of  individual  therapy?  To  make  a  study  of  human

structures in a way that would have relevance for the prophylaxis of neuroses,

it is first necessary to perfect our analytic technique. It will be shown in the

course of the present work to what extent the existing technical knowledge

cannot fulfill such a purpose. Hence, the chief concern of psychotherapy,

insofar as it wants to prepare itself for the future tasks of the prevention of

neuroses, must be to derive a theory of technique and therapy based on thedynamic and economic processes of the psychic mechanism. First of all, we

need  therapists  who  know  why  they  were  able  to  effect  a  change  in  a

structure or can explain why they failed. When we undertake to combat an

epidemic in any other branch of medicine, we use the best available methods

to investigate and to understand typical individual cases of this epidemic in

order  then  to  be  able  to  offer  advice  on  social  hygiene.  Thus,  we  are

concerned with the technique of individual analysis not because we have such

a high regard for individual therapy, but because, without a good technique,

we cannot gain the insights which we need for the more comprehensive goal

of research on the human structure.

  There is a further consideration, and it constitutes the general background

of the following clinical investigations. Let us briefly sketch it at this point.

Unlike other branches of medical science, we do not deal with bacteria or

tumors  but  with  human  reactions  and  psychic  illnesses.  An  offspring  of

medical science, psychoanalysis has developed far beyond it. If, according to

a  famous  saying,  man  is  the  author  of  his  own  history,  depending  upon

                                                                                          1
certain  economic  conditions  and  presuppositions;  if  the  materialistic

conception  of  history  does  indeed  proceed  from  the  basic  premise  of

sociology, the natural and psychic organization of man, then it is clear that, at

a certain point, our research assumes decisive sociological importance. We

study psychic structures, their economy and dynamics. The most important

productive power, the productive power called working power, is dependent

upon man’s psychic structure. Neither the so-called “subjective factor” of

history  nor  the  productive  power,  working  power,  can  be  comprehended

without  a  natural  scientific  psychology.  This  requires  a  detachment  from

those  psychoanalytic  concepts  which  explain  culture  and  the  history  of

human society on the basis of drives, instead of understanding that social

conditions must first have impinged upon and changed human needs before

these transformed drives and needs could begin to have an effect as historical

factors.  The  most  famous  of  today’s  characterologists  endeavor  tocomprehend the world on the basis of “values” and “character,” instead of

vice versa: to deduce character and valuations from the social process.

  In the broader scope of the question concerning the sociological function

of character formation, we have to focus our attention on a fact which, while

it  is  known  well  enough,  is  hardly  understood  in  its  details,  namely  that

certain average human structures are native to certain social organizations.

Or, to put it another way, every social organization produces those character

structures which it needs to exist. In class society, the existing ruling class

secures  its  position,  with  the  help  of  education  and  the  institution  of  the

family, by making its ideologies the ruling ideologies of all members of the

society. However, it is not solely a matter of implanting the ideologies in all

members  of  the  society.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  indoctrinating  attitudes  and

opinions but of a far-reaching process in every new generation of a given

society,  the  purpose  of  which  is  to  effect  a  change  in  and  mold  psychic

structures (and this in all layers of the population) in conformity with the

social order. Hence, natural scientific psychology and characterology have a

clearly  defined  task:  they  have  to  put  their  finger  on  the  ways  and

mechanisms  by  means  of  which  man’s  social  entity  is  transformed  into

psychic structure and, thereby, into ideology. Thus, the social production of

ideologies has to be differentiated from the reproduction of these ideologies

in the people of a given society. While the investigation of the former is the

task of sociology and economics, the ascertaining of the latter is the task of

psychoanalysis. It has to study how not only the immediate material existence

(nourishment, shelter, clothing, work process, i.e., the way of life and the way

in  which  needs  are  gratified)  but  also  the  so-called  social  superstructure

(morality, laws, and institutions) affect the instinctual apparatus. It has to

determine, as completely as possible, the myriad intermediate links in the

transforming of the “material basis” into the “ideologic superstructure.” It

cannot  be  immaterial  to  sociology  whether  psychology  fulfills  this  task

adequately and to what extent it fulfills it, for man is, first and foremost, theobject  of  his  needs  and  of  the  social  organization  which  regulates  the

gratification of his needs in this or that way. In his position as the object of

his needs, however, man is also and at the same time the subject of history

and of the social process of which he “himself is the author,” not, to be sure,

exactly  as  he  would  like  to  be,  but  under  definite  economic  and  cultural

presuppositions, which determine the content and outcome of human action.

  Since  society  became  divided  into  those  who  possess  the  means  of

production  and  those  who  possess  the  commodity,  working  power,  every

social order has been established by the former, at least independent of the

wills and minds of the latter, indeed usually against their wills. However, in

that this social order begins to mold the psychic structures of all members of

the society, it reproduces itself in the people. And insofar as this takes place

through the utilization and transformation of the instinctual apparatus, which

is governed by the libidinal needs, it also affectively anchors itself in it. Ever

since the beginning of the private ownership of the means of production, the

first and most important organ for the reproduction of the social order has

been  the  patriarchal  family,  which  lays  in  its  children  the  character

groundwork for the later influencing by the authoritarian order. While, on the

one hand, the family represents the primary reproduction organ of character

structures, the insight into the role of sexual education in the educational

system  as  a  whole  teaches  us  that,  first  and  foremost,  they  are libidinal

interests  and  energies  which  are  employed  in  the  anchoring  of  the

authoritarian social order. Hence, the character structures of the people of a

given epoch or of a given social system are not only a mirror of this system.

More  significantly,  they  represent  its  anchoring.  In  the  course  of  an

investigation  of  the  change  in  sexual  morality  during  the  transition  from

                            2
matriarchy to patriarchy, it was possible to demonstrate that this anchoring

by means of adapting the structures of people’s characters to the new social

order constitutes the conservative nature of so-called “tradition.”

  It is in this anchoring of the social order in the character structure that wefind the explanation of the toleration on the part of the suppressed layers of

the population toward the ruler-ship of an upper social class that has the

means of power at its disposal, a toleration that sometimes goes so far as to

affirm authoritarian suppression at the expense of its own interests. This is far

more obvious in the sphere of sexual suppression than it is in the sphere of

the  material  and  cultural  gratification  of  needs.  And  yet,  precisely  in  the

formation of the libidinal structure, it can be demonstrated that, coeval with

the anchoring of a social order, which completely or partially obstructs the

gratification  of  one’s  needs,  the  psychic  preconditions  begin  to  develop

which undermine this anchoring in the character structure. As time goes on,

an ever widening divergency springs up between forced renunciation and the

increased strain on one’s needs. This divergency takes place along with the

development of the social process, and it has a disintegrating effect upon

“tradition”; it constitutes the psychological core of the formation of mental

attitudes that undermine this anchoring.

  It would be wrong to equate the conservative element of the character

structure of the men and women of our society with the arbiter which we call

the “superego.” While it is certainly true that a person’s moralistic arbiters

derive  from  the  definite  prohibitions  of  the  society,  of  which  the  parents

function as the chief representatives in life, it is equally true that the first

changes in the ego and the instincts, changes that occur during the earliest

frustrations  and  identifications,  long  before  the  superego  is  formed,  are

dictated by the economic structure of the society and represent the initial

reproductions and anchorings of the social system, in the same way as they

begin  to  develop  the  first  contradictions.  (If  a  child  develops  an  anal

character, he will be sure to develop a corresponding stubbornness at the

same time.) The superego receives its special importance for this anchoring in

that it groups itself in the core around the child’s incestuous genital demands;

it  is  here  that  the  best  energies  are  bound  and  that  the  formation  of  the

character is determined.  The dependence of the character formation upon the historical-economic

situation  in  which  it  takes  place  is  most  clearly  shown  in  the  changes

exhibited by the members of primitive societies as soon as they fall under the

influence of an alien economy or culture, or begin to develop a new social

order on their own accord. It follows quite clearly from Malinowski’s studies

that the character distinctions change relatively rapidly in the same region

when the social structure is changed. For example, he found the natives of the

Amphlett Islands (South Sea) to be distrustful, shy, and hostile, as opposed to

the neighboring Trobrianders, whom he found to be simple, frank, and open.

The former were already living under a patriarchal social system with strict

familial  and  sexual  mores,  whereas  the  latter  were  still  to  a  large  extent

enjoying the freedom of matriarchy. These findings confirm the conception,

                                                                                          3
formulated at the Vienna Psychoanalytic Clinic and developed elsewhere,

that  the  social  and  economic  structure  of  a  society  impinges  upon  the

character  formation  of  its  members  in  an  indirect,  very  complicated,

circuitous way. The society’s socioeconomic structure dictates definite modes

of  familial  life,  but  these  modes  not  only  presuppose  definite  forms  of

sexuality; they also produce them inasmuch as they influence the instinctual

life of the child and adolescent, from which changed attitudes and modes of

reaction result. At this point we can extend our earlier statement about the

reproduction  and  anchoring  of  the  social  system,  and  say: the  character

structure is the congealed sociological process of a given epoch. A society’s

ideologies can become a material force only on condition that they actually

change the character structures of the people. Hence, research on character

structure is not of clinical interest only. It can reveal essential material if we

turn to the question of why ideologies undergo revolutionary changes at a

much slower pace than the socioeconomic basis, i.e., why man usually lags

far  behind  that  which  he  produces  and  which  should  and  could  actually

change  him.  In  addition  to  the  hindrance  to  participation  in  cultural

enjoyment due to class, we have the fact that character structures are acquiredin early childhood and remain intact, without undergoing many changes. On

the other hand, the socioeconomic situation that formed their basis at one

time changes rapidly with the development of the forces of production, later

makes different demands and requires other kinds of adaptations. To be sure,

it also creates new attitudes and modes of reaction that superimpose on and

penetrate  the  old,  earlier-acquired  characteristics,  without,  however,

eliminating  them.  These  two  sets  of  characteristics,  which  correspond  to

different,  historically  differentiated  sociological  situations,  now  become

involved in a contradiction with one another. Let me cite an example by way

of illustration. A woman reared in the family of 1900 develops a mode of

reaction  corresponding  to  the  socioeconomic  situation  of  1900;  by  1925,

however, as a result of the process of economic distintegration brought about

by capitalism, familial conditions have changed to such a degree that she

becomes  involved  in  a  critical  contradiction,  despite  a  partial  surface

adaptation  of  her  personality.  For  instance,  her  character  requires  a  strict

monogamous sexual life; in the meantime, however, monogamy has become

socially  and  ideologically  disintegrated.  Intellectually,  the  woman  can  no

longer require monogamy of herself or her husband; in terms of her structure,

however,  she  is  not  equal  to  the  new  conditions  and  the  demands  of  her

intellect.

  Similar questions arise when one follows the difficulties involved in the

transformation of privately owned farms into the collective cultivation of the

soil in the Soviet Union. The Soviet economy has had to wrestle not only

with economic difficulties but also with the character structure which the

Russian  peasant  acquired  under  the  tsars  and  private  enterprise.  The  role

played  in  these  difficulties  by  the  dissolution  of  the  family  through  the

collectives and, above all, through the revolutionary change in sexuality can

be roughly understood from the literature on this subject. The old structures

not only lag behind; they struggle against the new in many different ways. If

the old ideology or orientation which corresponds to an earlier sociologicalsituation were not anchored in the structure of the instincts or, more properly

speaking, in the structure of the character, as a chronic and automatic mode

of reaction and, in addition, with the help of libidinal energy, it would be able

to adapt to the economic revolutions more easily and much more rapidly. No

detailed proof is needed to show that an exact knowledge of the mechanisms

that mediate between economic situation, instinctual life, character formation,

and ideology would make possible a number of practical measures, above all

in the field of education, but perhaps even in the manner of mass influencing.

  All  these  things  still  have  to  be  worked  out.  But  the  science  of

psychoanalysis cannot demand to be practically and theoretically recognized

on a social scale if it itself does not get control of those fields which belong to

it and in which it can prove that it does not want to remain outside the great

historical events of our century. For the time being, research in the field of

characterology must persist in its clinical investigations. Perhaps the material

set forth in Part II will reveal of itself where the transitions lie to the more

comprehensive sociological questions. Elsewhere an attempt has already been

made  to  pursue  these  questions  briefly.  They  led  to  an  unexpected  field,

which we will not enter into in this work.

                                                                                    W. R.

Berlin

January 1933                                PART ONE


                                Technique                                    CHAPTER I





    SOME PROBLEMS OF PSYCHOANALYTIC


                                  TECHNIQUE




In  the  practice  of  his  profession,  the  analyst  is  daily  confronted  with

problems,  for  whose  solution  neither  theoretical  knowledge  nor  practical

experience alone is adequate. It can be said that all questions of technique

cluster around the one essential question, namely whether and how a clearly

defined  technique  of  analytic  treatment  can  be  deduced  from  the

psychoanalytic theory of psychic illness. It is the question of the possibilities

and limits of the application of theory to practice. However, in view of the

fact that analytic practice itself does not yield the theory of psychic processes

until practical tasks have been set, we have, to proceed correctly, to seek out

the avenues which lead from purely empirical practice, pass through theory,

and terminate in a theoretically well-grounded practice. Vast experience in

the Vienna Seminar for Psychoanalytic Therapy and in monitored analytic

sessions has shown that we have hardly progressed beyond the preliminary

work toward the solution of the problem sketched above. It is true that we

have the basic material, the so-called ABC of analytic technique, in Freud’s

various  essays  and  his  scattered  remarks  on  the  subject;  and  the  very

informative works on technique by Ferenczi and other writers have increased

our  understanding  of  many  individual  problems  of  technique.  Generally

speaking, however, there are just as many techniques as there are analysts,

notwithstanding  Freud’s  commonly  shared,  partially  positive  and  partially

negative suggestions, which are few compared with the welter of questionscentered on practice.

  These generally valid principles of technique which have become a matter

of  course  among  analysts  are  deduced  from  the  general  basic  theoretical

concepts  of  the  neurotic  process.  All  neuroses  can  be  traced  back  to  the

conflict  between  repressed  instinctual  demands—among  which  the  sexual

demands of early childhood are never missing—and the ego forces which

ward them off. The result of the failure to resolve this conflict is the neurotic

symptom or the neurotic character trait. In terms of technique, therefore, the

resolution of the conflict necessitates the “elimination of the repression”; in

other  words,  the  making  conscious  of  the  unconscious  conflict.  But  the

psychic  agency  known  as  the  preconscious  has  erected  psychic  “counter-

cathexes”  against  the  breakthrough  of  repressed,  unconscious  impulses,

“counter-cathexes” which act as a strict censor of one’s own thoughts and

desires by preventing them from becoming conscious; so it is necessary in

analytic  treatment  to  dispense  with  the  usual  ordering  of  one’s  thoughts

required in everyday thinking and to allow one’s train of ideas to flow freely

and without critical selection. In the course of analytic work, traces of one’s

unconscious  repressed  demands  and  childhood  experiences  stand  out  ever

more clearly amid the emerging material and, with the help of the analyst,

these traces have to be translated into the language of the conscious. The so-

called  basic  rule  of  psychoanalysis,  which  requires  that  the  censor  be

abolished and one’s thoughts be allowed to “associate freely,” is the strictest,

most indispensable measure of analytic technique. It finds a powerful support

in the force of the unconscious impulses and desires pressing toward action

and consciousness; however, it is opposed by another force, which is also

unconscious, namely the “counter-cathexis” of the ego. This force makes it

difficult and sometimes impossible for the patient to follow this basic rule.

This same force also feeds the neurosis through the moralistic agencies. In

the  analytic  treatment,  these  forces  show  up  as  “resistances”  to  the

elimination of the repression. This theoretical insight dictates a further rule ofpractice,  namely  that  the  making  conscious  of  the  unconscious  must  not

proceed directly but by the breaking down of the resistances. This means the

patient has to realize that he is resisting, then by what means, and finally

against what.

  The work of making the unconscious conscious is called “interpretation”;

it consists either in the unveiling of veiled expressions of the unconscious or

in  the  reestablishment  of  relations  which  were  torn  asunder  by  the

repressions. The patient’s unconscious and repressed desires and fears are

constantly seeking release or, more precisely, contact with real persons and

situations. The most important driving force of this behavior is the patient’s

ungratified  libido.  Hence,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  he  will  relate  his

unconscious demands and fears to the analyst and the analytic situation. This

results in the “transference,” i.e., the establishment of relationships to the

analyst which are prompted by hate, love, or fear. But these attitudes which

are  expressed  toward  the  analyst  in  the  analytic  situation  are  merely

repetitions of older, usually childish attitudes toward people of the patient’s

childhood who had a special importance for him at one time. The patient has

no  awareness  of  their  meaning.  These  transferences  must  be  principally

handled as such, i.e., they must be “resolved” by discovering how they are

related to the patient’s childhood. Since every neurosis, without exception,

can be traced back to conflicts of childhood prior to the fourth year of life,

conflicts which could not be handled at that time but become resuscitated in

the transference, the analysis of the transference, i.e., that part of it which

deals  with  the  breaking  down  of  the  resistances,  constitutes  the  most

important piece of analytic work. Since, moreover, in the transference the

patient either tries to supplant the explanatory work of the analysis, e.g., by

gratifying  the  old  love  demands  and  hate  impulses  which  have  remained

unsatisfied, or refuses to take cognizance of these attitudes, the transference

usually  develops  into  a  resistance,  i.e.,  it  impedes  the  progress  of  the

treatment. The negative transferences, i.e., the attitudes expressive of hatewhich are projected upon the analyst, are easily recognized as resistances

from the beginning, whereas the transference of positive attitudes of love

becomes  a  resistance  only  through  a  sudden  change  into  a  negative

transference as a consequence of disappointment or fear.

  Only as long as analytic therapy and technique were not discussed at any

great length, or were insufficiently and unsystematically discussed, could the

view prevail that a technique practiced by everyone in the same way had

developed from the common basis sketched above. This view was true of

many  individual  questions;  but  in  the  comprehension  of  the  concept  of

“analytic passivity,” for instance, the most varied interpretations exist. The

most extreme and surely the least correct is the view that one need merely be

silent; everything else will follow of itself. Confused views prevailed and still

prevail on the function of the analyst in the analytic treatment. It is generally

known, to be sure, that he has to break down the resistances and to “manage”

the transference, but how and when this is to take place, how diverse his

approach has to be in the handling of this task in various cases and situations,

was never systematically discussed. Hence, even in the simplest questions

dealing with everyday analytic situations, the views are of necessity vastly

divergent. When, for instance, a certain resistance situation is described, one

analyst thinks that this, another that that, and a third that the other should be

done. And when, then, the analyst who described the situation returns to his

case  with  the  various  suggestions  of  his  colleagues,  countless  other

possibilities arise, and the confusion is often much greater than it was in the

first place. And yet it is to be assumed that, under given circumstances and

conditions, a definite analytic situation admits of only one single, optimal

possibility of solution, that there is only one application of technique that can

really  be  correct  in  any  given  case.  This  applies  not  only  to  a  particular

situation; it applies to analytic technique as a whole. Hence, the task is to

establish the criteria of this correct technique and, above all, how one arrives

at it.  It took a long time to realize what is important: to allow the technique of a

given situation to grow out of the specific analytic situation itself by an exact

analysis of its details. This method of developing the analytic technique was

strictly adhered to at the Vienna seminar, and it proved successful in many

cases—in  all  cases  where  a  theoretical  comprehension  of  the  analytic

situation was possible. Suggestions which, in the final analysis, were a matter

of  taste,  were  avoided.  A  given  difficulty  was  discussed—for  example,  a

resistance situation—until the measure necessary to deal with it emerged of

itself from the discussion, in a clear and definite form. Then one had the

feeling that it could be correct only in this way and in no other way. Thus, a

method had been found which made it possible to apply analytic material to

the analytic technique, if not in every case, then at least in many cases and—

above all—fundamentally. Our technique is not a principle that rests upon

firmly  fixed  practices  but  a  method  built  upon  certain  basic  theoretical

principles; as for the rest, it can be determined in the individual case and in

the individual situation only. One might say that the making conscious of all

manifestations of the unconscious through interpretations is a basic principle.

But does this imply that this unconscious material has to be immediately

interpreted as soon as it begins to show itself with some degree of clarity?

That all transference manifestations are to be traced back to their infantile

source is another basic principle. But does this tell us at what point and how

this  is  to  take  place?  The  analyst  is  faced  with  negative  and  positive

transferences  at  one  and  the  same  time;  fundamentally,  both  have  to  be

“resolved.” But isn’t one justified in asking what is to be resolved first and in

what sequence, and which conditions are decisive for determining this? In

this connection, is it sufficient to say that there are indications of ambivalent

transference?

  Against the attempt to deduce from the particular situation as a whole the

sequence,  emphasis,  and  depth  of  the  interpretations  necessary  in  each

individual  case,  it  would  be  easy  to  contend:  interpret  everything  as  itappears. To this contention, we reply: when countless experiences and the

subsequent  theoretical  assessment  of  these  experiences  teach  us  that  the

interpretation of the entire material in this way and in the sequence in which

it appears does not, in a very large number of cases, achieve the purpose of

interpretation, namely therapeutic influencing, then it becomes necessary to

search for the conditions that determine the therapeutic effectiveness of an

interpretation. These are different in every case, and even if, from the point of

view of technique, some basic general principles applicable to interpretation

are yielded, they do not signify that much as compared with the supreme

principle,  namely  that  the  analyst  must  endeavor  to  wrest  the  special

technique of the case and the individual situation from each individual case

and  from  each  individual  situation,  without,  while  so  doing,  losing  the

general continuity in the development of the analytic process. Suggestions

and views such as that this or that has “to be analyzed,” or it is simply “a

matter of analyzing correctly,” are matters of taste; they are not principles of

technique.  What  is  precisely  meant  by  “analyze”  usually  remains  a  dark

secret. Nor can the analyst seek consolation by trusting to the duration of the

treatment.  Time  alone  will  not  do  it.  Having  faith  in  the  duration  of  the

treatment is meaningful only when the analysis is developing, i.e., when the

analyst understands the resistances and can pursue the analysis accordingly.

Then, naturally, time is not and cannot be a factor. But it is absurd to expect

that a success can be achieved merely by waiting.

  We shall have to show how important the correct comprehension and

handling of the first transference resistance is for the natural development of

the  treatment.  It  is  not  immaterial  which  detail  and  which  layer  of  the

transference neurosis is approached for the first time in the work of analysis,

whether the analyst selects this or that piece from the wealth of material

offered by the patient, whether the analyst interprets the unconscious material

that has become manifest or the resistance pertaining to it, etc. If the analyst

interprets the material in the sequence in which it is offered, he proceedsupon the preconceived notion that “material” is always capable of being used

analytically,  i.e.,  that  all  material  is  therapeutically  effective.  In  this

connection,  however,  it  is  its  dynamic  value  that  is  most  important.  The

prime objective of my efforts to secure a theory of technique and therapy is to

establish  general  as  well  as  particular  points  of  view  for  the legitimate

application  of  material  to  the  technical  handling  of  the  case;  to  secure  a

theory,  in  other  words,  which  will  enable  the  analyst  to  know,  in  each

interpretation, precisely why and toward what end he is interpreting—and not

merely to interpret. If the analyst interprets the material in the sequence in

which it appears in each case, whether or not the patient is deceiving, using

the material as a camouflage, concealing an attitude of hate, laughing up his

sleeve, is emotionally blocked, etc., he (the analyst) will be sure to run into

hopeless  situations.  Proceeding  in  such  a  way,  the  analyst  is  caught  in  a

scheme  which  is  imposed  on  all  cases,  without  regard  to  the individual

requirements of the case with respect to the timing and depth of the necessary

interpretations. Only by strict adherence to the rule of deducing the technique

from every situation can the analyst begin to meet the demand that he be able

to state, in each and every case, exactly why he succeeded or failed to effect a

cure. If the analyst cannot, at least in the average case, satisfy this demand, no

proof is necessary to show that our therapy does not deserve the name of a

scientific causal therapy. However, in explaining the reasons for the failure of

a particular case, the analyst must avoid statements such as that the patient

“did  not  want  to  get  well,”  or  he  or  she  was  not  accessible;  for  this  is

precisely what we want to know: why didn’t the patient want to get well, why

wasn’t he or she accessible.

  No attempt shall be made to establish a “system” of technique. It is not a

matter  of  outlining  a  scheme  valid  for  all  cases  but  of  establishing  a

groundwork, based on our theory of neurosis, for the comprehension of our

therapeutic  tasks;  in  short,  to  trace  a  broad  frame  of  reference  allowing

sufficient latitude for the application of the general groundwork to individualcases.

  I have nothing to add to Freud’s principles on the interpretation of the

unconscious and his general formula that the analytic work depends on the

elimination of the resistances and the handling of the transference. However,

the following explication must be regarded as a consistent application of the

basic  principles  of  psychoanalysis,  in  the  course  of  which  new  areas  of

analytic work are opened. If our patients adhered to the basic rules at least

roughly, there would be no reason to write a book on character analysis.

Unfortunately,  only  a  very  small  fraction  of  our  patients  are  capable  of

analysis from the outset; most patients adhere to the basic rule only after the

resistances  have  been  successfully  loosened.  Hence,  we  shall  concern

ourselves merely with the initial phases of the treatment up to the point at

which the course of the analysis can be confidently left to the patient. The

first  problem  is  “to  teach  the  patient  to  be  analyzed.”  The  second  is  the

termination  of  analysis,  the  problem  of  resolving  the  transference  and  of

teaching the patient to deal with reality. The middle part, the body of the

analysis, as it were, will be of interest to us only insofar as it follows from the

initial phase of the treatment and leads to its termination.

  Before we begin, however, a brief theoretical consideration of the libido-

economic basis of analytic therapy is called for.                                    CHAPTER II





THE ECONOMIC VIEWPOINT IN THE THEORY


                    OF ANALYTIC THERAPY




When Freud moved away from the position of cathartic therapy, gave up

hypnosis as a device of analysis, and assumed the standpoint that what the

patient was able to tell the analyst while asleep could also be communicated

while awake, he tried for a time to make the patient aware of the unconscious

meaning of the symptoms by direct interpretation of the traces of repressed

elements. It wasn’t long before he discovered that this method was dependent

upon  the  readiness  on  the  part  of  the  patient  to  accept  what  the  analyst

pointed out. He divined that the patient put up a “resistance,” which was

usually  unconscious,  to  the  analyst’s  statements.  Thus,  he  adapted  his

technique to the new knowledge, i.e., he dispensed with direct interpretation

and attempted, from then on, to enable the unconscious to become conscious

by eliminating the resistances directed against the repressed elements.

  This  fundamental  change  in  the  theoretic  conception  and  technique  of

analytic  therapy  was  a  turning  point  in  its  history,  which  marked  the

beginning of the newer, still valid technique. This was never understood by

those students who turned away from Freud; even Rank returned to the old

method  of  direct  symptom  interpretation.  In  the  present  work,  we  have

merely applied the new technique of dealing with resistances to the analysis

of the character, entirely in keeping with the development of analytic therapy

from symptom analysis to the analysis of the personality as a whole.

    Whereas, in the period of cathartic therapy, the idea existed that it wasnecessary “to liberate the strangulated affect from repression” to bring about

the  disappearance  of  the  symptom,  it  was  later  stated,  in  the  period  of

resistance  analysis  (this  was  perhaps  a  carry-over  from  the  direct

interpretation  of  the  symptom’s  meaning)  that  the  symptom  would of

necessity disappear when the repressed idea upon which it rested had been

made  conscious.  Then,  when  it  turned  out  that  this  thesis  was  untenable,

when it was repeatedly observed that symptoms, despite the consciousness of

their  formerly  repressed  contents,  often  continued  to  exist,  Freud,  in  a

discussion at a meeting of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society, changed the

first formula to read that the symptom might disappear when its unconscious

content had become conscious but that it did not have to disappear.

  Now one was confronted by a new and difficult problem. If becoming

conscious, by itself, was not enough to effect a cure, what other factors were

necessary to cause the symptom to disappear; what further conditions decided

whether becoming conscious would lead to a cure or not? Hence, the making

conscious of the repressed contents remained the indispensable precondition

of cure; it did not, however, specifically account for it. Once this question

had been posed, it was immediately joined by another, namely whether those

opponents of psychoanalysis were right, after all, who had always exhorted

that analysis had to be followed by “synthesis.” However, closer examination

showed quite clearly that this exhortation was but a hollow phrase. At the

Budapest Congress, Freud himself completely refuted it by pointing out that

analysis and synthesis went hand in hand, since every drive which is set free

from  one  relationship  immediately  forms  another  relationship.  Was  this

perhaps a key to the solution of the problem? Which drives and which new

relationships were we dealing with? Doesn’t it make any difference what

kind of libido structure the patient has when he leaves the analysis? As an

analyst, one has ceased to search for a godhead in psychotherapy and must

content  oneself  with  the  finding  of  a  solution  more  in  keeping  with  the

pretensions of the average man. Surely, all psychotherapy suffers from thefact  that  the  primitive-biological  and  the  sociological  bases  of  all  the  so-

called  higher  aspirations  have  been  neglected.  The  way  out  was  again

indicated by Freud’s inexhaustible libido theory, which in many cases had

been more than neglected in recent years of analytic research. But there were

still too many questions all at once. For the sake of brevity, we shall arrange

them according to metapsychological points of view.

    Topographically, the problem could not be solved. Such an attempt would

only have proved inadequate: the mere translation of an unconscious idea into

consciousness is not enough to effect a cure. A solution from the dynamic

point of view was promising but likewise inadequate, notwithstanding the

                                                                                        1
fact that Ferenczi and Rank had made successful efforts in this connection. It

is true that the abreaction of the affect related to an unconscious idea almost

always alleviates the patient’s condition, but usually for a short time only. It

must be borne in mind that, apart from certain forms of hysteria, it is difficult

to  achieve  abreaction  in  the  concentrated  form  necessary  to  produce  the

desired result. Thus, only the economic point of view remained. It is quite

clear that the patient suffers from an inadequate, disturbed libido economy;

the  normal  biological  functions  of  his  or  her  sexuality  are  in  part

pathologically  distorted,  in  part  completely  negated—both  contrary  to  the

average healthy person. And surely the normal or abnormal functioning of

the libido economy is dependent upon the libido’s organization. Hence, one

must  be  able  to  make  a  functional  distinction  between  those  libido

organizations  which  enable  the  libido  economy  to  function  normally  and

those which disrupt it. Our later differentiation between two prototypes, the

“genital” character and the “neurotic” character, is an attempt to solve this

problem.

    Whereas,  however,  the  topographical  and  the  dynamic  points  of  view

were, from the outset, easy to handle in everyday practice (consciousness or

unconsciousness  of  an  idea,  intensity  of  the  affective  breakthrough  of  a

repressed element, etc.), it was not immediately clear how the economic pointof view could be applied in practice. We are dealing here of course with the

quantitative  factor  of  psychic  life,  with  the  amount  of  libido  which  is

dammed up or discharged. But how were we to tackle this quantitatively

determined  difficulty,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  in  psychoanalysis  we  deal

directly with qualities only? To begin with, we had to understand why we

were continually coming up against the quantitative factor in our theory of

neurosis  and  why  the  qualitative  factor  of  psychic  life  was  not,  in  itself,

sufficient to explain psychic phenomena. While experience and deliberation

on  the  problem  of  analytic  therapy  always  pointed  to  the  problem  of

quantities, an empirical solution turned up unexpectedly.

  We  learn  from  analytic  practice  that  some  cases,  notwithstanding

protracted  and  copious  analysis,  remain  refractory;  whereas  other  cases,

despite  incomplete  examination  of  the  unconscious,  can  achieve  lasting

                                                            2
practical recovery. In comparing these two groups, it turned out that, after

the analysis, the former cases, namely those which remained refractory or

readily relapsed, had not succeeded in establishing a regulated sexual life or

had continued to live in abstinence; whereas the latter, enabled to do so by a

partial analysis, quickly took up a lasting and satisfactory sexual life. In an

investigation of the prognosis of average cases, it was further shown that,

under otherwise equal conditions, the chances of cure were that much more

favorable  the  more  completely  genital  primacy  had  been  achieved  in

childhood and adolescence. Or, to put it another way, the cure was impeded

to the extent to which the libido had been withheld from the genital zone in

early childhood. The cases that proved to be more or less inaccessible were

those in which genital primacy had not been established at all in childhood,

the cases in which the activity of genitality had been restricted to anal, oral,

                        3
and urethral eroticism. However, in view of the fact that genitality proved to

have such prognostic importance, it seemed obvious to investigate in these

cases the evidence of genitality, their potency. It turned out that there were no

female patients whose vaginal potency was not disturbed and hardly any malepatients whose ejaculative or erective potency was not impaired. However,

the patients whose potency was intact in the usual sense, the small number of

erectively potent neurotics, were enough to erode the value of genitality for

the understanding of the economics of cure.

    Eventually,  one  had  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  it  doesn’t  make  any

difference whether erective potency exists; this fact tells us nothing about the

economy of the libido. What is important, evidently, is whether the capacity

to achieve adequate sexual gratification is intact. This is quite clearly not the

case in female patients suffering from vaginal anesthesia; here it is clear from

which source the symptoms derive their energy, and what sustains the libido

stasis, which is of course the specific energy source of the neurosis. The

economic concept of orgastic  impotence,  i.e.,  the  incapacity  to  achieve  a

resolution of sexual tension satisfactory to the libidinal demands, was first

derived  from  the  more  thorough  investigation  of  male  patients  having

erective  potency.  The  far-reaching  importance  of  genitality  or,  more

precisely, of orgastic impotence for the etiology of the neurosis was set forth

in my book The Function of the Orgasm. It wasn’t until its implications for

the theory of the actual neurosis were shown that the genital function became

theoretically important—for investigations of the character also. Suddenly it

was clear where the problem of quantity was to be sought: it could be nothing

other than the organic groundwork, the “somatic core of the neurosis,” the

actual neurosis which results from dammed-up libido. And, therefore, the

economic problem of the neurosis as well as its cure lay, to a large extent, in

the somatic sphere, i.e., was accessible only by way of the somatic content of

                    4
the libido concept.

  Now one was also in a better position to decide what other factors, apart

from the making conscious of the unconscious, were necessary to cause the

symptom  to  disappear.  It  is  only  the meaning  (ideational  content)  of  the

symptom  that  becomes  conscious.  In  terms  of  dynamics,  the  process  of

becoming conscious brings about a certain alleviation through the emotionaldischarge which goes hand in hand with it, and through the elimination of a

part of preconscious counter-cathexis. But these processes in themselves do

not effect very much of a change at the source of the energy of the symptom

or  neurotic  character  trait.  The  libido  stasis  remains,  notwithstanding  the

consciousness of the symptom’s meaning. The pressure of the high-strung

libido  can  be  partially  relieved  through  intensive  analytic  work,  but  the

overwhelming  majority  of  our  patients  require genital  sexual  gratification

(because the pregenital cannot produce an orgasm) for a permanent resolution

of sexual tension. It is only after this step, which is made possible by the

analysis, that an economic readjustment also takes place. At that time, I tried

to  formulate  this  conception  in  the  following  way:  by  removing  sexual

repressions,  the  analysis  creates  the  possibility  of  a spontaneous

organotherapy  of  neuroses.  Hence, the  ultimate  therapeutic  agent  is  an

organic process in the metabolic sexual economy, a process which is related

to  the  sexual  gratification  achieved  in  the  genital  orgasm  and,  with  the

elimination  of  the  actual  neurosis,  the  somatic  core,  also  erodes  the

groundwork of the psychoneurotic superstructure. At the outset, when the

neurosis begins to develop, an external inhibition (tangible fear), which then

becomes internalized, produces the libido stasis, which in turn imparts its

pathological energy to the experiences of the Oedipal stage and, perpetuated

as a consequence of sexual repression, keeps the psychoneurosis constantly

supplied with energy in a kind of cyclic motion. Therapy works in reverse

order in that it first breaks down the psychoneurosis by making conscious the

unconscious  inhibitions  and  fixations,  thus  opening  the  way  to  the

elimination of the libido stasis. Once this stasis has been eliminated, again in

a  kind  of  cycle,  the  repression  and  the  psychoneurosis  have  also  become

unnecessary, indeed impossible.

  Roughly  speaking,  this  is  the  concept  which,  in  the  book  mentioned

above,  I  developed  with  respect  to  the  role  of  the  somatic  core  of  the

neurosis.  From  this  concept,  a  larger  framework  and  a  clearly  definedtherapeutic  goal  ensue  for  the  technique  of  analysis:  the  establishment  of

genital primacy not only in theory but also in practice; that is to say, the

patient must, through analysis, arrive at a regulated and gratifying genital

life—if he is to be cured and permanently so. No matter how short of this

goal we may fall in some cases, it is, on the basis of our insights into the

dynamics of the libido stasis, the actual goal of our efforts. It is not without

danger to lay less stress upon the therapeutic demand for effective sexual

gratification as a goal than upon the demand for sublimation, if only because

the  ability  to  sublimate  is  still  an  ill-understood  endowment,  whereas  the

capacity  for  sexual  gratification,  even  if  significantly  restricted  by  social

factors, is on the average attainable through analysis. It is easily understood

that the shifting of the stress of the goal of the treatment from sublimation to

direct sexual gratification broadens considerably the sector of our therapeutic

possibilities. Yet it is precisely in this shifting that we encounter difficulties

of a social nature, difficulties that we cannot underestimate.

  However,  that  this  goal  is  not  achieved  by  means  of  instruction,

“synthesis,” or suggestion but solely through the thorough analysis of the

sexual inhibitions rooted in the character will have to be demonstrated in the

following discussions dealing with technique. But first let us make a few

comments on Nunberg’s conception of the task.

  In his book Allgemeine Neurosenlehre, Nunberg attempts to interpret the

theory of psychoanalytic therapy; we extract the most important of his views.

He is of the opinion that the “first therapeutic task is … to help the instincts

to  achieve  discharge  and  to  provide  them  with  access  to  consciousness.”

Nunberg  further  sees  an  important  task  “in  the  establishment  of  peace

between the two poles of the personality, the ego and the id, in the sense that

the  instincts  will  no  longer  lead  an  isolated  existence  shut  off  from  the

organization of the ego and that the ego will regain its synthesizing power.”

This,  even  if  incomplete,  is  essentially  correct.  But  Nunberg  is  also  the

exponent of the old view, proved erroneous by practical experience, that, inthe act of remembering, psychic energy is discharged, that it is, so to speak,

“detonated” in the act of becoming conscious. Thus, in the explanation of

cure from the point of view of dynamics, he draws the line at the becoming

conscious  of  what  is  repressed,  without  asking  whether  the  minimal

quantities of affect which are discharged in this process are also sufficient to

release  the  dammed-up  libido  in  its  entirety  and  to  balance  the  energy

economy. If, to counter this objection, Nunberg contended that in the course

of the many acts of becoming conscious the entire quantity of the dammed-up

energy is indeed disposed of, he could be confronted with a wealth of clinical

experiences which clearly indicate the following: only a small fraction of the

affect  attached  to  a  repressed  idea  is  unlocked  in  the  act  of  becoming

conscious; the far greater and more important part is soon after shifted to

another segment of unconscious activity if the affect is attached to the idea

itself; or a resolution of the affect does not take place at all if, for instance, it

is  absorbed  into  and  made  a  part  of  the  character.  In  such  a  case,  the

becoming  conscious  of  unconscious  material  remains  without  therapeutic

effect. In short, the dynamics of the cure can by no means be deduced solely

from the act of becoming conscious.

  This leads to another inevitable criticism of Nunberg’s formulations. He

writes that the repetition compulsion operates independent of the transference

and that it is based on the attractive force of repressed infantile ideas. This

would be correct if the repetition compulsion were a primary, irreducible

psychic datum. Clinical experience shows, however, that the great attractive

force  exercised  by  the  unconscious  and  infantile  ideas  derives  from  the

energy  of  the  unsatisfied  sexual  needs,  and  that  it  retains  its  compulsive

repetitive  character  only  as  long  as  the  possibility  of  mature  sexual

gratification  is  blocked.  In  short,  the  neurotic  repetition  compulsion  is

contingent on the libido’s economic situation. Seen from this perspective as

well as from the point of view to be encountered later in the formulations on

the  neurotic  and  genital  characters,  the  peace  between  ego  and  id  whichNunberg  is  justified  in  postulating  can  be  secured  only  on  a  given  sex-

economic  basis:  first,  through  the  supplanting  of  pregenital  strivings  by

genital  strivings;  second,  through  effective  gratification  of  the  genital

demands,  which,  in  turn,  would  solve  the  problem  of  the  permanent

elimination of stasis.

    Nunberg’s theoretical assumption leads to an attitude toward technique

which we cannot look upon as the proper analytic attitude. Nunberg claims

that the resistances should not be attacked directly; as he sees it, the positive

transference should be exploited by the analyst for the purpose of insinuating

himself into the patient’s ego, from which vantage point he should set about

their destruction. It is Nunberg’s contention that a relationship similar to the

one  existing  between  a  hypnotized  person  and  the  hypnotist  would  result

from  this.  “Since,  inside  the  ego,  the  analyst  is  surrounded  by  libido,  he

neutralizes to some extent the severity of the superego itself.” In this way, he

argues, the analyst becomes capable of bringing about the reconciliation of

the two cloven parts of the neurotic personality.

  In opposition to this, it is necessary to point out:

  a) It is precisely this “insinuation” into the ego that is therapeutically

dangerous  in  many  cases,  for  in  the  beginning,  as  will  be  thoroughly

elaborated later, there is no durable and genuine positive transference. In the

initial stages of the analysis, we are always dealing with narcissistic attitudes,

e.g., an infantile need for protection. In view of the fact that the reaction of

disappointment  is  stronger  than  the  positive  object-relationship,  this

narcissistic dependence can readily change into hate. Such an “insinuating

into” for the purpose of evading the resistances and “destroying” them from

“within”  constitutes  a  danger  inasmuch  as  the  resistances  could  become

disguised in this way. What is more important, the old condition (if not the

severest  reactions  of  disappointment)  will  be  reestablished  as  soon  as  the

weak object-relationship falls apart or is usurped by other transferences. It is

precisely through such procedures that we bring about the most severe, mostdevious,  and  least  controllable  manifestations  of  negative  transference.

Termination of the analysis by the patient or even suicide is very often the

result of such procedures. It is necessary to point out that incidents of suicide

are  especially  likely  when  the  establishment  of  an  artificially  positive,

hypnoidal attitude has succeeded all too well, whereas an open and clear

working through of the aggressive and narcissistic reactions, also borne by

positive  attitudes  of  course,  prevents  a  suicide  as  well  as  an  abrupt

termination of the analysis. This may sound paradoxical, but it mirrors the

workings of the psychic apparatus.

  b)  In  the  process  of  insinuating  oneself  into  the  positive  transference

(instead of allowing it to become crystallized out of its infantile fixations),

the danger arises of accepting superficial interpretations which can delude the

analyst as well as the patient about the true situation until, very often, it

becomes too late to correct. Unfortunately, a hypnotic relationship ensues of

its  own  accord  all  too  often;  it  should  be  unmasked  and  eliminated  as  a

resistance.

  c)  When  anxiety  subsides  at  the  beginning  of  treatment,  this  merely

attests to the fact that the patient has channeled a portion of his libido into the

transference—the  negative  transference  also—not  that  he  has  resolved

anxiety. To make analytic work possible, the analyst may, by some form of

reassurance,  have  to  relieve  anxieties  that  are  too  acute.  Apart  from  this,

however, it must be made clear to the patient that he can be cured only by

mobilizing the greatest possible quantity of aggression and anxiety.

  My  own  experiences  have  made  me  very  familiar  with  Nunberg’s

description of the typical course of an analytic treatment. I can only add that I

do my utmost to obviate such an imbroglio; indeed, it is precisely for this

reason  that  I  give  so  much  attention  to  the  technique  of  dealing  with

resistances  at  the  beginning  of  the  treatment.  The  following  is  the  most

frequent result of an analysis in which the negative transference has not been

worked  out  at  the  beginning  of  the  treatment  and  the  durability  of  thepatient’s positive transference has been falsely appraised:


    For a time, an undisturbed harmony exists between the patient and the analyst; indeed, the

  patient completely relies on the analyst, also on his interpretations, and, if it were possible,

  would rely on him in his recollections also. But the moment soon arrives at which this accord is

  disturbed.  As  we  already  mentioned,  the  deeper  the  analysis  proceeds,  the  stronger  the

  resistances become, and this is all the more the case as the original pathogenic situation is

  approached. Added to these difficulties, moreover, is the frustration that occurs inevitably at

  some point of the transference, for the patient’s personal demands upon the analyst cannot be

  satisfied.  Most  patients  react  to  this  frustration  by  slacking  off  in  the  analytic  work,  by

  enactment, i.e., they behave as they once did in analogous situations. This could be interpreted

to mean that they are expressing a certain activity; … on the contrary, they are evading it. At

  bottom, they behave passively toward it. In short, the repetition compulsion, which of course

  helps  to  bring  about  the  fixations,  also  governs,  in  the  transference  situation,  the  psychic

  utterances of what is repressed. Now the patient relegates a piece of active work to the analyst:

  the divination of what he wants but cannot express. As a rule, it is a matter of wanting to be

  loved. The actual omnipotence of the means of expression (which can also be mute) and the

  supposed omnipotence of the analyst are put to a crucial test. To some extent, the analyst is

  capable of unmasking these resistances; for the rest, he is hard put to know what the patient is

  trying to communicate. The conflict, which is no longer an internal one but one between the

  patient and the analyst, is thus brought to a head. The analysis threatens to go to pieces, i.e., the

  patient is faced with the choice of losing the analyst and his love or of again performing active

  work. [My italics, W.R.] If the transference is a durable one, i.e., if the patient is again in control

of a modicum of the object-libido which has already been loosened from the fixations, he is

  alarmed at the possibility of losing the analyst. A peculiar thing often occurs in such cases. Just

  when the analyst has given up hope of a favorable outcome of the analysis, has lost interest in

  the case, a wealth of material suddenly appears betokening a rapid conclusion of the analysis.

  (Nunberg: Allgemeine Neurosenlehre, p. 305)


  A determined, consistent, systematic resistance analysis does not succeed

in  all  cases.  Where  it  does  succeed,  such  hopelessness  is  not  part  of  the

analysis. Where it does not succeed, such a situation occurs quite frequently.

Uncertain of the outcome, we are forced, precisely because of it, to pay the

greatest attention to the technique of resistance analysis.                                  CHAPTER III





  ON THE TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION

                                                                            1
            AND OF RESISTANCE ANALYSIS





      (The Natural Development of the Transference


                                      Neurosis)




    1. SOME TYPICAL ERRORS IN THE TECHNIQUE OF

        INTERPRETATION AND THEIR CONSEQUENCES


In  analytic  work,  we  have  to  differentiate  two  parts:  the recovery  of  the

patient  and  his immunization  insofar  as  this  is  possible  in  the  course  of

treatment. The first task too falls into two parts: the preparatory work of the

introductory period and the actual healing process. True, this is merely an

artificial differentiation, for even the very first resistance interpretation has a

lot to do with the actual cure. But we do not allow ourselves to be deterred by

this. Even the preparations for a journey (to which Freud compared analysis)

have a lot to do with the journey itself—its success could depend upon them.

In  analysis,  at  any  rate,  everything  depends  upon  the  way  in  which  the

treatment is initiated. A case which is incorrectly or confusedly begun can be

salvaged only with difficulty—often not at all. Most cases offer the greatest

difficulties in the introductory period, whether they are “going well” or not. It

is  precisely  those  cases  in  which  the  introductory  period  proceeds  with

apparent  smoothness  that  later  offer  the  greatest  difficulties,  for  theuntrammeled course in the beginning complicates the timely recognition and

elimination  of  the  difficulties.  Errors  committed  during  the  introductory

period of the treatment become that much more difficult to eliminate, the

longer the treatment has progressed without their correction.

  What  is  the  nature  of  these  special  and  typical  difficulties  of  the

introductory period?

  Let us sketch, for the time being merely to gain a better orientation, the

goal toward which the analysis must advance from the introductory period.

Its aim is to reach the energy source of the symptoms and of the neurotic

character in order to set the healing process in motion. Obstructing this effort

are the patient’s resistances, the most tenacious of which are those which

derive  from  the  transference  conflicts.  They  have  to  be  made  conscious,

interpreted, and relinquished by the patient, i.e., their psychic value has to be

annulled.  Thus,  the  patient  penetrates  ever  deeper  into  the  affect-laden

remembrances of early childhood. For us, the widely discussed question of

what is more essential, affective reanimation (enactment) or remembering, is

of  no  importance.  Clinical  experience  confirms  Freud’s  dictate  that  the

patient  who  likes  to  reenact  what  he  has  experienced  not  only  must

understand what he enacts but also must remember affectively if he is to get

                                2
at the core of his conflicts. But I do not want to anticipate our program. I

mention this merely to avoid creating the impression that the analysis of the

resistances and transference constitutes the entire analytic effort. It must be

borne in mind that in this section we are dealing solely with the principles of

resistance technique.

  What  is  the  course  taken  by  many  of  our  cases  in  lieu  of  affective

remembering?

  There are the cases which fail to achieve a cure because, as a result of the

many heterogeneous transferences, the analyst is no longer able to keep track

of the welter of unearthed material. We call this a “chaotic situation” and find

that it is caused by certain errors in the technique of interpretation. Let us butthink of the many cases in which the negative transference is overlooked

because it is hidden behind manifest positive attitudes. And last but not least

let us consider those cases which, notwithstanding far-reaching recall work,

do not lead to a successful cure because their affect-paralysis is not accorded

sufficient attention or is not, at the very beginning, subjected to analysis.

  In contrast to these cases, which appear to be going well but actually end

chaotically, there are those which are “not going well,” i.e., do not come up

with any associations and oppose our efforts with passive resistance.

  If, now, I sketch some of my own gross failures, we shall soon recognize

that they can be traced back to typical errors. And the similarity of most of

these failures is indicative of typical errors that we make in the introductory

period, errors that can no longer be ascribed to the gross sins which beginners

are known to commit. We must not be disheartened by this, for, as Ferenczi

once said, every new experience costs us a case. What is important is to

recognize errors and to translate them into experience. It is no different in any

other branch of medicine; but let us leave extenuation and the concealment of

failures to our colleagues.

  In analysis, a patient who suffered from an inferiority complex and self-

consciousness  enacted  his  impotence  by  adopting  an  apathetic  attitude

(“What’s  the  use?”).  Instead  of  divining  the  nature  of  this  resistance,

clarifying  it,  and  making  conscious  the  deprecatory  tendency  concealed

behind it, I told him again and again that he did not want to cooperate and

had  no  desire  to  get  well.  I  was  not  entirely  unjustified  in  this,  but  the

analysis was not successful because I failed to probe further into his “not

wanting,” because I did not make an effort to understand the reasons for his

“not  being  able  to.”  Instead,  I  allowed  myself  to  be  trapped  into  futile

reproaches by my own inability. Every patient has the tendency to remain

sick, and I know that many analysts, when they themselves are not clear

about a particular case, simply accuse the patient of not wanting to get well,

without giving any further explanation. Such accusations should disappearfrom analytic practice altogether and be replaced by self-control. For this too

we must realize: a stagnation in an analysis which remains unclear is the fault

of the analyst.

  Another patient, in the course of three years of analysis, had recalled the

primal scene together with all material pertaining to it, but not once had there

been  any  loosening  of  his  affect-paralysis,  not  once  had  he  accused  the

analyst of those feelings which—however emotionless—he harbored toward

his father. He was not cured. I had not known how to elicit his repressed hate.

This example will make some people jubilant: finally it is admitted that the

unearthing of the primal scene is of no use therapeutically. Such people are

deceived. There is no real cure without analysis of the earliest experiences.

What is important is that the act of remembering be accompanied by the

affects pertaining to the remembered material.

  In still another case, it happened that in a dream during the second week

of treatment the incest fantasy appeared quite clearly and the patient himself

recognized its true meaning. For a whole year I heard nothing more about it;

consequently, there was no real success. However, I had learned that at times

material that is emerging too rapidly has to be suppressed until the ego is

strong enough to assimilate it.

  A case of erythrophobia failed because I pursued the material which the

patient  offered  in  every  direction,  interpreting  it  indiscriminately,  without

first having clearly eliminated the resistances. They eventually appeared, of

course, but much too strongly and chaotically; I had used up my ammunition;

my explanations were without effect; it was no longer possible to restore

order. I assure you that at the time, with three or four years’ analytic practice

behind me, I was no longer such a novice that, contrary to Freud’s teaching, I

would have given an interpretation before the unconscious had clearly and

unequivocally  revealed  itself  and  the  patient  himself  was  close  to  the

solution.  Evidently,  however,  this  alone  was  not  enough,  for  the  chaotic

situation  was  similar  to  those  which  are  encountered  in  seminars  andmonitored analyses.

  A  case  of  classical  hysteria  marked  by  twilight  states  would  have

recovered beautifully (subsequent experiences with similar cases permit me

to say this) if, at the right time, I had understood and correctly handled the

patient’s  reactions  to  the  analysis  of  the  positive  transference,  i.e.,  her

reactive  hate.  Instead,  I  allowed  myself  to  be  lured  into  a  chaos  by  her

recollections, a chaos from which I was not able to find my way out. And the

patient continued to have her twilight states.

  A number of bad experiences as a consequence of incorrect handling of

the transference when reactions of disappointment set in taught me to respect

the danger to the analysis of the original negative transference or the negative

transference resulting from the frustration of the love transference. And it was

not  until  a  patient  told  me,  some  months  after  the  termination  of  an

unsuccessful  analysis,  that  he  had  never  trusted  me  that  I  learned  to

appreciate the danger of the negative transference that remains latent. That

patient  had  recalled  beautifully  for  a  year  and  a  half  in  a  good  positive

transference. This experience prompted me successfully to seek a means of

drawing the negative transference out of its concealment in order to avoid

such a thing ever happening again, and so as to fulfill my therapeutic duties

in a wiser way.

  Most of our meetings at the Vienna seminar were also concerned with the

negative transference, especially the latent transference. In short, we see that

this was not the blind spot of one analyst. Failure to recognize the negative

transference appears to be a general occurrence. Undoubtedly, this can be

traced  back  to  our  narcissism,  which  makes  us  highly  receptive  to

compliments but quite blind to all negative tendencies in the patient unless

they are crudely expressed. Psychoanalytic literature is conspicuous for its

references to the transference in its positive sense. To my knowledge, apart

from  Landauer’s  article  on  “Passive  Technique,”  the  problem  of  negative

transference has been largely neglected.  The failure to recognize negative transference is only one of the many

mistakes  which  confuse  the  course  of  the  analysis.  We  have  all  had

experiences  of  what  we  have  termed  the  “chaotic  situation”;  hence,  my

description of it need not be anything more than the roughest sketch.

  The remembrances and actions are quite numerous, but they follow one

another  in  great  confusion;  the  analyst  learns  a  great  deal;  the  patient

produces  abundant  material  from  all  layers  of  his  unconscious,  from  all

periods of his life; everything is there in large chunks, as it were. Yet nothing

has  been  worked  through  in  accordance  with  the  therapeutic  goal;

notwithstanding  the  wealth  of  material,  the  patient  has  not  gained  any

conviction  of  its  importance.  The  analyst  has  done  a  good  deal  of

interpreting, but the interpretations have not deepened the analysis one way

or another. It is clear that everything the patient has offered serves a secret,

unrecognized resistance. Such a chaotic analysis is dangerous inasmuch as,

for a long time, the analyst believes that it is going very well, simply because

the patient is “coming up with material.” Usually too late, the analyst realizes

that the patient has been going around in circles and has turned up the same

material again and again, only in a different light. In this way, the patient is

able, for years on end, to use up his analytic hour without the slightest change

taking place in his nature.

  Here is a characteristic case which I took over from a colleague. A patient

with  a  number  of  perversions  had  been  under  analysis  for  eight  months,

during which time he had rattled on incessantly and had yielded material

from  the  deepest  layers  of  his  unconscious.  This  material  had  been

continuously interpreted. The more it was interpreted, the more copiously

flowed the stream of his associations. Finally, the analysis had to be broken

off  for  external  reasons,  and  the  patient  came  to  me.  At  that  time  I  was

already familiar with the dangers of concealed resistances. It struck me that

the patient uninterruptedly produced unconscious material, that he knew, for

instance, how to give an exact description of the most intricate mechanismsof the simple and double Oedipus complex. I asked the patient whether he

really  believed  what  he  was  saying  and  what  he  had  heard.  “Are  you

kidding!” he exclaimed. “I really have to contain myself not to burst out

laughing at all this.” To my question why he had not told this to the first

analyst, he answered that he had not considered it necessary. There was no

longer anything to be done, notwithstanding a vigorous analysis of his levity.

He already knew too much. My colleague’s interpretations had all fizzled out,

and my own interpretations merely ricocheted from his levity. I gave him up

after  four  months,  but  it  is  possible  that  a  longer  and  more  consistent

interpretation of his narcissistic defense would have achieved some result. At

any rate, I had gained a new understanding. At that time, however, I had not

yet had the full experience gained from working on this type of behavior

continuously for a period of time.

  If we look for the causes of such chaotic situations, we soon see that the

technique of interpretation falls short on the following points:

  1. Premature interpretation of the meaning of the symptoms and other

manifestations of the deep unconscious, particularly of symbols. Compelled

by the resistances which have remained concealed, the patient gets control of

the analysis, and only too late the analyst notices that the patient is going

around in circles, completely untouched.

  2. Interpretation of the material in the sequence in which it yields itself,

without  due  consideration  to  the  structure  of  the  neurosis  and  the

stratification of the material. The error consists in the fact that interpretations

are made simply because the material has come to light clearly (unsystematic

interpretation of meaning).

  3. The analysis is embroiled not only because interpretations are pursued

in every direction but also because this is done before the cardinal resistance

has been worked through. The error here is that the interpretation of meaning

precedes the interpretation of resistance. The situation becomes even more

confused in that the resistances soon become entangled in the relationship tothe  analyst;  hence, unsystematic  interpretation  of  resistances  also

complicates the transference situation.

  4.  The  interpretation  of  the  transference  resistances  is  not  only

unsystematic but also inconsistent, i.e., not enough attention is given to the

fact that the patient has the tendency to conceal his resistances anew, or, more

specifically,  to  mask  them  by  sterile  accomplishments  or  acute  reaction

formations. The latent transference resistances are usually overlooked, or the

analyst shies away from developing and following them up consistently when

they are hidden, whatever their form.

  Presumably, an incorrect comprehension of the Freudian rule, namely that

the course of the analysis should be left to the patient, lies at the root of these

errors. This Freudian rule can only be taken to mean that the patient’s work

should not be disturbed when it is following a course in keeping with his

conscious will to get well and our intention to cure him. Clearly, however, we

must intervene when the patient’s fear of struggling with his conflicts and his

desire to remain sick disrupt this course.


  2. SYSTEMATIC INTERPRETATION AND RESISTANCE

                                      ANALYSIS


  I have now subjected our efforts to sufficient criticism, and I fear that I

may have overtaxed the reader’s patience. I fear this all the more since, when

he now asks us to describe the correct technique, that is not so easily done.

Yet  I  am  convinced  that  the  reader  has  gained  sufficient  insight  into  the

difficulties of the subject so that a rough outline will suffice. He can then

draw conclusions from the errors outlined and will be able to apply them to

general aspects of the problem.

  Before I begin, I must express my concern about the danger of being

caught  in  a  snare  in  the  discussion  of  this  very  peculiar  subject.  We  are

dealing  with  living  and  fluid  psychic  events;  that  they  take  on  a  rigid

character as soon as we put them into words and try to communicate them insentences cannot be helped. What follows may easily create the impression of

being a rigid system, but in fact it is hardly more than a rough sketch of a

field which we are in the process of surveying and must still study in detail.

Only some things which stand out conspicuously are marked in; other things

which are just as important must be passed over for the time being.  The

differentiating detail work is also missing. Hence, we must be prepared at all

times to correct the sketch when some aspect of it turns out to be incorrect,

less important, or not universally valid. It is important that we understand one

another  and  not  speak  at  cross  purposes,  each  of  us  talking  a  different

language. Whatever appears to be schematic in the following exposition is

intended merely to serve as a means of orientation. There is no getting out of

a  thicket  if  one  fails  to  establish  one’s  bearings  by  means  of  various

landmarks, e.g., conspicuous formations of the terrain, or if one does not use

a compass. Our investigation of the psychic processes during treatment will

be  “held  together”  by  similar  “landmarks,”  which  will  be  created ad hoc

solely for the purpose of orientation. The same holds true for the schema

which  automatically  emerges  as  soon  as  one  particular  phenomenon  is

isolated and viewed as a separate unit; it is merely a scientific makeshift. It

must also be borne in mind that we do not impose the system, the rule, or the

principle on the case. We approach the case free of preconceived notions and

establish our bearings on the basis of its material, its behavior, on what the

patient conceals or represents as its opposite. Only then do we turn to the

question: how do I best make use of what I know about this case for the

technique of this case? Should it turn out, after vast experience, that we are

able to differentiate various types of resistances—a possibility Freud spoke of

favorably at the Budapest Congress—this would make it easier for us. But

even then, in each individual case, we would have to wait to see whether the

patient reveals this or that kind of typical resistance or, perhaps, shows no

similarity with other cases. The latent negative transference is only one of

such typical resistances. Hence, we should not look solely for this resistanceand immediately apply a different means of orientation in the event we don’t

find  it.  The  means  must  be  derived  solely  from  the  individual  patient’s

material.

  We  have  already  agreed  that  interpretations  involving  deeper  probing

have to be avoided as long as the first front of the cardinal resistances has not

become manifest and been eliminated, regardless of how abundant, clear, and

obviously  interpretable  the  material  may  be.  The  more  material  a  patient

recollects  without  having  produced  corresponding  resistances,  the  more

circumspect  one  must  become.  Faced  with  the  choice  of  interpreting

unconscious contents or taking up evident resistances, the analyst will choose

the latter. Our principle is: No interpretation of meaning when a resistance

interpretation is still to come. The reason for this is simple enough. If the

analyst  offers  an  interpretation before  the  dissolution  of  the  germane

resistances, the patient will accept the interpretation for reasons related to the

transference, in which case he will wholly depreciate its importance at the

first sign of a negative bearing, or the resistance will follow afterwards. In

either case, the interpretation has forfeited its therapeutic force; it has fizzled

out. Such an error is very difficult, if at all possible, to correct. The path

which  the  interpretation  must  take  into  the  deep  unconscious  has  been

blocked off.

  It is important not to disturb the patient in the unfolding of his “analytic

personality”  during  the  first  weeks  of  treatment.  Neither  should  the

resistances  be  interpreted  before  they  have  been  fully  developed  and  in

essence  understood  by  the  analyst.  Naturally,  the  moment  at  which  a

resistance is interpreted will depend largely upon the analyst’s experience.

Small signs will suffice for the experienced analyst, while the beginner will

need gross actions to understand the same case. Not infrequently, it depends

solely upon experience whether and by which indications latent resistances

are  recognized.  When  the  analyst  has  grasped  the  meaning  of  such

resistances, he will make them conscious by consistent interpretation, i.e., hewill  first  make  it  clear  to  the  patient  that  he  has  resistances,  then  what

mechanism they are making use of, and finally what they are directed against.

  If  the  first  transference  resistance  has  not  been  preceded  by  sufficient

recall work, a major difficulty is encountered in dissolving it, a difficulty,

however, which diminishes as the analyst gains practice and experience. This

obstacle consists in the fact that, to dissolve the resistance, the analyst must

know the unconscious material pertaining to and contained in it, yet he has no

way of reaching this material because it is shut off by the resistance. Like the

dream,  every  resistance  has  a  historical  meaning  (an  origin)  and  a

contemporary relevance. The impasse can be penetrated by first divining the

contemporary meaning and purpose of the resistance from the contemporary

situation (the unfolding of which the analyst has observed) and from the form

and  mechanisms  of  the  resistance,  and  then  working  through  it  with

corresponding  interpretations  in  such  a  way  that  the  germane  infantile

material is brought to the surface. It is only with the help of the latter that the

resistance  can  be  wholly  dissolved.  There  are  of  course  no  rules  for  the

ferreting  out  of  the  resistances  and  the  divining  of  their  contemporary

meaning. To a large extent, this is a matter of intuition—and here we have the

beginning of the non-teachable art of analysis. The less blatant, the more

concealed the resistances are (i.e., the more the patient deceives), the more

certain the analyst will have to be of his intuitions in order to gain control. In

other words, the analyst himself must be analyzed and, over and above this,

he must have special gifts.

  What is a “latent resistance”? They are attitudes on the part of the patient

which are not expressed directly and immediately, i.e., in the form of doubt,

distrust,  tardiness,  silence,  obstinacy,  apathy,  etc.,  but  indirectly  in  the

analytic performance. Exceptional docility or complete absence of manifest

resistances  is  indicative  of  concealed  and,  for  that  reason,  much  more

dangerous passive resistance. I am in the habit of tackling latent resistances

as soon as I perceive them; and I do not hesitate to interrupt the flow ofcommunications when I have learned all that is necessary to understand them.

For I have learned from experience that the therapeutic effect of analytic

communications is lost as long as there are unresolved resistances.

  The one-sided and therefore incorrect assessment of analytic material and

the not infrequent incorrect application of the Freudian thesis, namely that the

analyst must proceed from the specific surface, easily lead to catastrophic

misunderstandings and technical difficulties. To begin with: what is meant by

“analytic  material”?  This  is  usually  taken  to  mean  the  patient’s

communications, dreams, associations, slips. Theoretically, to be sure, it is

known that the patient’s behavior is of analytic importance; but unequivocal

experiences in the seminar show that the patient’s behavior (manner, look,

language,  countenance,  dress,  handshake,  etc.)  not  only  is  vastly

underestimated in terms of its analytic importance but is usually completely

overlooked. At the Innsbruck Congress, Ferenczi and I, independent of one

another,  stressed  the  therapeutic  importance  of  these  formal  elements.  As

time went on, they became for me the most important fulcrum and point of

departure for the analysis of the character. The overestimation of the content

of the material usually goes hand in hand with an underestimation, if not total

neglect, of the patient’s bearing, the manner in which the patient makes his

communications, recounts his dreams, etc. and when the patient’s bearing is

neglected  or  not  given  importance  equal  to  content,  a  therapeutically

catastrophic  comprehension  of  the  “psychic  surface”  is  unintentionally

arrived at. When a patient is very polite, at the same time producing a great

deal of material, e.g., on his relationship to his sister, we have two contents of

the “psychic surface” existing side by side: his love for his sister and his

bearing—the politeness. Both are grounded in the unconscious. In view of all

this, it is no longer a simple matter of stating that the analyst must proceed

from  the  surface.  We  learn  from  analytic  experience  that,  beneath  this

politeness and nicety, a more or less unconscious, if not downright distrustful

or  derogatory  attitude  is always  concealed.  More  correctly,  the  patient’sstereotype  politeness  is  in  itself  indicative  of  negative  criticism,

distrustfulness, or derogation. From this point of view, should the incestuous

love for the sister be interpreted without any further consideration, if a dream

or association pertaining to it arises? There are special reasons why one part

of the psychic surface, and not another, is dealt with first in analysis. It would

be  a  mistake  to  wait  until  the  patient  himself  begins  to  speak  about  his

politeness  and  the  reasons  for  it.  Since  in  analysis  this  character  trait

immediately becomes a resistance, the same holds true for it as for every

other resistance: the patient will never bring it up of his own accord. The

analyst must unmask the resistance for what it is.

  At this point we can expect an important objection. It will be contended

that  my  assumption,  i.e.,  that  the  politeness  immediately  becomes  a

resistance,  does  not  tally  with  the  facts  of  the  situation,  for  if  it  did,  the

patient would not produce any material. Yes, but this is precisely the point: it

is not solely the content of the material which is important; at the beginning

of the analysis, the formal aspect of the material is also of special importance.

To return to our example of politeness: owing to his repressions, the neurotic

has  every  reason  to  set  an  especially  high  value  on  politeness  and  social

convention and to make use of them as a means of protection. It may be

much more agreeable to treat a polite patient than it is to treat an impolite,

highly outspoken patient who might, for example, tell the analyst straight off

that he is too young or too old, hasn’t a beautifully furnished apartment or has

an ugly wife, is not very bright or looks too Jewish, acts like a neurotic,

should be undergoing analysis himself, and similar flattering things. This is

not  necessarily  a  transference  phenomenon:  that  the  analyst  should  be  a

“blank piece of paper” is an ideal. It can never be wholly realized. The “true

nature”  of  the  analyst  is  a  fact  which  at  first  has  nothing  to  do  with

transference.  And  patients  are  exceptionally  sensitive  to  our  weaknesses;

indeed,  in  scenting  these  weaknesses,  some  patients  directly  revenge

themselves for the stress they have to endure because of the imposition of thebasic rule. Only a few patients (usually they are sadistic characters) derive

sadistic pleasure from the frankness demanded of them. In therapeutic terms,

their behavior is valuable, even if it becomes a resistance for a time. But the

majority  of  patients  are  still  much  too  diffident  and  apprehensive,  too

burdened with guilt feelings, to bring this frankness into play spontaneously.

Unlike many of my colleagues, I must subscribe to the contention that every

case, without exception, begins the analysis with a more or less pronounced

attitude  of  distrust  and  skepticism, which  usually  remains  concealed.  To

persuade  himself  of  this,  the  analyst  must  not  of  course  rely  upon  the

patient’s need to confess or, for that matter, his need for punishment; rather,

he must use all his wits to elicit from the patient the quite obvious reasons for

being  distrustful  and  exercising  negative  criticism  (the  novelty  of  the

situation, the lack of familiarity with the analyst, the public’s contempt for

psychoanalysis, etc.) which are inherent in the analytic situation. Thus, it is

only  through  his  own  frankness  that  the  analyst  gains  the  patient’s

confidence. One technical question remains, namely at what point should the

analyst  deal  with  those  attitudes  of  distrust  and  negative  criticism,  which

cannot yet be called neurotic, determined as they are by the contemporary

situation.  What  is  important  here  is  that  deeper  interpretations  of  the

unconscious be avoided as long as the wall of conventional politeness exists

between patient and analyst.

  We  cannot  continue  our  discussion  of  the  technique  of  interpretation

without  going  into  the  development  and  treatment  of  the  transference

neurosis.

  In an analysis that is proceeding correctly, it is not long before the first

substantial transference resistance arises. To begin with, we must understand

why the first significant resistance against the continuation of the analysis is

automatically, and in keeping with the legitimacy of the case’s structure, tied

in with the relationship to the analyst. What is the motive of “transference

compulsion” (Ferenczi)? As a result of the basic rule, adherence to which weinsist  on,  we  have  hit  upon  the  taboo  that  is  so  disagreeable  to  the  ego.

Sooner  or  later,  the  patient’s  defense  against  his  repressions  becomes

stronger. At first, the resistance is directed solely against what is repressed,

but  the  patient  knows  nothing  about  it,  neither  that  he  bears  something

forbidden in himself nor that he is fending it off. As Freud demonstrated, the

resistances themselves are unconscious. But the resistance is an emotional

stirring corresponding to an increased expenditure of energy, and for that

reason  cannot  remain  buried.  Like  everything  else  that  is  irrationally

motivated,  this  emotional  stirring  also  strives  to  achieve  a  rational

foundation, i.e., to become anchored in a real relationship. Now what could

be closer to hand than to project, and to project upon that person who brought

about the whole conflict through his insistence on the disagreeable basic rule?

As a result of the displacement of the defense (from the unconscious to the

analyst),  the  particular  content  of  the  unconscious  also  creeps  into  the

resistance; that is, the content is also projected upon the analyst. He becomes

a miserable creature like the father or a lovable creature like the mother. It is

clear that this defense can lead only to a negative attitude at first. As the

disturber of the neurotic balance, the analyst necessarily becomes the enemy,

whether it is a matter of projected love or projected hate, for in both cases

defense and rejection are also always present.

  If hate impulses are projected first, the transference resistance is clearly

negative. If, on the other hand, the impulses that are projected first are of a

loving nature, then the real transference resistance is preceded for a time by a

manifest but not conscious positive transference. However, its fate is always

the same, i.e., it becomes a reactive negative transference, on the one hand

because of the inevitable disappointment (“disappointment reaction”) and on

the other hand because it is warded off as soon as it endeavors to become

conscious  under  the  pressure  of  sensuous  strivings;  and  every  defense

encompasses negative attitudes.

  The problem of technique pertaining to the latent negative transference isso important that it will be necessary to make a separate investigation of the

forms in which this transference becomes manifest and how it is to be treated.

At this time, I want merely to list a few typical cases in which we are most

likely to encounter a latent negative transference. They are:

  1. The obsequious, obtrusively friendly, implicitly trustful, in short, the

“good” patients; those who are always in a positive transference and never

show  a  disappointment  reaction.  (Usually  passive-feminine  characters  or

female hysterics having nymphomanic tendencies.)

  2.  Those  who  are  always rigidly  conventional  and  correct.  They  are

usually compulsive characters who have converted their hatred into “being

polite at all costs.”

  3. Patients  whose  affects  are  paralyzed.  Like  those  who  are  rigidly

correct,  these  patients  are  characterized  by  an  exaggerated  but  blocked

aggressiveness.  They,  too,  for  the  most  part,  are  compulsive  characters;

however, female hysterics also show a surface affect-paralysis.

  4. Patients  who  complain  about  the  artificiality  of  their  feelings  and

emotionality—patients, in short, who suffer from depersonalization. Among

these  we  also  have  those  patients  who  consciously  and  at  the  same  time

compulsively “play act,” i.e., who know at the back of their minds that they

are deceiving the analyst. In such patients, who usually belong to the group of

narcissistic neuroses of the hypochondriac type, we always discover a “secret

chuckle” at everything and everybody, a chuckle which becomes a torture to

the patient himself. It entails the greatest difficulties in analysis.

  Since the form and stratification of the first transference resistance are

determined by the individual’s infantile experience of love, it is possible to

analyze  the  infantile  conflicts  in  a  systematic  way,  free  of  unnecessary

complications, only if we make strict allowances for this stratification in our

interpretations of the transference. It is not, of course, that the contents of the

transferences  are  dependent  upon  our  interpretations;  but  there  can  be  no

doubt  that  the  sequence  in  which  they  become  acute  is  decided  by  thetechnique  of  interpretation.  It  is  important  not  only  that  a  transference

neurosis develop but also that in its development it follow the same pattern as

its prototype, the primal neurosis, and that it exhibit the same stratification as

the other in its dynamics. Freud taught us that the original neurosis becomes

accessible only through the transference neurosis. Thus, it is clear that our

task will be that much easier, the more completely and systematically the

original neurosis has coiled around the spools of the transference. Naturally,

this coiling takes place in reverse sequence. Hence, one can see that a faulty

analysis of the transference—e.g., the interpretation of an attitude stemming

from a deeper layer of the unconscious, regardless of how distinct the attitude

is and how accurate the interpretation may be—will blur the blueprint of the

original  neurosis  and  entangle  the  transference  neurosis.  We  learn  from

experience that the transference neurosis will develop of its own accord, in

keeping  with  the  structure  of  the  original  neurosis.  But  we  must  avoid

premature and unsystematic interpretations and interpretations that penetrate

too deeply.

  Let us take the following schematic example to illustrate our point. A

patient first loves his mother, then hates his father, and eventually withdraws

his love from his mother out of fear and converts his hatred of his father into

a passive-feminine love of him. If the resistance is correctly analyzed, it will

be  the  passive-feminine  attitude,  i.e.,  the  last  result  of  his  libidinal

development, that manifests itself first in the transference. Next, a systematic

resistance analysis will bring out the hatred of the father concealed behind

this passive-feminine attitude, and only after this hatred has been worked

through  will  a  new  cathexis  of  the  mother  follow,  at  first  through  the

transference of the love for the mother to the analyst. From here, then, it can

be transferred to a woman in real life.

  Let us now consider a less favorable but no less possible development.

The patient, for example, might exhibit a manifest positive transference and

produce in this connection not only dreams reflecting his passive-feminineattitude  but  also  dreams  embodying  his  tie  to  his  mother.  Let  us  further

assume that both sets of dreams are clear and capable of interpretation. If the

analyst recognizes the true stratification of the positive transference; if it is

clear to him that the reactive love for the father represents the top layer of this

transference, the hatred of him the second layer, and the transferred love for

the mother the deepest layer, then he will certainly leave the last untouched,

no matter how importunate. If, however, he should choose to work first on

the  love  for  the  mother  which  is  projected  upon  him  as  part  of  the

transference, then the latent hatred of the father transferred to the analyst in a

reactive form would constitute a powerful and impenetrable resistance block

between  his  interpretations  pertaining  to  the  incestuous  love  and  the

experience  of  the  patient.  The  interpretation  that  would  have  had  to  pass

through the topographically higher layers of distrust, disbelief, and rejection

will be superficially accepted but will be therapeutically ineffective and have

but  one  result:  it  will  cause  the  patient,  internally  frightened  and  made

cautious by this interpretation, to conceal the hatred of his father even more

thoroughly  and,  because  of  intensified  guilt  feelings,  to  become  an  even

“nicer” person. In one form or another, we would have a chaotic situation on

our hands.

  What is important, therefore, is to single out from the welter of material

flowing  from  many  psychic  layers  that  element  which  assumes  a  central

position in the existing or preceding transference resistance and is not laden

with other attitudes. As theoretical as this may sound, it is a principle which

has to be applied in every average case.

  Now we have to ask what happens to the remainder of the material which

is of less contemporary importance. Usually it is enough just to ignore it.

Thus  it  will  automatically  recede  into  the  background.  It  often  happens,

however,  that  the  patient  will  obtrude  an  attitude  or  a  definite  sphere  of

experience in order to conceal material of greater immediate importance. It

follows  from  everything  we  have  said  that  such  a  resistance  has  to  beeliminated. In elucidating the situation, the analyst “steers the material,” i.e.,

unceasingly points to that which is being buried and disregards that which is

being pushed forward. A typical example of this is the patient’s behavior in a

latent  negative  transference.  He  tries  to  conceal  his  secret  criticism  and

discredit  the  analyst  and  the  analysis  by  means  of  hypocritical  praise.

Analyzing this resistance, the analyst easily arrives at the patient’s motive,

his fear of expressing criticism.

  Only seldom is the analyst forced to check rapidly flowing material—for

instance, when unconscious perverse fantasies or incestuous desires become

conscious prematurely and cumulatively—before the ego has become strong

enough to handle them. When this happens, if disregarding the material is not

enough, the analyst will have to ward it off.

  Thus, the central content of the transference resistance remains always in

contact  with  the  patient’s  remembrances,  and  the  affects  aroused  in  the

transference  are  automatically  passed  on  to  them.  And  in  this  way  the

analytically dangerous situation of remembering without affects is avoided. It

is  indicative  of  the  chaotic  situation,  on  the  other  hand,  that  a  concealed

resistance remains unresolved for months on end and binds all affects, while

the remembrances flit about in wild succession, e.g., one day the castration

anxiety, another day the oral fantasy, and still another day the incest fantasy.

  By correctly selecting the material that is to be interpreted, we achieve a

continuity in the analysis. In this way, we are not only conversant with the

existing situation at all times; we are also able to keep a close watch on the

legitimacy with which the transference develops. Our work is made easier

and the groundwork of the cure is thoroughly prepared by the fact that the

resistances, which of course are nothing other than individual pieces of the

neurosis,  appear one  after  the  other,  yet  tied  together  by  a  historically

determined structure.


        3. CONSISTENCY IN RESISTANCE ANALYSIS  Thus  far,  we  have  merely  described  the  technique  of  interpreting  the

meaning  of  unconscious  material  and  the  technique  of  interpreting

resistances, and we have agreed that interpretation must be systematic and

must be carried out in keeping with the individual structure of the neurosis. In

listing  the  errors  made  in  interpretation,  we  differentiated  between

disorganized and inconsistent interpretations. There was good reason for this,

for we know cases which, notwithstanding systematic interpretation, become

disorganized; and we perceive the cause of this in the lack of consistency in

the further working through of the already interpreted resistances.

  If we have happily passed the barrier of the first transference resistance,

the work of recalling usually moves forward rapidly and penetrates into the

period of childhood. But it isn’t long before the patient runs into fresh layers

of forbidden material, which he endeavors to ward off with a second front of

transference resistances. The game of resistance analysis begins anew, but

this time it has a somewhat different character. Before, we were dealing with

a virgin difficulty, whereas the new resistance has an analytic past which was

not without influence on its formation. In keeping with the new material, it

has, to be sure, a structure and meaning different from the first resistance. It

might  be  assumed  that  the  patient  has  learned  from  the  first  resistance

analysis and will himself help to eliminate the difficulty this time. However,

it doesn’t work out that way in practice. In the large majority of cases, it turns

out that, in addition to the new resistance, the patient reactivates the old one.

Indeed, the patient may relapse into the old resistance without showing the

new one. This stratification complicates the whole situation. There is no set

pattern as to which resistance will gain the upper hand, the reactivated old

one or the new one. But this is not significant with respect to the tactics of

analysis. What is important is that the patient restores a large portion of his

counter-cathexis  to  the  old  resistance  position  which  had  apparently  been

disposed of. If the analyst takes up the new resistance first or exclusively, he

will  be  neglecting  an  intermediate  layer,  namely  the  reactivated  oldresistance. He will then run the risk of wasting his costly interpretations.

Disappointments and failures can be averted if the old difficulty is reverted to

every time, regardless of how conspicuous or inconspicuous it makes itself,

and is used as the point of departure for the work of dissolution. In this way,

the analyst slowly advances to the new resistance and avoids the danger of

conquering  a  new  piece  of  land  while  the  enemy  reestablishes  itself  in  a

previously conquered area.

  Using the cardinal resistance as a kind of citadel, as it were, the analyst

must undermine the neurosis from all sides, instead of taking up individual

peripheral resistances, i.e., attacking many different points which have only

an indirect relation to one another. By consistently broaching the resistances

and the analytic material from the first transference resistance, the analyst is

able to survey the situation as a whole, both past and present. The required

continuity of the analysis does not have to be fought for and a thorough

working through of the neurosis is guaranteed. Assuming that we are dealing

with typical case histories and that the resistance analysis has been correctly

carried  out,  we  are  able  to  foresee  the  sequence  in  which  recognized

tendencies will appear as acute transference resistances.

  There is no point in trying to persuade us that the major problems of

psychotherapy  are  to  be  coped  with  by  “bombarding”  the  patient  with

interpretations of his unconscious material or, for that matter, by treating all

patients according to one scheme, e.g., from one assumed primal source of

the  neurosis.  The  analyst  who  tries  such  a  thing  shows  that  he  has  not

comprehended the real problems of psychotherapy and does not know what

the “cutting of the Gordian knot” really means, namely a destroying of the

conditions of analytic cure. An analysis carried out in such a way can hardly

be salvaged. Interpretation is comparable to a valuable drug, which must be

used sparingly if its effectiveness is not to be lost. This, too, we have learned

from  experience:  the  complicated  way  of  disentangling  the  knot  is  the

shortest—yes, the shortest—way to true success.  On the other side of the fence, we have those analysts who, incorrectly

apprehending  the  concept  of  analytic  passivity,  are  experts  in  the  art  of

waiting. They would be able to furnish us with much valuable material on the

casuistry of the chaotic situation. In the resistance period, the difficult task of

steering the course of the analysis devolves upon the analyst. The patient

holds the reins only in phases which are free of resistance. Freud could not

have had anything else in mind. And the danger, both for the patient and for

the development of analytic therapy, of making a rigid principle of analytic

passivity or of “letting matters ride” is no less than that of “bombardment” or

interpretation according to a theoretical scheme.

  There are forms of resistance in which this kind of passivity is in the

nature  of  a  classic  mistake.  For  instance,  a  patient  might  fight  shy  of  a

resistance or, more specifically, the discussion of the material pertaining to it.

He  will  make  allusions  to  a  remote  subject  until  he  has  also  produced

resistances there, then switch to a third subject, etc. This “zigzag technique”

can go on ad infinitum, whether the analyst looks on “passively” or follows

him offering one interpretation after the other. Since, as is evident, the patient

is constantly on the run and his efforts to satisfy the analyst with substitute

accomplishments are to no avail, it is the analyst’s obligation to lead him

back to the first resistance position again and again until he summons up the

                                              3
courage to get control of it analytically. The other material is of course not

lost.

  Or  the  patient  reverts  to  an  infantile  phase  and  divulges  otherwise

valuable secrets merely for the sake of holding on to a particular position.

Naturally, such divulgences have no therapeutic value—the reverse is more

likely  the  case.  The  analyst  can  listen  all  he  wants  if  he  prefers  not  to

interrupt, but then he will have to be consistent in the working through of that

position which the patient refused to face. The same holds true when the

patient  takes  refuge  in  the  contemporary  situation.  Ideal  and  optimal  is  a

rectilinear development and analysis of the transference neurosis along thesame  lines  as  the  primal  neurosis.  The  patient  develops  his  resistances

systematically and performs, intermittently, affective recall work which is

free of resistance.

  The controversial question of which is better, an “active” or a “passive”

attitude has no real meaning when phrased this way. It can be said generally

that resistances cannot be taken up soon enough in the analysis, and that,

apart from the resistances, the interpretation of the unconscious cannot be

held back enough. Usually, the procedure is the reverse of this: the analyst is

in the habit, on the one hand, of showing much too much courage in the

interpretation of meaning and, on the other hand, of cringing as soon as a

resistance turns up.                                  CHAPTER IV





        ON THE TECHNIQUE OF CHARACTER

                                                      1
                                  ANALYSIS




                              1. INTRODUCTION


Our therapeutic method is contingent upon the following basic theoretical

concepts.  The topographical  point  of  view  determines  the  principle  of

technique to the effect that the unconscious has to be made conscious. The

dynamic point of view dictates that this making conscious of the unconscious

must not proceed directly, but by way of resistance analysis. The economic

point  of  view  and  the  knowledge  of structure  dictate  that,  in  resistance

analysis, each individual case entails a definite plan which must be deduced

from the case itself.

  As  long  as  the  making  conscious  of  the  unconscious,  i.e.,  the

topographical process, was regarded as the sole task of analytic technique,

the formula was justified that the patient’s unconscious manifestations had to

be translated into the language of the conscious in the sequence in which they

appeared. In this process, the dynamics of the analysis were left largely to

chance, that is, whether the act of becoming conscious actually released the

germane  affect  and  whether  the  interpretation  had  anything  more  than  an

intellectual influence on the patient. The very inclusion of the dynamic factor,

i.e.,  the  demand  that  the  patient  had  not  only  to  remember  but  also  to

experience what he remembered, complicated the simple formula that “the

unconscious had to be made conscious.” Since the dynamic effect of analysisdepends not on the material which the patient produces but on the resistances

which he brings into play against this material and on the emotional intensity

with which they are mastered, the task of analysis undergoes no insignificant

shift. Whereas it is sufficient, from the topographical point of view, to make

the patient conscious of the clearest and most easily interpretable elements of

the unconscious in the sequence in which they appear, in other words, to

adhere to the pattern of the contents of the material, it is necessary, when the

dynamic factor is taken into consideration, to relinquish this plan as a means

of  orientation  in  the  analysis.  Instead,  another  must  be  adopted,  which

embraces both the content of the material and the affect, namely the pattern

of successive resistances. In pursuing this plan, however, a difficulty arises in

most  cases,  a  difficulty  which  we  have  not  considered  in  the  foregoing

presentation.


        2. CHARACTER ARMORING AND CHARACTER

                                    RESISTANCE


a) The inability to follow the basic rule


  Our patients are seldom capable of analysis at the outset. Only a very

small number of patients are prepared to follow the basic rule and to open

themselves completely to the analyst. First of all, it is not easy for the patient

to have immediate trust in the analyst, if only because he is a stranger. Added

to this, however, is the fact that years of illness, the unrelenting influence of a

neurotic milieu, bad experiences with mental specialists—in short, the entire

secondary fragmentation of the ego—have created a situation that is adverse

to the analysis. The elimination of this difficulty becomes a precondition of

the analysis, and it could be accomplished easily if it were not complicated

by the characteristic, indeed character of the patient, which is itself a part of

the  neurosis  and  has  developed  on  a  neurotic  basis.  It  is  known  as  the

“narcissistic barrier.” Fundamentally, there are two ways of getting at thesedifficulties, especially at the difficulty entailed by the resistance to the basic

rule. The first way, and the one usually pursued, I believe, is to prepare the

patient for analysis through instruction, reassurance, challenge, exhortation,

persuasion, and more of the same. In this case, by establishing a kind of

positive  transference,  the  analyst  seeks  to  convince  the  patient  of  the

necessity of being open and honest in the analysis. This roughly corresponds

to  the  technique  suggested  by  Nunberg.  Vast  experience  has  taught  us,

however,  that  this  pedagogic  or  active  approach  is  highly  uncertain,  is

dependent upon uncontrollable contingencies, and lacks the secure basis of

analytic clarity. The analyst is constantly at the mercy of the oscillations of

the transference and treads on uncertain terrain in his efforts to make the

patient capable of analysis.

  The  second  method  is  more  complicated,  and  not  yet  feasible  for  all

patients. It is a far more secure approach. Here the attempt is made to replace

the instructional measures by analytic interpretations. There is no question

that this is not always possible, yet it remains the ideal goal toward which

analysis strives. Instead of inducing the patient to enter into the analysis by

persuasion, suggestion, transference maneuvers, etc., the analyst takes a more

passive attitude and attempts to get an insight into the contemporary meaning

of  the  patient’s  behavior, why  he  or  she  doubts,  arrives  late,  speaks  in  a

ranting  or  confused  manner,  communicates  only  every  third  idea  or  so,

criticizes  the  analysis,  or  produces  deep  material,  often  in  uncommon

amounts. In other words, the analyst can do one of two things: (1) attempt to

persuade  a  narcissistic  patient  who  speaks  in  grandiloquent  technical

terminology that his behavior is detrimental to the analysis and that he would

do better to rid himself of analytic terminology and to come out of his shell;

or (2) dispense with any kind of persuasion and wait until he understands

why the patient behaves as he does. It may turn out, for instance, that the

patient’s  ostentatious  behavior  is  an  attempt  to  cover  up  a  feeling  of

inferiority  toward  the  analyst.  In  this  case,  the  analyst  will  endeavor  toinfluence  him  through  a  consistent  interpretation  of  the  meaning  of  his

actions. In contrast to the first, this second approach is entirely in keeping

with the principles of analysis.

  From  this  endeavor  to  use  purely  analytic  interpretations  wherever

possible in place of all the instructional or otherwise active measures which

become necessary  as  a result of the patient’s characteristics, a method of

analyzing the character emerged in an unsought and unexpected way.

  Certain clinical considerations make it necessary for us to designate as

“character resistances” a special group of the resistances that we encounter

in the treatment of our patients. These derive their special character not from

their content but from the specific mannerisms of the person analyzed. The

compulsive  character  develops  resistances  whose  form  is  specifically

different from that of the hysterical character, the form of whose resistances,

in  turn,  is  different  from  that  of  the  genital  narcissistic,  impulsive,  or

neurasthenic character. The form of the ego’s reactions, which differs from

character  to  character  even  where  the  contents  of  the  experiences  are  the

same, can be traced back to infantile experiences in the same way as the

content of the symptoms and fantasies.


b) Where do the character resistances come from?


  Some time ago, Glover made an effort to discriminate between character

neuroses and symptom neuroses. Alexander also operated on the basis of this

distinction.  I  adhered  to  it  in  earlier  works,  but  it  turned  out,  on  closer

comparison of the cases, that this distinction makes sense only insofar as

there are neuroses with circumscribed symptoms (“symptom neuroses”) and

neuroses without them (“character neuroses”). In the former, understandably,

the symptoms are more conspicuous; in the latter, the neurotic character traits

stand out. But are there symptoms which do not have a neurotic reaction

basis, which, in other words, are not rooted in a neurotic character? The only

difference between character neuroses and symptom neuroses is that, in thecase  of  the  latter,  the  neurotic  character  also  produces  symptoms,  has

become, so to speak, concentrated in them. That the neurotic character is at

one time exacerbated in circumscribed symptoms and at another time finds

other  ways  of  discharging  the  libido  stasis  requires  more  detailed

investigation  (cf.  Part  II).  But  if  it  is  acknowledged  that  the  symptom

neurosis is always rooted in a neurotic character, then it is clear that, in every

analysis, we are dealing with resistances that are manifestations of a neurotic

character.  The  individual  analysis  will  differ  only  with  respect  to  the

importance ascribed to the analysis of the character in each case. However, a

retrospective  glance  at  analytic  experiences  cautions  us  against

underestimating this importance in any one case.

  From the point of view of character analysis, the differentiation between

neuroses  which  are  chronic,  i.e.,  have  existed  since  childhood,  and  those

which are acute, i.e., appeared later, has no importance whatever; it is of no

great  moment  whether  the  symptoms  appear  in  childhood  or  later.  What

matters is that the neurotic character, i.e., the reaction basis for the symptom

neurosis, is formed, at least in its principal features, by the time the Oedipal

stage comes to a close. We have ample clinical experience to show that the

boundary  which  the  patient  draws  between  health  and  the  outbreak  of

sickness always vanishes in the analysis.

  Since  the  symptom  formation  does  not  hold  up  as  a  descriptive

characteristic, we have to look for others. Two which readily come to mind

are illness insight and rationalizations.

  A lack of insight into the illness is not, of course, absolutely reliable but it

is  certainly  an  essential  indication  of  character  neurosis.  The  neurotic

symptom is sensed as something alien, and it engenders a feeling of being ill.

On the other hand, the neurotic character trait, e.g., the exaggerated sense of

order of the compulsive character or the anxious shyness of the hysterical

character,  is  organically  incorporated  into  the  personality.  One  might

complain of being shy, but one does not feel sick for that reason. Not until thecharacterological  shyness  becomes  a  pathological  blushing  or  until  the

compulsive-neurotic  sense  of  order  becomes  a  compulsive  ceremony,  not

until,  in  other  words,  the  neurotic  character  exacerbates  symptomatically,

does one feel that one is sick.

    Naturally,  there  are  symptoms  for  which  no  insight,  or  insufficient

insight,  exists.  They  are  regarded  by  patients  as  bad  habits  or  something

which has to be accepted (e.g., chronic constipation, mild ejaculatio praecox).

Then  there  are  some  character  traits  which  are  sometimes  felt  to  be

pathological,  e.g.,  irrational,  violent  fits  of  anger,  gross  negligence,  a

penchant for lying, drinking, splurging, and other such. Generally, however,

an insight into the sickness is indicative of a neurotic symptom, whereas lack

of insight points to a neurotic character trait.

  In practical terms, the second important difference consists in the fact that

symptoms  never  exhibit  such  complete  and  credible rationalizations  as

neurotic  character  traits.  Neither  hysterical  vomiting  nor  abasia;  neither

compulsive counting nor compulsive thinking can be rationalized. There is no

question  about  the  senselessness  of  a  symptom,  whereas  the  neurotic

character  trait  has  a  sufficiently  rational  motivation  so  as  not  to  appear

pathological or senseless.

  Furthermore, there is a justification for neurotic character traits which is

immediately rejected as absurd when it is applied to symptoms. We often

hear it said: “That’s simply the way I am.” The implication here is that the

person concerned was born that way; he simply cannot behave differently—

that’s  his  character.  However,  this  does  not  tally  with  the  facts,  for  the

analysis of its development shows that the character had to become what it is,

and not something else, for very specific reasons. Fundamentally, therefore, it

is capable of analysis and of being changed, just like the symptom.

    Occasionally, symptoms have become so ingrained in the personality that

they  are  like  character  traits.  An  example  is  compulsive  counting  that  is

wholly  absorbed  within  the  framework  of  one’s  need  to  be  orderly,  orcompulsive methodicalness that is fulfilled in the rigid subdivisions of each

day. The latter is especially true of the compulsion to work. Such modes of

behavior are held to be indicative more of eccentricity or excessiveness than

of pathology. Hence, we see that the concept of illness is highly flexible, that

there are many shades, ranging from the symptom as an isolated foreign body

through the neurotic character trait and the “wicked habit” to rationally sound

behavior. However, in view of the fact that these shades are not very much

help to us, the differentiation between symptom and neurotic character trait

recommends  itself,  even  insofar  as  rationalizations  are  concerned,

notwithstanding the artificiality of all divisions.

  With this reservation, another differentiation occurs to us with respect to

the structure of the symptom and of the character trait. In the process of

analysis, it is shown that, in terms of its meaning and origin, the symptom has

a  very  simple  structure  compared  with  that  of  the  character  trait.  True

enough, the symptom too is indeterminate; but the more deeply we penetrate

into its reasons, the more we move away from the actual compass of the

symptom and the more clearly we perceive its basis in the character. Hence,

theoretically, the reaction basis in the character can be worked out from any

symptom.  The  symptom  is  directly  determined  by  a  limited  number  of

unconscious  attitudes;  hysterical  vomiting,  for  example,  is  based  on  a

repressed  fellatio  desire  or  an  oral  desire  for  a  child.  Each  of  them  is

expressed in the character, the former in a kind of childishness, the latter in a

maternal  attitude.  But  the  hysterical  character,  which  determines  the

hysterical  symptom,  is  based  on  a  multiplicity  of—to  a  large  extent

antagonistic—strivings,  and  is  usually  expressed  in  a  specific attitude  or

mode of existence. It is not nearly so easy to analyze the attitude as it is to

analyze the symptom; fundamentally, however, the former, like the latter, can

be traced back to and understood on the basis of drives and experiences.

Whereas the symptom corresponds solely to one definite experience or one

circumscribed  desire,  the  character,  i.e.,  the  person’s  specific  mode  ofexistence, represents an expression of the person’s entire past. So a symptom

can  emerge  quite  suddenly,  while  the  development  of  each  individual

character  trait  requires  many  years.  We  must  also  bear  in  mind  that  the

symptom could not have suddenly emerged unless a neurotic reaction basis

already existed in the character.

  In  the  analysis,  the  neurotic  character  traits  as  a  whole  prove  to  be  a

compact defense mechanism against our therapeutic efforts, and when we

trace the origin of this character “armor” analytically, we see that it also has a

definite economic function. Such armor serves on the one hand as a defense

against external stimuli; on the other hand it proves to be a means of gaining

mastery over the libido, which is continuously pushing forward from the id,

because  libidinal  and  sadistic  energy  is  used  up  in  the  neurotic  reaction

formations, compensations, etc. Anxiety is continually being bound in the

processes which are at the bottom of the formation and preservation of this

armor  in  the  same  way  that,  according  to  Freud’s  description,  anxiety  is

bound in the compulsive symptoms. We shall have more to say about the

economy of the character formation.

  Since, in its economic function as defensive armor, the neurotic character

trait has established a certain, albeit neurotic balance, analysis constitutes a

danger to this balance. It is from this narcissistic defense mechanism of the

ego that the resistances originate which give the analysis of the individual

case its special features. If, however, a person’s mode of behavior represents

the result of a total development which is capable of analysis and resolution,

then it must also be possible to deduce the technique of character analysis

from that behavior.


c) On the technique of analyzing the character resistance


  In addition to the dreams, associations, slips, and other communications

of the patients, the way in which they recount their dreams, commit slips,

produce associations, and make their communications, in short their bearing,                            2
deserves special attention. Adherence to the basic rule is something rare, and

many months of character-analytic work are required to instill in the patient a

halfway sufficient measure of candidness. The way the patient speaks, looks

at and greets the analyst, lies on the couch, the inflection of the voice, the

degree of conventional politeness which is maintained, etc., are valuable cues

in assessing the secret resistances with which the patient counters the basic

rule. And once they have been understood, they can be eliminated through

interpretation. It is not only what the patient says but how he says it that has

to be interpreted. Analysts are often heard to complain that the analysis is not

progressing, that the patient is not producing any “material.” By material,

what  is  usually  meant  is  merely  the  content  of  the  associations  and

communications. But the nature of the patient’s silence or sterile repetitions is

also  material  which  has  to  be  used  fully.  There  is  scarcely  a  situation  in

which the patient does not produce any material, and we have to lay the

blame  upon  ourselves  if  we  can’t  make  use  of  the  patient’s  bearing  as

material.

  There is of course nothing new in the statement that behavior and the

form  of  the  communications  are  of  analytic  importance.  What  we  are

concerned with here, however, is the fact that they give us access to the

analysis of the character in a very definite and relatively complete way. Bad

experiences in the analysis of some neurotic characters have taught us that, at

the  outset  of  such  cases,  the  form  of  the  communications  is  of  greater

importance  than  the  content.  We  want  merely  to  allude  to  the  concealed

resistances produced by the emotionally paralyzed, by the “good” men and

women,  the  excessively  polite  and  correct  patients;  by  those  patients,

moreover, who always give evidence of a deceptive positive transference or,

for that matter, by those who raise a passionate and monotonous cry for love;

those who conceive of analysis as a kind of game; the eternally “armored”

who  laugh  in  their  sleeve  at  anything  and  everything.  The  list  could  be

extended indefinitely. Hence, one has no illusions about the painstaking workwhich the innumerable individual problems of technique will entail.

  To allow what is essential in character analysis to stand out more clearly

in contrast to symptom analysis, and to give a better idea of our thesis in

general, let us consider two pairs of cases. The first pair consists of two men

being treated for ejaculatio praecox: one is a passive-feminine character, the

other a phallic-aggressive character. Two women suffering from an eating

disturbance  constitute  the  second  pair:  one  is  a  compulsive  character,  the

other a hysteric.

  Let us further assume that the ejaculatio praecox of the two male patients

has the same unconscious meaning: fear of the (paternal) phallus assumed to

be in the woman’s vagina. On the basis of the castration anxiety which lies at

the root of the symptom, both patients produce a negative father transference

in the analysis. They hate the analyst (father) because they perceive in him

the enemy who limits their pleasure, and each of them has the unconscious

desire to dispose of him. While the phallic-sadistic character will ward off the

danger of castration by means of vituperations, disparagements, and threats,

the passive-feminine character will become more and more confiding, more

and more passively devoted, and more and more accommodating. In both of

them the character has become a resistance: the former wards off the danger

aggressively; the latter gets out of its way by compromising his standards, by

deceptiveness and devotion.

    Naturally, the character resistance of the passive-feminine type is more

dangerous,  for  he  works  with  devious  means.  He  produces  material  in

abundance, recalls infantile experiences, appears to adapt himself beautifully

—but at bottom he glosses over a secret obstinacy and hate. As long as he

keeps this up, he will not have the courage to show his true nature. If the

analyst does not pay any attention to his manner and merely enters into what

the  patient  produces,  then,  according  to  experience,  no  analytic  effort  or

elucidation will change his condition. It may even be that the patient will

recall his hatred of his father, but he will not experience it unless the meaningof  his  deceptive  behavior  is  consistently  pointed  out  to  him  in  the

transference, before a deep interpretation of the father-hatred is begun.

  In  the  case  of  the  second  pair,  let  us  assume  that  an  acute  positive

transference has developed. In both women, the main content of this positive

transference  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  symptom,  namely  an  oral  fellatio

fantasy.  However,  the  transference  resistance  ensuing  from  this  positive

transference  will  be  wholly  different  in  form.  The  woman  suffering  from

hysteria, for example, will be apprehensively silent and behave timidly; the

woman having a compulsive neurosis will be obstinately silent or behave in a

cold, haughty way toward the analyst. The transference resistance employs

various means in warding off the positive transference: in the one instance,

aggression; in the other, anxiety. We would say that in both cases the id

conveyed the same wish, which the ego warded off differently. And the form

of this defense will always remain the same in both patients; the woman

suffering from hysteria will always defend herself in a way expressive of

anxiety, while the woman suffering from a compulsive neurosis will always

defend herself aggressively, no matter what unconscious content is on the

verge of breaking through. In other words, the character resistance always

remains the same in the same patient and disappears only when the neurosis

has been uprooted.

  The  character  armor  is  the  molded  expression  of narcissistic  defense

chronically  embedded  in  the  psychic  structure.  In  addition  to  the  known

resistances  which  are  mobilized  against  each  new  piece  of  unconscious

material,  there  is  a  constant  resistance  factor  which  has  its  roots  in  the

unconscious and pertains not to content but to form. Because of its origin in

the character, we call this constant resistance factor “character resistance.”

  On  the  basis  of  the  foregoing  statements,  let  us  summarize  the  most

important features of character resistance.

    Character resistance is expressed not in terms of content but formally, in

the way one typically behaves, in the manner in which one speaks, walks, andgestures;  and  in  one’s  characteristic  habits  (how  one  smiles  or  sneers,

whether one speaks coherently or incoherently, how one is polite and how

one is aggressive).

  It is not what the patient says and does that is indicative of character

resistance, but how he speaks and acts; not what he reveals in dreams, but

how he censors, distorts, condenses, etc.

  The character resistance remains the same in the same patient, regardless

of content. Different characters produce the same material in a different way.

The  positive  father  transference  of  a  woman  suffering  from  hysteria  is

expressed and warded off differently than that of a woman suffering from a

compulsive  neurosis.  Anxiety  is  the  defense  mechanism  in  the  former;

aggression in the latter.

  The character resistance which is manifested in terms of form is just as

capable of being resolved, with respect to its content, and of being traced

back to infantile experiences and instinctual interests as the neurotic symptom

3
is.

  In  given  situations,  the  patient’s  character  becomes  a  resistance.  In

everyday life, in other words, the character plays a role similar to the one it

plays as a resistance in the treatment: that of a psychic defense apparatus.

Hence, we speak of the “character armoring” of the ego against the outer

world and the id.

  If we trace the formation of the character into early childhood, we find

that, in its time, the character armor ensued for the same reasons and for the

same purposes the character resistance serves in the contemporary analytic

situation. The resistive projection of the character in the analysis mirrors its

infantile genesis. And those situations which seem to appear by chance but

actually are brought about by the character resistance in the analysis are exact

duplicates of those childhood situations which caused the formation of the

character.  Thus,  in  the  character  resistance,  the  function  of  defense  is

combined with the projection of infantile relationships to the outer world.    Economically, the character in everyday life and the character resistance

in the analysis serve as a means of avoiding what is unpleasant (Unlust), of

establishing and preserving a psychic (even if neurotic) balance, and finally

of  consuming  repressed  quantities  of  instinctual  energy  and/or  quantities

which have eluded repression. The binding of free-floating anxiety or—what

amounts to the same thing—the absorbing of dammed-up psychic energy, is

one of the cardinal functions of the character. Just as the historical, i.e., the

infantile,  element  is  embodied  and  continues  to  live  and  operate  in  the

neurotic  symptom,  so  too  it  lives  and  operates  and  is  embodied  in  the

character.  This  explains  why  the  consistent  loosening  of  the  character

resistance provides a sure and direct approach to the central infantile conflict.

  How  do  these  facts  bear  upon  the  analytic  technique  of  character

analysis? Is there an essential difference between character analysis and the

usual resistance analysis?

  There are differences and they relate to:

  a) the sequence in which the material is to be interpreted

  b) the technique of resistance interpretation itself

  With respect to (a): In speaking of “selection of material,” we shall have

to be prepared to encounter an important objection. It will be said that any

selection is in contradiction to the basic principle of psychoanalysis, namely

that the analyst must follow the patient, must allow himself to be led by him.

Every time the analyst makes a selection, he runs the risk of falling prey to

his own inclinations. First of all, we have to point out that, in the kind of

selection we are speaking of here, it is not a matter of neglecting analytic

material. The whole point here is to insure that the material is interpreted in a

legitimate  sequence,  in  keeping  with  the  structure  of  the  neurosis.  All

material is in turn interpreted; it is only that one detail is momentarily more

important than another. We also have to realize that the analyst always selects

anyhow,  for  in  the  very  act  of  singling  out  individual  details  of  a  dream

instead of interpreting them successively, he has made a selection. And as faras that goes, the analyst has also made a biased selection when he considers

only the content and not the form of the communications. Hence, the very

fact  that  the  patient  produces  material  of  the  most  diverse  kinds  in  the

analytic situation forces the analyst to make selections in interpreting this

material. It is merely a question of selecting correctly, i.e., in keeping with

the analytic situation.

  With  patients  who,  because  of  a  particular  character  development,

repeatedly disregard the fundamental rule, as well as with all cases in which

the character is obstructing the analysis, it will be necessary to single out the

germane character  resistance  from  the  welter  of  material  and  to  work  it

through  analytically  by  interpreting  its  meaning.  Naturally,  this  does  not

mean that the rest of the material is neglected or disregarded. On the contrary,

everything  is  valuable  and  welcome  which  gives  us  an  insight  into  the

meaning and origin of the recalcitrant character trait. The analyst merely puts

off the analysis, and, above all, the interpretation of the material which does

not have an immediate bearing upon the transference resistance, until the

character resistance has been understood and broken through, at least in its

basic features. In Chapter III, I tried to point out the dangers of giving deep

interpretations before the character resistances have been resolved.

  With respect to (b): Now we turn our attention to some special problems

of  the  technique  of  character  analysis.  First,  we  must  anticipate  a  likely

misunderstanding. We stated that character analysis begins with the singling

out and consistent analysis of the character resistance. This does not mean

that the patient is enjoined not to be aggressive, not to be deceptive, not to

speak in an incoherent manner, to follow the basic rule, etc. Such demands

would not only be contrary to analytic procedure, they would be fruitless. It

cannot be sufficiently stressed that what we are describing here has nothing

whatever to do with the so-called education of the patient and similar matters.

In character analysis, we ask ourselves why the patient is deceptive, speaks in

an incoherent manner, is emotionally blocked, etc.; we endeavor to arouse hisinterest in the peculiarities of his character in order to elucidate, with his help,

their meaning and origin through analysis. In other words, we merely single

out  from  the  orbit  of  the  personality  the  character  trait  from  which  the

cardinal resistance proceeds, and, if possible, we show the patient the surface

relation between the character and the symptoms. But for the rest, we leave it

up to him whether or not he wants to make use of his knowledge to change

his character. Fundamentally, our procedure in this is no different from the

one  followed  in  the  analysis  of  a  symptom;  the  one  exception  is  that,  in

character analysis, we have to isolate the character trait and put it before the

patient again and again until he has succeeded in breaking clear of it and in

viewing it as he would a vexatious compulsive symptom. In breaking clear of

and objectifying the neurotic character trait, the patient begins to experience

it  as  something  alien  to  himself,  and  ultimately  gains  an  insight  into  its

nature.

  In  this  process,  it  becomes  apparent,  surprisingly,  that  the  personality

changes—at least temporarily. And as the character analysis progresses, that

impetus  or  disposition  which  gave  rise  to  the  character  resistance  in  the

transference  automatically  comes  to  the  surface  in  an  unconcealed  form.

Applying this to our example of the passive-feminine character, we can say

that the more thoroughly the patient objectifies his inclinations to passive

devotion, the more aggressive he will become. For, of course, his feminine,

deceptive behavior was, in the main, an energetic reaction against repressed

aggressive  impulses.  Hand  in  hand  with  the  aggressiveness,  however,  the

infantile  castration  anxiety  also  reappears  which,  at  one  time,  caused  the

aggression to be transformed into a passive-feminine attitude. Thus, through

the analysis of the character resistance, we arrive at the center of the neurosis,

the Oedipus complex.

  Let there be no illusions, however: the isolation and objectification as

well as the analytic working through of such a character resistance usually

take many months, demand great effort and, most of all, steadfast patience.Once the breakthrough has been achieved, the analytic work usually proceeds

by leaps and bounds, borne by affective analytic experiences. If, on the other

hand,  such  character  resistances  are  left  untended;  if  the  analyst  merely

follows the patient, continually interpreting the content of his material, such

resistances will, as time goes on, form a ballast that will be almost impossible

to remove. When this happens, the analyst begins to feel in his bones that all

his interpretations of content were wasted, that the patient continues to doubt

everything,  to  accept  it  merely pro  forma,  or  to  laugh  in  his  sleeve  at

everything. In later stages of the analysis, after the essential interpretations of

the Oedipus complex have already been given, the analyst will find himself

embroiled in a hopeless situation, if he has neglected to clear away these

resistances right from the beginning.

  I have already tried to refute the objection that resistances cannot be taken

up  until  their infantile  determinants  are  known.  In  the  beginning  of  the

treatment, it is merely necessary for the analyst to discern the contemporary

meaning of the character resistance, for which purpose the infantile material

is  not  always  required.  This  material  we  need  for  the dissolution  of  the

resistance. If, at the beginning, the analyst contents himself with putting the

resistance before the patient and interpreting its contemporary meaning, it is

not  long  before  the  infantile  material  emerges  and,  with  its  help,  the

resistance can then be eliminated.

  When stress is laid upon a previously neglected fact, the impression is

unwittingly created that other facts are being deprived of their importance. If

in this work we lay such strong emphasis on the analysis of the mode of

reaction, this does not mean that we neglect the content. We merely add

something  which  had  not  been  properly  appreciated  before  this.  Our

experience teaches us that the analysis of the character resistance must be

given  absolute  precedence;  but  this  does  not  mean  that  the  analysis  is

confined solely to character resistance until a certain date, when the analyst

then takes up the interpretation of content. To a large extent, the two phases,resistance analysis and analysis of the early infantile experiences, overlap one

another. It is merely that the analysis of the character is given priority at the

beginning of the treatment (“preparing the analysis through analysis”), while

the main accent in the later stages falls upon the interpretation of content and

infantile experiences. This, however, is not a rigid rule; its application will

depend upon the behavior pattern of the individual patient. The interpretation

of  infantile  material  will  be  taken  up  early  with  one  patient,  later  with

another.  There  is  one  rule,  however,  which  must  be  strictly  adhered  to,

namely that deep analytic interpretations have to be avoided, even in the case

of fairly clear material, until the patient is prepared to assimilate them. This is

of course nothing new. Yet, in view of the many different ways in which

analysts work, it is obviously important to know what is meant by “prepared

for  analytic  interpretation.”  In  deciding  this,  we  shall  doubtless  have  to

differentiate those contents which pertain directly to the character resistance

and  those  which  pertain  to  other  spheres  of  experience.  Normally,  in  the

beginning of analysis, the analysand is prepared to take cognizance of the

former but not of the latter. On the whole, the main idea behind character

analysis is to gain the greatest possible security both in the preparatory work

of the analysis and in the interpretation of infantile material. At this point, we

are confronted with the important task of investigating and systematically

describing  the  various  forms  of  character  transference  resistances.  The

technique of dealing with them will emerge of itself from their structure.


d) The technique of dealing with individual situations as derived from the

structure of the character resistance (technique of interpreting ego defense)


  We now turn to the problem of the character-analytic technique of dealing

with  individual  situations,  and  how  this  technique  is  derived  from  the

structure of the character resistance. To illustrate this, we shall take a patient

who develops resistances right at the outset, the structure of which, however,

is far from immediately clear. In the following case, the character resistancehad  a  very  complicated  structure;  there  were  many  determining  factors,

intermingled  with  one  another.  An  attempt  will  be  made  to  set  forth  the

reasons  which  induced  me  to  begin  my  interpretation  precisely  with  one

particular element of the resistance. Here, too, it will become apparent that a

consistent and logical interpretation of the ego defense and of the mechanism

of the “armor” leads into the very heart of the central infantile conflicts.


    A CASE OF MANIFEST FEELINGS OF INFERIORITY


  A thirty-year-old man turned to analysis because he “didn’t really enjoy

life.” He could not really say whether or not he felt sick. Actually, he didn’t

think that he was really in need of treatment. Yet he felt that he should do

whatever he could. He had heard of psychoanalysis—perhaps it could help

him gain insight into himself. He was not aware of having any symptoms. It

turned out that his potency was very weak; he seldom engaged in sexual

intercourse, approached women only with great reluctance, did not derive any

gratification from coitus, and, moreover, suffered from ejaculatio praecox. He

had very little insight into his impotence. He had—so he said—reconciled

himself to its meagerness. There were so many men who had no need of it.

  His demeanor and behavior betrayed at a glance that he was a severely

inhibited and oppressed man. He didn’t look into one’s eyes while speaking,

spoke  softly,  in  a  muffled  way,  with  many  hesitations  and  embarrassed

clearings of the throat. In all this, however, one detected that he was making a

strenuous effort to suppress his shyness and to appear bold. Nonetheless, his

nature bore all the earmarks of severe feelings of inferiority.

    Familiarized with the basic rule, the patient began to speak softly and

hesitatingly.  The  first  communications  included  the  recollection  of  two

“horrible” experiences. While driving a car, he had once run over a woman,

who had died from the effects of the accident. Another time he had gotten

into a situation where he had to perform a tracheotomy on a person who was

suffocating (the patient had been a medical orderly in the war). He couldthink of these two experiences only with horror. During the first sessions, he

spoke  about  his  home  in  an  unvaried,  somewhat  monotonous,  soft,  and

muffled way. As the second youngest of several brothers and sisters, he had a

second-rate position in the household. The oldest brother, some twenty years

his senior, was the darling of the parents. He had traveled a great deal and he

knew his way around “in the world.” At home he vaunted his experiences,

and when he returned from a trip, “the entire household revolved around

him.” Though the envy and hatred of his brother were clearly evident from

the content of the communication, the patient vehemently denied having any

such feelings when I made a cautious inquiry in this direction. He had, he

said, never felt any such thing against his brother.

  Then he talked about his mother, who had been very good to him and who

had died when he was seven years old. While speaking about her, he began to

cry softly, was ashamed of his tears, and didn’t say anything for a long time.

It seemed clear that the mother had been the only person who had given him

a bit of attention and love, that her demise had been a severe shock to him,

and he could not hold back his tears in remembering her. After the death of

his mother, he had spent five years in the house of his brother. It was not

from what he said but from the way he said it that his enormous animosity

toward the domineering, cold, and unfriendly nature of his brother became

evident.

  Then, in short, not very pregnant sentences, he related that he had a friend

now who very much loved and admired him. Following this communication,

there was a prolonged silence. A few days later he reported a dream: he saw

himself in a strange city with his friend, except that the face of his friend was

different. Since, for the purpose of the analysis, the patient had left the town

in which he had been living, it was reasonable to assume that the man in the

dream represented the analyst. The fact that the patient identified him with

his  friend  could  be  interpreted  as  an  indication  of  an  incipient  positive

transference; but the situation as a whole militated against conceiving of thisas  a  positive  transference,  and  even  against  its  interpretation.  The  patient

himself recognized the analyst in the friend but had nothing to add to this.

Since  he  was  either  silent  or  monotonously  expressing  doubts  about his

ability to carry out the analysis, I told him that he had something against me

but lacked the courage to articulate it. He vehemently denied this, whereupon

I told him that he had also never dared to express his hostile emotions toward

his older brother, indeed had not even dared to think of them consciously. I

also pointed out that he had obviously established some kind of a connection

between me and his older brother. This was true, but I committed the error of

interpreting his resistance too deeply. The interpretation did not achieve its

purpose, so I waited a few days, observing his demeanor the while, to see

what relevance the resistance had for the contemporary situation. This much

was clear to me: in addition to the transference of the hatred of the brother,

there was a strong defense against a feminine attitude (the dream about the

friend).  Naturally,  I  couldn’t  risk  an  interpretation  in  this  direction.  So  I

continued to point out that, for one reason or another, he was fighting shy of

me and the analysis. I told him that his whole manner was indicative of a

block against the analysis. He agreed with this and went on to say that this

had  always  been  his  way  in  life—rigid,  inaccessible,  defensive.  While  I

constantly and consistently, in every session and at every opportunity, called

his attention to his recalcitrance, I was struck by the monotonous tone in

which  he  expressed  his  complaints.  Every  session  began  with  the  same

remarks: “What’s this all leading to, I don’t feel a thing, the analysis has no

influence on me, will I be able to go through with it, I can’t, nothing comes to

mind, the analysis has no influence on me,” and so on. I couldn’t understand

what he was trying to express. And yet it was clear that here lay the key to

                                        4
the understanding of his resistance.

  This offers us a good opportunity to study the difference between the

character-analytic  and  the  active-suggestive  preparation  of  the  patient  for

analysis. I could have urged the patient in a nice way and endeavored toexercise  a  kind  of  comforting  influence  to  get  him  to  produce  additional

communications. It is even possible that, by so doing, I might have brought

about an artificial positive transference; but experiences with other cases had

taught me that one does not get very far with this approach. Since his entire

demeanor left no room for doubt that he opposed the analysis in general and

me  in  particular,  there  was  no  reason  why  I  should  not  continue  in  this

interpretation and wait for further reactions. One time, when we returned to

the dream, he said the best proof that he did not reject me was the fact that he

identified me with his friend. I took this opportunity to suggest that perhaps

he had expected me to have the same liking and admiration for him that his

friend had, that he had been disappointed, and now very much resented my

reserve. He had to admit that he had harbored such thoughts but had not had

the courage to tell me. Subsequently he told me that he had always merely

demanded love and especially recognition and that he had always behaved

very defensively, especially toward manly-looking men. He felt that he was

not on a par with them, and in his relationship with his friend he played the

feminine role. Again he offered me material toward the interpretation of his

feminine transference, but his demeanor as a whole cautioned me against

making such a disclosure. The situation was difficult, for the elements of his

resistance which I already understood, the transference of the hatred he felt

for his brother and the narcissistic-feminine attitude toward his superiors, had

been sharply rejected. Hence, I had to be very careful if I did not want to risk

the abrupt termination of the analysis at that time. Moreover, in each session,

he complained almost without letup and always in the same way that the

analysis was not having any effect on him, etc. Even after some four weeks

of analysis, I still did not understand this attitude, though it appeared to me as

an essential and momentarily acute character resistance.

  I fell ill at this time and had to interrupt the analysis for two weeks. The

patient sent me a bottle of cognac as a tonic. He seemed pleased when I

resumed the analysis, but continued to complain in the same way, and toldme that he was tortured by thoughts of death. He couldn’t get it out of his

mind that something had happened to someone in his family, and while I was

sick  he  couldn’t  stop  thinking  that  I  might  die.  One  day,  when  he  was

especially  tortured  by  this  thought,  he  made  up  his  mind  to  send  me  the

cognac. It was a very tempting opportunity to interpret his repressed death

wishes. There was more than ample material for such an interpretation, yet I

was held back by the consideration and the definite feeling that it would have

been sterile, merely ricocheting from the wall of his complaints: “Nothing

gets through to me”; the “analysis has no affect on me.” In the meantime, of

course, the concealed ambiguity of the complaint that “nothing gets through

to me” had become clear. This was an expression of his deeply repressed

passive-feminine transference desire for anal intercourse. But would it have

been  sensible  and  justified  to  interpret  his  homosexual  desire,  however

clearly manifested, while his ego continued to protest against the analysis?

First, the meaning of his complaint about the fruitlessness of the analysis had

to become clear. I might have shown him that his complaint was unfounded.

He always had new dreams to report, the thoughts of death became more

pronounced, and many other things were taking place in him. I knew from

experience that telling him this would not have eased the situation, despite

the fact that I clearly felt the armor which stood between the analysis and the

material offered by the id. Moreover, in all probability, I had to assume that

the existing resistance would not allow any interpretation to pass through to

the id. Thus, I continued to dwell on his behavior—interpreting it to him as

an expression of his strong defense—and told him we both had to wait until

the meaning of this behavior became clear to us. He had already grasped that

the thoughts of death which he had had on the occasion of my illness did not

necessarily have to be an expression of his loving concern for me.

  In the course of the following weeks, the impressions of his behavior and

his  complaints  multiplied.  It  became  more  and  more  clear  that  these

complaints  were  intimately  related  to  the  defense  of  his  femininetransference,  but  the  situation  was  still  not  ripe  for  exact  interpretation.  I

lacked a tight formulation of the meaning of his behavior as a whole. Let us

summarize the fundamental aspects of the solution which followed later:

  a) He wanted recognition and love from me as well as from all other men

who appeared masculine to him. The fact that he wanted love and had been

disappointed by me had already been interpreted repeatedly, without success.

  b) His attitude toward me, the transference of his unconscious attitude

toward his brother, was clearly full of hate and envy; to avoid the danger of

having the interpretation fizzle out, it was best not to analyze this attitude at

this point.

  c)  He  warded  off  his  feminine  transference;  the  defense  could  not  be

interpreted without touching upon the forbidden femininity.

  d) He felt inferior to me because of his femininity—and his continuous

complaints could only be an expression of his inferiority complex.

  I now interpreted his feelings of inferiority toward me. At first, this had

no  success.  After  several  days  of  consistently  dwelling  upon  his  nature,

however, he finally produced some communications on his inordinate envy,

not of me but of other men he also felt inferior to. And now I was suddenly

struck by the idea that his continual complaints that “the analysis has no

effect on me” could have no other meaning than, “It’s worthless.” It follows,

therefore,  that  the  analyst  is  inferior,  impotent,  and  could  not  achieve

anything with him. Thus the complaints were to be understood partially as a

triumph over and partially as a reproach against the analyst. Now I told him

how I viewed his continual complaints; even I was amazed at the success. He

accepted my interpretation as quite plausible. He immediately came up with a

large number of examples which revealed that he always acted this way when

someone wanted to influence him. He said that he could not endure another

person’s superiority and always endeavored to disparage those toward whom

he felt inferior. He went on to say that he had always done the exact opposite

of what a superior had demanded of him. He brought forward a wealth ofrecollections about his insolent and deprecatory attitude toward teachers.

  Here, then, lay his pent-up aggressiveness, the most extreme expression

of which, until this point, had been the death wish. But our joy was short-

lived. The resistance returned in the same form—the same complaints, the

same depression, the same silence. But now I knew that my disclosure had

very much impressed him and, as a consequence, his feminine attitude had

become more pronounced.  The  immediate  result  of  this,  naturally,  was  a

renewed warding off of the effeminacy. In the analysis of this resistance, I

again proceeded from his feelings of inferiority toward me, but I enlarged

upon the interpretation by pointing out that he not only felt inferior but also,

indeed precisely for this reason, felt himself cast in a feminine role toward

me, a fact which was too much of an insult to his manly pride.

    Notwithstanding the fact that he had, before this, produced a great deal of

material about his feminine behavior toward manly men and had also showed

complete understanding of it, he no longer wanted to know anything about it.

This was a new problem. Why did he refuse to admit something he himself

had  described  earlier?  I  continued  to  interpret  the  meaning  of  his  acute

behavior, namely that he felt so inferior toward me, that he refused to accept

what I explained to him, though this refusal constituted reversal of his earlier

position.  He  admitted  that  this  was  true,  and  went  on  to  give  a  detailed

account of his relationship to his friend. It turned out that he had indeed

played the feminine role; there had often been intercouse between the thighs.

I could now show him that his defensive behavior was nothing other than the

expression  of  a  struggle  against  the  surrender  to  analysis  which,  for  his

unconscious, was obviously related to the idea of surrendering to the analyst

in a feminine way. This too, however, was an insult to his pride and was the

reason  for  his  tenacious  opposition  to  the  influence  of  the  analysis.  He

reacted to this with a confirmatory dream: he is lying on a sofa with the

analyst and is kissed by him. However, this clear dream released a new wave

of  resistance,  again  in  the  old  form  of  complaints  (the  analysis  was  nothaving any affect on him, couldn’t have any influence on him, what was it

leading to anyhow, he was completely cold, etc.). I interpreted his complaints

as a deprecation of the analysis and a defense against surrendering to it. At

the same time, I began to explain to him the economic meaning of his block. I

told him that, even on the basis of what he had related about his childhood

and  adolescence,  it  was  clear  he  had  immured  himself  against  all  the

disappointments which he had experienced in the outside world and against

the rough, cold treatment on the part of father, brother, and teachers. This had

been his only salvation, even if a salvation which entailed many restrictions

upon his enjoyment of life.

  He immediately accepted this explanation as plausible and followed it up

with remembrances of his behavior toward teachers. He had always found

them so cold and alien (a clear projection of his own feelings), and even if he

were  outwardly  agitated  when  they  beat  or  scolded  him,  he  remained

inwardly indifferent. In this connection, he told me that he had often wished I

were more strict. At first, the meaning of this desire did not appear to fit into

the situation; much later it became clear that at the bottom of his obstinacy

lay the intent to put me and my prototypes, the teachers, in the wrong.

  For several days the analysis proceeded free of resistances; now he went

on to relate that there had been a time in his early childhood when he had

been very wild and aggressive. At the same time, curiously, he produced

dreams which revealed a strong feminine attitude toward me. I could only

surmise  that  the  recollection  of  his  aggressiveness  had  simultaneously

mobilized the guilt feeling which was expressed in these dreams of a passive-

feminine nature. I avoided an analysis of the dreams not only because they

were  not  directly  related  to  the  existing  transference  situation  but  also

because  he  did  not  appear  prepared  to  grasp  the  connection  between  his

aggression and dreams expressing a guilt feeling. I assume that some analysts

will regard this as an arbitrary selection of material. Against this, however, I

have to defend the clinically tested position that the optimum in therapy willbe  achieved  when  a  direct  connection  has  been  established  between  the

contemporary transference situation and the infantile material. So I merely

voiced  the  supposition  that  his  recollection  of  the  wild  conduct  of  his

childhood indicated he had once been wholly different, the exact opposite of

what he was today, and the analysis would have to uncover the time and the

circumstances that led to the transformation of his character. Presumably, his

present effeminacy was a moving out of the way of aggressive masculinity.

The patient did not react to this disclosure at all; instead, he sank back into

the old resistance: he couldn’t manage it, he didn’t feel anything, the analysis

had no effect on him, etc.

  I again interpreted his feelings of inferiority and his repeated attempt to

show  up  the  powerlessness  of  the  analysis  or,  more  to  the  point,  of  the

analyst; but I also endeavored now to work out the transference of the attitude

he held toward his brother. He himself had said that the brother had always

played the dominant role. He entered into this only with great hesitation,

evidently because it concerned the central conflict situation of his childhood.

He repeated that the mother had paid a great deal of attention to the brother,

without, however, going into his subjective attitude toward this preference.

As was brought out by a cautious inquiry in this direction, he was completely

closed to an insight into his envy of his brother. This envy, it had to be

assumed, was so intimately associated with an intensive hate and repressed

out  of  fear  that  not  even  the  feeling  of  envy  was  permitted  to  enter

consciousness. An especially strong resistance resulted from my attempt to

draw out his envy of his brother; it lasted many days and was marked by

stereotyped complaints about his powerlessness. Since the resistance did not

give way, it had to be assumed that we were dealing with a very immediate

defense against the person of the analyst. I again urged him to speak openly

and without fear about the analysis and particularly about the analyst and to

                                                                                5
tell what impression the analyst had made on him on first encounter. After a

long hesitation, he told me in a faltering voice that the analyst had appearedcrudely  masculine  and  brutal  to  him,  as  a  man  who  would  be  absolutely

ruthless toward women in sexual matters. How did this fit in with his attitude

toward men who appeared potent?

  We were at the end of the fourth month of analysis. Now, for the first

time,  that  repressed  relationship  to  the  brother  broke  through  which  was

intimately related to the most disruptive element of the existing transference,

envy of potency. Revealing strong affects, he suddenly remembered that he

had always condemned his brother in the most rigorous manner because he

(the brother) chased after all the girls, seduced them, and, moreover, made a

show of it. My appearance had immediately reminded him of his brother.

Given greater confidence by his last communication, I again explained the

transference situation and showed him that he identified me with his potent

brother and, precisely for this reason, could not open himself to me; that is,

he  condemned  me  and  resented  my  alleged  superiority,  as  he  had  once

condemned  and  resented  his  brother’s  alleged  superiority.  I  told  him,

furthermore, that it was clearly evident now that the basis of his inferiority

was a feeling of impotence.

  After this explanation, the  central  element  of  the  character  resistance

emerged spontaneously. In a correctly and consistently carried out analysis,

this will happen every time, without the analyst having to push matters or

give  anticipatory  conceptions.  In  a  flash  he  remembered  that  he  had

repeatedly compared his own small penis with his brother’s big penis, and

had envied his brother because of it.

  As  was  to  be  expected,  a  powerful  resistance  again  ensued;  again  he

complained, “I can’t do anything,” etc. Now I was able to go a step further in

my interpretations and show him that these complaints were a verbalization

of his feeling of impotence. His reaction to this was completely unexpected.

After my interpretation of his distrust, he declared for the first time that he

had never believed any man, that he believed nothing at all, probably not

even the analysis. Naturally, this was a big step forward. But the meaning ofthis  communication,  its  connection  to  the  preceding  situation,  was  not

immediately  clear.  He  spoke  for  two  hours  on  the  many  disappointments

which he had experienced in his life, and was of the opinion that his distrust

could be rationally traced back to these disappointments. The old resistance

reappeared. Since I was not sure what lay behind it this time, I decided to

wait. For several days the situation remained unchanged—the old complaints,

the familiar behavior. I continued to interpret the elements of the resistance

which had already been worked through and were very familiar to me, when

suddenly a new element emerged. He said that he was afraid of the analysis

because it might deprive him of his ideals. Now the situation was clear again.

He  had  transferred  to  me  the  castration  anxiety  which  he  felt  toward  his

brother. He was afraid of me. Naturally, I made no mention of the castration

anxiety, but again proceeded from his inferiority complex and his impotence

and asked him whether he did not feel himself superior to all people on the

basis of his high ideals, whether he did not regard himself as better than all

the  others.  This  he  readily  admitted;  indeed,  he  went  even  further.  He

asserted that he really was superior to all the others, who chased after women

and were like animals in their sexuality. With less certitude he added that,

unfortunately,  this  feeling  was  frequently  disturbed  by  his  impotence.

Evidently, he had not yet entirely come to terms with his sexual debility.

Now I was able to elucidate the neurotic manner in which he was attempting

to deal with his feeling of impotence and to show him that he was seeking to

regain  a  feeling  of  potency  in  the  sphere  of  ideals.  I  showed  him  the

compensation and again drew his attention to the resistances to the analysis

which stemmed from his secret feeling of superiority. It was not only that he

secretly thought of himself as better and more intelligent; it was precisely for

this reason that he had to resist the analysis. For if it turned out to be a

success, then he would have needed someone’s help and the analysis would

have  vanquished  his  neurosis,  the  secret  value  of  which  we  had  just

uncovered. From the point of view of the neurosis, this constituted a defeatand, in terms of his unconscious, this also meant becoming a woman. In this

way, moving forward from his ego and its defense mechanisms, I prepared

the ground for the interpretation of the castration complex and the feminine

fixation.

  Thus, using the patient’s demeanor as its point of departure, character

analysis had succeeded in penetrating directly to the center of the neurosis,

his castration anxiety, the envy of his brother stemming from the mother’s

preference of the brother, and the concomitant disappointment in her. The

outlines  of  the  Oedipus  complex  were  already  coming  into  view.  Here,

however, what is important is not that these unconscious elements emerged—

this  often  happens  spontaneously.  What  is  important  is  the  legitimate

sequence in which they emerged and the intimate contact they had with the

ego defense and the transference. Last but not least, it is important that this

happened  without  pushing  but  through  pure  analytic  interpretation  of  the

patient’s  bearing  and  with  accompanying  affects.  This  constitutes  what  is

specific to consistent character analysis. It means a thorough working through

of the conflicts assimilated by the ego.

  Let  us  compare  this  with  what  might  have  resulted  if  we  had  not

consistently focused on our patient’s ego defense. Right at the beginning, the

possibility existed of interpreting both his passive homosexual relationship to

his brother and the death wish. We have no doubt that dreams and subsequent

associations  would  have  yielded  additional  material  for  interpretation.

However,  unless  his  ego  defense  had  been  systematically  and  thoroughly

worked  through  beforehand,  no  interpretation  would  have  evoked  an

affective  response;  instead,  we  would  have  obtained  an  intellectual

knowledge of his passive desire on the one hand and a narcissistic, highly

affective  defense  against  these  desires  on  the  other  hand.  The  affects

pertaining to the passivity and murder impulses would have remained in the

function  of  defense.  The  result  would  have  been  a  chaotic  situation,  the

typical bleak picture of an analysis rich in interpretation and poor in success.Several months of patient and persistent work on the ego resistance, with

particular reference to its form (complaints, inflection, etc.), lifted the ego to

the level necessary to assimilate what was repressed, loosened the affects,

and brought about a shifting in their direction to the repressed ideas.

  Thus, it cannot be said that there were two techniques which could have

been applied in this case; there was only one, if the intent was to change the

case dynamically.  I  hope  that  this  case  has  made  sufficiently  clear  the

predominant  difference  in  the  conception  of  the  application  of  theory  to

technique. The most important criterion of effective analysis is the use of few

(but accurate and consistent) interpretations, instead of many unsystematic

interpretations which fail to take the dynamic and economic moment into

account. If the analyst does not allow himself to be tempted by the material

but correctly assesses its dynamic position and economic role, the result is

that,  though  he  will  receive  the  material  later,  it  will  be  that  much  more

thorough  and  affect-laden.  The  second  criterion  is  the  maintaining  of  a

continuous connection between the contemporary situation and the infantile

situation. The initial disconnectedness and confusion of the analytic material

is  transformed  into  an  orderly  sequence,  that  is,  the  succession  of  the

resistances  and  contents  is  now  determined  by  the  special  dynamics  and

structural relations of the particular neurosis. When the work of interpretation

is not performed systematically, the analyst must always make a fresh start,

search  about,  divine  more  than  deduce.  When  the  work  of  interpretation

proceeds  along  character-analytic  lines,  on  the  other  hand,  the  analytic

process develops naturally. In the former case, the analysis runs smoothly in

the beginning only to become more and more entangled in difficulties; in the

latter case, the most serious difficulties present themselves in the first weeks

and months of the treatment, only to give way to smoother work, even in the

deepest  material.  Hence,  the  fate  of  each  analysis  depends  upon  the

introduction of the treatment, i.e., upon the correct or incorrect unraveling of

the resistances. Thus, the third criterion is the unraveling of the case, notarbitrarily  from  any  position  which  happens  to  be  conspicuous  and

intelligible, but from those positions where the strongest ego resistance is

concealed, followed by the systematic expansion of the initial incursion into

the unconscious and the working through of the important infantile fixations,

which are affect-laden at any given time. An unconscious position which

manifests  itself  in  dreams  or  in  an  association,  at  a  certain  point  in  the

treatment and notwithstanding the fact that it is of central importance for the

neurosis, can play a completely subordinate role, i.e., have no contemporary

importance  with  respect  to  the  technique  of  the  case.  In  our  patient,  the

feminine relationship to the brother was the central pathogen; yet in the first

months the fear of losing the compensation for impotence provided by the

fantasized ego ideals constituted the problem with respect to technique. The

error which is usually made is that the analyst attacks the central element in

the neurotic formation (which usually manifests itself in some way right at

the outset), instead of first attacking those positions which have a specific

contemporary  importance.  Systematically  worked  through  in  succession,

these positions must eventually lead to the central pathogenic element. In

short, it is important, indeed decisive for the success of many cases, how,

when, and from which side the analyst penetrates to the core of the neurosis.

  It is not difficult to fit what we are describing here as character analysis

into  Freud’s  theory  of  resistance  formation  and  resistance  resolution.  We

know that every resistance consists of an id impulse which is warded off and

an ego impulse which wards off. Both impulses are unconscious. In principle,

it would seem to be a matter of choice whether the striving of the id or the

striving  of  the  ego  is  interpreted  first.  For  example:  if  a  homosexual

resistance  in  the  form  of  silence  is  encountered  right  at  the  outset  of  an

analysis, the striving of the id can be taken up by telling the patient that he is

presently engaged in tender intentions toward the person of the analyst. His

positive transference has been interpreted and, if he does not take flight, it

will be a long time before he becomes reconciled to this hideous idea. Hence,the analyst must give precedence to that aspect of the resistance which lies

closer to the conscious ego, namely the ego defense, by merely telling the

patient, to begin with, that he is silent because he rejects the analysis “for one

reason or another,” presumably because it has become dangerous to him in

some  way.  In  short,  the  resistance  is  attacked  without  entering  into  the

striving of the id. In the former case, that aspect of the resistance which

pertains to the id (in the above instance, the love tendency) has been attacked

through interpretation; in the latter case, that part of the resistance pertaining

to the ego, i.e., the rejection, is attacked through interpretation.

  By  using  this  procedure,  we  simultaneously  penetrate  the  negative

transference, in which every defense finally ends, and also the character, the

armor of the ego. The surface layer of every resistance, i.e., the layer closest

to consciousness, must of necessity be a negative attitude toward the analyst,

whether the id striving is based on hate or love. The ego projects onto the

analyst its defense against the striving of the id. Thus, the analyst becomes an

enemy and is dangerous because, by his imposition of the irksome basic rule,

he has provoked id strivings and has disturbed the neurotic balance. In its

defense, the ego makes use of very old forms of defensive attitudes. In a

pinch it calls upon hate impulses from the id for help in its defense, even

when it is warding off a love striving.

  Thus, if we adhere to the rule of tackling that part of the resistance which

pertains to the ego, we also resolve a part of negative transference in the

process,  a  quantity  of  affect-laden  hate,  and  thereby  avoid  the  danger  of

overlooking  the  destructive  tendencies  which  are  very  often  brilliantly

concealed; at the same time the positive transference is strengthened. The

patient  also  comprehends  the  ego  interpretation  more  easily  because  it  is

more related to his conscious feelings; in this way, he is also more prepared

for the id interpretations which follow later.

  No matter what kind of id strivings we are dealing with, the ego defense

always  has  the  same  form,  namely  one  that  corresponds  to  the  patient’scharacter; and the same id striving is warded off in various ways in various

patients. Thus, we leave the character untouched when we interpret only the

striving of the id; on the other hand, we include the neurotic character in the

analysis when we tackle the resistances fundamentally from the defense, i.e.,

from the ego side. In the former case, we tell the analysand immediately what

he is warding off; in the latter case, we first make it clear to him that he is

warding off “something,” then how he is going about it, what means he is

employing  to  do  it  (character  analysis),  and  only  much  later,  when  the

analysis of the resistance has progressed sufficiently, he is told or finds out

for himself what the defense is directed against. In this very roundabout way

to the interpretation of the id strivings, all the germane attitudes of the ego are

taken apart analytically, thus precluding the grave danger that the patient will

learn  something  too  soon,  or  that  he  will  remain  unemotional  and

unconcerned.

  Analyses in which the attitudes are accorded so much analytic attention

proceed  in  a  more  orderly  and  more  effective  manner,  without  the  least

detriment to the theoretical research work. It is only that the important events

of  childhood  are  learned  later  than  usual.  However,  this  is  amply

compensated for by the emotional freshness with which the infantile material

springs  forth after  the  character  resistances  have  been  worked  through

analytically.

  Yet, we must not fail to mention certain unpleasant aspects of consistent

character analysis. Character analysis subjects the patient to far more psychic

strain; the patient suffers much more than when the character is left out of

consideration. This has, to be sure, the advantage of a weeding out: those

who don’t hold out would not have been cured anyhow, and it is better to

have a case fail after four or six months than to have it fail after two years.

But experience shows that if the character resistance does not break down, a

satisfactory success cannot be counted on. This is especially true of cases

having  concealed  character  resistances.  The  overcoming  of  the  characterresistance does not mean that the patient has changed his character; this is

possible only after the analysis of its infantile sources. He must merely have

objectified it and have gained an analytic interest in it. Once this has been

accomplished, a favorable continuation of the analysis is very probable.


e) The breaking down of the narcissistic defense apparatus


  As we already mentioned, the essential difference between the analysis of

a symptom and that of a neurotic character trait consists in the fact that, from

the very outset, the former is isolated and objectified, whereas the latter must

be continually singled out in the analysis so that the patient gains the same

attitude toward it as toward a symptom. It is only seldom that this happens

easily. There are patients who show very little inclination to take an objective

view of their character. This is understandable, for it is a question of the

breaking  down  of  the  narcissistic  defense  mechanism,  and  the  working

through of the libido anxiety which is bound in it.

  A twenty-five-year-old man sought analytic help because of a few minor

symptoms and a disturbance in his work. He exhibited a free, self-confident

bearing,  yet  one  sometimes  had  the  vague  impression  that  his  behavior

required great strain and that he did not establish a genuine relationship with

the person with whom he happened to be speaking. There was something

cold in his manner of speaking; his voice was soft and subtly ironic. Once in

a while he smiled, but it was hard to know whether it was a smile indicative

of embarrassment, superiority, or irony.

  The  analysis  commenced  with  violent  emotions  and  a  vast  amount  of

enactment. He cried when he spoke of his mother’s demise and swore when

he described the usual upbringing of children. He divulged only very general

information about his past: his parents had had a very unhappy marriage; his

mother had been very strict with him; and it wasn’t until he had reached

maturity that he established a rather superficial relationship with his brothers

and sisters. All his communications sharpened the original impression thatneither his crying nor his swearing nor any of his other emotions was sincere

and natural. He himself stated that it really wasn’t so bad as all that, and

indeed he was forever smiling at everything he said. After several sessions,

he  took  to  provoking  the  analyst.  When  I  had  concluded  the  session,  for

example, he would continue to lie on the couch ostentatiously for a while; or

he  would  strike  up  a  conversation  afterwards.  Once  he  asked  me  what  I

would do if he seized me by the throat. Two sessions later he tried to frighten

me  by  a  sudden  movement  of  his  hand  toward  my  head.  I  shrank  back

instinctively and told him that the analysis required of him only that he say

everything, not that he do everything. Another time, he stroked my arm on

taking leave. The deeper but inexplicable meaning of this behavior was an

incipient homosexual transference which was expressing itself sadistically.

When I translated these actions superficially as provocations, he smiled to

himself  and  immured  himself  even  more.  The  actions  as  well  as  the

communications ceased; only the stereotyped smile remained. He began to

immerse  himself  in  silence.  When  I  called  his  attention  to  the  resistive

character of his behavior, he merely smiled again and repeated, after a period

of silence, the word “resistance” several times, in a clearly ironic tone of

voice. In this way, his smiling and his tendency to treat everything ironically

became the fulcrum of the analytic task.

  The situation was difficult enough. Apart from the scanty information

about his childhood, I knew nothing about him. So I had to concentrate on his

mode  of  behavior  in  the  analysis.  For  the  time  being,  I  withdrew  into  a

passive position and waited to see what would come, but there was no change

in his behavior. About two weeks elapsed in this way. Then it struck me that,

in point of time, the intensification of his smiling coincided with my warding

off his aggression. So, to begin with, I tried to make him understand the

contemporary reason for his smiling. I told him that there was no doubt his

smiling meant many different things, but at the moment it was his reaction to

my cowardice as testified by my instinctive drawing back. He said that thiswas very likely true, but he would continue to smile nonetheless. He spoke

little and on matters of subsidiary importance, treated the analysis ironically,

and stated that he couldn’t believe anything I told him. Gradually, it became

more and more clear that his smiling served as a defense against the analysis.

I repeatedly pointed this out to him throughout several sessions, but several

weeks elapsed before he had a dream, the content of which was that a pillar

made  of  brick  was  cut  down  into  individual  bricks  by  a  machine.  What

relation this dream had to the analytic situation was all the more difficult to

fathom inasmuch as he did not produce any associations at first. Finally, he

stated that the dream was altogether quite clear; obviously, it dealt with the

castration complex—and he smiled. I told him that his irony was merely an

attempt to disavow the sign that the unconscious had given him through the

dream. This evoked a screen memory, which was of the greatest importance

for the future development of the analysis. He remembered that once, when

he was about five, he had “played horsy” in the courtyard of his parents’

home. He had crawled about on all fours, letting his penis hang out of his

pants; his mother had caught him in the act and asked him what he was doing

—he had merely smiled. For the time being, there was nothing else to be

gotten out of him. Yet, some clarity had been gained; his smiling was a part

of the mother transference. When I now told him that, obviously, he was

acting here as he had acted toward his mother and that his smiling must have

a definite meaning, he merely smiled. All this was of course very nice, he

said, but its meaning eluded him. For several days we had the same smiling

and  silence  on  his  part  and,  on  my  part,  consistent  interpretation  of  his

behavior  as  a  defense  against  the  analysis  and  of  his  smiling  as  the

conquering  of  a  secret  fear  of  this  interpretation.  Yet  he  warded  off  this

interpretation  of  his  behavior  with  his  typical  smile.  This,  too,  was

consistently interpreted as a block against my influence, and I pointed out to

him that he evidently was always smiling in life. He admitted that this was

the only possibility of holding one’s own in the world. In admitting this,however, he had unwittingly concurred with my interpretation. One day he

came into the analysis wearing his usual smile and said, “You’ll be happy

today, Doctor. I was struck by something funny. In my mother tongue, bricks

mean the testicles of a horse. That’s pretty good, isn’t it? You see, it is the

castration complex.” I told him that this might or might not be the case, but as

long as he persisted in his defensive attitude, it was out of the question to

think of analyzing his dream. He would be sure to nullify every association

and every interpretation with his smiling. We have to append here that his

smile was hardly more than a suggestion of a smile; it expressed, rather, a

sense of mockery. I told him that he had no need to be afraid to laugh heartily

and loudly at the analysis. From then on, he came out much more clearly with

his irony. But the verbal association, so ironically communicated, was a very

valuable  cue  toward  an  understanding  of  the  situation.  It  seemed  very

probable that, as is often the case, the analysis had been conceived of as a

castration threat and had been warded off in the beginning with aggression

and later with smiling. I returned to the aggression he had expressed at the

beginning  of  the  analysis  and  supplemented  my  earlier  interpretation  by

pointing out that he had used his provocation to test to what extent he could

trust me, to see how far he could go. In short, his lack of trust was very likely

rooted in a childhood fear. This explanation made an evident impression on

him.  He  was  momentarily  shaken,  but  quickly  recovered  and  began  once

again  to  deride  the  analysis  and  the  analyst.  Well  aware,  from  the  few

indications derived from the reactions to his dream, that my interpretations

were hitting home and were undermining his ego defense, I refused to be

diverted. Unfortunately, he was not too happy about this, and he stuck to his

smiling just as tenaciously as I stuck to my explanatory work. Many sessions

elapsed without any apparent progress. I intensified my interpretations not

only by becoming more insistent but also by more closely relating his smiling

to the supposed infantile fear. I pointed out that he was afraid of the analysis

because it would arouse his childhood conflicts. He had, I said, at one timecome to terms with these conflicts, even if not in a very satisfactory way, and

now he recoiled from the possibility of having again to go through all that he

thought he had mastered with the help of his smile. But he was deceiving

himself, for his excitement in telling of his mother’s death had certainly been

genuine. I also ventured the opinion that his relationship to his mother had

not been unambiguous; surely he had not only feared her and derided her but

also loved her. Somewhat more seriously than usual, he related details of his

mother’s loveless attitude toward him. Once, when he had been naughty, she

had even injured his hand with a knife. To this, however, he added, “Right,

according  to  analytic  theory,  this  is  again  the  castration  complex?”  But

something serious seemed to be preparing itself inside of him. On the basis of

the analytic situation, I continued to interpret the contemporary and latent

meaning  of  his  smile.  During  this  time,  additional  dreams  were  reported.

Their manifest content was rather typical of symbolic castration fantasies.

Finally, he produced a dream in which horses appeared, and another dream in

which the fire department was mobilized and out of a truck rose a high tower

from which a powerful column of water was discharged into the flames of a

burning house. At this time, occasional bed-wettings were also reported. He

himself  recognized,  albeit  still  with  a  smile,  the  connection  between  the

“horse dream” and his playing “horsy.” He recalled, indeed, that the long

genital  of  horses  had  always  been  of  special  interest  to  him,  and  added

spontaneously that he had no doubt imitated such a horse in the childish

game. Micturition had also afforded him great pleasure. He did not remember

whether he had wet his bed as a child.

  Another time when we were discussing the infantile meaning of his smile,

he put a different interpretation on the smile of the childhood incident in

which he had been playing “horsy.” It was quite possible, he said, that it had

been intended not as a sneer but as an attempt to disarm his mother, out of

fear that she would scold him. In this way, he came closer and closer to what,

on the basis of his behavior in the analysis, I had been interpreting to him formonths. Thus, the function and meaning of the smile had changed in the

course of his development: at first it had been an attempt to propitiate, later

it had become a compensation for inner fear, and finally it served a feeling of

superiority. The patient himself hit upon this explanation when, in the course

of several sessions, he reconstructed the way he had found to keep at bay the

misery of his childhood. Hence, the meaning was: “Nothing can harm me; I

am  immune  to  everything.”  It  was  in  the  latter  sense  that  the  smile  had

become a resistance in the analysis, a defense against the resuscitation of the

old conflicts. Infantile fear seemed to be the essential motive for this defense.

A dream which the patient had at about the end of the fifth month of analysis

revealed  the  deepest  layer  of  his  fear,  the  fear  of  being  deserted  by  his

mother. The dream went as follows: “Accompanied by an unknown person, I

am riding in a car through a completely deserted and dreary looking town.

The houses are dilapidated, the windows smashed. No one is to be seen. It is

as if death had ravaged this place. We come to a gate, and I want to turn

back. I tell my companion we should have another look around. A man and a

woman in mourning are kneeling on the sidewalk. I walk toward them with

the intent of asking them something. As I touch their shoulders, they are

startled, and I wake up in fear.” The most important association was that the

town was similar to the one he had lived in until he was four. Symbolically,

the death of the mother and the feeling of infantile desertion were clearly

intimated. The companion was the analyst. For the first time the patient took

a dream completely seriously and without smiling. The character resistance

had  been  broken  through  and  the  connection  had  been  established  to  the

infantile  material.  From  this  point  on,  apart  from  the  usual  interruptions

caused by relapses into the old character resistance, the analysis proceeded

without  any  particular  difficulty.  But  a  deep  depression  ensued,  which

disappeared only with time.

    Naturally, the difficulties were far greater than may be evident from this

brief summary. The resistance phase from beginning to end lasted almost sixmonths and was marked by continuing mockery of the analysis. If it had not

been  for  the  necessary  patience  and  confidence  in  the  effectiveness  of

consistent interpretation of the character resistance, one might easily have

“thrown in the sponge.”

  Let us now endeavor to decide whether the subsequent analytic insight

into the mechanism of this case would justify the use of a different technical

procedure. It is true that the manner of the patient’s behavior could have been

given less prominence in the analysis; instead, the scanty dreams could have

been  subjected  to  more  exact  analysis.  It  is  also  true  that  he  might  have

produced interpretable associations. Let us pass over the fact that, until he

entered analysis, this patient always forgot his dreams or didn’t dream at all.

And it wasn’t until his behavior was consistently interpreted that he produced

dreams  of  a  definite  content  and  of  a  specific  relevance  to  the  analytic

situation.  I  am  prepared  for  the  objection  that  the  patient  would  have

produced  the  corresponding  dreams  spontaneously.  To  enter  into  such  a

discussion is to get into an argument about things that cannot be proven.

There are ample experiences which show that a situation such as the one

presented by this patient is not easily resolved solely through passive waiting;

and if it is, then it happens only by chance, i.e., the analyst does not have the

analysis under control.

  Let  us  assume  that  we  had  interpreted  his  associations  relating  to  the

castration  complex,  that  is,  tried  to  make  him  conscious  of  the  repressed

content, the fear of cutting or of being cut. Eventually this approach, too,

might have  achieved  success.  But  the  very  fact  that  we  cannot  say  with

certainty  that  that  would  have  been  the  case,  the  fact  that  we  admit  the

element of chance, compels us to reject as unanalytic this kind of technique

which violates the essence of psychoanalytic work. Such a technique would

mean a reversion to that stage of analysis where one did not bother about the

resistances because one did not recognize them, and therefore interpreted the

meaning of the unconscious directly. It is evident from the case history itselfthat this technique would also have meant a neglect of the ego defenses.

  It might also be objected that, while the technical handling of the case

was absolutely correct, my polemics were uncalled for. What I am saying is

quite obvious and not at all new—that’s the way all analysts work. I do not

deny that the general principles are not new, that character analysis is merely

the special application of the principle of resistance analysis. But many years

of experience in the seminar have clearly and unequivocally shown that while

the  principles  of  resistance  technique  are  generally  known  and

acknowledged, in practice one proceeds almost exclusively according to the

old technique of direct interpretation of the unconscious. This discrepancy

between theoretical knowledge and actual practice was the cause of all the

mistaken  objections  to  the  systematic  attempts  on  the  part  of  the  Vienna

seminar to develop the consistent application of theory to therapy. Those who

said that all this was commonplace and that there was nothing new in it were

basing their statements on their theoretical knowledge; those who contended

that this was all wrong and not “Freudian analysis” were thinking of their

own practice, which, as we have said, deviated considerably from theory.

  A colleague once asked me what I would have done in the following case.

For four weeks he had been treating a young man who immured himself in

complete silence but who was otherwise very friendly and, before and after

the  analytic  session,  feigned  a  very  genial  disposition.  The  analyst  had

already tried everything possible, threatened to terminate the analysis, and

finally, when even a dream interpretation failed to achieve any results, had set

a definite termination date. The scanty dream material had contained nothing

but sadistic murders; the analyst had told the patient that his dreams showed

quite clearly that he conceived of himself as a murderer in fantasy. But this

had not served any purpose. The analyst was not satisfied with my statement

that it does not do to make a deep interpretation to a patient who has an acute

resistance, even though the material appears quite manifestly in a dream. He

was  of  the  opinion  that  there  was  no  alternative  but  to  do  that.  To  mysuggestion  that,  to  begin  with,  the  patient’s  silence  should  have  been

interpreted as a resistance, he said that this was not possible: there was “no

material” available for such an interpretation. Wasn’t there, quite apart from

the  content  of  the  dreams,  sufficient  “material”  in  the  patient’s  behavior

itself, the contradiction between his silence during the analytic session and

his  friendliness  outside  of  it?  Wasn’t  at  least  one  thing  clear  from  the

situation,  namely  that  through  his  silence  the  patient—to  put  it  in  very

general  terms—expressed  a  negative  attitude  or  a  defense;  expressed,  to

judge from his dreams, sadistic impulses which he sought to counter and

conceal through his obtrusively friendly behavior? Why is it that an analyst

will venture to infer unconscious processes from a patient’s slip—e.g., the

forgetting of an object in the analyst’s consultation room—but is afraid to

make inferences, from the patient’s behavior, which will have bearing on the

meaning  of  the  analytic  situation?  Does  a  patient’s  behavior  offer  less

conclusive material than a slip? Somehow I couldn’t get this across to my

colleague.  He  stuck  to  his  view  that  the  resistance  could  not  be  tackled

because there was “no material.” There can be no doubt that the interpretation

of the sanguinary wish was a mistake; the result of such an interpretation can

only be that the patient’s ego becomes even more frightened and even more

inaccessible to analysis. The difficulties offered by the cases presented in the

seminar were of a similar nature. There was always an underestimation of or

disregard  for  the  patient’s  behavior  as  interpretable  material;  the  repeated

attempt to eliminate the resistance from the position of the id, instead of

through the analysis of the ego defense; and finally the oft-repeated idea,

which served as an excuse, that the patient simply did not want to get well or

was “much too narcissistic.”

  The technique of breaking down the narcissistic defense in other types is

not  fundamentally  different  from  that  described  above.  If,  for  example,  a

patient  never  becomes  emotionally  involved  and  remains  indifferent,

regardless of what material he produces, one is dealing with a dangerousemotional block, the analysis of which must take precedence over everything

else  if  one  does  not  want  to  run  the  risk  of  having  all  the  material  and

interpretations  lost.  If  this  is  the  case,  the  patient  may  acquire  a  good

knowledge of psychoanalytic theory, but he will not be cured. If, confronted

with such a block, the analyst elects not to give up the analysis because of the

“strong narcissism,” he can make an agreement with the patient. The patient

will be given the option to terminate the analysis at any time; in turn, he will

allow the analyst to dwell upon his emotional lameness until it is eliminated.

Eventually—it usually takes many months (in one case it took a year and a

half)  —the  patient  begins  to  buckle  under  the  continual  stressing  of  his

emotional  lameness  and  its  causes.  In  the  meantime,  the  analyst  will

gradually  have  obtained  sufficient  clues  to  undermine  the  defense  against

anxiety,  which  is  what  an  emotional  block  is.  Finally,  the  patient  rebels

against the threat of the analysis, rebels against the threat to his protective

psychic  armor,  of  being  put  at  the  mercy  of  his  drives,  particularly  his

aggressive  drives.  By  rebelling  against  this  “nonsense,”  however,  his

aggressiveness  is  aroused  and  it  is  not  long  before  the  first  emotional

outbreak ensues (i.e., a negative transference) in the form of a paroxysm of

hate. If the analyst succeeds in getting this far, the contest has been won.

When  the  aggressive  impulses  have  been  brought  into  the  open,  the

emotional block has been penetrated and the patient is capable of analysis.

From this point on, the analysis runs its usual course. The difficulty consists

in drawing out the aggressiveness.

  The same holds true when, because of the peculiarity of their character,

narcissistic patients vent their resistance verbally. For example, they speak in

a grandiloquent manner, use technical terminology, always rigidly chosen or

else  confused.  This  manner  of  speaking  constitutes  an  impenetrable  wall;

until it is subjected to analysis, no real progress can be made. Here, too, the

consistent  interpretation  of  the  patient’s  behavior  provokes  a  narcissistic

rebellion: the patient does not like to hear that he speaks in such a stilted,grandiloquent manner, or uses technical terminology to conceal his inferiority

complex from himself and from the analyst, or that he speaks confusedly

because he wants to appear especially clever—the truth of the matter being

that he cannot formulate his thoughts simply. In this way the hard terrain of

the neurotic character has been loosened in an essential area and an approach

has been paved to the infantile foundation of the character and the neurosis.

Needless to say, it is not enough to make passing allusions to the nature of

the resistance. The more tenacious it proves to be, the more consistently it

must be interpreted. If the negative attitudes toward the analyst which are

provoked by this consistent interpretation are simultaneously analyzed, then

there is little danger that the patient will terminate the treatment.

  The immediate result of the analytic loosening of the character armor and

the  disruption  of  the  narcissistic  protective  apparatus  is  twofold:  (1) the

loosening of the affects from their reactive anchorings and concealments; (2)

the establishment of an entry into the central area of the infantile conflict, the

Oedipus complex and the castration anxiety. There is an advantage in this

procedure which should not be underestimated: it is not only the content of

infantile  experiences  that  is  reached.  More  important,  they  are  brought

directly  to  analysis  in  the  specific  context  in  which  they  have  been

assimilated, i.e., in the form in which they have been molded by the ego. It is

seen again and again in analysis that the dynamic value of the same element

of  repressed  material  varies  depending  on  the  degree  to  which  the  ego

defenses  have  been  loosened.  In  many  cases  the  affect-cathexis  of  the

childhood experiences has been absorbed into the character as a defensive

mechanisms,  so  that,  by  simply  interpreting  the  content,  one  reaches  the

remembrances but not the affects. In such cases, to interpret the infantile

material before the affects assimilated into the character have been loosened

is a grave mistake. It is, for example, to this neglect that the long, bleak, and

                                                                                      6
more or less fruitless analyses of compulsive characters are to be traced. If,

on the other hand, the affects pertaining to the defensive formation of thecharacter are liberated first, then a new cathexis of the infantile instinctual

expressions takes place automatically. The character-analytic interpretation of

resistances  all  but  excludes  remembering  without  affects  because  of  the

disturbance  of  the  neurotic  balance,  which  always  occurs  at  the  outset  in

character analysis.

  In still other cases, the character erects itself as a hard protective wall

against  the  experiencing  of  infantile  anxiety  and  thus  maintains  itself,

notwithstanding the great forfeiture of joie de vivre which this entails. If a

patient having such a character enters analytic treatment because of some

symptom or other, this protective wall continues to serve in the analysis as a

character  resistance;  and  it  soon  becomes  apparent  that  nothing  can  be

accomplished until the character armor, which conceals and consumes the

infantile anxiety, has been destroyed. This, for example, is the case in moral

insanity  and  in  manic,  narcissistic-sadistic  characters.  Here,  the  analyst  is

often faced with the difficult question whether the existing symptom justifies

a thoroughgoing character analysis. For let there be no doubt about it: when

the analysis of the character destroys the character compensation, especially

in cases where that defense is a relatively good one, a temporary condition is

created which approximates a breakdown of the ego. In some extreme cases,

it is true, such a breakdown is necessary before the new reality-oriented ego

structure can develop. (However, we must admit that the breakdown would

have come of itself sooner or later—the formation of a symptom was the first

sign of this.) Yet one is reluctant, unless an urgent indication exists, to adopt

a measure which involves such grave responsibility.

  Nor can it be ignored in this connection that, in every case in which it is

used,  character  analysis  provokes  violent  emotions;  indeed,  often  creates

dangerous situations. Hence, the analyst must have technical mastery of the

analysis at all times. Some analysts will perhaps reject the character-analytic

procedure for this reason. If such is so, however, the analytic treatment of

quite a number of patients can be counted upon to fail. There are neuroseswhich simply cannot be reached through mild means. The methods employed

in character analysis, the consistent stressing of the character resistance and

the persistent interpretation of its forms, means, and motives, are as powerful

as they are disagreeable to the patient. This has nothing to do with preparing

the patient for analysis; it is a strict analytic principle. However, it is good

policy to make the patient aware, at the very outset, of all the foreseeable

unpleasantness and difficulties of the treatment.


f) On the optimal conditions for the analytic reduction to the infantile

situation from the contemporary situation


  Since the consistent interpretation of a patient’s behavior spontaneously

provides access to the infantile sources of the neurosis, a new question arises:

are there criteria for determining when the contemporary mode of behavior

should be reduced to its infantile prototype? Indeed, one of the main tasks of

analysis consists precisely in this reduction. In these general terms, however,

the formula is not applicable in everyday practice. Should this reduction take

place immediately, as soon as the first signs of the germane infantile material

become apparent, or are there factors which indicate that it would be better to

wait until a certain specific time? To begin with, it must be borne in mind that

the purpose of reduction, namely the dissolution of the resistance and the

elimination of amnesia, is not immediately encompassed in many cases. This

much we know from definite experiences. Either the patient does not get

beyond an intellectual understanding or the attempt at reduction is foiled by

doubt. This is explained by the fact that, just as in the case of making an

unconscious idea conscious, the topographical process of conversion actually

culminates  only  when  combined  with  the dynamic-affective  process  of

becoming conscious. Two things are necessary to achieve this: (1) the main

resistance must at least be loosened; (2) the cathexis of the idea which is to

become conscious or (as in the case of reduction) which is to be exposed to a

definite connection must have attained a minimum degree of intensity. As weknow, however, the libido-charged affects of the repressed ideas are usually

split off, i.e., bound in the character or in the acute transference conflicts and

transference resistances. If the contemporary resistance is now reduced to its

infantile source, before it has been fully developed (that is, as soon as a trace

of its infantile foundation has been spotted), then the intensity of its cathexis

has not been fully taken advantage of. The content of the resistance has been

analytically utilized in the interpretation, but the corresponding affect has not

been included. If, in other words, both the topographical and the dynamic

points of view are taken into consideration in making one’s interpretations,

then we have the following stricture imposed upon us: the resistance must not

be  nipped  in  the  bud.  On  the  contrary,  it  must  be  allowed  to  reach  full

maturity  in  the  heat  of  the  transference  situation.  In  the  case  of  torpid

character encrustations which have become chronic, the difficulties cannot be

gotten at in any other way. To Freud’s rule that the patient has to be led from

acting out to remembering, from the contemporary to the infantile, must be

added that, before this takes place, what has been chronically stultified has to

attain a new living reality in the contemporary transference situation. This is

the same process involved in the healing of chronic inflammations—i.e., they

are first made acute by means of irritation—and this is always necessary in

the case of character resistances. In advanced stages of the analysis, when the

analyst is sure of the patient’s cooperation, “irritation therapy,” as Ferenczi

called it, is no longer as necessary. One gets the impression that when an

analyst reduces a wholly immature transference situation he does so out of

fear  of  the  stresses  which  are  part  and  parcel  of  strong  transference

resistances. So, despite one’s better theoretical knowledge, the resistance is

often regarded as something highly unwelcome, as merely disruptive. This is

also  the  reason  for  the  tendency  to  circumvent  the  resistance,  instead  of

allowing it to develop and then attacking it. It seems to be forgotten that the

neurosis itself is contained in the resistance, that, in dissolving a resistance,

we also dissolve a part of the neurosis.  Allowing the resistance to develop is necessary for another reason. In

view of the complicated structure of each resistance, all its determinants and

meaningful  contents  are  comprehended  only  with  time;  and  the  more

thoroughly  a  resistance  situation  has  been  comprehended,  the  more

successful  its  interpretation  will  be,  quite  apart  from  the  previously

mentioned  dynamic  factor.  The  double  nature  of  the  resistance,  its

contemporary and its historical motives, requires that the forms of the ego

defense which it contains must be brought to complete consciousness first.

Only  after  the  contemporary  meaning  of  the  resistance  has  become  clear

should its infantile origin be interpreted in light of the material which has

been produced. This also holds true for patients who have already revealed

the  infantile  material  necessary  to  the  understanding  of  the subsequent

resistance. In other cases, probably the majority, it is necessary to allow the

resistance to develop, if only to be able to obtain the infantile material in

sufficient measure.

  Thus, the resistance technique has two aspects: (1) comprehending the

resistance  from  the  contemporary  situation  through  interpretation  of  its

contemporary meaning; (2) dissolving the resistance by linking the ensuing

infantile material with the contemporary material. In this way, escape into

the contemporary as well as the infantile situation is easily avoided, inasmuch

as both are given equal consideration in interpretation.

  Thus, the resistance, once a therapeutic obstruction, becomes the most

powerful vehicle of analysis.


g) Character analysis in the case of abundantly flowing material


  In cases in which the patient’s character impedes the recall work from the

very  beginning,  character  analysis  as  described  above  is  unquestionably

indicated  as  the  solely  legitimate  analytic  method  of  introducing  the

treatment. But what about those patients whose characters admit of ample

recall work in the beginning? We are faced with two questions. Is characteranalysis as we have described it here also necessary in these cases? If so, how

should  the  analysis  be  introduced?  The  first  question  would  have  to  be

answered  in  the  negative  if  there  were  any  patients  who  did  not  exhibit

character  armor.  However,  since  there  are  no  such  patients,  since  the

narcissistic  protective  mechanism  sooner  or  later  becomes  a  character

resistance, varying only in intensity and depth, no fundamental difference

exists.  There  is  merely  a  circumstantial  difference:  in  patients  whose

character impedes the recall work, the mechanism of narcissistic protection

and  defense  lies  wholly  on  the  surface  and  immediately  appears  as  a

resistance,  whereas  in  the  other  patients  the  protective  and  defensive

mechanism lies deeper in the personality, so that it is not at all obvious at

first. But it is precisely these patients who are dangerous. With the former,

one  knows  in  advance  where  one  stands.  With  the  latter,  one  goes  on

believing  for  quite  some  time  that  the  analysis  is  progressing  very  well

because the patient seems to accept everything very readily; indeed, even

shows  signs  of  improvement,  and  produces  prompt  reactions  to  the

interpretations.  It  is  with  such  patients  that  one  experiences  the  greatest

disappointments. The analysis has been carried out, but there is no sign of

final success. One has used up all one’s interpretations, is confident that the

primal  scene  and  the  infantile  conflicts  have  been  made  completely

conscious; yet the analysis is stuck in bleak, monotonous repetitions of the

old  material—the  cure  refusing  to  take  effect.  It  is  still  worse  when  a

transference  success  deludes  the  analyst  into  thinking  that  the  patient  is

cured, only to find that he suffers a complete relapse soon after discharge.

  The countless bad experiences with such cases lead me to believe—a self-

evident belief, really—that something has been neglected, not with regard to

content, for the thoroughness of these analyses leaves little to be desired in

this area. What I have in mind is an unknown and unrecognized, a concealed

resistance  which  causes  all  therapeutic  efforts  to  fail.  Closer  examination

shows  that  these  concealed  resistances  are  to  be  sought  precisely  in  thepatient’s docility, in his manifestly weak defense against the analysis. And

these analyses, on closer comparison with other cases which succeed, are

shown to have followed a steady, even course, never disrupted by violent

affective outbursts, and, above all—something which did not become clear

until the very end—to have been conducted almost exclusively in a “positive”

transference.  Seldom  or  never  had  there  been  violent  negative  impulses

against the analyst. Although the hate impulses had been analyzed, they just

had not appeared in the transference or had been remembered without affects.

The  narcissistic  affect-lame  and  the  passive-feminine  characters  are  the

prototypes of these cases. The former are characterized by a tepid and steady

“positive” transference; the latter by an effusive “positive” transference.

  So it had to be admitted that in these so-called going cases—referred to as

“going” because they produce infantile material, i.e., again on the basis of a

one-sided overestimation of the contents of the material—the character had

operated as a resistance in a concealed form throughout the entire analysis.

Very  often  these  cases  were  held  to  be  incurable,  or  at  least  difficult  to

master,  an  appraisal  for  which,  formerly,  I  too  thought  I  saw  sufficient

evidence in my own experiences. However, since I gained a knowledge of

their concealed resistances, I can consider them among my most rewarding

cases.

  In terms of character analysis, the introductory phase of such cases differs

from other cases in that the flow of the communications is not disturbed and

the  analysis  of  the  character  resistance  is  not  taken  up  until  the  flood  of

material and the behavior itself have become clearly recognizable resistances.

The  following  typical  case  of  a  passive-feminine  character  is  intended  to

illustrate this and, moreover, to demonstrate how, here too, the entry into the

deeply repressed infantile conflicts ensues of itself. Furthermore, by pursuing

the  analysis  into  advanced  stages,  we  want  to  demonstrate  the  legitimate

unwinding of the neurosis on the spool of the transference resistances.      3. A CASE OF PASSIVE-FEMININE CHARACTER


a) Anamnesis


  A twenty-four-year-old bank employee turned to analysis because of the

anxiety states which had seized him a year before while he was visiting a

hygiene exhibition. And prior to that occasion, he had suffered from acute

hypochondriac  fears,  e.g.,  that  he  had  a hereditary  taint,  would  become

mentally ill and perish in a mental institution. He was able to offer a number

of  rational  reasons  to  account  for  these  fears:  his  father  had  contracted

syphilis and gonorrhea ten years before his marriage. His paternal grandfather

was also supposed to have had syphilis. One of his father’s brothers was very

nervous and suffered from insomnia. On his mother’s side the hereditary taint

was even worse: his maternal grandfather had committed suicide, as had one

of his maternal uncles. One of the sisters of his maternal grandmother was

“mentally  abnormal”  (apparently  melancholic-depressive).  The  patient’s

mother was a nervous, anxiety-ridden woman.

  This double “hereditary taint” (syphilis on his father’s side; suicide and

psychosis on his mother’s side) made the case that much more interesting:

psychoanalysis does not deny a hereditary etiology of the neurosis but merely

accords it the importance of one of many etiologies and, for this reason, finds

itself in opposition to orthodox psychiatry. We shall see that the patient’s idea

about his heredity also had an irrational basis. Notwithstanding his severe

handicaps, he was cured. His subsequent freedom from relapses was followed

up over a period of five years.

  This report covers only the first seven months of treatment, which were

taken up with the unfolding, objectification, and analysis of the character

resistances. The last seven months are considered only very briefly; from the

point  of  view  of  resistance  and  character  analysis,  this  part  had  little  of

interest to offer. For us it is chiefly important to describe the introductory

phase of the treatment, the course pursued by the analysis of the resistances,and  the  way  in  which  it  found  access  to  the  early  infantile  material.  In

deference to the difficulties of describing an analysis and also to make it

easier  to  comprehend,  we  shall  report  the  analysis  without  any  of  the

accessories and repetitions. We shall concentrate solely on the resistances and

how  they  were  worked  through.  We  shall,  as  it  were,  reveal  only  the

scaffolding of the analysis and attempt to lay bare its most important stages

and to relate them to one another. In reality, the analysis was not so simple as

it  may  appear  here  in  print.  As  the  months  passed,  however,  one

manifestation was added to another and a definite outline began to take shape

regarding certain events; it is this outline which we shall attempt to describe

here.

  The patient’s attacks of anxiety were accompanied by palpitations and a

paralysis of all volition. Even in the intervals between these attacks he was

never  wholly  free  of  a  feeling  of uneasiness.  Frequently,  the  attacks  of

anxiety occurred quite suddenly, but they were also easily provoked when,

for example, he read about mental illnesses or suicide in the newspaper. In

the course of the previous year his work capacity had shown marked signs of

deteriorating, and he feared that he might lose his job because of his reduced

performance.

  He had severe sexual disturbances. Shortly before his visit to the hygiene

exhibition, he had attempted to have intercourse with a prostitute but had

failed. This had not bothered him very much, or so he said. Nor were his

conscious  sexual  needs  very  strong.  Apparently,  abstinence  created  no

problem for him. Several years earlier, a sexual act had worked out, but he

had had a premature and pleasureless ejaculation.

  Asked whether he had ever suffered states of anxiety before this time, the

patient  reported  that  even  as  a child  he  had  been very  timorous  and,

especially during puberty, had been afraid of world catastrophes. He had

been very much afraid in 1910 when there was talk of the end of the world

through a collision with a comet, and he had been astonished that his parentsspoke about it so calmly. This “fear of catastrophes” subsided gradually, but

it was later replaced by the idea of having a hereditary taint. He had suffered

from  vivid  states  of  anxiety  ever  since  he  was  a  child.  In  recent  years,

however, they had become less frequent.

  Apart from the hypochondriac idea of having a hereditary taint, the states

of anxiety, and the sexual debility, there were no other neurotic symptoms. At

the beginning of the treatment, the patient had an insight into his states of

anxiety, for he suffered the most from these. The hereditary idea was too well

rationalized, and his libido debility (impotence) did not trouble him enough

to make him sense them as an illness. In terms of the symptoms, we had here

the hypochondriac form of anxiety-hysteria having the customary, in this case

especially well developed, actual neurotic core (stasis neurosis).

  The diagnosis, hysterical character with hypochondriac anxiety-hysteria,

was  based  on  the  analytic  findings  with  respect  to  his  fixations.

Phenomenologically,  he  came  under  the  type  of  the passive-feminine

character: his demeanor was always excessively friendly and humble; he was

forever excusing himself for the most trifling matters. Both when he arrived

and when he departed, he bowed deeply several times. In addition, he was

awkward, shy, and ceremonious. If he were asked, for example, whether he

had any objection to rescheduling his hour, he would not simply answer “no.”

He would assure me that he was at my service, that everything was quite

agreeable with him, etc. If he had a request to make, he stroked the arm of the

analyst  while  making  it.  Once,  when  it  was  intimated  that  perhaps  he

distrusted the analyst, he returned on the same day very much upset. He could

not, he said, endure the thought that his analyst regarded him as distrustful,

and he repeatedly begged forgiveness in the event he had said something that

might have caused me to make such an assumption.


b) The development and analysis of the character resistance


  The analysis, marked by resistances which stemmed from his character,developed as follows:

    Acquainted with the basic rule, he began, fluently and seldom at a loss for

words,  to  tell  about  his  family  background  and  the  hereditary  taint.

Gradually,  he  came  to  talk  about  his  relationship  to  his  parents.  He

maintained that he loved both of them the same; indeed, he said that he had a

very high regard for his father. He depicted him as an energetic, level-headed

person. His  father  had  repeatedly  warned  him  against  masturbation  and

extramarital  intercourse.  The  father  had  told  him  about  his  own  bad

experiences  in  this  area,  about  his  syphilis  and  gonorrhea,  about  his

relationships with women which had ended badly. All this had been done

with  the  best  of  intentions,  i.e.,  in  the  hope  of  sparing  the  son  similar

experiences. The father had never beaten him as a means of enforcing his

will. He had always used a more subtle approach: “I’m not forcing you; I’m

merely advising you…” Needless to say, this was said with great energy. The

patient described his relationship to his father as being extremely good; he

was devoted to him; he had no better friend in the whole world.

  He did not dwell upon this subject very long. The sessions were taken up

almost exclusively with descriptions of his relationship to the mother. She

had always been affectionate and extremely attentive to his welfare. He, too,

behaved  affectionately  toward  her.  On  the  other  hand,  he  let  himself  be

waited  on  hand  and  foot.  She  laid  out  his  clothes  for  him,  served  him

breakfast in bed, sat beside his bed until he fell asleep (still at the time of the

analysis), combed his hair; in a word, he led the life of a pampered child.

  He progressed rapidly in the discussion of his relationship to his mother

and within six weeks was on the verge of becoming conscious of the desire for

coitus. With this exception, he had become fully conscious of his affectionate

relationship to his mother—to some extent he had been aware of this even

before the analysis: he was fond of throwing her on his bed; to which she

submitted with “glowing eyes and flushed cheeks.” When she came in her

nightgown  to  wish  him  goodnight,  he  would  embrace  her  impetuously.Though he always endeavored to stress the sexual excitement of the mother

—in an effort, no doubt, to betray his own intentions as little as possible—he

mentioned several times, parenthetically as it were, that he himself had felt

clear sexual excitation.

  My extremely cautious attempt to make him aware of the real meaning of

these practices met with prompt and violent resistance. He could assure me,

he said, that he would have responded in the same way to other women. I had

not made this attempt with the intent of interpreting the incest fantasy but

merely  to  ascertain  whether  I  had  been  right  in  assuming  that  his  rigid

advance in the direction of the historically important incestuous love was a

clever  evasion  of  other  material  having  greater contemporary importance.

The material which he produced on the relationship to his mother was not in

the least ambiguous; it really appeared as if he were on the verge of grasping

the  true  situation.  In  principle,  therefore,  there  was  no  reason  why  an

interpretation  could  not  be  given.  Yet  the  striking  disparity  between  the

content  of  his  communications  and  the  content  of  his  dreams  and  his

excessively friendly demeanor cautioned me against such an interpretation.

  Thus, my attention had to become more and more focused on his behavior

and  dream  material.  He  did  not  produce  any  associations  to  his  dreams.

During  the  session  itself,  he  was  enthusiastic  about  the  analysis  and  the

analyst; outside of the session, he was deeply worried about his future and

had sullen thoughts about his hereditary taint.

  The dream material had a twofold nature: in part, it was concerned with

his incestuous fantasies. What he did not express during the day, he betrayed

in the manifest content of his dreams. Thus, in his dream he followed his

mother with a paper knife, or he crawled through a hole in front of which his

mother was standing. On the other hand, it frequently dealt with a dark story

of murder, with the hereditary idea, a crime which someone had committed,

jeering remarks made by somebody, or an expression of distrust.

  In the first four to six weeks, I had the following analytic material at mydisposal:  his  communications  about  his  relationship  to  his  mother;  his

contemporary  states  of  anxiety  and  the  hereditary  idea;  his  excessively

friendly, submissive behavior; his dreams, those which clearly followed up

his incest fantasies and those which dealt with murder and distrust; certain

indications of a positive mother transference.

  Faced with the choice of interpreting his completely clear incest material

or of stressing the indications of his distrust, I chose the latter. For, in fact, we

were dealing here with a latent resistance which, over a period of weeks,

remained  concealed.  And  it  was  precisely  for  this  reason  that  the  patient

offered too much material and was not sufficiently inhibited. As was shown

later, this was also the first major transference resistance, the special nature

of which was determined by the patient’s character. He gave a deceptive

impression: (1) through his divulgence of therapeutically worthless material

relating to his experiences; (2) through his excessively friendly demeanor; (3)

through the frequency and clarity of his dreams; (4) through the sham trust

which  he  showed  in  the  analyst. His  attitude  toward  the  analyst  was

“complaisant,”  in  the  same  way  as  he  had  been  devoted  to  his  father

throughout his life, and, in fact, for the same reason, i.e., because he was

afraid of him. If this had been my first case of this kind, it would have been

impossible  for  me  to  know  that  such  behavior  is  a  strong,  dangerous

resistance; nor would I have been able to resolve it, for I could not have

divined its meaning and its structure. However, previous experiences with

similar cases had taught me that such patients are not capable of producing

any manifest resistance for months, indeed years on end, and that they do not

react  at  all  therapeutically  to  the  interpretations  which  the  clear  material

induces the analyst to give. Hence, it cannot be said that, in such cases, one

has to wait until the transference resistance sets in; the truth of the matter is

that  it  is  already  completely  developed  from  the  very  beginning.  The

resistance is concealed in a form peculiar to the patient’s character.

  Let us consider also whether the heterosexual incest material which wasoffered actually represents material that had broken through from the depth of

the unconscious. The answer must be in the negative. If the contemporary

function  of  the  material  currently  offered  is  considered,  it  can  often  be

ascertained that deeply repressed impulses, without any change whatever in

the fact of repression, are temporarily drawn upon by the ego to ward off

other contents. This very peculiar fact is not easily comprehensible in terms

of  depth  psychology.  It  is  a  decided  error  of  judgment  to  interpret  such

material.  Such  interpretations  not  only  do  not  bear  fruit,  they  thwart  the

maturation of this repressed content for future use. In theory, we can say that

psychic contents can appear in the conscious system under one of two highly

diverse  conditions:  borne  by native,  specifically  libidinal  affects  which

pertain to them, or by foreign, nonrelated interests. In the first instance, the

internal  pressure  of  dammed-up  excitation  forces  the  content  into

consciousness; in the second instance, the content is brought to the surface

for purposes of defense. An illustration of this is freely flowing expressions

of love as compared with those whose purpose is to cover up repressed hate,

i.e., reactive testimonies of love.

  The resistance had to be tackled, a task which was of course much more

difficult in this case than if the resistance had been manifest. Though the

meaning  of  the  resistance  could  not  be  derived  from  the  patient’s

communications, it was certainly possible to derive it from his demeanor and

from the seemingly insignificant details of some of his dreams. From these it

could be seen that, fearing to rebel against his father, he had masked his

obstinacy and distrust with reactive love and by means of his obedience had

spared himself anxiety.

  The first interpretation of the resistance was made as early as the fifth day

of the analysis, in connection with the following dream: “My handwriting is

sent to a graphologist for an expert evaluation. Answer: this man belongs in

an insane asylum. Deep despair on the part of my mother. I want to make an

end of my life. I wake up.”  He thought of Professor Freud in connection with the graphologist; the

professor had told him, the patient added, that sicknesses such as the one

from which he suffered could with “absolute certainty” be cured by analysis.

I called his attention to the contradiction: since, in the dream, he thought of

an insane asylum and was afraid, he was undoubtedly of the opinion that the

analysis could not help him. He refused to admit this, insisting that he had

full confidence in the efficacy of the analysis.

  Until the end of the second month, he had many dreams, though few were

capable of interpretation, and continued to talk about his mother. I allowed

him to go on speaking, without interrupting or inciting him, and was careful

not to miss any indication of distrust. After the first resistance interpretation,

however, he masked his secret distrust even better, until finally he had the

following dream:

  “A  crime,  possibly  a  murder,  has  been  committed.  I  have  become

involuntarily implicated in this crime. Fear of being detected and punished.

One  of  my  co-workers,  by  whose  courage  and  determined  nature  I  am

impressed, is present. I am aware of his superiority.”

  I  singled  out  only  his  fear  of  detection  and  related  it  to  the  analytic

situation by telling him point-blank that his entire demeanor indicated that he

was concealing something.

  On the very next night, he had a longer dream confirming what I had said:

  “I have learned that there is a plan to commit a crime in our apartment.

It is night and I am on the dark staircase. I know that my father is in the

apartment. I want to go to his aid, but I am afraid of falling into the hands of

the enemy. It occurs to me to notify the police. I have a roll of paper in my

possession which contains all the details of the criminal plot. A disguise is

necessary, otherwise the leader of the gang, who has planted many spies, will

frustrate my undertaking. Putting on a large cape and a false beard, I leave

the house stooped over like an old man. The chief of the adversaries stops

me. He orders one of his subordinates to search me. The roll of paper isnoticed by this man. I feel that all will be lost if he reads its contents. I try to

appear as innocent as possible and tell him that they are notes having no

meaning whatever. He says that he has to have a look anyhow. There is a

moment of agonizing suspense; then, in desperation, I look for a weapon. I

find a revolver in my pocket and pull the trigger. The man has disappeared,

and I suddenly feel very strong. The chief of the adversaries has changed into

a woman. I am overcome by a desire for this woman; I seize her, lift her up,

and carry her into the house. I am filled with a pleasurable sensation and I

wake up.”

  The entire incest motif appears at the end of the dream, but we have also,

at the beginning, unmistakable allusions to his dissimulation in the analysis. I

stressed only this element, again bearing in mind that a patient who is so self-

sacrificing would first have to give up his deceptive attitude in the analysis

before deeper interpretations could be given. But this time I went one step

further in the interpretation of the resistance. I told him that not only was he

distrustful of the analysis but he feigned to be the exact opposite. The patient

became terribly excited at this and produced three different hysterical actions

over a period of six sessions.

  1.  He  reared  up,  his  arms  and  legs  thrashing  in  all  directions,  as  he

screamed, “Leave me alone, do you hear, don’t come near me, I’ll kill you,

I’ll pulverize you.” This action often modulated imperceptibly into a different

one:

  2. He seized himself by the throat, produced a whining sound, and cried

in a rattling voice, “Oh, leave me alone, please leave me alone, I won’t do

anything again.”

  3. He did not behave like one who has been violently attacked but like a

girl who has been raped: “Leave me alone, leave me alone.” This was spoken

without sounds of strangulation and, whereas he had curled up in the earlier

action, he now spread his legs wide apart.

  During these six days, the flow of his communications faltered; he wasdefinitely  in  a  state  of  manifest  resistance.  He  spoke  continously  of  his

hereditary  taint;  between  times  he  occasionally  lapsed  into  that  peculiar

condition  in  which,  as  we  described,  he  reenacted  the  above  scenes.  The

strange thing was that, as soon as the action ceased, he went on speaking

calmly  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  He  merely  remarked,  “But  this  is  a

strange thing that is going on in me here, Doctor.”

  I  now  explained  to  him,  without  going  into  any  details,  that  he  was

obviously enacting something for me which he must have experienced or at

least fantasized sometime in his life. He was visibly delighted with this first

explanation, and he enacted far more frequently from then on. It had to be

admitted  that  my  interpretation  of  the  resistance  had  roused  an  important

unconscious element, which now expressed itself in the form of these actions.

But he was a long way from an analytic clarification of the actions; he was

still making use of them as part of his resistance. He thought that he was

being especially pleasing to me with his frequent reenactments. I learned later

that, during his evening attacks of anxiety, he behaved as described in 2 and 3

above. Though the meaning of the actions was clear to me and I could have

communicated it to him in connection with the murder dream, I persisted in

the analysis of his character resistance, toward the understanding of which his

reenactments had already contributed a great deal.

  I  was  able  to  form  the  following  picture  of  the stratification  of  the

contents of the character transference resistance.

  The first action represented the transference of the murderous impulses

which he harbored toward the father (the deepest layer).

  The second  action  portrayed  the  fear  of  the  father  because  of  the

murderous impulses (intermediate layer).

  The third action represented the concealed, crudely sexual content of his

feminine attitude, the identification with the (raped) female, and at the same

time the passive-feminine warding off of the murderous impulses.

  Thus, he surrendered himself to prevent the father from executing thepunishment (castration).

  But even the actions which corresponded to the topmost layer could not

be interpreted yet. The patient might have accepted every interpretation pro

forma (“to be pleasing”), but none would have had therapeutic effect. For,

between the unconscious material which he offered and the possibility of a

deep  understanding,  there  was  the  inhibiting  factor  of  the transferred

feminine warding off of a similarly transferred fear of me, and this fear, in

turn, was related to a hate impulse and a distrust which were transferred from

the  father.  In  short,  hate,  fear,  and  distrust  were  concealed  behind  his

submissive,  confiding  attitude,  a  wall  against  which  every  symptom

interpretation would have been dashed to pieces.

  So I continued to restrict myself to the interpretation of the intentions of

his  unconscious  deceptions.  I  told  him  that  he  was  now  reenacting  so

frequently in an effort to win me over to his side; I added that this acting out

was in fact very important. But we could not begin to understand it until he

had grasped the meaning of his contemporary behavior. His opposition to the

interpretation of the resistance weakened, but he still did not agree.

  During the following night, he dreamed, for the first time openly, of his

distrust of the analysis:

    “Dissatisfied with the failure of the analysis thus far, I turn to Professor

Freud. As a remedy for my illness, he gives me a long rod, which has the

form of an ear-pick. I have a feeling of gratification.”

  In the analysis of this dream fragment, he admitted for the first time that

he  had  been  mildly  distrustful  of  Freud’s  words,  and  then  had  been

disagreeably surprised that he had been recommended to so young an analyst.

I was struck by two things: first, this communication about his distrust was

made  to  oblige  me;  second,  he  was  suppressing  something.  I  called  his

attention to both of these points. Sometime later I learned that he had cheated

me in the matter of remuneration.

  While  his  character  resistance,  his  deceptive  obedience  andsubmissiveness, was being consistently worked on, more and more material

continued to flow automatically from all periods of his life, material about his

childhood relationship to his mother and his relationship to young men, his

childhood anxiety, the pleasure he had had in being sick as a child, etc. This

was interpreted only insofar as it related to his character resistance.

  He began to have more and more dreams relating to his distrust and to his

suppressed sarcastic attitude. Among others, he had this dream several weeks

later:

  “To a remark by my father that he does not have any dreams, I reply that

this is definitely not the case, that he evidently forgets his dreams, which, to a

large  extent,  are  prohibited  fancies.  He  laughs  derisively.  I  point  out  in

excitement that this is the theory of no less a person than Professor Freud,

but I feel ill at ease in saying this.”

  I explained that he had his father laugh derisively because he himself was

afraid to, and I substantiated my claim by referring to the uneasiness which

he  experienced  in  the  dream.  This  I  interpreted  as  the  sign  of  a  bad

conscience.

  He accepted this interpretation, and during the next ten days the question

of remuneration was discussed. It turned out that, during the preliminary talk

before the beginning of the analysis, he had consciously lied to me, inasmuch

as, without having been asked, he quoted a smaller sum than he actually had

at  his  disposal.  He  had  done  this,  he  said,  “to  protect  himself,”  that  is,

because he doubted my honesty. As is my custom, I had quoted him my usual

fee and my minimum fee, and I had accepted him as a patient at the latter

rate. However, he could afford to pay more, not only because he had a larger

savings and a better income than he had said he had, but also because his

father was covering half of the cost of the analysis.


c) Linking the analysis of the contemporary material to the infantile


  In the discussion of the “money matter,” which was always taken up inconnection  with  his  character  resistance  (i.e.,  his  concealed  fear  and

concealed  distrust),  he  once  committed  a  slip  of  the  tongue.  He  said,  “I

wanted  my  savings  in  the  bank  to  get bigger!”  instead  of  saying  that  he

wanted his savings to increase. Thus, he betrayed the relationship of money

to the phallus and the relationship of the fear of losing money to the fear for

the phallus. I did not point any of this out to him, nor did I analyze his slip of

the tongue, for I did not want to interpret the castration anxiety as such too

soon. I merely made a few remarks to the effect that his thrift must be related

to his fear of catastrophes, that he evidently felt more secure when he had

more  money.  He  showed  a  good  and  genuine  understanding  of  this

explanation and produced confirmatory associations from his childhood: he

had begun to save pennies at a very early age, and he could never forget the

fact that his father had once taken his savings and spent it, without asking his

permission. For the first time he spontaneously expressed disapproval of the

father;  on  a  conscious  level,  this  disapproval  related  to  the  money,  but

unconsciously  of  course  it  was  related  to  the  castration  danger.  In  this

connection I also explained that, while his father had evidently acted in good

faith, he had been unwise to suppress his son’s sexuality to such an extent.

The patient admitted that he himself had often puzzled about these things in

secret but had never had the courage to oppose his father, who, as the patient

assumed, had only the patient’s best interest in mind. I still could not tell him

that a deep guilt feeling and fear of the father were the driving forces of his

obedience.

  From now on, the analysis of the transference resistance went hand in

hand with the analysis of the concealed rebellious attitude toward the father.

Every  element  of  the  transference  situation  was  related  to  the  father  and

understood by the patient, while producing a wealth of new material on his

true  attitude  toward  his  father.  To  be  sure,  everything  which  he  brought

forward was still strictly censored, still inaccessible to deep interpretation, but

the analysis of his childhood had been duly begun. He no longer divulged thematerial  for  the  purpose  of  escaping  other  things;  now,  because  of  the

analysis of the character resistance, he was deeply shaken and the conviction

had begun to grow in him that his relationship to his father was not what he

had  thought  it  was  and  that  it  had  had  a  detrimental  influence  on  his

development.

  Every time he came close to the murder fantasy, his fear grew stronger.

He  dreamed  less  frequently  and  had  shorter  dreams,  but  they  were  more

compact and had a closer connection to the analytic situation. To a large

extent, the material which had been previously pushed forward now faded

into the background. What came forth from other psychic layers had a close

connection to the father complex: his fantasy of being a woman and his incest

desire. In the course of the next six weeks, undisguised castration dreams

appeared  for  the  first  time,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  I  had  given  no

interpretations or suggestions along these lines.

  1. “I am lying in my bed, suddenly I am roused and notice that my former

high-school principal, Mr. L, is sitting on me. I overpower him and get him

under me, but he frees one of his hands and threatens my phallus.”

  2. My older brother climbs through a window in our hallway and gets

into our apartment. He commands that someone bring him a sword because

he wants to kill me. I beat him to it and I slay him.”

  Thus,  we  see  how  the  central  father  conflict  emerges  more  and  more

clearly, without any special effort on my part, but solely as a result of correct

resistance analysis.

    Repeated  stagnations  occurred  in  this  phase,  and  there  were  loud

exclamations of distrust concerning the analysis. Now the resistance was tied

up with the question of remuneration: he doubted my honesty. Doubt and

distrust always cropped up when he came close to his antipathy toward the

father, the castration complex, and the murder fantasy. True, the resistances

sometimes masked themselves behind feminine devotedness, but it was no

longer difficult to draw them out of their concealment.  After a five-week vacation, we resumed the analysis. Because his parents

were away on a trip and he was afraid to stay alone, the patient, who had not

taken a vacation, had lived with a friend during this time. There had been no

letup in his anxiety states; on the contrary, they had become very severe after

my departure. In this connection he told me that as a child he had always

been afraid when his mother went away, that he had always wanted to have

her with him and was angry with his father when he took her to the theater or

to a concert.

  Thus, it was fairly clear that, alongside the negative father transference,

he had realized a strong, affectionate mother transference. Comparing the

situation  during  the  vacation  with  the  situation  in  the  months  before  my

departure, the patient said he had felt quite well and secure with me. This

shows that the mother transference had been present from the very beginning,

alongside the reactive passive-feminine attitude. He himself deduced that he

felt as sheltered with me as he felt with his mother. I did not go into this

communication any further, for the affectionate mother transference was not

causing any trouble then. It was still premature for an analysis of the mother

relationship and, as a result of the interruption, his reactive-feminine father

transference was again as strong as ever. He spoke in a meek and submissive

manner,  as  he  had  done  at  the  beginning  of  the  analysis,  and  his

communications were again focused upon his relationship to his mother.

  On the third and fourth day after we had resumed the analysis, he had two

dreams which contained the incest desire, his infantile attitude toward his

mother, and his womb fantasy. In connection with these dreams, the patient

remembered  scenes  which  he  had  experienced  with  his  mother  in  the

bathroom. She had washed him until he was twelve years old, and he could

never  understand  why  his  school  friends  teased  him  about  this.  Then  he

remembered his childhood fear of criminals who might force their way into

the apartment and murder him. Thus, the analysis had already brought to the

surface  the  infantile  anxiety-hysteria,  without  any  interpretations  orsuggestions along these lines. A deeper analysis of the dreams was avoided,

because  the  remainder  of  his  behavior  was  again  marked  by  deceptive

tendencies.

  The dreams of the following night were even more distinct:

  1. “I  am  hiking  through  the  Arnbrechtthal  (the  site  of  our  summer

vacations when I was five and six) with the intent of refreshing my childhood

impressions. Suddenly, I come to a large place, to leave which one has to go

through a castle. The doorkeeper, who is a woman, opens the gate for me and

explains that I cannot visit the castle at this time. I reply that this is not my

intention; I merely want to go through the castle to get into open country. The

owner of the castle appears, an elderly lady who seeks to find favor with me

flirtatiously. I want to withdraw, but suddenly notice that I have forgotten my

key (which opens my suitcase and also appears to be of great importance to

me  otherwise)  in  the  private  coffer  of  the  lady  of  the  castle.  Unpleasant

feeling, which soon passes, however, for the coffer is opened and the key is

given back to me.”

  2. “I am called by my mother, who lives on the floor above mine. I seize a

newspaper, form it into a penis, and go to my mother.

  3. “I am in a large hall in the company of my cousin and her mother. My

cousin, who causes a tingle of delight in me, is clad solely in a shift. I, too. I

embrace her. It strikes me that I am suddenly considerably smaller than she,

for my penis is only halfway up her thighs. I have an involuntary ejaculation

and feel terribly ashamed because I fear that this will cause stains on my shift

which might be easily noticed.”

  He  himself  recognizes  his  mother  in  the  cousin.  With  respect  to  his

nudity,  he  remembered  that  he  never  undressed  in  his  attempts  at  sexual

intercourse. He had a vague fear of doing so.

  Thus, the incest fantasy (parts 2 and 3) and the castration anxiety (part 1)

were  revealed  quite  clearly.  Why  did  he  censor  so  little?  In  view  of  his

barefaced diversions, I did not give any interpretations, nor did I make anyeffort to get the patient to produce further communications or associations.

On the other hand, I did not interrupt the patient’s associations. I wanted this

subject to develop further and, most important of all, I did not want anything

to happen until the next transference resistance had emerged and had been

eliminated.

  It  wasn’t  long  in  making  its  appearance,  and  it  was  touched  off  by  a

remark,  which  I  had  made  involuntarily  and  against  my  better  judgment,

relating to the second dream. I called his attention to the fact that once before

he  had  had  a  dream  about  a  paper  penis.  It  was  a  needless  observation.

Notwithstanding the unambiguous manifest content of the dream, he reacted

to it defensively in his usual way. He saw my point, he said, “but…” On the

night following this incident, he had a violent attack of anxiety and had two

dreams:  the  first  related  to  his  “money  resistance”  (transferred  castration

anxiety); the second revealed the primal scene for the first time, which, when

all was said and done, motivated the money resistance.

  1. “I am standing in front of an amusement stand in the midst of a large

crowd at the Prater. Suddenly, I notice that a man standing behind me is

trying to purloin my wallet from my back pocket. I reach for my wallet and

prevent the theft at the last moment.

  2. “I am riding in the rear car of a train in a part of the country south of

Wörther  See.  At  a  curve  I  suddenly  notice  that  another  train  is  coming

toward me on the single-line stretch of railroad. There seems to be no way of

averting the catastrophe; to save myself, I jump from the platform.”

  This dream made it quite clear that I had been right in not interpreting his

incest dreams. A latent but strong resistance was in front of it. We also see

that the resistance dream was intimately related to his infantile anxiety (fear

of castration, fear of the primal scene). Between the ages of three and six, he

had spent his summer vactions at Wörther See.

  No associations came to mind with reference to the dream. Relating the

man in the first dream to myself, I once again focused the discussion upon hisentire attitude, his suppressed fear of me and his concealed distrust in the

matter  of  remuneration,  without,  for  the  time  being,  touching  upon  the

connection with the fear of catastrophes. In the second dream, I singled out

only the “unavoidable catastrophe.” We of course already knew, I told him,

that for him money meant protection against catastrophes, and he feared I

could deprive him of this protection.

  He did not admit this immediately (indeed, he appeared to be shocked at

the idea that he might conceive of me as a thief), but he did not reject it

either. During the next three days, he produced dreams in which he assured

me of his devotion and trust. I also appeared as his mother. There was also a

new element: his mother as a man; she appeared in the dream as a Japanese.

We  didn’t  understand  this  element  until  many  months  later,  when  the

meaning of his childhood fantasies about the Russo-Japanese War became

clear. The Russian represented the father; the Japanese, because of his slight

stature represented the mother. His mother, moreover, had worn Japanese

pajamas at that time: the mother in pants. He made repeated slips, referring,

e.g., to “mother’s penis.” Even his “school friend” who appeared in some

dreams represented his cousin, who resembled his mother.

  However, the clear incest dreams were resistance dreams, the intent of

which was to conceal his fear of woman (having a penis).

  From this point on—for about six weeks—the analysis followed a strange

zigzag course: dreams and communications relating to his money resistance

alternating  with  dreams  which  revealed  his  longing  for  the  mother,  the

mother as a man, the dangerous father, and the most diverse variations of the

castration anxiety. In my interpretations, I always proceeded from his money

resistance (= castration anxiety) and, using this as a base, continued to deepen

the analysis of the infantile situation. This was quite easy since the infantile

material was always intimately connected with the transference situation. Of

course all the childhood fears and desires which now emerged did not appear

in the transference, which was brought to a head more and more every day.(At  this  time,  the  salient  feature  of  the  transference  was  the  castration

anxiety.)  Only  the  core  of  the  infantile  situation  had  appeared  in  the

transference resistance. Since I had a secure feeling that the analysis was

proceeding correctly, I had no misgivings about reserving the deep content

interpretations for the proper time. Instead, I consistently worked on his fear

of me by always relating it to his fear of his father.

  It was my intention, by working through and eliminating as thoroughly as

possible the transferred father resistance, to penetrate to his childhood incest

fantasies. In this way I would receive them relatively free of resistance and be

able to interpret them. Thus, I hoped to prevent the wasting of my main

interpretations. For the time being, therefore, I made no effort to interpret the

incest  material  which  flowed  ever  more  clearly  and  compactly  from  the

unconscious.

  At  the  beginning  of  this  phase,  the  topographical  stratification  of  the

resistance and of the material was as follows:

  1. The castration anxiety, in the form of his money resistance, occupied

the top layer.

  2.  He  continually  sought  to  ward  this  off  by  means  of  his  feminine

behavior toward me; but this was no longer so easy for him as it had been in

the beginning.

  3. The feminine behavior concealed a sadistic-aggressive attitude toward

me (toward his father) and was accompanied by

  4.  a  deep  affectionate  attachment  to  the  mother,  which  was  also

transferred to me.

  5. Connected with this ambivalent behavior, which was concentrated in

the transference resistance, were the incest desires, the fear of masturbation,

his longing for the womb, and the great fear stemming from the primal scene,

all of which appeared in his dreams but were not interpreted. Only his intent

to deceive and its motives, the fear of an antipathy toward the father, were

interpreted.  This situation, which of course had been latently present from the very

beginning but had not become concentrated in all points until now (above all,

in the transference of the castration anxiety), developed in the following way.

  In the fifth month of the analysis he had his first incestuous masturbation

anxiety dream:

  “I am in a room. A young woman with a round face is sitting at a piano. I

see only the upper part of her body, for the piano conceals the rest of her

body. I hear the voice of my analyst beside me: ‘You see, this is the cause of

your neurosis.’ I feel myself being drawn closer to the woman, am suddenly

overwhelmed by fear and scream loudly.”

  On the previous day, in reference to a dream, I had told him, “You see,

this is one of the causes of your neurosis,” by which I meant his childish

behavior, his demand to be loved and cared for. As if the patient had known

the true cause of his neurosis, he connected this “statement of the preceding

day” with his repressed masturbation anxiety.  The  masturbation  idea  was

again associated with the incest idea. He woke up in a state of fear. There was

a  good  reason  for  the  fact  that  the  lower  part  of  the  woman’s  body  was

concealed. (Representation of the aversion to the female genital.)

  However, since his resistance was still at its height and nothing occurred

to him with respect to the dream, I did not pursue the subject.

  The patient subsequently had a dream in which a “naked family,” father,

mother, and child, were clasped by an enormous snake.

  Another dream ran as follows:

  1. “I am lying in bed; my analyst is sitting beside me. He says to me:

‘Now I will show you the cause of your neurosis.’ I cry out in fear (not only

fear, perhaps with a trace of voluptuousness) and almost lose consciousness.

He repeats that he will analyze me in our bathroom. I am pleasantly taken

with this idea. It is dark as we open the door to the bathroom.”

  2. “I am walking with my mother through a woods. I notice that we are

being pursued by a robber. I notice a revolver in my mother’s dress and Itake it into my possession to shoot down the robber when he gets closer.

Walking at a rapid pace, we reach an inn. The robber is hard on our heels as

we climb up the steps. I fire a shot at him. However, the bullet is transformed

into a banknote. We are safe for the time being, but I am not sure whether the

robber, who is sitting in the lobby, still has evil intentions. To put him in a

good humor, I give him another banknote.”

  That I made the right move in not going into these clear dreams was

confirmed by the fact that the patient, who already had sufficient analytic

knowledge, made no reference whatever to the figure of the robber. Nor was

he able to come up with any associations. Either he said nothing or he spoke

excitedly about the “large sums of money” which he had to pay and about his

doubts as to whether the analysis would help him, etc.

  There could be no doubt, of course, that this resistance was also directed

against  the  discussion  of  the  incest  material,  but  an  interpretation  to  this

effect  would  not  have  served  any  purpose.  I  had  to  wait  for  a  suitable

opportunity to interpret his money anxiety as phallus anxiety.

  In the first part of the robber dream it is said that I am going to analyze

him in the bathroom. It came out later that he felt safest in the bathroom when

he masturbated. In the second part of the dream, I (the father) appeared as a

robber  (=  castrator).  Thus, his  contemporary  resistance  (distrust  due  to

money) was intimately related to the old masturbation anxiety (castration

anxiety).

  With respect to the second part of the dream, I told him that he was afraid

I might hurt him, that I might endanger his life. Unconsciously, however, it

was  his  father  he  was  afraid  of.  After  some  opposition,  he  accepted  this

interpretation  and,  in  this  connection,  he  himself  began  to  discuss  his

exaggerated friendliness. He required very little help in this. He recognized

the meaning of his obsequious attitude toward his boss as an expression of a

vague fear of being blamed for something. Nor were other people to notice

that he sneered at them in secret. The more he succeeded in objectifying andunmasking his character, the more free and more open he became, both in

and outside the analysis. Already he ventured to offer criticism and began to

be ashamed of his former mode of behavior. For the first time he began to

sense the neurotic character trait as something alien. This, however, also

marked the first success of the character analysis: the character had been

analyzed.

  The money resistance continued. Without the least bit of help from me,

the deepest layer of material, the fear for his penis, began to appear in his

dreams more and more clearly in connection with the primal scene.

  This  fact  has  to  be  especially  emphasized:  when  the  analysis  of  the

character resistance is carried out in a systematic and consistent manner, it is

not  necessary  to  make  a  special  effort  to  obtain  the  infantile  material

pertaining to it. It emerges of its own accord, always more clearly and always

more  closely  connected  with  the  contemporary  resistance,  provided,

naturally,  that  this  process  has  not  been  disturbed  by  premature

interpretations  of  the  childhood  material.  The  less  effort  that  is  made  to

penetrate to the childhood sphere and the more accurately the contemporary

resistance material is worked through, the more rapidly the infantile material

is reached.

  This was again proven when he dreamed, after the interpretation, that he

was afraid of being hurt. He dreamed that he was walking past a chicken farm

and saw how a chicken was killed. A woman also lay stretched out on the

ground, and another woman stuck a large fork into her a number of times.

Then he embraced one of his female co-workers; his phallus was halfway up

her thighs and he had an involuntary ejaculation.

  Since his money resistance had grown somewhat weaker, an attempt was

made to analyze this dream. With respect to the chicken farm, he was now

able to remember that as a child he had often witnessed animals in the act of

copulation during his summer vacations in the country. We had no way of

knowing at this time what meaning the detail “summer in the country” had.He identified the first woman as his mother, but had no way of explaining her

position in the dream.

  However, he was able to tell us more about the involuntary ejaculation.

He was convinced that he appeared as a child in the dream. He remembered

that he liked to and was in the habit of pressing himself against women until

he ejaculated involuntarily.

  It appeared to me to be a good sign that this intelligent patient did not

offer an interpretation, despite the fact that everything lay before him in a

rather  transparent  state.  If, prior  to  the  analysis  of  his  resistances,  I  had

interpreted symbols or essential contents of the unconscious, he would have

immediately accepted these interpretations for reasons of resistance, and we

would have leaped from one chaotic situation into another.

  Through my interpretation of his fear of being injured, the analysis of his

character had been brought into full swing. For days on end there was no

trace of his money resistance; he discussed his infantile behavior at great

length,  and  produced  one  example  after  another  of  his  “cowardly”  and

“furtive” way of doing things, which now he wholeheartedly condemned. I

made an effort to persuade him that his father’s influence had been chiefly

responsible  for  this.  Here,  however,  I  encountered  the  most  passionate

opposition. He still lacked the courage to speak critically of his father.

    Sometime after this, he again dreamed about that subject behind which I

surmised the primal scene:

  “I am standing along the shore of the ocean. A number of large polar

bears are romping about in the water. Suddenly they become restless. I see

the back of a gigantic fish emerging. The fish pursues one of the polar bears,

upon which he inflicts injuries by terrible bites. Finally, the fish turns away

from the mortally wounded bear. However, the fish itself has been severely

wounded; a stream of blood shoots out of its gills as it struggles to breathe.”

  I  call  his  attention  to  the  fact  that  his  dreams  always  have  a  cruel

character. He responded to this and went on for several sessions to tell aboutthe  sexual  fantasies  he  had  while  masturbating  and  the  cruel  acts  he  had

indulged in until the age of puberty. I had him write them down after they

had  been  analyzed.  Almost  all  of  them  were  determined  by  the  “sadistic

conception of the sexual act.”

  “(Three to five years old). At the summer resort I accidentally witness

how pigs are slaughtered. I hear the squealing of the animals and see the

blood spurting from their bodies, which have a white gleam in the darkness. I

feel a deep sensation of pleasure.

  “(Four  to  six  years  old).  The  idea  of  slaughtering  animals,  especially

horses, evokes a sensation of deep pleasure in me.

  “(Five to eleven years old). I very much like to play with tin soldiers. I

stage battles which always end up in hand-to-hand fighting. In this, I press

the bodies of the soldiers against one another. The soldiers which I favor

overpower the enemy.

  “(Six to twelve years old). I press two ants together in such a way that

they  fasten  upon  one  another  with  their  nippers.  Thus  locked  into  one

another, these two insects are forced to fight to the death. I also engineer

battles between two different colonies of ants by sprinkling sugar in the area

between their hills. This lures the insects from their hostile camps and causes

them to engage in regular battles. It also affords me pleasure to imprison a

wasp and a fly in a water glass. After a while, the wasp pounces upon the fly

and bites off its wings, legs, and head, in that order.

  “(Twelve to fourteen years old). I keep a terrarium and like to observe

how the males and the females engage in the sexual act. I like to observe the

same thing in the chicken yard; it also gives me pleasure to see the stronger

cocks drive away the weaker ones.

  “(Eight to sixteen years old). I like to scuffle with the housemaid. In later

years, I usually lifted the girls up, carried them to a bed, and threw them

down on it.

  “(Five to twelve years old). I like to play with trains. I run my little trainsthroughout the apartment, whereby tunnels improvised out of boxes, stools,

etc., are gone through. In this, I also attempt to imitate the sound of the

locomotive as it builds up steam and picks up speed.

    “(Fifteen years old; masturbation fantasies). I am always an onlooker.

The  woman  defends  herself  against  the man,  who,  in  many  instances, is

considerably  smaller  than  she  is.  After  a  struggle  of  some  duration, the

woman is overpowered. Brutally, the man clutches at her breasts, thighs, or

hips. Neither the male nor female genital nor the sexual act itself is ever part

of the fantasy. At the moment that the woman ceases to offer resistance, I

have an orgasm.”

  The  two  major  aspects  of  the  situation  at  this  time  were:  (1)  he  was

ashamed of his cowardice; (2) he remembered his past sadism. The analysis

of the fantasies and acts which are summarized above lasted until the end of

the  treatment.  He  became  much  freer  in  the  analysis,  bolder  and  more

aggressive;  but  his  behavior  was  still  characterized  by  fear.  His  states  of

anxiety were not as frequent, but they always reappeared with the money

resistance.

  Here  again  we  can  be  assured  that  the  chief  object  in  producing  the

genital-incest material was to conceal the infantile sadism, even though, at

the  same  time,  it  represented  an  attempt  to  move  toward  a  genital-object

cathexis.  But  his  genital  strivings  were  imbued  with  sadism  and,

economically, it was important to extract them from their entanglement with

the sadistic impulses.

  At the beginning of the sixth month of the analysis, the first opportunity

presented itself to interpret his fear for the penis. It was in connection with

the following dream:

  1. “I am lying on a sofa in an open field (at the summer resort!). One of

the girls whom I know comes toward me and lies on top of me. I get her

under me and attempt to have intercourse. I get an erection, but I notice that

my phallus is too short to complete the sexual act. I am very sad about this.  2. “I  am  reading  a  drama.  The  characters:  three  Japanese—father,

mother, and a four-year-old child. I sense that this play will have a tragic

ending. I am deeply moved by the role of the child.”

  For the first time, an attempt to have intercourse appeared as a manifest

part of a dream. The second part, which alludes to the primal scene (four

years old), was not analyzed. In continuously discussing his cowardice and

timidity, he himself began to speak about his penis. I took this opportunity to

point out that his fear of being injured and cheated, etc., referred in actual fact

to his genital. Why and of whom he was afraid were not yet discussed. Nor

was any effort made to interpret the real meaning of the fear. The explanation

seemed plausible to him, but now he fell into the clutches of a resistance

which lasted for six weeks and was based on a passive-feminine homosexual

defense against the castration anxiety.

  It  was  the  following  which  told  me  that  he  was  in  a  fresh  state  of

resistance: he did not rebel openly, expressed no doubt, but again became

excessively  polite,  docile,  and  obedient.  His  dreams,  which  had  become

shorter,  clearer,  and  less  frequent  during  the  analysis  of  the  previous

resistance, were again as they had been at the beginning—long and confused.

His states of anxiety were again very prevalent and intense. But he did not

voice any doubts about the analysis. The hereditary idea also cropped up

again, and in this connection his doubts about the analysis were expressed in

a veiled manner. As he had done at the beginning of the analysis, he again

enacted a raped woman. The passive-homosexual attitude was also dominant

in  his  dreams.  He  no  longer  had  any  dreams  involving  coitus  or  an

involuntary ejaculation. Hence, we see that, notwithstanding the advanced

stage of the analysis of his character, the old character resistance immediately

assumed its full force when a new layer of his unconscious—this time the

most crucial layer for his character, i.e., the castration anxiety—moved into

the forefront of the analysis.

  Accordingly, the analysis of the new resistance did not go into the phallusanxiety, the point at which the resistance had been aroused. Instead, I again

referred to his attitude as a whole. Throughout six full weeks the analysis was

taken up almost exclusively with the consistent interpretation of his behavior

as a defense against danger. Every detail of his conduct was examined from

this perspective and impressed upon him again and again, gradually moving

forward to the central motive of his behavior, the phallus anxiety.

  The patient made repeated efforts to slip away from me through “analytic

sacrifices” of infantile material, but I consistently interpreted the meaning of

this procedure also. Gradually, the situation came to a head. He felt like a

woman  toward  me,  told  me  so,  and  added  that  he  also  sensed  sexual

excitations  in  the  region  of  the  perineum.  I  explained  the  nature  of  this

transference phenomenon. He construed my attempt to explain his behavior

to him as a reproach, felt guilty, and wanted to expiate his guilt through

feminine devotion. For the time being, I did not enter into the deeper meaning

of this behavior, namely that he identified with the mother because he was

afraid to be the man (i.e., the father).

  Among other things, he now produced the following confirmatory dream:

  “I meet a young chap at the Prater and get into a conversation with him.

He  appears  to  misconstrue  one  of  my  statements  and  remarks  that  he  is

willing  to  give  himself  to  me.  In  the  meantime,  we  have  reached  my

apartment; the young man lies down in my father’s bed. I find his underwear

very distasteful.”

  In the analysis of this dream, I could again trace the feminine transference

back to the father. In association with this dream, he remembered that there

had been a time in his masturbation fantasies when he had had the desire to

be a woman and also had had fantasies in which he was a woman. The “dirty

underwear”  led  to  the  analysis  of  the  anal  activities  and  habits  (toilet

ceremonies)  which  related  to  his  behavior.  Another  character  trait,  his

punctiliousness, was also clarified.

  Finally, the resistance had been resolved; in the process, both its old formand its erogenous, anal basis had been discussed. Now I went a step further in

the interpretation of his character: I explained the connection between his

submissive attitude and his “female fantasy,” telling him that he behaved in a

feminine, i.e., exaggeratedly faithful and devoted, manner because he was

afraid to be a man. And I added that the analysis would have to go into the

reasons for his fear to be a man (in his sense of the word: brave, open, honest,

proud).

  Almost as an answer to this, he produced a short dream in which the

castration anxiety and the primal scene were again conspicuous:

  “I am at my cousin’s, an attractive young woman [the mother, W.R.].

Suddenly I have the sensation that I am my own grandfather. I am gripped by

an oppressive despondency. At the same time I somehow have the feeling that

I am the center of a stellar system and that planets are revolving around me.

At the same time (still in the dream) I suppress my fear and am annoyed at

my weakness.”

  The most important detail of this incest dream is his appearance in it as

his own grandfather. We were immediately agreed that his fear of having a

hereditary taint played an important role here. It was clear that, identifying

himself with the father, he fantasized being his own procreator, i.e., having

intercourse with his mother; but this was not discussed until later.

  He was of the opinion that the planetary system was an allusion to his

egotism, i.e., “everything revolves around me.” I surmised that there was

something deeper at the bottom of this idea, namely the primal scene, but I

made no mention of it.

  After the Christmas vacation, he went on for several days speaking almost

exclusively about his egotism, about his desire to be a child who is loved by

everyone—at the same time realizing that he himself neither wanted to love

nor was able to love.

  I showed him the connection between his egotism and his fear for his

                            7
adored ego and his penis, whereupon he had the following dream, giving me,as it were, a glimpse of the infantile groundwork:

  1. “I am completely nude and regard my penis, which is bleeding at the

tip. Two girls are walking away; I am sad because I assume that they will

hold me in contempt due to the smallness of my penis.

  2. “I am smoking a cigarette with a holder. I remove the holder and

notice with astonishment that it is a cigar holder. As I put the cigarette back

into my mouth, the mouthpiece breaks off. I feel disturbed.”

  Thus,  without  my  having  done  anything,  the  castration  idea  began  to

assume definite forms. Now he interpreted the dreams without my assistance,

and  he  produced  an  abundance  of  material  on  his  aversion  to  the  female

genital and on his fear of touching his penis with his hand and of having

someone else touch it. The second dream is clearly a matter of an oral fantasy

(cigar holder). It occurred to him that he desired everything about a woman

(most of all the breast) except the genital, and in this way he came to speak of

his oral fixation on the mother.

  I explained to him that mere awareness of the genital anxiety was not

much help. He had to find out why he had this anxiety. After this explanation,

he again dreamed about the primal scene, not realizing that he had entered

into my question:

  “I am behind the last car of a standing train right at a fork in the tracks.

A second train travels past and I am sandwiched between the two trains.”

  Before continuing the description of the analysis itself, I must mention

here that, in the seventh month of the treatment, after the dissolution of his

passive-homosexual  resistance,  the  patient  made  a  courageous  effort  to

involve himself with women. I had no knowledge of this whatever—he told

me about it later, in passing. He followed a girl and carried out his intentions

in this way: in the park he pressed himself against her, had a strong erection,

and an involuntary ejaculation. The anxiety states gradually ceased. It did not

occur to him to engage in sexual intercourse. I called his attention to this and

told him that he was evidently afraid to have coitus. He declined to admitthis, using the lack of opportunity as an excuse. Finally, however, he too was

struck by the infantile nature of his sexual activity. Naturally, he had dreams

in which this kind of sexual activity was depicted. Now he remembered that

as a child he had pressed himself against his mother in this same way.

  The incest theme with which, in the hope of diverting me, he had begun

the analysis, reappeared, but this time it was fairly free of resistance—at any

rate,  free  of  secondary  motives.  Thus,  there  was  a  parallel  between  the

analysis of his demeanor during the analytic session and the analysis of his

outside experiences.

  Again and again he refused to accept the interpretation that he had really

desired his mother. In the course of seven months, the material which he had

produced in confirmation of this desire was so clear, the connections—as he

himself admitted—were so evident, that I made no effort to persuade him, but

began, instead, to analyze why he was afraid to avow this desire.

  These questions had been simultaneously discussed in connection with his

penis anxiety, and now we had two problems to solve:

  1. What was the etiology of the castration anxiety?

  2. Why, notwithstanding conscious agreement, did he refuse to accept the

sensuous incest love?

  From now on, the analysis advanced rapidly in the direction of the primal

scene. This phase began with the following dream: “I am in the hall of a

royal palace where the king and his retinue are gathered. I ridicule the king.

His attendants pounce upon me. I am thrown down and feel that mortal cuts

are inflicted upon me. My corpse is carried away. Suddenly, it seems as if I

were still alive, but I keep still so as not to undeceive the two gravediggers,

who take me for dead. A thin layer of earth lies on top of me, and breathing

becomes  difficult.  I  make  a  movement  which  catches  the  eyes  of  the

gravediggers. I keep myself from being detected by not moving. Somewhat

later I am liberated. Once again I force my way into the royal palace, a

terrible weapon in each hand, perhaps thunderbolts. I kill everyone who getsin my way.”

  It seemed to him that the idea of the gravediggers must have something to

do with his fear of catastrophes, and now I was able to show him that these

two fears, the hereditary idea and the penis anxiety, related to one and the

same  thing.  It  was  very  likely,  I  added,  that  the  dream  reproduced  the

childhood scene from which the penis anxiety originated.

  With respect to the dream, it struck him that he pretended to be “dead,”

that he remained still in order not to be detected. Then, he recalled that, in his

masturbation fantasies, he was usually the onlooker. And he himself posed

the question whether he might have witnessed “such a thing” between his

parents. He immediately rejected this possibility, however, arguing that he

had never slept in his parents’ bedroom. Naturally, this greatly disappointed

me, for, on the basis of his dream material, I was convinced that he had

actually witnessed the primal scene.

  I, too, pointed out the inconsistency and asserted that one must not allow

oneself to be put off so easily—the analysis would clarify the situation in due

course. In the very same session, the patient felt fairly sure that he must have

seen a certain maid together with her friend. Then it occurred to him that

there were two other occasions when he might have eavesdropped on his

parents. He remembered that, when guests were visiting, his bed was pushed

into his parents’ bedroom. On summer holidays in the country, moreover, he

had slept in the same room with his parents until he was of school age. There

was  also  the  representation  of  the  primal  scene  through  the  killing  of

chickens  (rural  scene),  and  the  many  dreams  about  Ossiacher  See  and

Wörther See, where he had often spent his summer vacations.

  In this connection, he again spoke about his acting out at the beginning of

the  analysis  and  about  the  states  of  nocturnal  anxiety  which  he  had

experienced in childhood. One of the details of this anxiety was clarified

here. He was afraid of a white female figure emerging from between the

curtains. Now he remembered that, when he screamed at nights, his motherused  to  come  to  his  bed  in  her  nightgown.  Unfortunately,  the  element,

“someone behind the curtains,” was never clarified.

  Evidently, however, we had ventured too far into forbidden territory in

this session. That night, he had a resistance dream whose content was clearly

derisive:

  “I am standing on a pier and am on the verge of boarding a steamship, as

the  companion,  it  turns  out,  of  a  mental  patient.  Suddenly  the  whole

operation appears to me to be a spectacle in which I have been assigned a

definite role. On the narrow plank which leads from the pier to the steamer, I

have to repeat the same thing three times—which I do.”

  He himself interpreted the boarding of the steamer as a desire for coitus,

but I directed his attention to an element of the dream which had greater

contemporary importance, namely the “play acting.” His having to repeat the

same  thing  three  times  was  a  mocking  allusion  to  my  consistent

interpretations. He admitted that he had often been quietly amused at my

efforts. It also occurred to him that he had in mind to call on a woman and to

engage in the sexual act three times—“to please me,” I told him. But I also

explained  to  him  that  this  resistance  had  a  deeper  content,  namely  the

warding off of his coital intentions out of fear of the sexual act.

  On the following night, he again had the two complementary dreams:

homosexual surrender and coital anxiety.

  1. “I meet a young chap on the street who belongs to the lower classes,

but who has a healthy, vigorous appearance. I have the feeling that he is

physically stronger than I, and I endeavor to gain his favor.

  2. “I go on a ski trip with the husband of one of my cousins. We are in a

narrow pass which drops down precipitately. I examine the snow and find it

sticky. I remark that the terrain is not very suitable for skiing—one would

often have to take a spill on going down. As we continue our trip, we come to

a road which runs along the declivity of a mountain. On a sharp curve, I lose

a ski, which falls over the precipice.”  He did not, however, go into this dream. Instead he took up the question

of “remuneration”; he had to pay so much and had no idea whether it would

do him any good. He was very dissatisfied, was again afraid—and more of

the same.

  It was no difficult matter now to show him the connection between the

money resistance and the nonresolved coitus anxiety and genital anxiety—

and to overcome this resistance. He could also be shown the deeper intentions

of his feminine surrender: when he approached a woman, he became afraid

of the consequences and became a woman himself, i.e., became homosexual

and passive in character. As a matter of fact, he understood very well that he

had made himself into a woman, but he was at a loss to explain why and what

he was afraid of. It was clear to him that he was afraid of sexual intercourse.

But, then, what could possibly happen to him?

  Now he devoted his full attention to this question. Instead of discussing

his fear of the father, however, he talked about his fear of women. In the

anxiety-hysteria of his childhood, the woman was also an object to be feared.

From first to last, instead of a woman’s genital, he spoke of a “woman’s

penis.” Until the age of puberty he had believed that the woman was made in

the same way as the man. He himself was able to see a connection between

this  idea  and  the  primal  scene,  the  reality  of  which  he  was  now  firmly

convinced.

  At the end of the seventh month of the analysis, he had a dream in which

he saw how a girl lifted her skirt so that her underwear was visible. He turned

away as someone “who sees something which he isn’t supposed to see.” Now

I felt that the time had come to tell him that he was afraid of the female

genitalia because it looked like an incision, a wound. On seeing it for the first

time,  he  must  have  been  terribly  shocked.  He  found  my  explanation

plausible,  for  his  feelings  toward  the  female  genitalia  were  a  mixture  of

disgust and antipathy; fear was aroused in him. He had no recollection of a

real incident.  Now the situation was this: whereas the central element of his symptoms,

the castration anxiety, had been worked through, it was still unresolved in its

ultimate  and  deepest  meaning  because  the  more  intimate,  individual

connections to the primal scene were missing; these connections had been

disclosed but not analytically assimilated.

  Another time, in a resistance-free period, as we were discussing these

relationships and not achieving any tangible results, the patient mumbled to

himself, “I must have been caught once.” Upon closer questioning, he said

that he had a feeling that he had once done something wrong in a sneaky way

and had been caught in the act.

  Now the patient remembered that, even as a small boy, he had secretly

rebelled  against  his  father.  He  had  ridiculed  and  made  faces  behind  his

father’s back, while feigning obedience to his face. But this rebellion against

the  father  had  ceased  completely  in  puberty.  (Complete  repression  of  the

hatred of the father out of fear of the father.)

  Even the hereditary-taint idea turned out to be a severe reproach against

the father. The complaint, “I have a hereditary taint,” meant: “My father

handicapped me in giving me birth.” The analysis of the fantasies about the

primal scene revealed that the patient fancied himself in the womb while his

father was having intercourse with his mother. The idea of being injured in

the genitalia combined with the womb fantasy to form the notion that he had

been castrated by the father in the womb.

  We can be brief in our description of the remainder of the analysis. It was

relatively free of resistance and was clearly divided into two parts.

  The first part was taken up with the working through of his childhood

masturbation  fantasies  and  the  masturbation  anxiety.  For  some  time,  his

castration anxiety was anchored in the fear of (or aversion to) the female

genitalia. The “incision,” the “wound,” was not an easily refutable proof of

the feasibility of castration. Finally, the patient plucked up enough courage to

masturbate,  whereupon  the  anxiety  states  disappeared  completely,  a  proofthat the attacks of anxiety originated from the libido stasis and not from the

castration anxiety, for this anxiety continued. By working through additional

infantile material, we finally succeeded in subduing the castration anxiety to

such an extent as to enable him to attempt intercourse, which, as far as his

erection  was  concerned,  succeeded  well.  Further  sexual  experiences  with

women brought out two disturbances: he was orgastically impotent, i.e., he

derived less sensual pleasure from coitus than he did from masturbation; and

he had an indifferent, contemptuous attitude toward the woman. There was

still a cleavage in the sexual impulse between tenderness and sensuality.

  The  second  phase  was  taken  up  with  the  analysis  of  his  orgastic

impotence  and  his  infantile  narcissism.  As  had  always  been  his  habit,  he

wanted everything from the woman, from the mother, without having to give

anything in return. With great understanding and even greater eagerness, the

patient  himself  took  the  initiative  in  dealing  with  his  disturbances.  He

objectified his narcissism, realized that it was a burden, and finally overcame

it when the final remnant of his castration anxiety, which was anchored in his

impotence, had been resolved analytically. He was afraid of the orgasm; he

thought the excitement it produced was harmful.

  The following dream was the projection of this fear:

  “I am visiting an art gallery. One picture catches my eye—it is entitled

‘Inebriated Tom.’ It is a painting of a young handsome English soldier in the

mountains. There is a storm. It appears that he has lost his way; a skeleton

hand  has  taken  hold  of  his  arm  and  appears  to  be  leading  him  away,

evidently  a  symbol  that  he  is  going  to  his  doom.  A  painting  ‘Difficult

Profession’: also in the mountains, a man and a small boy plunge down an

incline;  at  the  same  time,  a  rucksack  empties  its  contents.  The  boy  is

surrounded by a whitish pap.”

                                            8
  The plunge represents the orgasm, the whitish pap the sperm. The patient

discussed the anxiety which, in puberty, he experienced when he ejaculated

and when he had an orgasm. His sadistic fantasies with regard to womenwere  also  thoroughly  worked  through.  A  few  months  later—it  was  then

summer—he  began  a  liaison  with  a  young  girl;  the  disturbances  were

considerably milder.

  The resolution of the transference did not offer any difficulties, because it

had  been  systematically  dealt  with  from  the  very  beginning,  both  in  its

negative and in its positive aspects. He was happy to leave the analysis and

was full of hope for the future.

  I saw the patient five times in the course of the next five years, full of

health in both mind and body. His timidity and attacks of anxiety had wholly

disappeared.  He  described  himself  as  completely  cured  and  expressed  his

satisfaction  that  his  personality  had  been  cleansed  of  its  servile  and

underhanded traits. Now he was able to face all difficulties courageously. His

potency had increased since the termination of the analysis.


                                  4. SUMMARY


  Having arrived at the conclusion of our report, we become keenly aware

of the inadequacies of language to depict analytic processes. Notwithstanding

these  linguistic  difficulties,  we  want  to  outline  at  least  the  most  salient

features of character analysis in the hope of improving our understanding of

it. Hence, let us summarize:

  1. Our patient is the prototype of the passive-feminine character who,

regardless  of  what  symptoms  cause  him  to  seek  analytic  help,  always

confronts us with the same kind of character resistance. He also offers us a

typical example of the mechanism of the latent negative transference.

  2. In terms of technique, the analysis of the passive-feminine character

resistance  (i.e.,  deception  through  excessive  friendliness  and  submissive

demeanor)  was  given  priority.  The  result  was  that  the  infantile  material

became manifest in the transference neurosis according to its own inner logic.

This  prevented  the  patient  from  delving  into  his  unconscious  in  a  solely

intellectual way, that is, to satisfy his feminine devotion (“to be obliging”),which would have had no therapeutic effect.

  3. It becomes clear from this report that, if the character resistance is

systematically and consistently stressed and if premature interpretations are

avoided, the germane infantile material emerges of itself ever more clearly

and  distinctly.  This  ensures  that  the  content  and  symptom  interpretations

which follow will be irrefutable and therapeutically effective.

  4. The case history showed that the character resistance can be taken up

as soon as its contemporary meaning and purpose have been grasped. It was

not necessary to have a knowledge of the infantile material pertaining to it.

By stressing  and  interpreting  its  contemporary  meaning,  we  were  able  to

draw  out  the  corresponding  infantile  material,  without  having  to  interpret

symptoms  or  have  preconceptions. The  dissolution  of  the  character

resistance began with the establishment of contact with the infantile material.

The subsequent symptom interpretations took place free of resistance, with

the patient turning his full attention to the analysis. Typically, therefore, the

analysis of the resistance fell into two parts: (a) stressing of the resistance’s

form and of its contemporary meaning; (b) its dissolution with the help of the

infantile  material  drawn  to  the  surface  by  that  emphasis.  The  difference

between a character resistance and an ordinary resistance was shown here in

that the former was manifested in his politeness and submissiveness, whereas

the latter was manifested in simple doubting and distrusting of the analysis.

Only the former attitudes were a part of his character and constituted the form

in which his distrust was expressed.

  5. Through consistent interpretation of the latent negative transference,

the repressed and masked aggressiveness against the analyst, superiors, and

father was liberated from repression, whereby the passive-feminine attitude,

which  of  course  was  merely  a  reaction  formation  against  the  repressed

aggressiveness, disappeared.

  6.  Since  the  repression  of  the  aggressiveness  toward  the  father  also

entailed  the  repression  of  the  phallic  libido  toward  women,  the  active-masculine genital strivings returned with the aggressiveness in the process of

analytic dissolution (cure of impotence).

  7. As the aggressiveness became conscious, the timidity which was a part

of his character vanished, along with the castration anxiety. And the attacks

of anxiety left off when he ceased to live in abstinence. Through the orgastic

elimination of the actual anxiety, the “core of the neurosis” was also finally

eliminated.

  Finally,  it  is  my  hope  that  by  describing  a  number  of  cases,  I  have

shattered the opinion held by my opponents, namely that I approach each and

every case with a “fixed scheme.” Hopefully, the point of view which I have

advocated for years, that there is only one technique for each case and that

this technique has to be deduced from the structure of the case and applied to

it, will have become clear from the foregoing representation.                                    CHAPTER V





  INDICATIONS AND DANGERS OF CHARACTER


                                    ANALYSIS




The  transitions  from  unsystematic  and  inconsistent  analysis  to  systematic

character  analysis—which,  compared  to  the  former,  resembles  a  well-

considered psychic operation—are fluid and so manifold that it is impossible

to take them all in at once. Yet it is possible to set up a number of criteria for

determining when character analysis is indicated.

  In  view  of  the  fact  that  violent  affects  are  aroused  by  the  character-

analytic loosening of the narcissistic defense mechanism and that the patient

is also temporarily reduced to a more or less helpless state, character analysis

can  be  applied  without  ill  effects  only  by  therapists  who  have  already

mastered the analytic technique. Primarily, this means those therapists who

are  capable  of  handling  the  transference  reactions.  Hence,  it  is  not  to  be

                                1
recommended for beginners. The patient’s temporary helplessness is due to

the  isolation  of  the  infantile  neurosis  from  the  character,  and  as  a

consequence  the  neurosis  becomes  fully  reactivated.  Of  course  it  is

reactivated even without systematic character analysis. In this case, however,

since the armoring remains relatively untouched, the affective reactions are

weaker  and  therefore  easier  to  control.  If  the  structure  of  the  case  is

thoroughly grasped at the beginning, there is no danger in applying character

analysis. With the exception of a hopeless case of acute depression which I

took on many years ago, I have not had any suicides in my practice thus far.

In this instance, the patient broke off the treatment after two or three sessions,before  I  was  able  to  take  any  decisive  measures.  As  I  examine  my

experiences as critically as possible, the picture which ensues is paradoxical

only in appearance. Since I began to use character analysis, i.e., about eight

years ago, I have lost only three cases due to precipitate flight. Before that,

patients ran away far more frequently. This is explained by the fact that,

when  the  negative  and  narcissistic  reactions  are  immediately  subjected  to

analysis, an escape is usually made impossible—though the burden on the

patient is greater.

    Character analysis is applicable in every case, but its use is not indicated

in  every  case.  There  are  circumstances,  indeed,  which  strictly  forbid  its

application. Let us begin by surveying cases in which it is indicated. They are

all determined by the extent of the encrustation of the character, that is, by the

degree and intensity of the neurotic reactions which have become chronic and

have been incorporated into the ego. Character analysis is always indicated in

cases of compulsive neuroses, especially in those which are marked not by

clearly defined symptoms but by a general debility of the functions, in those

cases in which the character traits constitute not only the object of but also

the greatest hindrance to the treatment. Likewise, it is always indicated in

cases of phallic-narcissistic characters (ordinarily, these patients are wont to

ridicule every analytic effort), and in moral insanity, impulsive characters and

pseudologia  phantastica.  In  schizoid  or  early  schizophrenic  patients,  an

extremely cautious but very consistent character analysis is the precondition

for the avoidance of premature and uncontrollable emotional breakthroughs,

for it anneals the ego functions before the deep layers of the unconscious are

activated.

  In  cases  of  acute  and  extreme  anxiety-hysteria,  it  would  be  wrong  to

begin  with  a  consistent  analysis  of  the  ego  defense  in  the  way  described

above, for the id impulses in these cases are in an acute state of agitation at a

time when the ego is not strong enough to shut itself off against them, to bind

the  free-floating  energies.  Extreme  and  acute  anxiety  is  of  course  anindication that the armor has been broken through along a wide front, thus

making superfluous immediate work on the character. In later stages of the

analysis, when the anxiety has given way to a strong tie to the analyst and the

first signs of reactions of disappointment have become noticeable, character-

analytic work cannot be dispensed with; but it is not the main task in the

initial stages of the treatment.

  In  cases  of  melancholia  and  manic-depressives,  the  application  or

nonapplication  of  character  analysis  will  depend  upon  whether  an  acute

exacerbation,  e.g.,  strong  suicidal  impulses  or  acute  anxiety,  exists;  or

whether psychic apathy is the dominant trait. Another important factor will

certainly be the amount of genital object-relationship which is still present. In

the case of apathetic forms, cautious but thorough character-analytic work on

the ego defense (repressed aggression!) is indispensable if one wants to avoid

interminable analyses.

  It  goes  without  saying  that  the  loosening  of  the  armor  can  always  be

carried out by degrees, depending not only on the individual case but also on

the  individual  situation.  There  are  many  different  ways  of  loosening  the

armor by degrees: the intensity and consistency of the interpretation can be

increased or decreased according to the tenacity of the resistance; the depth at

which the resistance is interpreted can be raised or deepened; the negative or

positive aspect of the transference can be given greater play, occasionally

allowing the patient free rein, no matter how strong his resistance is, without

making any effort to resolve the resistance. The patient has to be attuned to

violent therapeutic reactions when he is on the verge of them. If the analyst is

sufficiently elastic in his interpretations and influence, if he has overcome his

initial apprehensiveness and insecurity and, over and above this, has great

patience, he will not encounter any great difficulties.

  It  will  not  be  easy  to  apply  character  analysis  to  unusual  cases.  The

analyst will have to attempt to understand and be guided by the ego structure

very slowly, step by step. Interpretations of deep layers of the unconsciouswill certainly be avoided if one wants to protect oneself against unforeseeable

and  unpleasant  reactions.  If  deep  interpretations  are  withheld  until  the

mechanisms of the ego defense are revealed, a certain amount of time, it is

true, will have been lost, but the analyst will have gained far greater security

in knowing how to handle that particular case.

  I have often been asked by colleagues and beginning analysts whether

character analysis can be introduced when the patient has already produced a

chaotic situation for several months. A final judgment is not possible, but it

would  appear  that,  in  some  cases  at  any  rate,  a  change  in  technique  is

definitely attended by success. The application of character analysis is much

easier when the analyst himself can initiate that treatment, even if the patient

has undergone an extended analysis with another analyst without any or only

partial success.

  It is worthy of note that, in consistent character analysis, it makes no

difference  whether  or  not  the  patient  has  any  intellectual  knowledge  of

analysis.  Since  deep  interpretations  are  not  applied  until  the  patient  has

loosened  his  basic  attitude  of  resistance  and  opened  himself  to  affective

experience, he has no opportunity to make a show of his knowledge. And if

he should nonetheless try to do so, this would merely be a part of his general

attitude of resistance and could be unmasked within the framework of his

other narcissistic reactions. The use of analytic terminology is not checked; it

is  merely  treated  as  a  defense  and  a  narcissistic  identification  with  the

analyst.

  Another question which is often asked is: in what percentage of cases can

character analysis be initiated and consistently followed through? The answer

is:  not  in  all  cases  at  any  rate;  much  depends  on  practice,  intuition,  and

indications. During past years, however, more than half of our cases could be

dealt with by character analysis. This also made possible a comparison of

intensive  and  consistent  methods  with  less  rigid  methods  of  resistance

analysis.  To what extent is a change of the character at all necessary in the analysis

and to what extent can it be brought about?

    Fundamentally, there is only one answer to the first question: the neurotic

character  must  be  so  changed  that  it  ceases  to  be  the  basis  of  neurotic

symptoms and to interfere with the capacity for work and the capacity for

sexual enjoyment.

  The second question can be answered only empirically. To what extent

the actual success approximates the desired success depends, in each case,

upon a vast number of factors. With the existing psychoanalytic methods,

qualitative  changes  of  character  cannot  be  brought  about  directly.  A

compulsive character will never become a hysterical character; a paranoid

character will never become a compulsive neurotic character; a choleric will

never  become  a  phlegmatic,  nor  will  a  sanguine  character  become

melancholic. However, it is definitely possible to effect quantitative changes

which  approximate  qualitative  changes  when  they  have  reached  a  certain

measure. For example, the slight feminine attitude of the compulsive neurotic

patient  grows  stronger  and  stronger  during  analysis  until  it  takes  on  the

characteristics of the hysterical-feminine personality, while the masculine-

aggressive attitudes grow weaker.

  In this way, the patient’s entire being undergoes a “change,” which is

more apparent to people who do not often see the patient than it is to the

analyst.  The  inhibited  person  becomes  freer;  the  fear-ridden,  more

courageous;  the  overconscientious,  relatively  less  scrupulous;  the

unscrupulous,  more  conscientious;  but  that  certain  indefinable  “personal

note”  is  never  lost.  It  continues  to  show  through,  no  matter  how  many

changes are brought about. The overconscientious compulsive character will

become  reality-oriented  in  his  conscientiousness;  the  cured  impulsive

character will remain impetuous but less so than the uncured character; the

patient  cured  of  moral  insanity  will  never  take  life  too  hard  and  will

consequently always get through easily, whereas the cured compulsive willalways have some difficulty because of his awkwardness. Thus, though these

traits persist even after a successful character analysis, they remain within

limits which do not constrict one’s freedom of movement in life to the extent

that one’s capacity for work and for sexual pleasure suffer from them.                                  CHAPTER VI





ON THE HANDLING OF THE TRANSFERENCE




1. THE DISTILLATION OF THE GENITAL-OBJECT LIBIDO


In the course of the analysis, the patient “transfers” to the analyst infantile

attitudes  which  undergo  manifold  transformations  and  fulfill  definite

functions. The handling of these transferred attitudes creates a problem for

the analyst. The patient’s relationship to the analyst is of both a positive and a

negative nature. The analyst has to reckon with ambivalence of feelings and,

above all, to bear in mind that sooner or later every form of transference

becomes a resistance, which the patient himself is not in a position to resolve.

Freud  stressed  that  the  initial  positive  transference  shows  a  tendency  to

change suddenly into a negative transference. Moreover, the importance of

the transference is evidenced by the fact that the most essential elements of

the neurosis can be gotten at only through the transference. Consequently, the

resolution of the “transference neurosis,” which gradually takes the place of

the  real  illness,  ranks  as  one  of  the  most  challenging  tasks  of  analytic

technique. The positive transference is the main vehicle of analytic treatment;

the  most  tenacious  resistances  and  symptoms  are  dissolved  in  it,  but  its

resolution is not the cure itself. This transference, though not the therapeutic

factor  as  such  in  the  analysis,  is  the  most  important  precondition  for  the

establishment  of  those  processes  which,  independent  of  the  transference,

finally lead to cure. The purely technical tasks which Freud treated in his

essays on the transference can be briefly summarized as follows:

  1. The establishment of a durable positive transference.  2. The use of this transference to overcome the neurotic resistances.

  3. The use of the positive transference to extract repressed contents and to

bring about dynamically complete and affective abreactive eruptions.

  From the point of view of character analysis, there are two further tasks:

one relating to technique and the other a libido-economic one.

  The task of technique is the necessary establishing of a durable positive

transference,  because,  as  indicated  by  clinical  fact,  only  a  very  small

percentage  of  patients  spontaneously  establish  it.  The  considerations  of

character analysis, however, lead us a step further. If it is correct that all

neuroses result from a neurotic character and, moreover, that the neurotic

character  is  characterized  precisely  by  its  narcissistic  armoring,  then  the

question arises whether our patients are at all capable of a genuine positive

transference,  in  the  beginning.  By  “genuine,”  we  mean  a  strong,

nonambivalent, and erotic object striving, capable of providing a basis for an

intense relationship to the analyst and of weathering the storms entailed by

the analysis. Reviewing our cases, we have to answer this question in the

negative: there is no genuine positive transference at the beginning of the

analysis, nor can there be, because of the sexual repression, the fragmentation

of the object-libidinal strivings, and the restrictions of the character. At this

point,  someone  will  be  sure  to  call  my  attention  to  the  unambiguous

indications of positive transference which we perceive in our patients in the

initial phases of analysis. Most assuredly, in the beginning, there are any

number of indications which look like a positive transference. But what is

their unconscious background? Are they genuine or deceptive? Too often we

have mistakenly assumed that we were dealing with genuine, object-libidinal,

erotic strivings. Thus, the question cannot be left unanswered. It ties in with

the more general question whether a neurotic character is at all capable of

love, and if so, in what sense. Closer examination of these initial indications

of  the  so-called  positive  transference,  i.e.,  the  focusing  of  object-libidinal

sexual  impulses  on  the  analyst,  shows  that,  except  for  a  certain  residuecorresponding to the glimmering of rudimentary elements of genuine love,

they  are  a  question  of  three  things,  which  have  little  to  do  with  object-

libidinal strivings:

  1. Reactive  positive  transference—i.e.,  the  patient  uses  love  to

compensate for a transference of hate. In this case, the background is a latent

negative  transference.  If  the  resistances  which  ensue  from  this  kind  of

transference are interpreted as an expression of a love relationship, one has

first of all made an incorrect interpretation and second has overlooked the

negative transference concealed in it. If that is the case, the analyst runs the

risk of circumventing the core of the neurotic character.

  2. A devotional attitude toward the analyst indicative of a guilt feeling or

a  moralistic  masochism.  Again  we  find  nothing  but  repressed  and

compensated hate at the root of this attitude.

  3. The transference of narcissistic desires—i.e., the narcissistic hope that

the  analyst  will  love,  console,  or  admire  the  patient.  No  other  kind  of

transference  falls  to  pieces  more  readily  than  this  one,  or  is  more  easily

transformed  into  bitter  disappointment  and  a  spiteful  narcissistic  sense  of

injury. If this is interpreted as a positive transference (“You love me”), one

has again made an incorrect interpretation; the patient does not love at all but

merely wants to be loved, and he loses interest the moment he realizes that

his  desires  cannot  be  fulfilled.  Connected  with  this  kind  of  transference,

however,  there  are  pregenital  libido  strivings  which  cannot  establish  a

durable transference because they are too laden with narcissism, e.g., oral

demands.

  These three types of specious positive transference—I have no doubt that

further study will bring to light a number of others—overrun and interfuse

the  rudiments  of  genuine  object-love  which  the  neurosis  has  not  yet

consumed.  They  themselves  are  sequels  of  the  neurotic  process,  for  the

frustration of the libidinal strivings causes hate, narcissism, and guilt feelings

to surface. Despite their speciousness, they suffice to hold the patient in theanalysis until they can be eliminated; but they will just as surely drive the

patient to terminate the analysis if they are not unmasked in time.

  It  was  precisely  the  endeavor  to  bring  about  an  intensive  positive

transference  that  caused  me  to  give  the  negative  transference  so  much

attention. If the negative, critical, and disparaging attitudes toward the analyst

are  made  thoroughly  conscious  right  from  the  outset,  the  negative

transference  is  not  reinforced;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  eliminated  and  the

positive transference then emerges more clearly. There are two factors which

could create the impression that I “work with the negative transference.” The

fact that the breakdown of the narcissistic defense mechanism brings to the

surface  the  latent  negative  transferences—which  even  today  I  tend  to

overestimate rather than underestimate—and that often months are required

in  the  analysis  of  the  manifestations  of  defense.  I  do  not,  however,  put

something in the patient which was not already there; I merely bring into

sharper focus what is latently concealed in his modes of behavior (politeness,

indifference, etc.) and serves no other purpose than to ward off the influence

exercised by the analyst.

  In  the  beginning,  I  regarded  all  forms  of  ego  defense  as  negative

transferences. This had, it is true, a certain, if indirect, justification. Sooner or

later, the ego defense makes use of the existing hate impulses; the ego resists

the analysis in various ways by means of the destructive drive mechanism. It

is also correct that hate impulses, i.e., the genuine negative transference, are

always  and  in  a  relatively  easy  way  drawn  out  when  the  resistance

interpretation proceeds from the ego defense. It is merely incorrect to call the

ego defense as such a negative transference; rather, it is a narcissistic defense

reaction. Even the narcissistic transference is not a negative transference, in

the strict sense of the word. At that time I was evidently under the strong

impression that every ego defense, when consistently analyzed, easily and

rapidly becomes a negative transference. But a latent negative transference is

present  from  the  outset  only  in  the  transference  of  the  passive-femininecharacter and in cases of affect block. Here we are dealing with a hate which,

though repressed, is nonetheless active in the contemporary situation.

  A  good  illustration  of  the  transference  technique  involving  a  specious

positive  transference  is  the  case  of  a  twenty-seven-year-old  woman  who

sought analytic treatment because of her sexual vacillations. She had been

divorced twice, had broken up both marriages, and had had, for a woman of

her social standing, an uncommonly large number of lovers. She herself was

aware  of  the  contemporary  reason  for  this  nymphomanic  trait:  lack  of

gratification  because  of  orgastic  vaginal  impotence.  To  understand  the

resistance and its interpretation, it is necessary to mention that the patient was

exceptionally attractive and was very much aware of her feminine appeal.

Nor was she at all modest about it. During the preliminary consultation, I was

struck by a certain self-consciousness on her part; she stared at the floor

continuously, though she spoke fluently and answered all questions.

  The first hour and two-thirds of the second hour were taken up with the

relatively uninhibited account of the embarrassing circumstances connected

with her second divorce and of the disturbances of sexual sensitivity in the

sexual act. Her account was abruptly broken off toward the end of the second

hour. The patient was silent and, after a pause, said that she had nothing else

to say. I knew that the transference had already become active as a resistance.

There  were  two  possibilities:  (1)  to  urge  the  patient  to  continue  her

communications by persuading and exhorting her to follow the basic rule; (2)

to attack the resistance itself. The former would have constituted an evasion

of  the  resistance,  while  the  latter  was  feasible  only  if  the  inhibition  was

understood at least in part. Since, in such situations, there is always a defense

which stems from the ego, it was possible to begin with an interpretation of

the resistance from there. I explained the meaning of such blocks, pointing

out that “something unstated” was disrupting the continuation of the analysis,

something against which she unconsciously struggled. I told her further that

such  inhibitions  are  usually  caused  by  thoughts  about  the  analyst  and  Istressed that, among other things, the success of the treatment was dependent

upon her ability to be completely honest in these matters. Under considerable

strain, she went on to relate that, while she had been able to speak freely on

the  previous  day,  she  was  now  plagued  by  thoughts  which  actually  had

nothing to do with the treatment. Finally, it came out that, before entering

analysis,  she  had  wondered  what  would  happen  if  the  analyst  gained  “a

certain impression” of her; whether he would hold her in contempt because of

her experiences with men. This brought the session to a close. The block

continued  on  the  following  day.  Once  again  I  called  her  attention  to  her

inhibition and to the fact that she was again warding something off. It now

turned out that she had completely repressed what had taken place during the

previous hour. I explained the meaning of this forgetting, whereupon she said

that she had been unable to fall asleep the night before because she had been

so afraid the analyst could develop personal feelings toward her. This could

have  been  interpreted  as  a  projection  of  her  own  love  impulses,  but  the

patient’s  personality,  her  strongly  developed  feminine  narcissism  and  her

background, insofar as it was known, did not really lend themselves to such

an interpretation. I had the vague impression that she was suspicious of my

professional code of conduct and feared that I might take advantage of the

analytic situation in a sexual way. Within the context of the analytic situation,

there  could  be  no  doubt  that  sexual  desires  already  existed  on  her  part.

However, faced with the choice of dealing first with these manifestations of

the id or with the fears of the ego, one could hardly hesitate to choose the

latter. Thus, I told her what I surmised about her fears. She responded with a

torrent of information about the bad experiences she had had with physicians;

sooner  or  later  all  of  them  had  propositioned  her  or  even  exploited  the

professional situation. Wasn’t it natural, she asked, for her to be suspicious of

physicians?  After  all,  she  had  no  way  of  knowing  whether  I  was  any

different. These disclosures had a temporarily liberating effect; she was again

able to turn her full attention to the discussion of her contemporary conflicts.A great deal was learned about the motivations and circumstances of her love

affairs.  Two  facts  stood  out:  (1)  she  usually  sought  relationships  with

younger men; (2) it didn’t take her long to lose interest in her lovers. It was of

course clear that her motivations were of a narcissistic nature. On the one

hand she wanted to dominate men, and this she could do more easily when

dealing with young men. On the other hand, she lost her interest in a man as

soon as he expressed sufficient admiration. It would of course have been

possible to tell her the meaning of her behavior; this certainly would not have

done any harm because it was not a matter of deeply repressed material. But

the consideration of the dynamic effect of this interpretation restrained me

from doing so. Since her leading characteristics would soon develop into a

powerful resistance in the analysis, it seemed advisable to wait for this to take

place so as to be able to use the affects from the transference experience to

bring the unconscious contents into consciousness. As a matter of fact, the

resistance soon developed, but in a wholly unexpected form.

  She was again silent, and I continued to point out that she was warding

something off. After great hesitation, she declared that what she had feared

had  finally  come  to  pass,  only  it  was  not  my  relationship  to  her  but  her

attitude toward me which worried her. The analysis was constantly in her

mind. The day before, in fact, she had masturbated with the fantasy that she

was having sexual intercourse with the analyst. After I had told her that such

fantasies  were  not  unusual  while  undergoing  analysis,  that  the  patient

projected upon the analyst all the feelings which he or she harbored toward

others at one time or another—this she understood very well—I went into the

narcissistic background of this transference. There could be no doubt that the

fantasy as such was also partially the expression of the incipient breakthrough

of  an  object-libidinal  desire.  For  various  reasons,  however,  it  was  not

possible to interpret this as a transference. More to the point, the moment was

not  ripe  for  such  an  interpretation.  The  incest  desire  was  still  deeply

repressed; hence, the fantasy, in spite of its clearly childish elements, couldnot  be  traced  back  to  this.  But  the  patient’s  personality,  and  the  entire

situation in which the transference fantasy was embedded, provided ample

material  for  dealing  with  other  aspects  and  motives  of  the  fantasy.  She

suffered  states  of  anxiety  before  and  during  the  analysis;  these  were

indicative  partly  of  blocked  sexual  excitation  and  partly  of  the  ego’s

immediate  fear  of  a  difficult  situation.  Thus,  in  the  interpretation  of  the

transference resistance, I again proceeded from her ego. To begin with, I

explained  that  her  strong  inhibition  about  discussing  these  things  was

connected with her pride, i.e., she was too proud to admit to such emotional

stirrings.  She  immediately  agreed,  adding  that  her  whole  nature  rebelled

against such admissions. Asked whether she had ever experienced love or

desire spontaneously, she answered that this had never been the case. The

men  had  always  desired  her;  she  had  merely  acquiesced  to  their  love.  I

explained the narcissistic character of this attitude, and she understood it very

well. I further made it clear that there could be no question of a genuine love

striving; rather, she had been irritated to see a man sitting there completely

unmoved by her charms and found that situation unbearable. The fantasy had

been an expression of her desire to make the analyst fall in love with her.

That this had been the case was confirmed by the recollection that, in the

fantasy,  the  conquest  of  the  analyst  had  played  the  major  role  and  had

afforded the actual source of pleasure. Now I could draw her attention to the

danger concealed in this attitude, namely that, as time went on, she would not

be  able  to  tolerate  the  rejection  of  her  desires  and  would  eventually  lose

interest in the analysis. She herself was already aware of this possibility.

  This  point  requires  special  emphasis.  In  such  transferences,  if  the

narcissistic  background  is  not  uncovered  in  time,  it  easily  happens  that  a

disappointment reaction sets in unexpectedly and the patient, in a negative

transference, breaks off the analysis. Over the years, a number of such cases

were reported in the Technical Seminar. The story had always been the same:

the  analyst  had  accepted  such  manifestations  at  their  face  value  and  hadinterpreted the relationship solely as a love relationship. He had failed to

stress the patient’s need to be loved and the tendency to be disappointed.

Sooner or later, consequently, the patient had broken off the analysis.

  My interpretation of the transference led without difficulty to the analysis

of her narcissism, her scornful attitude toward men who chased after her, and

her general incapacity for love—which was one of the chief reasons for her

difficulties. It was quite clear to her that she first had to unearth the reasons

for the impairment of her capacity for love. In addition to her vanity, she

mentioned her exaggerated obstinacy, her inner estrangement from people

and things, her merely superficial and specious interests—all of which added

up  to  the  feeling  of  dreariness  by  which  she  was  tormented.  Thus,  the

analysis of her transference resistance had led directly to the analysis of her

character, which, from now on, became the focal point of the analysis. She

had to admit that she was not really involved in the analysis, notwithstanding

her earnest intentions to straighten herself out through it. The rest of the case

is of no interest to us here. I merely wanted to show how the unfolding of the

transference  in  keeping  with  the  patient’s  character  leads  directly  to  the

question of narcissistic isolation.

    Considerations related to the economic point of view in our therapy also

make it clear that it is technically incorrect to bring into consciousness at the

outset  the  rudiments  and  incipient  manifestations  of  the  genuine  positive

transference, instead of first working through the narcissistic and negative

superimpositions.

  To my knowledge, it was Landauer who first called attention to the fact

that,  initially,  every  interpretation  of  a  projected  emotion  weakens  it  and

strengthens its counter-tendency. Since our aim in the analysis is to extract

and  clearly  crystallize  the  genital-object  libido,  to  liberate  it  from  its

condition  of  repression,  and  to  extricate  it  from  its  entanglement  with

narcissistic, pregenital, and destructive impulses, the analysis should, for as

long as possible, deal only or predominantly with the manifestations of thenarcissistic and negative transference, to interpret them and trace them back

to  their  source.  But  the  indications  of  an  incipient  manifestation  of  love

should  be  allowed  to  develop  undeterred  until  they  are  clearly  and

unambiguously concentrated in the transference. This does not usually take

place until very advanced stages, frequently not until the end of the analysis.

Particularly in cases of compulsion neuroses, ambivalence and doubt are very

difficult to master unless the ambivalent impulses are isolated by consistent

stress on the strivings (such as narcissism, hate, and guilt feelings) which are

opposed  to  or  at  variance  with  the  object  libido.  Unless  this  isolation  is

effected,  it  is  practically  impossible  to  get  out  of  the  condition  of  acute

ambivalence and doubt; all interpretations of unconscious contents lose their

force, if not effectiveness, because of the wall erected by the armor of doubt.

Moreover,  this  economic  consideration  ties  in  very  well  with  the

topographical  consideration,  for  the  genuine,  original  object  libido,

particularly the incestuous genital striving, constitutes the deepest layer of

repression  in  neurotics.  On  the  other  hand,  narcissism,  hate,  and  guilt

feelings, as well as pregenital demands, lie closer to the surface, in both the

topographical and the structural senses.

  From the economic point of view, the task of handling the transference

might best be formulated as follows: the analyst must strive to bring about a

concentration of all object libido in a purely genital transference. To achieve

this, the sadistic and narcissistic energies, which are bound in the character

armor, must be freed, and the pregenital fixations must be loosened. When

the transference is correctly handled, the libido, built up as a result of the

liberation  of  those  strivings  from  the  structure  of  the  character,  becomes

concentrated in the pregenital positions. This concentration of libido induces

a temporary positive transference of a pregenital, i.e., more infantile, nature.

This  transference,  in  turn,  is  conducive  to  the  breakthrough  of  pregenital

fantasies and incest drives and thus helps to unbind the pregenital fixations.

However,  all  the  libido  which  analysis  helps  to  free  from  its  pregenitalfixations becomes concentrated in the genital stage and intensifies the genital

oedipal situation, as in the case of hysteria; or reawakens it, as in the case of

compulsion neurosis (depression, etc.).

  At first, however, this concentration is usually accompanied by anxiety,

causing the infantile anxiety-hysteria to be reactivated. This is the first sign of

a new cathexis of the genital stage. What appears first in this phase of the

analysis, however, is not the genital Oedipus desire as such but once again its

warding off by the ego, the castration anxiety. As a rule, this concentration of

libido in the genital stage is only temporary, an attempt to achieve a new

cathexis of the genital strivings. Incapable at this point of coping with the

castration  anxiety,  the  libido  recoils  and  temporarily  flows  back  to  its

pathological (narcissistic and pregenital) fixations. This process is usually

repeated many times; each attempt to penetrate to the genital incest desires is

followed by a retreat because of the castration anxiety. The result of this,

because of the reactivation of the castration anxiety, is the rehabilitation of

the  old  mechanism  for  the  binding  of  anxiety;  that  is,  either  transitory

symptoms  appear  or,  what  is  perhaps  more  frequently  the  case,  the

narcissistic  defense  mechanism  is  fully  reactivated.  Naturally,  the  analyst

always takes up the defense mechanism first in his interpretation and thus

brings  deeper  and  deeper  infantile  material  to  light.  With  each  advance

toward the genital stage, elements of anxiety are neutralized until the libido

finally remains firmly concentrated in the genital position and the anxiety or

pregenital and narcissistic desires are gradually replaced by genital sensations

                              1
and transference fantasies.

  When I delivered a report on these findings, a number of analysts stated

that they were not able to tell at what point the actual neurosis assumed such

a major role in the analysis. This question can now be answered: in that phase

of the analysis when the essential fixations of the libido have been dissolved,

when neurotic anxiety has ceased to be absorbed in symptoms and character

traits, the core of the neurosis, the stasis anxiety, becomes fully reactivated.This stasis neurosis corresponds to the stasis of the now free-floating libido.

At  this  stage,  since  everything  is  converted  back  into  libido,  the genuine

positive transference, which is both affectionate and sensuous, develops in

full  force.  The  patient  begins  to  masturbate  with  fantasies  from  the

transference. The remaining inhibitions and infantile distortions of the incest-

fixated genitality can be eliminated through these fantasies; thus, consistently

and systematically, we approach that stage of the analysis when we are faced

with the task of dissolving the transference. Before we go on to this stage,

however,  we  will  enlarge  upon  some  clinically  observed  details  in  the

concentration of the libido in the transference and the genital zone.


            2. SECONDARY NARCISSISM, NEGATIVE

          TRANSFERENCE, AND INSIGHT INTO ILLNESS


  The  loosening,  indeed  breaking  down  of  the  character’s  defense

mechanism, which is necessary in order to free the largest possible amount of

libido, temporarily causes the ego to become completely helpless. This can be

described as the phase of the breakdown of secondary narcissism. In this

phase the patient does indeed cling to the analysis with the help of the object

libido, which has become free in the meantime, and this situation affords him

a kind of childish protection. But the breakdown of the reaction formations

and of the illusions which the ego has devised for its self-assertion rouses

                                                                      2
strong negative strivings in the patient against the analysis. In addition, with

the  dissolution  of  the  armor,  the  instinctual  drives  regain  their  original

intensity and the ego now feels itself at their mercy. Taken together, these

factors sometimes cause the transitional phases to become critical: suicidal

tendencies emerge; the patient becomes disinterested in his work; in schizoid

characters, even autistic regressions are at times observed. The compulsive

neurotic characters, by virtue of their strong anality and dogged aggression,

prove to be the most tenacious during this process. By the consistency of the

interpretation and, in particular, by the clear working through of the negativestirrings in the patient, the analyst who is in command of the transference can

easily control the tempo and the intensity of the process.

  In the course of dissolving the reaction formations, the male’s potency,

i.e., whatever of it still remains, collapses. I am in the habit of informing

erectively potent patients of this in order to obviate a reaction that can be very

intense. To lessen the shock of the acute disturbance of erective potency in

such  patients,  it  is  advisable  to  recommend  abstinence  as  soon  as  the

decompensation  is  divined  from  certain  indications  (intensification  of  the

symptoms and anxiety, increased restlessness, emergence of the castration

anxiety in dreams). Certain types of narcissistic characters, on the other hand,

who  refuse  to  take  cognizance  of  the  compensation  for  their  fear  of

impotence,  must  be  exposed  to  that  unpleasant  experience.  While  intense

narcissistic and negative reactions result from it, this exposure, inasmuch as

the castration anxiety becomes manifest, thoroughly paves the way for the

decompensation of secondary narcissism.

  Since  the  decompensation  of  potency  is  the  surest  indication  that  the

castration anxiety is becoming an affective experience, and that the armor is

being dissolved, the absence of a potency disturbance in the course of the

analysis of an erectively potent neurotic has to mean that the patient has not

been deeply affected. Of course, this problem does not exist in most cases,

because most patients already have a potency disturbance at the outset of the

treatment.  But  there  are  some  patients  who  retain  an  erective  potency

sustained by sadism, and others who, without knowing it, have a potency

disturbance, e.g., weak erections and premature ejaculations.

  Until the patient grasps the full meaning of his sexual disturbance, the

analysis has, more or less, to struggle against the patient’s personality as a

whole.  To  the  extent  that  the  analysis  is  concerned  with  symptoms  from

which the patient suffers and into which he therefore has an insight, he can be

relied upon as an ally in the fight against the neurosis. On the other hand, the

patient has little interest in the analysis of his neurotic reaction basis, i.e., hisneurotic character. In the course of the analysis, however, his attitude toward

his character undergoes a radical change. He comes to feel that he is sick in

this respect also; he recognizes the full implications of his character as the

basis  of  his  symptoms,  gains  an  interest  in  changing  his  character,  and

extends his desire to get well to include his sexual disturbance, insofar as he

did not sense it as a disturbing symptom from the outset. Thus, subjectively,

he often feels sicker than he did before the analysis, but he is also more

willing to cooperate in the analytic work. This willingness to cooperate is

indispensable for the success of the analysis. To become capable of a healthy

sexual life (whose importance for psychic health he has learned from the

analyst  or  grasped  on  his  own)  is  the  chief  motivation  for  his  desire  to

recover. Essentially, therefore, the desire to recover is borne consciously by

the feeling of wretchedness caused by the neurosis and unconsciously by the

natural genital demands.

  The deepening of the awareness of illness and the intensification of the

feeling of sickness is the result of the consistent analysis of the narcissistic

defense  mechanism  and  of  the  ego  defense.  Although  this  increased

awareness  leads  to  an  intensified  defense,  a  negative  transference  whose

content is the hatred of the analyst as the disturber of the neurotic balance, the

latter  already  contains  the  seed  of  an  opposite  attitude,  which  offers  the

analysis the most positive aids. Now the patient is forced to surrender himself

completely to the analysis; he begins to look upon the analyst as the helper in

distress,  the  only  one  who  can  make  him  well.  This  lends  considerable

impetus  to  the  patient’s  determination  to  recover.  These  attitudes  are,  of

course, intimately connected with infantile tendencies, the castration anxiety

and the infantile need for protection.


    3. ON THE HANDLING OF THE ABSTINENCE RULE


  If, from the dynamic and economic points of view, the analysis aims at

establishing  a  genital-sensual  transference,  a  question  of  technique  arises,namely how the abstinence rule is to be interpreted and applied. Does the

patient have to desist from every form of sexual gratification? If not, which

forms  are  to  be  restricted?  Some  analysts  interpret  the  abstinence  rule  to

mean that the sexual act should be prohibited altogether, except for those

patients who are married. These analysts seem to feel that, unless abstinence

is  imposed,  the  necessary  stasis  of  libido  and  its  concentration  in  the

transference will not take place. But it must be emphatically stressed that

such prohibitions are much more likely to prevent the establishment of a

positive transference than to encourage it. In short, it is our opinion that the

forbidding of coitus does not achieve the desired effect. Apart from certain

exceptional cases, isn’t this measure at variance with the general principles of

analytic  therapy?  Isn’t  it  true  that  such  a  restriction  will  automatically

strengthen the origin of the neurotic situation, i.e., genital frustration, instead

of  eliminating  it?  In  the  case  of  sexually  timid  women  and  erectively

impotent men, to restrict the sexual act would be an outright error. The truth

of the matter is that our whole concept of the analytic task makes us wary of

placing genitality under the pressure of a contemporary prohibition, except in

very special circumstances. The point is this: regression and the deflection of

the libido from the genital stage produced the neurosis in the first place;

hence, to liberate the libido from its pathological moorings and to concentrate

it  in  the  genital  zone  is  the  primary  objective  of  analytic  technique.  The

general  endeavor,  therefore,  is  to  eliminate  pregenital  activities  through

interpretation, while allowing the genital tendencies to develop with complete

freedom. It would be a grave error of technique to restrict patients who did

not masturbate just when they are on the verge of overcoming their fear of

doing so. Nor are we alone in our view that genital masturbation should be

permitted—for a long time as a matter of fact—and a number of experienced

and unprejudiced analysts agree. Only when masturbation or the genital act

becomes  a  resistance  is  it  necessary  to  deal  with  it,  as  one  would  any

resistance, through interpretation and, in extreme cases, through restriction.The latter, however, is seldom necessary—usually only for patients who are

excessive  masturbators.  The  overwhelming  majority  of  our  patients,

especially the female patients, should not be forced into any form of genital

renunciation in analysis. When the patients begin to masturbate we have the

first sure indication of a new cathexis of the genital stage, a reactivation of

erotic realism.

  In  many  cases,  libido  stasis  acts  as  an  inhibiting  element  of  analysis.

When a large amount of libido becomes concentrated in the genital zone,

intense sexual excitations begin to disrupt the analysis. After the content of

the fantasies has been exhausted, a phase of strong sexual demands begins,

during which no additional unconscious material is produced. At such times,

periodic relief of the stasis by means of masturbation or sexual intercourse

has a liberating effect and allows the analysis to continue. We see, therefore,

that  the  abstinence  rule  must  be  applied  with  extreme  elasticity  and

subordinated to the economic principle of the concentration of libido in the

genital zone. In general terms, then, those technical measures which bring

about this concentration are correct, and those which hinder it are incorrect.

  The sensual transference that occurs as the libido is concentrated in the

genital  zone  is,  on  the  one  hand,  a  most  powerful  vehicle  for  bringing

unconscious  material  to  light  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  hindrance  to  the

analysis. The genital excitation causes the actualization of the sexual conflict

as a whole and some patients refuse, often for a long time, to recognize the

transference nature of this conflict. It is important in this situation that they

learn to endure the genital frustration, that they stand up to the reactions of

disappointment  which  usually  ensue,  cope  with  them  without  repressing

them, and that they have concentrated the affectionate and sensual strivings

on one object. We learn from experience that patients who have not gone

through such a phase of sensual transference of a genital nature never wholly

succeed in establishing genital primacy, a fact which, from the point of view

of the libido economy, constitutes a defect in the healing process. If such isthe case, the analysis has either failed to effect an actual liberation of the

genital strivings from repression or it was not capable of neutralizing the guilt

feeling  which  precludes  the  unification  of  the  affectionate  and  sensual

strivings. The indications that this effort has been completely successful are:

  1. Genital masturbation free of guilt feelings, with genital transference

fantasies and commensurate gratification. When the patient and analyst are of

the same sex: masturbation with fantasies in which the analyst figures as the

incest object.

  2. Incest  fantasies  free  of  guilt  feelings  are  sometimes  found.

Renunciation can best be achieved if the impulse is fully conscious.

  3. Genital excitation during the analysis (erections in male patients; what

corresponds to this in female patients) as the indication that castration anxiety

has been overcome.

  It cannot be sufficiently emphasized that the activation of genitality which

prefaces the final disintegration of the neurotic character and leads to the

establishment of genital character traits is never achieved by suggestion but

solely by analytic methods, by the correct handling of the transference, which

has as its goal the above-described concentration of the libido in the genital

zone. This activation is not achieved in all cases, for such reasons as age and

the chronicity of the neurosis. Yet it is not merely an ideal; it is an attainable

goal in many cases. From the economic point of view, activation of genitality

is indispensable, for it constitutes, either during or immediately following the

analysis,  the  basis  for  the  regulation  of  the  libido  economy  through  the

genital function.

  We have observed that the danger of the patient’s becoming involved in

ticklish situations if his genitality is allowed free rein during the analysis is

entirely negligible. When his neurosis is about to cause him to do something

detrimental, it is no difficult matter to keep him from doing it by subjecting

his motives to thorough analysis, without having to forbid anything. This

assumes of course that the analyst has been in control of the transferencefrom  the  outset.  In  this  area,  the  analyst’s  subjective  appraisals  of  the

situation show considerable latitude: one analyst will have no objection if a

young man engages in sexual intercourse but will take strong exception if a

young woman does so (double moral standards with respect to sex). Another

analyst, rightfully, will not make any such distinction insofar as this step,

more socially daring on the part of the young woman, does not interfere with

the analysis.


  4. ON THE QUESTION OF THE “DISSOLUTION” OF THE

                        POSITIVE TRANSFERENCE


  As  Freud  stated,  after  the  transference  neurosis  has  been  successfully

established the analyst is faced with the final task of resolving the positive

transference  which,  at  this  point,  dominates  the  analysis.  The  question

immediately  arises  whether  this  dissolution  is  wholly  analogous  to  the

process of dissolving the other “transferred” affects by tracing them back to

their infantile source; whether, in short, it is a matter of “dissolving” the

positive impulses. There cannot be a resolution of the transference in the

sense of a “dissolution.” What is important is that the object libido, which has

been liberated from all dross such as hate, narcissism, obstinacy, self-pity,

etc., is “transferred” from the analyst to another object, one in keeping with

the  patient’s  needs.  Whereas  it  is  possible  to  “dissolve”  all  sadistic  and

pregenital transferences by tracing them back to their infantile source, this

cannot be done in the case of genitality, because the genital function is part of

the  function  of  reality  in  general.  This  fact  is  indicative  of  the  patient’s

determination to get well, a determination which urges him forward toward

real life and insists on the fulfillment of his genital demands and, from the

                                                              3
point of view of recovery, does so with good reason. It is certainly no easy

matter to understand why the tracing of the genital transference back to the

genital incest desire does not “dissolve” it but, on the contrary, merely sets it

free from the incest fixation, enabling it to seek gratification. To understandwhy this is so, it may be of help to remember that tracing an anal transference

back to the infantile situation does not “dissolve” the impulse’s cathexis but

shifts the libido cathexis from the anal zone to the genital zone. This is how

the  progression  from  pregenitality  to  genital  primacy  takes  place.  Such  a

qualitative  shifting  is  no  longer  possible  in  the  tracing  of  the  genital

transference back to the primal situation, because the genital stage represents

the highest  libido  stage  in  the  progression  toward  cure.  Here  the  only

possibility is the “transference of the transference” to a real object.

  Great difficulties are encountered in the loosening of the transference,

especially in patients of the opposite sex. The libido refuses to let go and, in

some  cases,  defies  attempts  at  resolution  for  months  on  end.  In  the

investigation of the reasons for libido “stickiness,” we have discovered the

following:

  1. Traces of unresolved guilt feelings which correspond to a sadism as yet

unconscious against a childhood object.

  2. A secret hope that the analyst will fulfill the demands of love after all.

The analyst must have a sixth sense for this secret hope, never spontaneously

revealed by the patient.

  3. A trace not of a genital but of an infantile tie to the analyst as the

representative of the protective mother. This tie is an inevitable result of the

analytic  situation  itself.  (Rank’s  concept  of  the  analytic  situation  as  a

fantasized womb-situation has, in many cases, applicability here.) Just as the

last traces of sadistic impulses are worked through in the analysis of the guilt-

feeling, so the traces of the libidinal fixation of a pregenital character are

worked through in the analysis of the “stickiness” resulting from the infantile

mother fixation.

  4. In these final stages of the analysis, one encounters, especially in girls

and unhappily married women, a tremendous fear of the impending sexual

life. This anticipatory reaction reveals itself in part as a primitive fear of

coitus,  in  part  as  a  bondage  to  the  social  norms  determined  by  themonogamous ideology and its demand for chastity. The latter in particular

requires  thorough  analysis,  which  reveals  a  strong  identification  with  the

monogamous mother, the mother who demands chastity. Such fears can also

be traced back to a feeling of inferiority regarding one’s femininity resulting

from a childhood penis envy that has not been sufficiently worked through.

There is in addition a rational, fully justified fear of the sexual difficulties to

be faced in a society which has debased sexuality to so great an extent. Men

often  encounter  the  difficulty  that,  having  established  a  unity  between

affection  and  sensuality,  they  become  incapable  of  intercourse  with

prostitutes or under other conditions involving payment. If they do not get

married immediately, they will not easily find a partner who will gratify both

affection and sensuality.

  These and a number of other conditions make it difficult for the patient to

break away from the analyst. A patient will very often gratify his sensuality

with an object he does not and as a matter of fact cannot love, because his

affections are tied to the analyst. Though this tie complicates the patient’s

finding  the  right  object  while  undergoing  analysis,  the  best  results  are

obtained  when  the  patient,  whether  male  or  female,  finds  a  compatible

partner before the analysis is terminated. This has the great advantage that the

behavior  in  the  new  relationship  can  still  be  analytically  controlled  and

possible neurotic residues easily eliminated.

  If the finding of a partner during the analysis does not take place too

early, i.e., not before the working through of the positive transference, and if

the analyst is careful not to influence the patient in any way (does not urge

him or her to choose a partner), there can be no doubt whatever as to the

advantage  of  such  termination  of  the  treatment.  There  are,  to  be  sure,

difficulties  of  a  social  nature.  But  the  discussion  of  them  would  take  us

beyond the scope of this book; and they have already been considered in

                                                    4
works dealing specifically with this problem.5. A FEW REMARKS ABOUT COUNTER-TRANSFERENCE


  It  is  easy  to  understand  that  the  temperament  of  any  given  analyst

constitutes a decisive factor in the treatment of every case. As we know, the

analyst has the tasks of using his own unconscious as a kind of receiving

apparatus to “tune in” the unconscious of the analysand and of dealing with

each individual patient in keeping with the patient’s temperament. The usual

analytic knowledge and ability of the analyst are significant here only insofar

as his receptiveness to the unfamiliar unconscious and his ability to adapt to

every analytic situation enable him to increase that knowledge and ability.

  To  begin  with,  we  have  to  clarify  something  which  could  easily  be

misunderstood.  Freud  recommended  that  the  analyst  assume  an  unbiased

attitude, allow himself to be surprised by every new turn of the analysis. This

recommendation appears to be at variance with our insistence on systematic

resistance analysis and the strict derivation of the special technique from the

structure of each and every case. How, it will be asked, can one assume a

passive,  receptive,  unbiased  attitude  and  at  the  same  time  proceed  in  a

logical,  directive,  and  systematic  manner?  Some  of  my  colleagues

erroneously try to solve the new tasks of character analysis by meditating on

the structure of the case.

  The truth of the matter is that the assuming of an unbiased attitude and

consistent  resistance  analysis  are  not  at  variance  with  one  another.  If  an

analyst has developed the ability which Freud recommended, the handling of

the resistances and of the transference will ensue automatically as a reaction

to the process in the patient. There is no need for strenuous rumination about

the structure of a particular case. When material differing in dynamic value is

offered simultaneously from various layers of the unconscious, the analyst

will spontaneously pick out one element instead of another. Without giving it

much thought, he will analyze the ego defense before the repressed contents,

etc.  When  the  analyst  begins  to  rack  his  brain  about  the  structure  and

technical requirements of a case, it is a sign of one of two things: either he isdealing with an especially new and unaccustomed type or his unconscious is

in some way closed to the material the patient is offering. Freud was quite

right in saying that the analyst has to be open to surprises. Over and above

this, however, he must have the ability to fit very quickly what is surprisingly

new  into  the  total  context  of  the  therapeutic  process.  If,  from  the  very

beginning, the analysis has been unrolled in keeping with the structure of the

case and on the basis of the transference resistances; if the error has been

avoided of confusing the case and the situation by interpretations which are

too deep and too premature, then the incorporation of new material takes

place almost automatically. The most important reason for this is that the

potential elements of the unconscious do not emerge in an arbitrary way.

Their  emergence  is  determined  by  the  course  of  the  analysis  itself  and

presupposes  that  the  analytic  material  and  resistances,  juxtaposed  and

confused in the beginning, have been put into a definite order. Once again,

however, this is merely a matter of systematic resistance analysis.

  From  the  technical  discussion  of  cases  (which  can  only  take  place

intellectually) we could easily get the mistaken impression that character-

analytic work is the result of an intellectual dissection of the case during the

treatment. But this “intellectualization” must not be imputed to the analytic

work itself, whose success depends largely upon intuitive comprehension and

action.  Once  the  beginner  has  overcome  the  typical  tendency  “to  make  a

quick sale” of his analytic knowledge of the case, once he has learned to

assume  a  flexible  attitude,  then  he  has  established  the  essential  basis  of

analytic ability.

  Quite obviously, the ability of the analyst to adopt a flexible attitude in

his  work,  to  grasp  the  case  intuitively  without  becoming  stuck  in  his

intellectually acquired knowledge, will depend upon conditions pertaining to

his character in the same way that the similar ability of the analysand to let

himself go is determined by the degree to which his character armor has been

loosened.  Without going into the whole complex of questions, we will illustrate the

problem of counter-transference with a few typical examples. It is usually

possible to recognize by the way the case is proceeding whether and in which

area  the  attitude  of  the  analyst  is  defective,  i.e.,  disturbed  by  his  own

psychological problems. The fact that some cases never produce an affective

negative transference is to be ascribed not so much to the patient’s block as to

that of the analyst. The analyst who has not resolved the repression of his

own  aggressive  tendencies  will  be  incapable  of  accomplishing  this  work

satisfactorily  in  his  patients  and  might  even  develop  an  affective

unwillingness to form an accurate intellectual appraisal of the importance of

the analysis of the negative transference. His repressed aggression will cause

the analyst to regard as a provocation the patient’s aggression which has to be

roused. He will either overlook negative impulses in the patient or obstruct

their manifestation in some way. He might even reinforce the repression of

the  aggression  by  exaggerated  friendliness  toward  the  patient.  Patients

quickly sense such attitudes on the part of the analyst and thoroughly exploit

them  in  warding  off  drives.  An  affect  block  or  an  excessively  solicitous

bearing on the part of the analyst is the most telling sign that he is warding

off his own aggression.

  The counterpart to this is the analyst’s characterological inability to cope

with the patient’s sexual manifestations, i.e., his or her positive transference,

without becoming emotionally involved. In acting as a control analyst, one

observes  that  the  analyst’s  own  fear  of  the  patient’s  sensual  and  sexual

manifestations often severely hinders the treatment and can easily forestall

the establishment of genital primacy in the patient. Under normal analytic

conditions, the patient’s genital demands for love become manifest in the

transference. If the analyst himself is somewhat befuddled with respect to

sexual matters or does not have at least a sexually affirmative intellectual

orientation, his work as an analyst will certainly suffer. Needless to say, it is

extremely likely that an analyst lacking sexual experience will be unable tocomprehend  the  actual  difficulties  in  the  patient’s  sexual  life.  Hence,  the

student of psychoanalysis should fulfill, while undergoing analysis during his

training period, at least the same requirements which apply to the patient: the

establishment of genital primacy and the attainment of a satisfactory sexual

life.  Unless  he  represses  his  own  impulses,  the  sexually  disturbed  or

unsatisfied  analyst  will  not  only  be  hard-pressed  to  control  his  positive

counter-transference; he will find it increasingly difficult to cope with the

provocation  to  his  own  sexual  demands  by  the  patient’s  sexual

manifestations.  He  will  undoubtedly  become  entangled  in  a  neurotic

predicament. Practice imposes the strictest demands upon us in this respect,

and we would be foolish to conceal or gainsay them. Whether the analyst

consciously admits or denies that he has to struggle with such difficulties

makes  little  difference,  for  the  average  patient  will  sense  the  analyst’s

unconscious sexual negation and rejection and will consequently be unable to

get rid of his own sexual inhibitions. There is, in fact, more to it than that.

The analyst, to be sure, has the right to live according to his own light. But

the fact remains that if, unconsciously, he adheres to rigid moral principles,

which  the  patient  always  senses,  if, without knowing  it,  he  has  repressed

polygamous tendencies or certain kinds of love play, he will be able to deal

with very few patients and will be inclined to hold up some natural mode of

behavior as “infantile.”

  Analysts  who  experience  the  transferences  of  their  patients  in  an

essentially  narcissistic  way  tend  to  interpret  those  contemporary

manifestations of love as signs of a personal love relationship. For the same

reason,  it  often  happens  that  the  patient’s  criticism  and  distrust  are  not

adequately worked through.

  Analysts who are not sufficiently in control of their own sadism easily

lapse into the well-known “analytic silence,” despite the fact that there are no

satisfactory reasons for it. They regard the patient himself, rather than the

patient’s neurosis, as an enemy who “does not want to get well.” Threats tobreak off the analysis and unnecessary setting of deadlines are not so much

the result of an insufficiency in analytic technique as they are of a lack of

patience. The latter causes technique to fall short of its possibilities.

  Finally, it is an error to interpret the general analytic rule (the analyst

must  be  a  “blank  sheet  of  paper”  upon  which  the  patient  inscribes  his

transference)  to  mean  that  one  must  always  and  in  every  case  assume  a

mummy-like attitude. Under such conditions, many patients find it difficult

“to come out of their shell,” a fact which later makes artificial, unanalytic

measures necessary. It is clear that an aggressive patient has to be handled

differently  than  a  masochistic  patient,  an  overexcited  hysterical  patient

differently  than  a  depressive  patient,  that  the  analyst  changes  his  attitude

toward one and the same patient depending upon the situation. In short, one

does not act neurotically even if one has to bear an element of neurosis in

oneself.

  While  the  analyst  cannot  and  should  not  suppress  his  particular

temperament and will be mindful of this in deciding which patients he is best

fitted to deal with, we must nonetheless demand of him that his individuality

be held in check, that it be controlled. We must also expect that a certain

amount of character flexibility be attained in his training analysis.

  In  short,  the  demands  we  make  upon  the  analyst  are  as  great  as  the

difficulties he will later be expected to deal with. Above all, the analyst will

have  to  bear  in  mind  that,  because  his  professional  activity  is  in  sharp

opposition  to  the  majority  of  conventional  society,  he  will  be  persecuted,

ridiculed, and slandered unless he prefers to make concessions, at the expense

of  his  theoretical  and  practical  convictions,  to  a  social  order  directly  and

irreconcilably opposed to the requirements of the therapy of the neurosis.                                PART TWO


      Theory of Character Formation 


 


 


In  our  representation  thus  far,  we  have  followed  a  path  of  investigation

rigidly  dictated  by  analytic  practice.  Proceeding  from  the  question  of  the

economic principle of analytic therapy, we approached the character-analytic

problems which cluster around the “narcissistic barrier.” We were able to

solve some of the technical problems and found ourselves, in the process,

faced with new theoretical questions. The one prominent fact about our case

histories  was  that,  however  much  it  may  differ  from  case  to  case,  the

narcissistic armor is connected in a typical way with the sexual conflicts of

childhood.  This,  to  be  sure,  was  entirely  in  keeping  with  our  analytic

expectations.  Now,  however,  we  had  the  task  of  investigating  these

connections in detail. Nor did it escape our attention that the changes which

take place in the pathological character attitudes in the course of the treatment

follow  a  definite  logic.  It  is  the  development  from  a  neurotic  character

structure  to  a  structure  whose  nature  is  determined  by  the  attainment  of

genital primacy. For this reason, we call it “genital character.” And finally we

shall have to describe a number of character differentiations, among which

that of masochism will lead us to a critique of a more recent analytic theory

of the instincts.                                  CHAPTER VII





THE CHARACTEROLOGICAL RESOLUTION OF

                                                                              1
          THE INFANTILE SEXUAL CONFLICT




Psychoanalytic knowledge is in a position to provide the theory of character

with fundamentally new points of view and to arrive at new findings based on

them. Three characteristics of that investigation which make this possible are:

  1. Its theory of unconscious mechanisms.

  2. Its historical approach.

  3.  Its  comprehension  of  the  dynamics  and  economics  of  psychic

processes.

  Insofar  as  psychoanalytic  research  proceeds  from  the  investigation  of

phenomena to their nature and development and comprehends the processes

of  “depth  personality”  in  both  cross  section  and  longitudinal  section,  it

automatically opens the way to the ideal of character research, a “genetic

theory of types.” This theory, in turn, could provide us not only with the

natural scientific understanding of human modes of reaction but also with the

history of their specific development. The advantage of shifting character

research from  the humanistic field, in Klages’s sense of the word, to the

sphere of natural scientific psychology should not be underestimated. But the

clinical investigation of this field is not simple. It is first necessary to clarify

the facts which are to be discussed.


    1. CONTENT AND FORM OF PSYCHIC REACTIONS  From  the  very  beginning,  psychoanalytic  methods  provided  a  fresh

                                                              2
approach to the investigation of the character. Freud’s discovery was pioneer

work  in  this  field.  He  demonstrated  that  certain  character  traits  can  be

explained historically as the permanent transmutations of primitive instinctual

impulses  by  environmental  influences.  He  indicated,  for  example,  that

stinginess, pedantry, and orderliness are derivatives of anal erotic instinctual

                            34
forces. Later, both Jones and Abraham made important contributions to the

theory  of  character  by  showing  the  relation  between  character  traits  and

infantile  instinctual  forces,  e.g.,  between  envy  and  ambition  and  urethral

eroticism. In these first attempts, it was a matter of explaining the instinctual

basis of typical individual character traits. However, the problems resulting

from the demands of everyday therapy are more extensive. We see ourselves

faced with the alternatives of (1) understanding, historically and dynamic-

economically, the character as an integral formation both generally and in

terms of typological transmutations, or (2) foregoing the possibility of curing

a large number of cases in which the character-neurotic reaction basis has to

be eliminated.

  Since the patient’s character, in its typical mode of reaction, becomes the

resistance against the uncovering of the unconscious (character resistance), it

can be proven that during the treatment this function of the character mirrors

its origin. The causes of a person’s typical reactions in everyday life and in

the treatment are the same as those which not only determined the formation

of the character in the first place but consolidated and preserved the mode of

reaction  once  it  had  been  established  and  shaped  into  an  automatic

mechanism independent of the conscious will.

  In the constellation of this problem, therefore, what is important is not the

content  and  nature  of  this  or  that  character  trait  but  the  mechanism  and

genesis of the typical mode of reaction. Whereas, until now, we were able to

understand and explain genetically the contents of the experiences and the

neurotic symptoms and character traits, we are now in a position to give anexplanation of the formal problem, the way in which one experiences and the

way neurotic symptoms are produced. It is my firm conviction that we are

paving the way to an understanding of what might be called the basic feature

of a personality.

  In the vernacular, we speak of hard and soft, noble and base, proud and

servile,  cold  and  warm  people.  The  psychoanalysis  of  these  various

characteristics proves that they are merely various forms of an armoring of

the ego against the dangers of the outside world and the repressed instinctual

demands of the id. Etiologically, there is just as much anxiety behind the

excessive  politeness  of  one  person  as  there  is  behind  the  gruff  and

occasionally brutal reaction of another. A difference in circumstances causes

one person to deal or try to deal with his anxiety in one way and another

person  to  deal  with  it  in  a  different  way.  With  such  terms  as  passive-

feminine,  paranoic-aggressive,  compulsive-neurotic,  hysterical,  genital-

narcissistic,  and  others,  psychoanalysis  has  merely  differentiated  types  of

reaction  according  to  a  rough  scheme.  What  is  important  now  is  to

comprehend what pertains in a general way to “character formation” and to

say something about the basic conditions which lead to such a differentiation

of types.


      2. THE FUNCTION OF CHARACTER FORMATION


  The next question we have to deal with concerns the factors that cause the

character  to  assume  the  definite  form  in  which  it  is  operative.  In  this

connection, it is necessary to call to mind some attributes of every character

reaction. The character consists in a chronic change of the ego which one

might describe as a hardening.  This  hardening  is  the  actual  basis  for  the

becoming chronic of the characteristic mode of reaction; its purpose is to

protect the ego from external and internal dangers. As a protective formation

that has become chronic, it merits the designation “armoring,” for it clearly

constitutes a restriction of the psychic mobility of the personality as a whole.This  restriction  is  mitigated  by  the  noncharacterological,  i.e.,  atypical,

relations to the outside world that seem to be open communications in an

otherwise closed system. They are “breaches” in the “armor” through which,

depending upon the situation, libidinal and other interests are sent out and

pulled in again like pseudopodia. The armor itself, however, is to be thought

of as flexible. Its mode of reaction always proceeds according to the pleasure-

unpleasure principle. In unpleasurable situations the armoring contracts; in

pleasurable  situations  it  expands. The  degree  of  character  flexibility,  the

ability to open oneself to the outside world or to close oneself to it, depending

upon the situation, constitutes the difference between a reality-oriented and a

neurotic  character  structure.  Extreme  prototypes  of  pathologically  rigid

armoring  are  the  affect-blocked  compulsive  characters  and  schizophrenic

autism, both of which tend toward catatonic rigidity.

  The character armor is formed as a chronic result of the clash between

instinctual demands and an outer world which frustrates those demands. Its

strength and continued raison d’etre are derived from the current conflicts

between instinct and outer world. The expression and the sum total of those

impingements of the outer world on instinctual life, through accumulation

and  qualitative  homogeneity,  constitute  a  historical  whole.  This  will  be

immediately  clear  when  we  think  of  known  character  types  such  as  “the

bourgeois,” “the official,” “the proletarian,” “the butcher,” etc. It is around

the  ego  that  this  armoring  is  formed,  around  precisely  that  part  of  the

personality which lies at the boundary between biophysiological instinctive

life and the outer world. Hence we designate it as the character of the ego.

  At the core of the armor’s definitive formation, we regularly find, in the

course of analysis, the conflict between genital incest desires and the actual

frustration of their gratification. The formation of the character commences

as a definite form of the overcoming of the Oedipus complex. The conditions

which lead precisely to this kind of resolution are special, i.e., they relate

specifically to the character. (These conditions correspond to the prevailingsocial  circumstances  to  which  childhood  sexuality  is  subject.  If  these

circumstances are changed, both the conditions of the character formation

and the structures of the character will be changed.) For there are other ways

of resolving the conflict, naturally not so important or so determinative in

terms  of  the  future  development  of  the  total  personality,  e.g.,  simple

repression or the formation of an infantile neurosis. If we consider what is

common to these conditions, we find, on the one hand, extremely intense

genital desires and, on the other hand, a relatively weak ego which, out of

fear of being punished, seeks to protect itself by repressions. The repression

leads to a damming up of the impulses, which in turn threatens that simple

repression  with  a  breakthrough  of  the  repressed  impulses.  The  result  is  a

transformation of the ego, e.g., the development of attitudes designed to ward

off fear, attitudes which can be summarized by the term “shyness.” Although

this  is  merely  the  first  intimation  of  a  character,  there  are  decisive

consequences  for  its  formation.  Shyness  or  a  related  attitude  of  the  ego

constitutes a restriction of the ego. But in warding off dangerous situations

which could provoke what is repressed such an attitude also strengthens the

ego.

  It turns out, however, that this first transformation of the ego, e.g., the

shyness, does not suffice to master the instinct. On the contrary, it easily

leads to the development of anxiety and always becomes the behavioral basis

of  childhood  phobia.  In  order  to  maintain  the  repression,  an  additional

transformation  of  the  ego  becomes  necessary:  the repressions  have  to  be

cemented together,  the  ego  has to  harden,  the  defense  has  to  take  on  a

chronically  operative,  automatic  character.  And,  since  the  simultaneously

developed childhood anxiety constitutes a continual threat to the repressions;

since the repressed material is expressed in the anxiety; since, moreover, the

anxiety itself threatens to weaken the ego, a protective formation against the

anxiety also has to be created. The driving force behind all these measures

taken by the ego is, in the final analysis, conscious or unconscious fear ofpunishment, kept alive by the prevailing behavior of parents and teachers.

Thus, we have the seeming paradox, namely that fear causes the child to want

to resolve his fear.

    Essentially,  the  libido-economically  necessitated  hardening  of  the  ego

takes place on the basis of three processes:

  1. It identifies with the frustrating reality as personified in the figure of

the main suppressive person.

  2.  It  turns  against  itself  the  aggression  which  it  mobilized  against  the

suppressive person and which also produced the anxiety.

  3. It develops reactive attitudes toward the sexual strivings, i.e., it utilizes

the energy of these strivings to serve its own purposes, namely to ward them

off.

  The first process gives the armoring its meaningful contents. (The affect-

block of a compulsive patient has the meaning “I have to control myself as

my  father  always  said  I  should”;  but  it  also  has  the  meaning  “I  have  to

preserve  my  pleasure  and  make  myself  indifferent  to  my  father’s

prohibitions.”)

  The  second  process  probably  binds  the  most  essential  element  of

aggressive energy, shuts off a part of the mode of motion, and thereby creates

the inhibiting factor of the character.

  The  third  process  withdraws  a  certain  quantity  of  libido  from  the

repressed  libidinal  drives  so  that  their  urgency  is  weakened.  Later  this

transformation  is  not  only  eliminated;  it  is  made  superfluous  by  the

intensification of the remaining energy cathexis as a result of the restriction

of the mode of motion, gratification, and general productivity.

  Thus,  the  armoring  of  the  ego  takes  place  as  a  result  of  the  fear  of

punishment, at the expense of id energy, and contains the prohibitions and

standards  of  parents  and  teachers.  Only  in  this  way  can  the  character

formation  fulfill  its  economic  functions  of  alleviating  the  pressure  of

repression and, over and above this, of strengthening the ego. This, however,is  not  the  whole  story.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  this  armoring  is  at  least

temporarily successful in warding off impulses from within, it constitutes, on

the other hand, a far-reaching block not only against stimuli from the outside

but also against further educational influences. Except in cases where there is

a  strong  development  of  stubbornness,  this  block  need  not  preclude  an

external docility. We should also bear in mind that external docility, as, for

example,  in  passive-feminine  characters,  can  be  combined  with  the  most

tenacious  inner  resistance.  At  this  point,  we  must  also  stress  that  in  one

person the armoring takes place on the surface of the personality, while in

another person it takes place in the depth of the personality. In the latter case,

the external and obvious appearance of the personality is not its real but only

its ostensible expression. The affect-blocked compulsive character and the

paranoid-aggressive character are examples of armoring on the surface; the

hysterical character is an example of a deep armoring of the personality. The

depth of the armoring depends on the conditions of regression and fixation

and constitutes a minor aspect of the problem of character differentiation.

  If, on the one hand, the character armor is the result of the sexual conflict

of childhood and the definite way in which this conflict has been managed, it

becomes, under the conditions to which character formation is subject in our

cultural circles, the basis of later neurotic conflicts and symptom neuroses in

the majority of cases; it becomes the reaction basis of the neurotic character.

A more detailed discussion of this will follow later. At this point I will limit

myself to a brief summary:

  A personality whose character structure precludes the establishment of a

sex-economic  regulation  of  energy  is  the  precondition  of  a  later  neurotic

illness. Thus, the basic conditions of falling ill are not the sexual conflict of

childhood and the Oedipus complex as such but the way in which they are

handled.  Since,  however,  the  way  these  conflicts  are  handled  is  largely

determined by the nature of the family conflict itself (intensity of the fear of

punishment, latitude of instinctual gratification, character of the parents, etc.),the development of the small child’s ego up to and including the Oedipus

phase determines, finally, whether a person becomes neurotic or achieves a

regulated sexual economy as the basis of social and sexual potency.

  The reaction basis of the neurotic character means that it went too far and

allowed the ego to become rigid in a way which precluded attainment of a

regulated  sexual  life  and  sexual  experience.  The  unconscious  instinctual

forces are thus deprived of any energetic release, and the sexual stasis not

only remains permanent but continually increases. Next, we note a steady

development of the character reaction formations (e.g., ascetic ideology, etc.)

against  the  sexual  demands  built  up  in  connection  with  contemporary

conflicts in important life situations. Thus, a cycle is set up: the stasis is

increased and leads to new reaction formations in the very same way as their

phobic predecessors. However, the stasis always increases more rapidly than

the armoring until, in the end, the reaction formation is no longer adequate to

keep the psychic tension in check. It is at this point that the repressed sexual

desires  break  through  and  are  immediately  warded  off  by  symptom

formations (formation of a phobia or its equivalent).

  In this neurotic process, the various defense positions of the ego overlap

and interfuse. Thus, in the cross section of the personality, we find side by

side character reactions which, in terms of development and time, belong to

different periods. In the phase of the final breakdown of the ego, the cross

section  of  the  personality  resembles  a  tract  of  land  following  a  volcanic

eruption that throws together masses of rocks belonging to various geological

strata. However, it is not especially difficult to pick out from this jumble the

cardinal meaning and mechanism of all character reactions. Once discerned

and understood, they lead directly to the central infantile conflict.


  3. CONDITIONS OF CHARACTER DIFFERENTIATION


  What conditions, presently recognizable, enable us to understand what

constitutes the difference between a healthy and a pathological armoring?Our investigation of character formation remains sterile theorizing as long as

we do not answer this question with some degree of concreteness and thereby

offer guidelines in the field of education. In view of the prevailing sexual

morality, however, the conclusions which follow from our investigation will

put  the  educator  who  wants  to  raise  healthy  men  and  women  in  a  very

difficult position.

  To begin with, it must be stressed once again that the formation of the

character depends not merely upon the fact that instinct and frustration clash

with one another but also upon the way in which this happens; the stage of

development during which the character-forming conflicts occur; and which

instincts are involved.

  To gain a better understanding of the situation, let us attempt to form a

schema from the wealth of conditions bearing upon character formation. Such

a  schema  reveals  the  following  fundamental  possibilities.  The  result  of

character formation is dependent upon:

  the phase in which the impulse is frustrated;

  the frequency and intensity of the frustrations;

  the impulses against which the frustration is chiefly directed;

  the correlation between indulgence and frustration;

  the sex of the person chiefly responsible for the frustrations;

  the contradictions in the frustrations themselves.

  All these conditions are determined by the prevailing social order with

respect  to  education,  morality,  and  the  gratification  of  needs;  in  the  final

analysis, by the prevailing economic structure of the society.

  The goal of a future prophylaxis of neuroses is the formation of characters

which not only give the ego sufficient support against the inner and outer

world but also allow the sexual and social freedom of movement necessary

for psychic economy. So, to begin with, we must understand the fundamental

consequences of every frustration of the gratification of a child’s instincts.

  Every  frustration  of  the  kind  entailed  by  present-day  methods  ofeducation causes a withdrawal of the libido into the ego and, consequently, a

                                              5
strengthening of secondary narcissism. This in itself constitutes a character

transformation  of  the  ego  inasmuch  as  there  is  an  increase  in  the  ego’s

sensitiveness,  which  is  expressed  as  shyness  and  a  heightened  sense  of

anxiety. If, as is usually the case, the person responsible for the frustration is

loved, an ambivalent attitude, later an identification, is developed toward that

person. In addition to the suppression, the child internalizes certain character

traits of this person—as a matter of fact, precisely those traits directed against

his  own  instinct.  What  happens,  then,  is  essentially  that  the  instinct  is

repressed or coped with in some other way.

  However,  the  effect  of  the  frustration  on  the character  is  largely

dependent upon when the impulse is frustrated. If it is frustrated in its initial

stages of development, the repression succeeds only too well. Although the

victory is complete, the impulse can be neither sublimated nor consciously

gratified. For example, the premature repression of anal eroticism impedes

the development of anal sublimations and prepares the way for severe anal

reaction formations. What is more important in terms of the character is the

fact  that  shutting  out  the  impulses  from  the  structure  of  the  personality

impairs its activity as a whole. This can be seen, for example, in children

whose aggression and motor pleasure were prematurely inhibited; their later

capacity for work will consequently be reduced.

  At  the height  of  its  development,  an  impulse  cannot  be  completely

repressed.  A  frustration  at  this  point  is  much  more  likely  to  create  an

indissoluble conflict between prohibition and impulse. If the fully developed

impulse  encounters  a  sudden,  unanticipated  frustration,  it  lays  the

                                                                          6
groundwork for the development of an impulsive personality. In this case,

the child does not fully accept the prohibition. Nonetheless, he develops guilt

feelings,  which  in  turn  intensify  the  impulsive  actions  until  they  become

compulsive impulses. So we find, in impulsive psychopaths, an unformed

character structure that is the opposite of the demand for sufficient armoringagainst the outer and inner world. It is characteristic of the impulsive type

that the reaction formation is not employed against the impulses; rather the

impulses  themselves  (predominantly  sadistic  impulses)  are  enlisted  as  a

defense against imaginary situations of danger, as well as the danger arising

from the impulses. Since, as a result of the disordered genital structure, the

libido economy is in a wretched state, the sexual stasis occasionally increases

the anxiety and, with it, the character reactions, often leading to excesses of

all kinds.

  The opposite of the impulsive is the instinct-inhibited character. Just as

the impulsive type is characterized by the cleavage between fully developed

instinct and sudden frustration, the instinct-inhibited type is characterized by

an  accumulation  of  frustrations  and  other  instinct-inhibiting  educational

measures from the beginning to the end of his instinctual development. The

character armoring which corresponds to it tends to be rigid, considerably

constrains the individual’s psychic flexibility, and forms the reaction basis for

depressive states and compulsive symptoms (inhibited agression). But it also

turns  human  beings  into  docile,  undiscriminating  citizens.  Herein  lies  its

sociological significance.

  The sex and the character of the person mainly responsible for one’s

upbringing are of the greatest importance for the nature of one’s later sexual

life.

  We  shall  reduce  the  very  complicated  influence  exercised  by  a

authoritarian society on the child to the fact that, in a system of education

built upon family units, the parents function as the main executors of social

influence. Because of the usually unconscious sexual attitude of the parents

toward their children, it happens that the father has a stronger liking for and is

less  prone  to  restrict  and  educate  the  daughter,  while  the  mother  has  a

stronger liking for and is less prone to restrict and educate the son. Thus, the

sexual relationship determines, in most cases, that the parent of the same sex

becomes most responsible for the child’s upbringing. With the qualificationthat, in the child’s first years of life and among the large majority of the

working  population,  the  mother  assumes  the  main  responsibility  for  the

child’s upbringing, it can be said that identification with the parent of the

same  sex  prevails,  i.e.,  the  daughter  develops  a  maternal  and  the  son  a

paternal ego and superego. But because of the special constellation of some

families or the character of some parents, there are frequent deviations. We

shall  mention  some  of  the  typical  backgrounds  of  these  atypical

identifications.

  Let us begin by considering the relationships in the case of boys. Under

usual circumstances, namely when the boy has developed the simple Oedipus

complex, when the mother has a stronger liking for him and frustrates him

less than the father does, he will identify with the father and—provided the

father  has  an  active  and  manly  nature—will  continue  to  develop  in  a

masculine way. If, on the other hand, the mother has a strict, “masculine”

personality,  if  the  essential  frustrations  proceed  from  her,  the  boy  will

identify predominantly with her and, depending upon the erogenic stage in

which the main maternal restrictions are imposed upon him, will develop a

mother identification on a phallic or anal basis. Given the background of a

phallic  mother  identification,  a  phallic-narcissistic  character  usually

develops, whose narcissism and sadism are directed chiefly against women

(revenge  against  the  strict  mother).  This  attitude  is  the  character  defense

against the deeply repressed original love of the mother, a love which could

not continue to exist beside her frustrating influence and the identification

with her, but ended rather in a disappointment. To be more specific: this love

was transformed into the character attitude itself, from which, however, it can

be released through analysis.

  In the mother identification on an anal basis, the character has become

passive  and  feminine—toward  women,  but  not  toward  men.  Such

identifications often constitute the basis of a masochistic perversion with the

fantasy  of  a  strict  woman.  This  character  formation  usually  serves  as  adefense  against  phallic  desires  which,  for  a  short  time,  were  intensely

directed toward the mother in childhood. The fear of castration by the mother

lends  support  to  the  anal  identification  with  her.  Anality  is  the  specific

erogenic basis of this character formation.

  A  passive-feminine  character  in  a  male  is  always  based  on  an

identification with the mother. Since the mother is the frustrating parent in

this type, she is also the object of the fear that engenders this attitude. There

is,  however,  another  type  of  passive-feminine  character  which  is  brought

about by an excessive strictness on the part of the father. This takes place in

the  following  way:  fearing  the  realization  of  his  genital  desires,  the  boy

shrinks  from  the  masculine-phallic  position  to  the  feminine-anal  position,

identifies here with his mother, and adopts a passive-feminine attitude toward

his father and later toward all persons in authority. Exaggerated politeness

and compliance, softness and a tendency toward underhanded conduct are

characteristic  of  this  type.  He  uses  his  attitude  to  ward  off  the  active

masculine strivings, to ward off, above all, his repressed hatred of the father.

Side by side with his de facto feminine-passive nature (mother identification

in  the  ego),  he  has  identified  with  his  father  in  his  ego-ideal  (father

identification in superego and ego-ideal). However, he is not able to realize

this  identification  because  he  lacks  a  phallic  position.  He  will  always be

feminine and want to be masculine. A severe inferiority complex, the result

of this tension between feminine ego and masculine ego-ideal, will always set

the stamp of oppression (sometimes of humbleness) upon his personality. The

severe potency disturbance which is always present in such cases gives the

whole situation a rational justification.

  If we compare this type with the one who identifies with the mother on a

phallic basis, we see that the phallic-narcissistic character successfully wards

off an inferiority complex which betrays itself only to the eye of the expert.

The inferiority complex of the passive-feminine character, on the other hand,

is transparent. The difference lies in the basic erogenic structure. The phalliclibido  permits  a  complete  compensation  of  all  attitudes  which  are  not  in

keeping with the masculine ego-ideal, whereas the anal libido, when it holds

the  central  position  in  the  male’s  sexual  structure,  precludes  such  a

compensation.

  The  reverse  is  true  of  a  girl:  an  indulgent  father  is  more  likely  to

contribute to the establishment of a feminine character than a father who is

strict or brutal. Large numbers of clinical comparisons reveal that a girl will

usually react to a brutal father with the formation of a hard male character.

The ever-present penis envy is activated and is molded into a masculinity

complex  through  character  changes  of  the  ego.  In  this  case  the  hard,

masculine-aggressive  nature  serves  as  an  armoring  against  the  infantile

feminine attitude toward the father which had to be repressed because of his

coldness and hardness. If, on the other hand, the father is kind and loving, the

little girl can retain and, with the exception of the sensuous components, even

develop her object-love to a large extent. It is not necessary for her to identify

with  the  father.  True,  she  too  will  usually  have  developed  penis  envy.

However, in view of the fact that the frustrations in the heterosexual sphere

are relatively weak, the penis envy has no significant effect on the formation

of the character. Thus, we see that it is not important whether this or that

woman has penis envy. What is important is how it effects the character and

whether  it  produces  symptoms.  What  is  decisive  for  this  type  is  that  a

maternal identification takes place in the ego; it finds expression in character

traits which we call “feminine.”

  The  preservation  of  this  character  structure  is  dependent  upon  the

condition that vaginal eroticism becomes a permanent part of femininity in

puberty. At this age, severe disappointments in the father or father-prototypes

can arouse the masculine identification which did not take place in childhood,

activate  the  dormant  penis  envy,  and,  at  this  late  stage,  lead  to  a

transformation of the character toward the masculine. We very often observe

this  in  girls  who  repress  their  heterosexual  desires  for  moral  reasons(identification with the authoritarian, moralistic mother) and thus bring about

their  own  disappointment  in  men.  In  the  majority  of  such  cases,  these

otherwise feminine women tend to develop a hysterical nature. There is a

continuous genital urge toward the object (coquettishness) and a shrinking

back, accompanied by the development of genital anxiety, when the situation

threatens  to  become  serious  (hysterical  genital  anxiety).  The  hysterical

character in a woman functions as protection against her own genital desires

and against the masculine aggression of the object. This shall be discussed in

greater detail later.

  We sometimes meet with a special case in our practice, namely a strict

and hard mother who raises a daughter whose character is neither masculine

nor  feminine  but  remains  childish  or  reverts  to  childishness  later.  Such  a

mother did not give her child sufficient love. The ambivalent conflict with

respect to the mother is considerably stronger on the side of hate, in fear of

which the child withdraws to the oral stage of sexual development. The girl

will  hate  the  mother  at  a  genital  level,  will  repress  her  hatred,  and,  after

having  assumed  an  oral  attitude,  transform  it  into  reactive  love  and  a

crippling dependency upon the mother. Such women develop a peculiarly

sticky attitude toward older or married women, become attached to them in a

masochistic  way,  have  a  tendency  to  become  passively  homosexual

(cunnilingus  in  the  case  of  perverse  formations),  have  themselves  looked

after by older women, develop but a small interest in men, and, in their whole

bearing, exhibit “babyish behavior.” This attitude, like any other character

attitude,  is  an  armoring  against  repressed  desires  and  a  defense  against

stimuli from the outside world. Here the character serves as an oral defense

against intense hate tendencies directed against the mother, behind which the

equally warded-off normal feminine attitude toward the male is found only

with difficulty.

  Until now, we have focused our attention merely upon the fact that the

sex of the person mainly responsible for frustrating the child’s sexual desiresplays an essential role in the molding of the character. In this connection, we

touched upon the adult’s character only insofar as we spoke of “strict” and

“mild” influencing. However, the formation of the child’s character is, in

another decisive respect, dependent upon the natures of the parents, which, in

their time, were determined by general and particular social influences. Much

of what official psychiatry looks upon as inherited (which, incidentally, it

cannot account for) turns out, upon sufficiently deep analysis, to be the result

of early conflicting identifications.

  We do not deny the role played by heredity in determining the modes of

reaction. The new-born child has its “character”—that much is clear. It is our

contention, however, that the environment exercises the decisive influence

and  determines  whether  an  existing  inclination  will  be  developed  and

strengthened or will not be allowed to unfold at all. The strongest argument

against the view that the character is innate is provided by patients in whom

analysis demonstrates that a definite mode of reaction existed until a certain

age and then a completely different character developed. For example, at first

they might have been easily excitable and enthusiastic and later depressive;

or stubbornly active and then quiet and inhibited. Although it seems quite

probable that a certain basic personality is innate and hardly changeable, the

overemphasis  of  the  hereditary  factor  stems  undoubtedly  from  an

unconscious dread of the consequences of a correct appraisal of the influence

exercised by education.

  This controversy will not be finally settled until an important institute

decides  to  carry  out  a  mass  experiment,  e.g.,  isolates  some  one  hundred

children of psychopathic parents right after birth, brings them up in a uniform

educational  environment,  and  later  compares  the  results  with  those  of  a

hundred other children who were raised in a psychopathic milieu.

  If we once again briefly review the basic character structures sketched

above, we see that they all have one thing in common: they are all stimulated

by the conflict arising from the child-parent relationship. They are an attemptto resolve this conflict in a special way and to perpetuate this resolution. At

one  time,  Freud  stated  that  the  Oedipus  complex  is  submerged  by  the

castration  anxiety.  We  can  now  add  that  it  is  indeed  submerged  but  it

resurfaces  in  a  different  form.  The  Oedipus  complex  is  transformed  into

character reactions which, on the one hand, extend its main features in a

distorted way and, on the other hand, constitute reaction formations against

its basic elements.

    Summing  up,  we  can  also  say  that  the  neurotic  character,  both  in  its

contents and in its form, is made up entirely of compromises, just as the

symptom  is.  It  contains  the  infantile  instinctual  demand  and  the  defense,

which  belongs  to  the  same  or  different  states  of  development.  The  basic

infantile conflict continues to exist, transformed into attitudes which emerge

in  a  definite  form,  as  automatic  modes  of  reaction  which  have  become

chronic and from which, later, they have to be distilled through analysis.

  By virtue of this insight into a phase of human development, we are in a

position to answer a question raised by Freud: are repressed elements retained

as double entries, as memory traces, or otherwise? We may now cautiously

conclude that those elements of infantile experience which are not worked

into  the  character  are  retained  as  emotionally  charged  memory  traces;

whereas  those  elements  which  are  absorbed  into  and  made  a  part  of  the

character are retained as the contemporary mode of reaction. As obscure as

this process may be, there can be no doubt about the “functional continuum,”

for in analytic therapy we succeed in reducing such character formations to

their original components. It is not so much a question of again bringing to

the  surface  what  has  been  submerged,  as,  for  example,  in  the  case  of

hysterical amnesia; rather, the process is comparable to the recovery of an

element from a chemical compound. We are also in a better position now to

understand  why,  in  some  acute  cases  of  character  neuroses,  we  cannot

succeed  in  eliminating  the  Oedipus  conflict  when  we  analyze  only  the

content. The reason is that the Oedipus conflict no longer exists in the presentbut can be arrived at only by the analytic breakdown of the formal modes of

reaction.

  The following categorization of principal types, based on isolation of the

specifically pathogenic from specifically reality-oriented psychic dynamisms,

is anything but a theoretical pastime. Using these differentiations as our point

of departure, we shall attempt to arrive at a theory of psychic economy which

could be of practical use in the field of education. Naturally, society must

make possible and encourage (or reject) the practical application of such a

theory  of  psychic  economy.  Contemporary  society,  with  its  sex-negating

morality and economic incompetence to guarantee the masses of its members

even  a  bare  existence,  is  as  far  removed  from  the  recognition  of  such

possibilities as it is from their practical application. This will be immediately

clear  when,  by  way  of  anticipation,  we  state  that  the  parental  tie,  the

suppression of masturbation in early childhood, the demand for abstinence in

puberty,  and  the  forcing  of  sexual  interest  into  the  (today  sociologically

justified)  institution  of  marriage  represent  the  antithesis  of  the  conditions

necessary to establish and carry through a sex-economic psychic economy.

The prevailing sexual morality cannot but create the groundwork of neuroses

in the character. Sexual and psychic economy is impossible with the morals

which are so vehemently defended today. This is one of the inexorable social

consequences of the psychoanalytic investigation of neuroses.                                  CHAPTER VIII





        THE GENITAL CHARACTER AND THE


                      NEUROTIC CHARACTER





(The Sex-Economic Function of the Character Armor)




              1. CHARACTER AND SEXUAL STASIS


We now turn our attention to the reasons why a character is formed and to the

economic function of the character.

  The study of the dynamic function of the character reactions and of their

purposeful  mode  of  operation  paves  the  way  to  the  answer  to  the  first

question: in  the  main,  the  character  proves  to  be  a  narcissistic  defense

            1
mechanism.  Thus,  it  would  seem  correct  to  assume  that  if  the  character

serves essentially as a protection of the ego, e.g., in the analytic situation, it

must have originated as an apparatus intended to ward off danger. And the

character analysis of each individual case shows, when the analyst succeeds

in penetrating to the character’s final stage of development, i.e., the Oedipus

stage,  that  the  character  was  molded  under  the  influence  of  the  dangers

threatening from the outside world on the one hand and the pressing demands

of the id on the other.

  Building  upon  Lamarck’s  theory,  Freud  and  particularly  Ferenczi

differentiated an autoplastic  and  an alloplastic  adaptation  in  psychic  life.

Alloplastically,  the  organism  changes  the  environment  (technology  andcivilization); autoplastically, the organism changes itself—in both instances

in order to survive. In biological terms, character formation is an autoplastic

function initiated by the disturbing and unpleasurable stimuli from the outer

world (structure of the family). Because of the clash between the id and the

outer  world  (which  limits  or  wholly  frustrates  libido  gratification),  and

prompted by the real anxiety generated by this conflict, the psychic apparatus

erects a protective barrier between itself and the outer world. To comprehend

this process, which has been but crudely sketched here, we have to turn our

attention momentarily from the dynamic and economic points of view to the

topographical.

  Freud  taught  us  to  conceive  of  the  ego,  i.e.,  that  part  of  the  psychic

mechanism  directed  toward  the  outer  world  and  therefore  exposed,  as  an

apparatus intended to ward off stimuli. Here the formation of the character

takes  place.  Freud,  in  a  very  clear  and  illuminating  way,  described  the

struggle which the ego, as a buffer between id and outer world (or id and

superego), has to engage in. What is most important about this struggle is that

the ego, in its efforts to mediate between the inimical parties for the purpose

of survival, introjects the suppressive objects of the outer world, as a matter

of fact precisely those objects which frustrate the id’s pleasure principle, and

retains them as moral arbiters, as the superego. Hence, the morality of the ego

is a component which does not originate in the id, i.e., does not develop in the

narcissistic-libidinal  organism;  rather,  it  is  an  alien  component  borrowed

from the intruding and menacing outer world.

  The  psychoanalytic  theory  of  instincts  views  the  inchoate  psychic

organism  as  a  hodgepodge  of  primitive  needs  which  originate  in  somatic

conditions of excitation. As the psychic organism develops, the ego emerges

as a special part of it and intervenes between these primitive needs on the one

hand and the outer world on the other hand. To illustrate this, let us consider

the  protozoa.  Among  these  we  have,  for  example,  the  rhizopods,  which

protect  themselves  from  the  raw  outer  world  with  an  armor  of  inorganicmaterial held together by chemical eliminations of the protoplasm. Some of

these protozoa produce a shell coiled like that of a snail; others, a circular

shell equipped with prickles. As compared with the amoeba, the motility of

these armored protozoa is considerably limited; contact with the outer world

is confined to the pseudopodia, which, for the purpose of locomotion and

nourishment, can be stretched out and pulled in again through tiny holes in

the armor. We shall often have occasion to make use of this comparison.

  We can conceive of the character of the ego—perhaps the Freudian ego in

general—as an armor protecting the id against the stimuli of the outer world.

In the Freudian sense, the ego is a structural agent. By character, we mean

here not only the outward form of this agent but also the sum total of all that

the ego shapes in the way of typical modes of reaction, i.e., modes of reaction

characteristic of one specific personality. By character, in short, we mean an

essentially  dynamically  determined  factor  manifest  in  a  person’s

characteristic demeanor: walk, facial expression, stance, manner of speech,

and  other  modes  of  behavior.  This  character  of  the  ego  is  molded  from

elements of the outer world, from prohibitions, instinctual inhibitions, and the

most  varied  forms  of  identifications.  Thus,  the  material  elements  of  the

character armor have their origin in the outer world, in society. Before we

enter into the question of what constitutes the mortar of these elements, i.e.,

what dynamic process welds this armor together, we have to point out that

protection against the outer world, the central motive behind the formation of

the character, definitely does not constitute the chief function of the character

later. Civilized man has abundant means of protecting himself against the real

dangers  of  the  outer  world,  namely  social  institutions  in  all  their  forms.

Moreover, being a highly developed organism, he has a muscular apparatus

which enables him to take flight or to fight and an intellect which enables

him to foresee and avoid dangers. The protective mechanisms of the character

begin to function in a particular way when anxiety makes itself felt within,

whether because of an inner condition of irritation or because of an externalstimulus relating to the instinctual apparatus. When this happens, character

has to master the actual (stasis) anxiety which results from the energy of the

thwarted drive.

  The  relation  between  character  and  repression  can  be  observed  in  the

following process: the necessity of repressing instinctual demands initiates

the formation of the character. Once the character has been molded, however,

it economizes upon repression by absorbing instinctual energies—which are

free-floating in the case of ordinary repressions—into the character formation

itself. The formation of a character trait, therefore, indicates that a conflict

involving repression has been resolved: either the repressive process itself is

rendered  unnecessary  or  an  inchoate  repression  is  transformed  into  a

relatively rigid, ego-justified formation. Hence, the processes of the character

formation are wholly in keeping with the tendency of the ego to unify the

strivings of the psychic organism. These facts explain why repressions that

have led to rigid character traits are so much more difficult to eliminate than

those, for example, which produce a symptom.

  There is a definite connection between the initial impetus to the formation

of  the  character,  i.e.,  protection  against  concrete  dangers,  and  its  final

function, i.e., protection against instinctual dangers, stasis anxiety, and the

absorption  of  instinctual  energies.  Social  arrangements,  especially  the

development from primitive social organizations to civilization, have entailed

many restrictions upon libidinal and other gratifications. The development of

mankind thus far has been characterized by increasing sexual restrictions. In

particular, the development of patriarchal civilization and present-day society

has  gone  hand  in  hand  with  increasing  fragmentation  and  suppression  of

genitality. The longer this process continues, the more remote the causes of

real anxiety become. On a social level, however, the real dangers to the life of

the  individual  have  increased.  Imperialistic  wars  and  the  class  struggle

outweigh the dangers of primitive times. It cannot be denied that civilization

has brought about the advantage of security in individual situations. But thisbenefit  is  not  without  its  drawbacks.  To  avoid  real  anxiety,  man  had  to

restrict his instincts. One must not give vent to one’s aggression even if one is

starving as a result of economic crisis and the sexual drive is fettered by

social norms and prejudices. A transgression of the norms would immediately

entail  a  real  danger,  e.g.,  punishment  for  “larceny”  and  for  childhood

masturbation, and imprisonment for incest and homosexuality. To the extent

that real anxiety is avoided, the stasis of libido is increased and, with it, stasis

anxiety. Thus, actual anxiety and real anxiety have a complementary relation

to one another: the more real anxiety is avoided, the stronger stasis anxiety

becomes, and vice versa. The man who is without fear gratifies his strong

libidinal needs even at the risk of social ostracism. Animals are more exposed

to the conditions of real anxiety because of their deficient social organization.

However, unless they fall under the pressures of domestication—and even

then only under special circumstances—animals rarely suffer from instinctual

stasis.

  We have stressed here the avoidance of (real) anxiety and the binding of

(stasis) anxiety as two economic principles of character formation; we must

not  neglect  a  third  principle,  which  is  also  instrumental  in  shaping  the

character, i.e., the pleasure principle. True, the formation of the character

originates in and is caused by the need to ward off the dangers entailed by the

gratification  of  instincts.  Once  the  armor  has  been  formed,  however,  the

pleasure principle continues to operate inasmuch as the character, just as the

symptom, serves not only to ward off drives and to bind anxiety but also to

gratify distorted instincts. For example, the genital-narcissistic character has

protected himself against external influences; he also gratifies a good portion

of libido in the narcissistic relationship of his ego to his ego-ideal. There are

two kinds of instinctual gratification. On the one hand, the energy of the

warded-off instinctual impulses themselves, particularly the pregenital and

sadistic impulses, is largely consumed in the establishment and perpetuation

of the defense mechanism. While this, to be sure, does not constitute thegratification of an instinct in the sense of a direct, undisguised attainment of

pleasure, it does constitute a reduction of the instinctual tension comparable

to that derived from the disguised “gratification” in a symptom. Although this

reduction  is  phenomenologically  different  from  direct  gratification,  it  is

nonetheless almost on a par with it economically: both diminish the pressure

exerted by the instinctual stimulus. The instinct’s energy is expended in the

binding and solidifying of the character’s contents (identifications, reaction

formations,  etc.).  In  the  affect-block  of  some  compulsive  characters,  for

example, sadism mainly is consumed in the formation and perpetuation of the

wall between id and outer world, whereas anal homosexuality is consumed in

the exaggerated politeness and passivity of some passive-feminine characters.

  The instinctual impulses which are not absorbed into the character strive

to achieve direct gratification unless they are repressed. The nature of this

gratification  depends  upon  the  structure  of  the  character.  And which

instinctual  forces  are  employed  to  establish  the  character  and  which  are

allowed direct gratification decides the difference not only between health

and sickness but among the individual character types.

  Great importance also devolves on the quantity of the character armor as

well as on its quality. When the armoring of the character against the outer

world and against the biological part of the personality has reached a degree

commensurate with the libido development, there are still “breaches” in it

which provide the contact with the outer world. Through these breaches, the

unbound  libido  and  the  other  instinctual  impulses  are  turned  toward  or

withdrawn  from  the  outer  world.  But  the  armoring  of  the  ego  can  be  so

complete that the breaches become “too narrow,” i.e., the communication

lines with the outer world are no longer adequate to guarantee a regulated

libido economy and social adaptation. Catatonic stupor is an example of a

total insulation, while the impulsive character is a prime example of a wholly

inadequate  armoring  of  the  character  structure.  It  is  likely  that  every

permanent conversion of object libido into narcissistic libido goes hand inhand  with  a  strengthening  and  hardening  of  the  ego  armor.  The  affect-

blocked compulsive character has a rigid armor and but meager possibilities

of establishing affective relationships with the outer world. Everything recoils

from his smooth, hard surface. The garrulous aggressive character, on the

other hand, has, it is true, a flexible armor, but it is always “bristling.” His

relationships to the outer world are limited to paranoic-aggressive reactions.

The passive-feminine character is an example of a third type of armoring. On

the surface, he appears to have an acquiescent and mild disposition, but in

analysis we get to know it as an armoring that is difficult to dissolve.

  It is indicative of every character formation not only what it wards off but

what instinctual forces it uses to accomplish this. In general, the ego molds its

character by taking possession of a certain instinctual impulse, itself subject

to  repression  at  one  time,  in  order  to  ward  off,  with  its  help,  another

instinctual impulse. Thus, for example, the phallic-sadistic character’s ego

will use exaggerated masculine aggression to ward off feminine, passive, and

anal strivings. By resorting to such measures, however, it changes itself, i.e.,

assumes chronically aggressive modes of reaction. Others frequently ward off

their repressed aggression by “insinuating”—as one such patient once put it

—themselves  into  the  favor  of  any  person  capable  of  rousing  their

aggression. They become as “slippery” as eels, evade every straightforward

reaction, can never be held fast. Usually, this “slipperiness” is also expressed

in the intonation of their voice; they speak in a soft, modulated, cautious, and

flattering way. In taking over anal interests for the purpose of warding off the

aggressive  impulses,  the  ego  itself  becomes  “greasy”  and  “slimy,”  and

conceives of itself in this way. This causes the loss of self-confidence (one

such patient felt himself to be “stinky”). Such people are driven to make

renewed  efforts  to  adapt  themselves  to  the  world,  to  gain  possession  of

objects in any way possible. However, since they do not possess any genuine

ability  to  adapt  themselves  and  usually  experience  one  frustration  and

rejection  after  the  other,  their  aggression  builds  up  and  this,  in  turn,necessitates intensified anal-passive defense. In such cases, character-analytic

work not only attacks the function of the defense but also exposes the means

employed to accomplish this defense, i.e., anality in this case.

  The  final  quality  of  the  character—true  of  the  typical  as  well  as  the

particular—is determined by two factors: first, qualitatively, by those stages

of libido development in which the process of character formation was most

permanently influenced by inner conflicts, i.e., by the specific position of the

libido  fixation.  Qualitatively,  therefore,  we  can  differentiate  between

depressive  (oral),  masochistic,  genital-narcissistic  (phallic),  hysterical

(genital-incestuous)  characters  and  compulsive  (anal-sadistic  fixation)

characters; second, quantitatively, by the libido economy which is dependent

upon the qualitative factor. The former could also be called the historical, the

latter the contemporary motive of the character form.


2. THE LIBIDO-ECONOMIC DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE

GENITAL CHARACTER AND THE NEUROTIC CHARACTER


  If the armoring of the character exceeds a certain degree; if it has utilized

chiefly those instinctual impulses that under normal circumstances serve to

establish  contact  with  reality;  if  the  capacity  for  sexual  gratification  has

thereby  been  too  severely  restricted,  then  all  the  conditions  exist  for  the

formation  of  the  neurotic  character.  If,  now,  the  character  formation  and

character structure of neurotic men and women are compared with those of

individuals capable of work and love, we arrive at a qualitative difference

between the ways the character binds the dammed-up libido. It is found that

there are adequate and inadequate means of binding anxiety. Genital orgastic

gratification of the libido and sublimation prove to be prototypes of adequate

means; all kinds of pregenital gratification and reaction formations prove to

be inadequate. This qualitative difference is also expressed quantitatively: the

neurotic  character  suffers  a  continuously  increasing  stasis  of  the  libido

precisely because his means of gratification are not adequate to the needs ofthe  instinctual  apparatus;  whereas  the  genital  character  is  governed  by  a

steady alternation between libido tension and adequate libido gratification. In

short, the genital character is in possession of a regulated libido economy.

The term “genital character” is justified by the fact that, with the possible

exception of highly unusual cases, only genital primacy and orgastic potency

(itself determined by a special character structure), as opposed to all other

libido structures, guarantee a regulated libido economy.

  The historically determined quality of the character-forming forces and

contents determines the contemporary quantitative regulation of the libido

economy and therefore, at a certain point, the difference between “health”

and  “sickness.”  In  terms  of  their  qualitative  differences,  the  genital  and

neurotic  characters  are  to  be  understood  as  principal  types.  The  actual

characters  represent  a  mixture,  and  whether  or  not  the  libido  economy  is

vouchsafed depends solely upon how far the actual character approximates

the one or the other principal type. In terms of the quantity of the possible

direct  libido  gratification,  the  genital  and  neurotic  characters  are  to  be

understood as average types: either the libido gratification is such that it is

capable of disposing of the stasis of the unused libido or it is not. In the latter

case, symptoms or neurotic character traits develop which impair social and

sexual capacity.

  We shall attempt now to represent the qualitative differences between the

two ideal types. To this end, we shall contrast the structure of the id, the

superego, and finally the characteristics of the ego which are dependent upon

the id and superego.


a) Structure of the id

                                                                                          2
  The genital character has fully attained the post-ambivalent genital stage;

the incest desire and the desire to get rid of the father (the mother) have been

abandoned  and  genital  strivings  have  been  projected  upon  a  heterosexual

object  which  does  not,  as  in  the  case  of  the  neurotic  character,  actuallyrepresent the incest object. The heterosexual object has completely taken over

the  role—more  specifically,  the  place—of  the  incest  object. The Oedipus

complex is no longer a contemporary factor; it has been resolved. It is not

repressed; rather, it is free of cathexis. The pregenital tendencies (anality, oral

eroticism, and voyeurism) are not repressed. In part, they are anchored in the

character as cultural sublimations; in part, they have a share in the pleasures

preceding  direct  gratification.  They  are,  in  any  case,  subordinated  to  the

genital strivings. The sexual act remains the highest and most pleasurable

sexual goal. Aggression has also to a large extent been sublimated in social

achievements; to a lesser extent, it contributes directly to genital sexuality,

without, however, demanding exclusive gratification. This distribution of the

instinctual  drives  assures  the  capacity  for  corresponding  orgastic

gratification,  which  can  be  achieved  only  by  way  of  the  genital  system,

although it is not confined to it since it also provides gratification to the

pregenital  and  aggressive  tendencies.  The  less  pregenital  demands  are

repressed,  i.e.,  the  better  the  systems  of  pregenitality  and  gentility

communicate,  the  more  complete  is  the  gratification  and  the  fewer

possibilities there are for pathogenic stasis of the libido.

  The neurotic character, on the other hand, even if it does not have a feeble

potency from the outset or does not live abstinently (which is true of the

overwhelming  majority  of  cases),  is  not  capable  of  discharging  his  free,

                                                        3
unsublimated  libido  in  a  satisfactory  orgasm.  Orgastically,  he  is  always

relatively impotent. The following configuration is responsible for this: the

incest objects have a contemporary cathexis, or the libido cathexis pertaining

to these objects is put forth in reaction formations. If there is any sexuality at

all, its infantile nature is readily discernible. The woman who is loved merely

represents the mother (sister, etc.) and the love relationship is burdened with

all  the  anxieties,  inhibitions,  and  neurotic  whims  of  the  infantile  incest

relationship (spurious transference). Genital primacy either is not present at

all or has no cathexis or, as in the case of the hysterical character, the genitalfunction  is  disturbed  because  of  the  incest  fixation.  Sexuality—this  is

especially  true  of  the  transference  neuroses—moves  along  the  paths  of

forepleasure, if the patient is not abstinent or inhibited. Thus, we have a kind

of chain reaction: the infantile sexual fixation disturbs the orgastic function;

this  disturbance,  in  turn,  creates  a  stasis  of  libido;  the  dammed-up  libido

intensifies the pregenital fixations, and so on and so forth. Because of this

over-cathexis of the pregenital system, libidinal impulses creep into every

cultural and social activity. This, of course, can only result in a disturbance

because the action becomes associated with repressed and forbidden material.

Occasionally, indeed, the activity becomes undisguised sexual activity in a

distorted  form,  e.g.,  the  cramp  of  a  violinist.  The  libidinal  surplus  is  not

always  available  for  social  action;  it  is  intertwined  in  the  repression  of

infantile instinctual goals.


b) Structure of the superego


  The  superego  of  the  genital  character  is  chiefly  distinguished  by  its

important sexually affirmative elements. A high degree of harmony therefore

exists  between  id  and  superego.  Since  the  Oedipus  complex  has  lost  its

cathexis, the counter-cathexis in the basic element of the superego has also

become superfluous. Thus, to all intents and purposes, there are no superego

prohibitions of a sexual nature. The superego is not sadistically laden not

only for the above reasons but also because there is no stasis of the libido

                                                                          4
which  could  stir  up  sadism  and  make  the  superego  vicious.  The  genital

libido, since it is gratified directly, is not concealed in the strivings of the

ego-ideal.  Hence,  social  accomplishments  are  not,  as  in  the  case  of  the

neurotic  character,  proofs  of  potency;  rather  they  provide  a  natural,

noncompensatory  narcissistic  gratification.  Since  there  are  no  potency

disturbances,  an  inferiority  complex  does  not  exist.  There  is  a  close

correlation between ego-ideal and real ego, and no insurmountable tension

exists between the two.  In the neurotic character, on the other hand, the superego is essentially

characterized  by  sexual  negation.  This  automatically  sets  up  the  familiar

conflict and antipathy between id and superego. Since the Oedipus complex

has  not  been  mastered,  the  central  element  of  the  superego,  the  incest

prohibition, is still wholly operative and interferes with every form of sexual

relationship.  The  powerful  sexual  repression  of  the  ego  and  the  attendant

libido stasis intensify the sadistic impulses which are expressed, among other

ways, in a brutal code of morality. We would do well to remember in this

connection that, as Freud pointed out, repression creates morality and not

vice versa. Since a more or less conscious feeling of impotence is always

present, many social accomplishments are primarily compensatory proofs of

potency. These accomplishments, however, do not diminish the feelings of

inferiority.  On  the  contrary:  since  social  accomplishments  are  often

attestations of potency which cannot in any way replace the feeling of genital

potency,  the  neurotic  character  never  rids  himself  of  the  feeling  of  inner

emptiness and incapacity, no matter how arduously he tries to compensate for

it. Thus, the positive demands of the ego-ideal are raised higher and higher,

while  the  ego,  powerless  and  doubly  paralyzed  by  feelings  of  inferiority

(impotence and high ego-ideal), becomes less and less efficient.


c) Structure of the ego


  Now let us consider the influences on the ego of the genital character. The

periodic orgastic discharges of the id’s libidinal tension considerably reduces

the  pressure  of  the  id’s  instinctual  claims  on  the  ego.  Because  the  id  is

basically satisfied, the superego has no cause to be sadistic and therefore does

not exert any particular pressure on the ego. Free of guilt feelings, the ego

takes  possession  of  and  gratifies  the  genital  libido  and  certain  pregenital

strivings of the id and sublimates the natural aggression as well as parts of the

pregenital libido in social accomplishments. As far as genital strivings are

concerned, the ego is not opposed to the id and can impose certain inhibitionsupon it much more easily since the id gives into the ego in the main, i.e., the

gratification of the libido. This appears to be the only condition under which

the  id  allows  itself  to  be  held  in  check  by  the  ego  without  the  use  of

repression. A strong homosexual striving will express itself in one way when

the ego fails to gratify the heterosexual striving and in an entirely different

way when no libido stasis exists. Economically, this is easy to understand, for

in heterosexual gratification—provided the homosexuality is not repressed,

i.e., is not shut out of the communication system of the libido—energy is

taken away from the homosexual strivings.

  Since the ego is under only a small amount of pressure from both the id

and the superego—largely because of sexual gratification—it does not have

to defend itself against the id as does the ego of the neurotic character. It

requires  only  small  amounts  of  counter-cathexis  and  has,  consequently,

ample energy free for experiencing and acting in the outside world; acting

and  experiencing  are  intense  and  free-flowing.  Thus  the  ego  is  highly

accessible  to  pleasure (Lust)  as  well  as  unpleasure (Unlust).  The  genital

character’s ego also has an armor, but it is in control of the armor, not at its

mercy.  The  armor  is  flexible  enough  to  adapt  itself  to  the  most  diverse

experiences. The genital character can be joyous, but angry when necessary.

He reacts to an object-loss with a commensurable degree of sadness; he is not

subdued by his loss. He is capable of loving intensely and enthusiastically

and  of  hating  passionately.  In  a  particular  situation,  he  can  behave  in  a

childlike way, but he will never appear infantile. His seriousness is natural,

not stiff in a compensatory way, for he does not have to appear grownup at

all costs. His courage is not proof of potency, it is objectively motivated. So

under certain conditions, e.g., a war he believes unjust, he will not be afraid

to have himself labeled a coward but will stand up for his conviction. Since

the infantile wishes have lost their cathexis, his hate as well as his love are

rationally motivated. The flexibility and strength of his armor are shown by

the fact that, in one case, he can open himself to the world just as intenselyas, in another case, he can close himself to it. His ability to give himself is

mainly  demonstrated  in  his  sexual  experience:  in  the  sexual  act  with  the

loved object, the ego almost ceases to exist, with the exception of its function

of perception. For the moment, the armor has been almost entirely dissolved.

The entire personality is immersed in the experience of pleasure, without fear

of getting lost in it, for the ego has a solid narcissistic foundation, which does

not compensate but sublimates. His self-esteem draws its best energies from

the sexual experience. The very way he solves his contemporary conflicts

shows that they are of a rational nature; they are not clogged with infantile

and irrational elements. Once again, the reason for this is a rational libido

economy  that  precludes  the  possibility  of  an  over-cathexis  of  infantile

experiences and desires.

  In the forms of his sexuality, as in all other respects, the genital character

is flexible and unconstrained. Since he is capable of gratification, he is also

capable  of  monogamy  without  compulsion  or  repression;  when  rationally

motivated, however, he is fully capable of changing the object of his love or

of polygamy. He does not cling to his sexual object because of feelings of

guilt or moralistic considerations. Rather, he maintains the relationship on the

basis of his healthy demand for pleasure, because it gratifies him. He can

conquer polygamous desires without repression when they are incompatible

with his relationship to the beloved object, but he can indeed give in to them

if they become too urgent. He solves the actual conflicts arising from this in a

realistic way.

  Neurotic  feelings  of  guilt  are  practically  nonexistent.  His  sociality  is

based not on repressed but on sublimated aggression and on his orientation in

reality. This does not mean, however, that he always submits to social reality.

On the contrary, the genital character, whose structure is wholly at odds with

our contemporary moralistically anti-sexual culture, is capable of criticizing

and  changing  the  social  situation.  His  almost  complete  absence  of  fear

enables him to take an uncompromising stand toward an environment thatruns counter to his convictions.

  If  the  primacy  of  the  intellect  is  the  goal  of  social  development,  it  is

inconceivable without genital primacy. The hegemony of the intellect not

only puts an end to irrational sexuality but has as its precondition a regulated

libido  economy.  Genital  and  intellectual  primacy  belong  together,  i.e.,

interdetermine one another, as do libido stasis and neurosis, superego (guilt

feeling) and religion, hysteria and superstition, pregenital libido gratification

and the contemporary sexual morality, sadism and ethics, sexual repression

and committees for the rehabilitation of fallen women.

  In the genital character, the regulated libido economy and the capacity for

full sexual gratification are the foundation of the above character traits. In the

same way, everything the neurotic character is and does is determined, in the

final analysis, by his inadequate libido economy.

  The  ego  of  the  neurotic  character  is  either  ascetic  or  achieves  sexual

gratification accompanied by guilt feelings. It is under pressure from two

sides: (1) the constantly ungratified id with its dammed-up libido and (2) the

brutal superego. The neurotic character’s ego is inimical toward the id and

fawning toward the superego. At the same time, however, it flirts with the id

and secretly rebels against the superego. Insofar as its sexuality has not been

completely  repressed,  it  is  predominantly  pregenital.  Because  of  the

prevailing sexual mores, genitality is tinged with anal and sadistic elements.

The  sexual  act  is  conceived  of  as  something  dirty  and  beastly.  Since

aggressiveness is incorporated into or, more specifically, anchored partially

in the character armor and partially in the superego, social achievements are

impaired. The ego is either closed to both pleasure and unpleasure (affect-

block)  or  accessible  solely  to  unpleasure;  or  every  pleasure  is  quickly

transformed into unpleasure. The armor of the ego is rigid; communications

with the outer world, constantly under the control of the narcissistic censor,

are  poor  with  respect  to  both  object-libido  and  aggression.  The  armor

functions chiefly as a protection against inner life; the result is a pronouncedweakening of the ego’s reality function. The relationships to the outer world

are unnatural, myopic, or contradictory; the whole personality cannot become

a harmonious and enthusiastic part of things because it lacks the capacity for

complete experience. Whereas the genital character can change, strengthen,

or  weaken  his  defense  mechanisms,  the  ego  of  the  neurotic  character  is

completely at the mercy of his unconscious repressed mechanisms. He cannot

behave any differently even if he wants to. He would like to be joyous or

angry but is capable of neither. He cannot love intensely because essential

elements of his sexuality are repressed. Nor can he hate rationally because his

ego does not feel equal to his hatred, which has become inordinate as a result

of the libido stasis, and therefore has to repress it. And when he feels love or

hate, the reaction is hardly in keeping with the facts. In the unconscious, the

infantile experiences come into play and determine the extent and the nature

of the reactions. The rigidity of his armor makes him unable either to open

himself to some particular experience or to shut himself off completely from

other experiences where he would be rationally justified in doing so. Usually,

he is sexually inhibited or disturbed in the forepleasures of the sexual act.

Even if this is not the case, however, he does not receive any gratification.

Or, because of his inability to give himself, he is disturbed to such an extent

that the libido economy is not regulated. A thorough analysis of the feelings

one has during the sexual act allows the differentiation of various types: the

narcissistic person whose attention is concentrated not on the sensation of

pleasure  but  on  the  idea  of  making  a  very  potent  impression;  the

hyperaesthetic person who is very much concerned not to touch any part of

the body that might offend his aesthetic feelings; the person with repressed

sadism who cannot rid himself of the compulsive thought that he might hurt

the woman or is tormented by guilt feelings that he is abusing the woman; the

sadistic character for whom the act means the martyring of the object. The list

could  be  extended  indefinitely.  Where  such  disturbances  are  not  fully

manifested,  the  inhibitions  corresponding  to  them  are  found  in  the  totalattitude toward sexuality. Since the superego of the neurotic character does

not contain any sexually affirmative elements, it shuns sexual experience (H.

Deutsch mistakenly held this to be true of the healthy character as well). This

means, however, that only half of the personality takes part in the experience.

  The genital character has a solid narcissistic foundation. In the neurotic

character, on the other hand, the feeling of impotence forces the ego to make

compensations  of  a  narcissistic  nature.  The  contemporary  conflicts,

permeated  with  irrational  motives,  make  it  impossible  for  the  neurotic

character to reach rational decisions. The infantile attitude and desires always

have a negative effect.

  Sexually  unsatisfied  and  incapable  of  being  satisfied,  the  neurotic

character is finally forced either into asceticism or into rigid monogamy. The

latter he will justify on moral grounds or as deference to his sexual partner,

but in reality he is afraid of sexuality and unable to regulate it. Since sadism

is not sublimated, the superego is extremely harsh; the id is relentless in its

demands for the gratification of its needs, the ego develops feelings of guilt,

which it calls social conscience, and a need for punishment, in which it tends

to inflict on itself what it really wishes to do to others.

  Upon brief reflection, we see that the empirical discovery of the above

mechanisms becomes the basis for a revolutionary critique of all theoretically

based systems of morals. Without, at this point, going into the details of this

question so decisive for the social formation of culture, we can briefly state

that to the extent that society makes possible the gratification of needs and

the  transformation  of  the  corresponding  human  structures,  the moral

regulation  of  social  life  will  fall  away.  The  final  decision  lies  not  in  the

sphere of psychology but in the sphere of the sociological processes. As far

as our clinical practice is concerned, there can no longer be any doubt that

every successful analytic treatment, i.e., one which succeeds in transforming

the neurotic character structure into a genital character structure, demolishes

the moralistic arbiters and replaces them with the self-regulation of actionbased  on  a  sound  libido  economy.  Since  some  analysts  speak  of  the

“demolishing of the superego” by the analytic treatment, we have to point out

that  this  is  a  matter  of  withdrawing  energy  from  the  system  of  moral

arbitration and replacing it with libido-economic regulation. The fact that this

process  is  at  variance  with  the  present-day  interests  of  the  state,  moral

philosophy,  and  religion  is  of  decisive  importance  in  another  connection.

More simply expressed, what this all means is that the man whose sexual as

well as primitive biological and cultural needs are satisfied does not require

any morality to maintain self-control. But the unsatisfied man, suppressed in

all respects, suffers from mounting inner excitation that would cause him to

tear everything to pieces if his energy were not partially held in check and

partially consumed by moralistic inhibitions. The extent and intensity of a

society’s ascetic and moralistic ideologies are the best yardstick for the extent

and intensity of the unresolved tension, created by unsatisfied needs, in the

average individual of that society. Both are determined by the relationship of

the productive forces and the mode of production on the one hand and the

needs which have to be satisfied on the other.

  The  discussion  of  the  broader  consequences  of  sex-economy  and  the

analytic theory of character will not be able to evade these questions unless,

at the sacrifice of its natural scientific prestige, it prefers to pull in the reins at

the artificially erected boundary between what is and what should be.


      3. SUBLIMATION, REACTION FORMATION, AND

                      NEUROTIC REACTION BASIS


We  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  existing  differences  between  the  social

achievements of the genital character and the neurotic character.

  We pointed out earlier that the orgastic gratification of the libido and

sublimation are the adequate means of removing the libido stasis or, more

specifically, of mastering the stasis anxiety. The pregenital gratification of the

libido and the reaction formation are the inadequate means. Sublimation is,like orgastic gratification, a specific accomplishment of the genital character;

reaction formation is the mode of the neurotic character. This of course does

not mean that the neurotic character does not sublimate and that the healthy

character does not have any reaction formations.

  To  begin  with,  let  us  endeavor  to  give,  on  the  basis  of  our  clinical

experiences, a theoretical description of the relationship between sublimation

and sexual gratification. According to Freud, sublimation is the result of the

deflection of a libidinal striving from its original goal and its rechanneling to

a “higher,” socially valuable goal. The drive which receives a sublimated

gratification must have relinquished its original object and goal. This first

formulation by Freud eventually led to the misunderstanding that sublimation

and  instinctual  gratification  are  altogether  antithetical.  However,  if  we

consider the relation between sublimation and libido-economy in general, we

learn  from  everyday  experience  that  no  antithesis  exists  here.  We  learn,

indeed, that a regulated libido economy is the precondition of successful and

lasting sublimation. The really important factor is that those drives which

form the basis of our social achievements do not receive direct gratification;

this does not mean that the libido is not at all gratified. The psychoanalysis of

disturbances in work teaches us that the greater the stasis of the libido as a

whole, the more difficult it is to sublimate pregenital libido. Sexual fantasies

absorb  the  psychic  interests  and  distract  from  work;  or  the  cultural

achievements themselves are sexualized and in this way are caught up in the

                      5
sphere of repression. The observation of the genital character’s sublimations

shows that they are continually reinforced by the orgastic gratification of the

libido. Releasing the sexual tensions liberates energy for higher achievements

because, for a certain time, sexual fantasies do not draw any libidinal cathexis

to themselves. In successful analyses, moreover, we observe that the patient’s

productive  power  reaches  a  high  level  only  after  he  has  succeeded  in

achieving full sexual gratification. The durability of the sublimations is also

dependent  upon  the  regulation  of  the  libido  economy.  Patients  who  ridthemselves of their neurosis solely by means of sublimation exhibit a far less

stable condition and have a far greater tendency to relapse than those patients

who not only sublimate but also achieve direct sexual gratification. Just as

incomplete,  i.e.,  primarily  pregenital,  libido  gratification  interferes  with

sublimation, so orgastic genital gratification promotes it.

  Now let us compare—to begin with, from a purely descriptive point of

view—sublimation  with  reaction  formation.  What  strikes  us  about  these

phenomena  is  that  the  reaction  formation  is  spasmodic  and  compulsive,

whereas the sublimation flows freely. In the latter case, the id, in harmony

with the ego and ego-ideal, seems to have a direct contact with reality; in the

former case, all achievements seem to be imposed upon a rebelling id by a

strict superego. In sublimation, the effect of the action is important, even if

the action itself has a libidinal accent. In the reaction formation, on the other

hand, the act is important; the effect is of secondary importance. The action

does not have a libidinal accent; it is negatively motivated. It is compulsive.

The man who sublimates can suspend his work for a considerable period of

time—rest is just as important to him as work. When a reactive performance

is disrupted, however, an inner restlessness ensues sooner or later. And if the

disruption  continues,  the  restlessness  can  mount  to  irritability  and  even

anxiety.  The  man  who  sublimates  is,  on  occasion,  irritated  or  tense,  not

because  he  is  not  accomplishing  anything  but  because  he  is  absorbed  in

giving birth, so to speak, to his accomplishment. The man who sublimates

wants to accomplish things and derives pleasure from his work. The man

whose work is of a reactive nature has, as a patient once aptly expressed it,

“to  robot.”  And  as  soon  as  he  finishes  one  piece  of  work,  he  must

immediately  begin  another.  For  him,  work  is  an  escape  from  rest.

Occasionally, the effect of reactively performed work will be the same as that

of work based on sublimation. Usually, however, reactive achievements turn

out to be less successful socially than sublimated achievements. In any event,

the same man will accomplish much more under conditions of sublimationthan under those of a reaction formation.

  From the structure of each achievement that entails the absolute use of a

certain amount of energy, the correlation between individual achievement and

individual capacity for work can be measured with some degree of accuracy.

The  gap  between  work  capacity  (latent  capacity  for  work)  and  absolute

achievement is not nearly as great in the case of sublimation as in the case of

reaction formation. This means that the man who sublimates approximates

his capabilities more closely than the man who works reactively. Feelings of

inferiority  often  correspond  to  the  secret  awareness  of  this  discrepancy.

Clinically,  we  recognize  the  difference  between  these  two  types  of

accomplishment  in  that,  when  their  unconscious  relations  are  uncovered,

sublimated  accomplishments  undergo  relatively  little  change;  reactive

performances, on the other hand, if they do not break down altogether, often

show tremendous improvements in the transformation into sublimations.

  The  activities  of  the  average  worker  in  our  cultural  milieu  are

characterized  far  more  frequently  by  reaction  formations  than  by

sublimations. Moreover, the prevailing formation of the educational structure

(in addition to the social conditions of work) permits the realization of the

individual’s capacity for work in effective achievements to only a very small

degree.

  In the case of sublimation, there is no inversion of the drive’s direction:

the drive is simply taken over by the ego and diverted to another goal. In the

case of reaction formation, on the other hand, an inversion of the drive’s

direction does take place. The drive is turned against the self and is taken

over by the ego only insofar as this inversion takes place. In the process of

this inversion, the drive’s cathexis is turned into a counter-cathexis against

the drive’s unconscious goal. The process described by Freud in the case of

aversion is a perfect illustration of this. In the reaction formation, the original

goal retains its cathexis in the unconscious. The original object of the drive is

not relinquished but merely repressed. Retention and repression of the drive,inversion of the drive’s direction accompanied by the formation of a counter-

cathexis  characterize  reaction  formation.  Abjuration  (not  repression)  and

substitution of the drive’s original goal and object, retention of the drive’s

direction without the formation of a counter-cathexis, are the characteristics

of sublimation.

  Let us further examine the process involved in the reaction formation.

The most important economic feature in this process is the necessity of a

counter-cathexis.  Since  the  original  goal  of  the  drive  is  retained,  it  is

continuously flooded with libido and, just as continuously, the ego has to

transform this cathexis into a counter-cathexis, e.g., deduce the reaction of

aversion from the anal libido, etc., to keep the drive in check. The reaction

formation is not a process that takes place once, but is a continuous one and,

as we shall presently see, one which spreads.

  In the reaction formation, the ego is continually occupied with itself; it is

its  own  strict  monitor.  In  sublimation,  the  ego’s  energies  are  free  for

achievement. Simple reaction formations such as aversion and shame are part

of the character formation of every individual. These are not detrimental to

the  development  of  the  genital  character  and  remain  within  physiological

limits because there is no libido stasis to reinforce pregenital strivings. If,

however, the sexual repression goes too far, if it is directed against the genital

libido  in  particular,  so  that  a  stasis  of  libido  takes  place,  the  reaction

formations  receive  an  excess  of  libidinal  energy  and,  consequently,

demonstrate a characteristic known to the clinician as a phobic diffusion.

  Let us cite as an example the case of an official. As is usual for a typical

compulsive character, he performed his duties most conscientiously. In the

course of time, despite the fact that he derived not the slightest pleasure from

his work, he devoted himself to it more and more. At the time he entered

analysis,  it  was  not  unusual  for  him  to  work  until  midnight  or  even,  on

occasion, until three o’clock in the morning. The analysis quickly brought out

that (1) sexual fantasies disturbed his work (he needed more time to do hiswork for this very reason, i.e., he “dilly-dallied” and (2) he could not allow

himself a single quiet moment, especially not in the evenings, for then the

supercharged fantasies relentlessly invaded his conscious mind. By working

at nights, he discharged a certain amount of libido, but the greater part of his

libido, which could not be released in such a way, increased more and more

until he could no longer deny the disturbance in his work.














Originalgal  Sublimated gosl  Reaction formation

2

   
 

  
  
 

== Tuming back of the
impule, counter cathesis

Notepression

“origina goal

 

Source o instinctual

A energy B
Schematic presentation of sublimation as compared with reaction formation

A: Repression lacking; impulse merely diverted; original instinctual goal lacking cathexis.

B: Repression present; original goal has retained its full cathexis; impulse not diverted, but directed by

the ego against itself. At the place where the turning back occurs we find the achievement (reaction

formation).


  Hence, the proliferation of both the reaction formations and the reactive

performances  corresponds  to  a  continually  mounting  libido  stasis.  When,

finally, the reaction formations are no longer capable of mastering the libido

stasis;  when  the  process  of  decompensation  sets  in;  when,  in  short,  the

character of the ego fails in the consumption of the libido, either unconcealed

neurotic anxiety appears or neurotic symptoms emerge which dispose of the

excess of free-floating anxiety.

  Reactive  work  is  always  rationalized.  Thus,  our  patient  attempted  to

excuse  his  long  hours  by  complaining  about  his  excessive  work  load.  In

actual fact, however, his perfunctory activity served the economic purpose of

a release and a diversion from sexual fantasies. On the other hand, it fulfilledthe function of a reaction formation against the repressed hatred of his boss

(father). The analysis showed that the patient’s efforts to be especially useful

to his boss represented the opposite of his unconscious intentions. When all is

said and done, such “roboting” cannot be interpreted as self-punishment, only

one of many meaningful elements of the symptom. Basically, he certainly did

not want to punish himself but to protect himself against punishment. Fear of

the  consequences  of  his  sexual  fantasies  lay  at  the  root  of  the  reaction

formation.

  Neither  work  performed  as  a  compulsive  neurotic  duty  nor  any  other

reaction formation is capable of binding the entire stasis anxiety. Consider,

for example, the excessive motor activity of the female hysterical character or

the  hyper-agility  and  restlessness  of  the  neurotic  mountain  climber.  Both

have  a  muscular  system  overcharged  with  unsatiated  libido;  both  are

continually striving toward the object: the hysterical girl in an unconcealed

way, the mountain climber in a symbolic way (mountain = woman = mother).

Their motility, it is true, works off a certain amount of libido; at the same

time, however, it increases the tension inasmuch as it does not afford a final

gratification. Inevitably, therefore, the girl has attacks of hysteria, while the

neurotic  mountain  climber  must  undertake  more  and  more  strenuous  and

dangerous  mountain  tours  to  master  his  stasis.  However,  since  there  is  a

natural limit to this, a symptom neurosis finally breaks through if he does not,

as often happens, meet with a misfortune in the mountains.

  Reaction basis of the character is an appropriate term for all mechanisms

which consume the dammed-up libido and bind the neurotic anxiety in the

character  traits.  If,  as  a  result  of  inordinate  sexual  restrictions,  it  fails  to

perform its economic function, it becomes the neurotic reaction basis, which

the analytic treatment aims to remove. The proliferating reaction formation is

only one of the mechanisms of the neurotic reaction basis.

  It does not make much difference when an exacerbation of the neurotic

character occurs. The fact remains that the neurotic reaction basis has beenpresent in the character from early childhood, from the conflict period of the

Oedipus stage. The neurotic symptom usually exhibits a qualitative affinity to

its neurotic reaction basis. To give a few examples: the compulsive-neurotic

exaggerated  sense  of  order  will  become,  given  certain  conditions,  a

compulsive sense of order; the anal character will become constipated; self-

consciousness  will  become  pathological  blushing;  hysterical  agility  and

coquetry  will  develop  into  hysterical  attacks;  character  ambivalence  will

become  the  inability  to  make  decisions;  sexual  inhibition  will  become

vaginismus;  aggression  or  overconscientiousness  will  become  murder

impulses.

  However,  the  neurotic  symptom  does  not  always  exhibit  a  qualitative

homogeneity with its reaction basis. Sometimes the symptom constitutes a

defense against surplus anxiety at a higher or lower libido stage. Thus, a

hysterical  character  might  develop  a  compulsion  to  wash;  a  compulsive

character, a hysterical anxiety or a conversion symptom. Needless to say, in

actual  practice  our  patients  represent  mixtures,  with  the  one  or  the  other

character form in the ascendency. However, the diagnosis should not be made

according to the symptoms but according to the neurotic character which lies

at the basis of the symptoms. Thus, even when a patient comes to us because

of a conversion symptom, the diagnosis will be compulsion neurosis if the

character exhibits predominantly compulsive neurotic traits.

  Reviewing  the  results  of  this  investigation,  we  see  that  the  difference

between the neurotic and the genital character types must be conceived of as

elastically as possible. Since the distinction is based on quantitative criteria

(the degree of direct sexual gratification or degree of libido stasis) the variety

of actual character forms between the two principal types is endless. Yet, in

terms of its heuristic value and the point of view it offers in practical work, a

typological investigation seems not only justified but even required. Since

this work represents only a small beginning toward a genetic theory of types,

it makes no pretense of doing justice to all questions arising from a “theory oftypes.” Its task is momentarily fulfilled if it can succeed in convincing us that

Freud’s libido theory, unrestricted and consistently thought through, is the

only legitimate foundation for psychoanalytic characterology.                                  CHAPTER IX





      CHILDHOOD PHOBIA AND CHARACTER


                                FORMATION




              1. AN “ARISTOCRATIC” CHARACTER


Using a case as an illustration, we will show how the character attitude is

derived from the infantile experiences. In our presentation, we shall follow

the path that led from the analysis of the character resistance to its genesis in

definite infantile situations.

  A  thirty-three-year-old  man  entered  analysis  because  of  marital

difficulties and disturbances in his work. He was suffering from a severe

inability  to  make  decisions  which  made  it  difficult  for  him  to  solve  his

marriage problem in a rational way and prevented him from advancing in his

profession. With considerable perception and skill, the patient immediately

buckled  down  to  the  analytic  work.  Within  a  very  short  time,  the  usual

pathogenic  conflicts  of  the  Oedipus  relationship  allowed  a  theoretical

explanation  of  his  marital  difficulties.  We  shall  not  go  into  the  material

showing  the  identification  between  his  wife  and  his  mother,  between  his

superiors and his father; though interesting, this material revealed nothing

new.  We  shall  concentrate  on  his  behavior,  on  the  relation  between  this

behavior and the infantile conflict, and character resistance in the treatment.

  The patient had a pleasing external appearance, was of medium height,

had  a  reserved  countenance,  was  serious  and  somewhat  arrogant.  His

measured, noble stride caught one’s attention—it took him a good while tocome through the door and walk across the room to the couch. It was evident

that  he  avoided—or  concealed—any  haste  or  excitement.  His  speech  was

well  phrased  and  balanced,  soft  and  eloquent.  Occasionally,  he  would

interject an emphatic, staccato “Yes!,” at the same time stretching both arms

forward, then passing one hand across his brow. He lay on the couch with

crossed legs, very much at ease. There was very little if any change in his

composure  and  refinement,  even  when  very  ticklish  and  otherwise

narcissistic subjects were discussed. When, after several days of analysis, he

discussed  his  relationship  to  his  dearly  loved  mother,  he  quite  obviously

accentuated his noble pose in an effort to master the excitement which seized

him. I told him that there was no need to be embarrassed and I urged him to

express  his  feelings  freely—but  to  no  avail.  He  maintained  his  patrician

bearing and refined manner of speech. One day, indeed, when tears welled up

in his eyes and his voice was clearly choked, he raised his handkerchief to

dry his eyes with the same dignified composure.

  This much was already clear: his behavior, whatever its origin might be,

protected him against violent emotions in the analysis, guarded him against

an emotional breakthrough. His character obstructed the free development of

the analytic experience; it had already become a resistance.

  Soon  after  the  obvious  excitement  had  subsided,  I  asked  him  what

impression this analytic situation had made on him. He replied that it was all

very interesting but it did not affect him very deeply—the tears had simply

“escaped”  him;  it  had  been  very  embarrassing.  An  explanation  of  the

necessity and fruitfulness of such excitement was to no avail. His resistance

increased perceptibly; his communications became superficial; his attitude,

on the other hand, grew more and more pronounced, i.e., more noble, more

composed, more reserved.

  Perhaps it was merely an insignificant coincidence that one day the term

“aristocrat” occurred to me for his behavior. I told him that he was playing

the role of an English lord and that the reasons for this could be traced backto his adolescence and childhood. The contemporary defensive function of

his “aristocratic manner” was also explained to him. He then produced the

most important element of his family story: as a child he had never believed

that he could be the son of the small insignificant Jewish merchant who was

his father; he must be, he thought, of English descent. As a small boy he had

heard that his grandmother had had an affair with a real English lord and he

thought of his mother as having English blood in her veins. In his dreams

about the future, the fantasy of some day going to England as an ambassador

played a leading role.

  Thus, the following elements were contained in his lordly bearing:

  1. The idea of not being related to his father, whom he held in contempt

(father hatred).

  2. The idea of being the son of a mother who had English blood in her

veins.

  3. The ego-ideal of going beyond the circumscribed milieu of his lower-

middle-class background.

  The exposure of these elements, which had been incorporated into his

attitude, was a considerable blow to his self-esteem. But it was still not clear

which drives were being warded off.

  As we probed consistently into his “lordly” behavior, we found that it was

closely related to a second character trait, a tendency to deride his fellow men

and  the malicious  joy  he  derived  from  seeing  them  come  to  grief.  The

analysis of this character trait offered considerable difficulty. He expressed

his contempt and derision in a grand manner, as from a throne. At the same

time, however, this served to gratify his especially intense sadistic impulses.

To be sure, he had already talked about the many sadistic fantasies he had

had as an adolescent. But he had merely talked about them. It wasn’t until we

began to ferret them out in their contemporary anchoring, in the tendency to

ridicule, that he began to experience them. The lordly quality in his behavior

was a protection against the excessive extension of his ridicule into sadisticactivity.  The  sadistic  fantasies  were  not  repressed;  they  were  gratified  in

ridiculing others and warded off in the aristocratic pose. Thus, his arrogant

nature was structured exactly as a symptom: it served as a defense against

and, at the same time, gratification of an instinctual drive. There can be no

doubt that he saved himself the repression of a certain amount of sadism

through this form of defense, i.e., by absorbing the sadism into the arrogance

of the character. Under other circumstances, it is likely that a strong phobia

would have developed from his mild fear of burglars.

  The fantasy of being an aristocrat originated when he was about four

years old. He fulfilled the demand of self-control somewhat later, out of fear

of the father. To this, on the basis of a contrary identification with the father,

was added an essential tendency toward the control of his aggression. While

the father was continually fighting and wrangling with the mother, the ideal

took shape in the young boy: “I’m not going to be like my father; I’m going

                              1
to be the exact opposite.” This corresponded to the fantasy: “If I were my

mother’s husband, I would treat her in an entirely different way. I would be

kind to her, I would not get angry because of her shortcomings.” Thus, this

contrary identification was part and parcel of the Oedipus complex, love of

the mother and hatred of the father.

  Dreaminess  and  self-control,  accompanied  by  lively  sadistic  fantasies,

comprised the boy’s character that corresponded to the aristocrat fantasy. In

puberty, he made an intense, homosexual object-choice of a teacher, which

ended  in  an  identification.  However,  this  teacher  was  the  lord  incarnate,

noble, composed, controlled, faultlessly attired. The identification began with

the imitation of the teacher’s dress; other imitations followed and, at about

the  age  of  fourteen,  the  character  as  we  witnessed  it  in  the  analysis  was

complete. The fantasy  of  being  an  aristocrat  had  been  translated  into  his

demeanor.

  There was also a special reason why the realization of the fantasy in his

demeanor took place precisely at this age. The patient had never consciouslymasturbated  during  puberty.  The  castration  anxiety,  expressed  in  diverse

hypochondriacal  fears,  was  rationalized:  “A  noble  man  doesn’t  do  such

things.”  In  short,  being  an  aristocrat  also  served  as  a  defense  against  the

demand for masturbation.

  As a lord, he felt himself superior to all people, with the right to hold

everybody in contempt. In the analysis, however, he soon had to give way to

the insight that his contempt was the surface compensation of a feeling of

inferiority, just as, indeed, his whole pose concealed a feeling of inferiority

stemming from the lower-middle-class milieu. However, on a deeper level,

the contempt was a substitute for homosexual relations. He was especially

contemptuous of those men who pleased him and he did not care at all about

the others (contempt = sadism = homosexual flirtation). Being an aristocrat

embraced the antithesis between sadism and homosexuality on the one hand

and noble self-control on the other.

  In the analysis, his lordly pose became more pronounced with every fresh

penetration into the unconscious. As time went on, however, these defense

reactions weakened in the same way that his nature in everyday life became

milder, without the basic character ever being lost.

  The analysis of his demeanor led directly to the discovery of the central

conflicts  of  his  childhood  and  adolescence.  In  this  way,  his  pathogenic

positions  were  attacked  from  two  sides:  (1)  his  associations,  dreams,  and

other  material  communications—with  little  affect  here—and  (2)  his

character, the aristocratic pose, where the affects of aggression were bound.


    2. OVERCOMING OF CHILDHOOD PHOBIA BY THE

            FORMATION OF CHARACTER ATTITUDES


  A considerable amount of genital anxiety was bound in the pose of being

a lord. The history of this binding revealed a childhood phobia about which

little was known. From the age of three to about the age of six, the patient

had suffered from an intense phobia of mice. In terms of its content, we aremerely  interested  in  the  fact  that  his  feminine  attitude  toward  the  father

constituted the central element of this phobia, i.e., a regressive reaction to the

castration anxiety. This was related to the typical masturbation anxiety. The

more the boy transformed the fantasy of being an aristocrat into a pose, the

weaker his phobia became. As he grew older, he was merely aware of a mild

apprehensiveness before going to bed. During the analytic working through

of the pose, the mouse phobia and the castration anxiety reappeared in an

affective form. Obviously, a part of the libido or anxiety of the childhood

phobia had been absorbed into a character attitude.

  We are of course familiar with the transformation of infantile demands

and  anxieties  into  character  traits.  A  special  case  of  this  kind  of

transformation is the replacement of a phobia by a definite kind of armoring

against  the  outer  world  and  against  anxiety,  an  armoring  dictated  by  the

structure of the instinct. In this case, the patient’s noble bearing bound the

infantile anxiety.

  Another typical case is the absorption of a childhood phobia or of even

simpler  manifestations  of  castration  anxiety  into  a  passive-feminine

character,  which  appears  externally,  e.g.,  as  exaggerated,  stereotyped

politeness.  The  following  case  is  an  additional  illustration  of  the

transformation of a phobia into a character attitude.

  Apart from his symptoms, a compulsive patient stood out because of his

complete affect-block. A kind of living machine, he was accessible to neither

pleasure nor unpleasure. In analysis, the affect-block was unmasked as an

armoring against excessive sadism. True, even as an adult he had sadistic

fantasies, but they were dull and feeble. A correspondingly intense castration

anxiety stood out as the motive of the armoring but manifested itself in no

other way. The analysis was able to trace the affect-block to the day of its

emergence.

  The patient had also suffered from the usual childhood phobia—in this

case,  horses  and  snakes.  Until  the  age  of  six,  anxiety  dreams  with pavornocturnus  appeared  almost  nightly.  He  had  very  frequent  dreams,

accompanied by the severest anxiety, that a horse bit off one of his fingers

(masturbation = anxiety = castration). One day he resolved that he would no

longer be afraid (we shall come back to this peculiar resolution) and the next

horse dream in which one of his fingers was bitten off was wholly free of

anxiety.

  At that same time, the affect-block developed; it replaced the phobia. It

wasn’t  until  the  post-pubertal  period  that  anxiety  dreams  occasionally

reappeared.

  Now let us return to his peculiar resolution not to be afraid any more. We

could not clear up completely its dynamic process. Suffice it to say here that

his life was held together almost exclusively by similar resolutions. He was

not able to manage anything without a special decision. His anal obstinacy

and the extremely strict command to control himself which he assumed from

his parents formed the basis of his resoluteness. The anal tenacity also formed

the energetic basis of the affect-block, which, among other things, constituted

a kind of universal Götz von Berlichingen attitude toward the outer world as

        2
a whole. It wasn’t until the patient had been under analysis for six months

that the following was ascertained: each time, before ringing the bell to my

apartment, he passed his hand over the fly of his pants three times and recited

the Götz quotation three times as a kind of talisman against the analysis. His

affect-block could not have been more strikingly expressed.

  Thus, his anal obstinacy and his reaction against sadism were the two

most  important  components  that  had  been  built  into  the  affect-block.  In

addition to his sadistic energy, his powerful childhood anxiety (stasis anxiety

plus castration anxiety) was consumed in this armoring. Only after we had

worked through this wall, an aggregate of the most diverse repressions and

reaction formations, did we encounter his intense genital incest desires.

  Whereas the emergence of a phobia is an indication that the ego was too

weak to master certain libidinal impulses, the emergence of a character traitor typical attitude in place of a phobia constitutes a strengthening of the ego

formation in the form of a chronic armoring against the id and the outer

world. A phobia corresponds to a cleavage of the personality; the formation

of a character trait, on the other hand, corresponds to a consolidation of the

personality. The latter is the synthesizing reaction of the ego to a conflict in

the personality which can no longer be endured.

  In spite of this discrepancy between phobia and the character formation

that  follows  upon  it,  the  basic  tendency  of  the  phobia  is  retained  in  the

character trait. The nobility pose of our “aristocrat,” the affect-block of our

compulsive character, the politeness of the passive-feminine character are of

course nothing other than attitudes of avoidance, in the same way as the

phobia that preceded them.

  Through the armoring, therefore, the ego receives a certain strengthening.

At the same time, however, and precisely as a result of this, the ego’s ability

to act and its freedom of movement are curtailed. And the more the armoring

impairs  the  capacity  for  sexual  experience,  the  more  closely  the  ego’s

structure approximates that of a neurotic, the greater the likelihood of its

                    3
future breakdown.

  In the event of a later neurotic illness, the old phobia breaks through once

again  inasmuch  as  its  earlier  absorption  into  the  character  proves  to  be

insufficient to master the dammed-up libidinal excitations and stasis anxiety.

Hence, we can distinguish the following phases in the typical neurotic illness:

  1. Infantile conflict between libido impulse and frustration

  2.  Resolution  of  this  conflict  through  repression  of  the  impulse

(strengthening of the ego)

  3. Breakthrough of the repression, i.e., phobia (weakening of the ego)

  4. Mastery of the phobia through the formation of a neurotic character

trait (strengthening of the ego)

  5. Pubertal conflict (or its quantitative equivalent): insufficiency of the

character armoring  6.  Reemergence  of  the  old  phobia  or  development  of  a  symptomatic

equivalent

  7. Fresh attempt on the part of the ego to master the phobia by absorption

of the anxiety into the character

  Among  the  adult  patients  who  come  to  us  for  analytic  treatment,  two

types  can  be  distinguished:  those  who  find  themselves  in  the  breakdown

phase  (phase  6),  in  which  the  old  neurosis,  in  the  form  of  a  symptom,

augments the neurotic reaction basis (renewed formation of phobia, etc.); and

those who are already in the reconstruction phase (phase 7), i.e., whose egos

have already successfully begun to incorporate the symptoms. For instance, a

circumscribed  and  agonizing  compulsive  sense  of  order  loses  some  of  its

acuteness;  the ego  as  a  whole  devises  certain  ceremonies  which  are  so

diffused in the daily routine that they betray their compulsive character only

to the trained observer. A self-cure is feigned in this way, but the spreading

and leveling off of the symptoms impair the ego’s ability to act no less than

the circumscribed symptom. Hence, the patient no longer wants to be cured

because of a painful symptom but because of a general disturbance in his

work,  lack  of  pleasure  in  his  life,  and  similar  complaints.  A  relentless

struggle takes place between the ego and its neurotic symptoms, between the

formation and incorporation of symptoms. However, every incorporation of a

symptom  accompanies  a character  change  of  the  ego.  These  later

incorporations of the symptoms into the ego are merely reflections of that

first  major  process  by  which  the  childhood  phobia  was  partially  or

completely transformed into a character structure.

  We are speaking here of phobia because it is the most interesting and, in

terms of libido economy, the most important manifestation of a disturbance

of personal unity. But the processes described above can take place in the

case  of  any  anxiety  appearing  in  early  childhood.  For  instance,  a  child’s

rational and fully justified fear of his brutal father can lead to chronic changes

that  take  the  place  of  the  fear;  for  example,  obstinacy  and  harshness  ofcharacter, etc.

  Because experiences of infantile anxiety and other conflict situations of

the Oedipus complex (phobia is merely one of the special cases singled out

here) may determine character structure, the childhood experience or psychic

situation is preserved, so to speak, in two different ways: in terms of content,

as unconscious ideas; and in terms of form, as character attitudes of the ego.

The following clinical example is a simple illustration of this.

  A narcissistic-masochistic hypochondriac was characterized by his loud,

excited, and agitated complaints about the strict way his father had treated

him.  The  material  he  produced  during  the  months  of  treatment  could  be

summed up in the sentence: “Just look at what I have suffered at the hands of

my father; he has ruined me, has made me incapable of living.” Even before

he came to me, his infantile father conflicts had been thoroughly worked

through by a colleague during a year and a half of analysis. Nevertheless,

there had been hardly any change in his behavior and in his symptoms.

  One day I was struck by an aspect of his behavior in the analysis. His

movements were indolent, there was a trace of tiredness around his mouth.

His speech, hardly describable, was monotonous, somber. Finally, I divined

the meaning of his intonation. He spoke in an agonized tone of voice, as if he

were dying. I found out that, in certain situations outside of the analysis, he

also  lapsed  into  this unconsciously  put-on  lethargy.  The  meaning  of  his

speaking in this way was also: “Look at what my father has made of me, how

he has tortured me. He has ruined me, made me incapable of living.” His

bearing was a severe reproach.

  My interpretation of his “moribund,” plaintive, incriminating manner of

speech had a surprising effect. It was as if, with the resolution of this last

formal point of attachment to the father, all the prior content interpretations

began to take effect. I concluded that, as long as his manner of speech had not

betrayed  its  unconscious  meaning,  a  large  portion  of  the  affects  of  his

relationship to his father was bound in it; hence, the uncovered contents ofthat  relationship,  despite  their  having  been  made  conscious,  were  not

sufficiently charged to be therapeutically effective.

  Evidently,  therefore,  one  and  the  same  element  of  the  unconscious,

infantile structure is preserved and made manifest in two ways: in what the

individual does, says, and thinks; and in the manner in which he acts. It is

interesting to note that the analysis of the “what,” despite the unity of content

and form, leaves the “how” untouched; that this “how” turns out to be the

hiding place of the same psychic contents that had already appeared in the

“what”; and finally that the analysis of the “how” is especially significant in

liberating the affects.                                    CHAPTER X





SOME CIRCUMSCRIBED CHARACTER FORMS




                  1. THE HYSTERICAL CHARACTER


In our investigation of the various character types, we proceeded from the

assumption  that  every  character  form,  in  terms  of  its  basic  function,

represents  an  armoring  against  the  stimuli  of  the  outer  world  and  the

repressed  inner  drives.  The  external  form  of  this  armoring,  however,  is

always historically determined. We also endeavored to cite a few conditions

which  determine  different  character  types.  Perhaps  the  most  important  of

these, apart from the character of the person most responsible for the child’s

upbringing, is the stage of development in which the instinctual apparatus

meets  its  most  crucial  frustration.  Definite  relations  must  always  exist

between the external appearance of the character, its inner mechanism, and

the specific history of its origin.

  The hysterical character, as complicated as the pathological symptoms

and reactions pertaining to it may often be, represents the simplest, most

transparent type of character armor. If one disregards the differences existing

within this type, if one condenses what is common to all of them, the most

conspicuous characteristic of both male and female examples of this type is

an  importunate sexual attitude.  This  is  combined  with  a  specific  kind  of

physical agility exhibiting a distinct sexual nuance, which explains the fact

that the connection between female hysteria and sexuality was recognized

very early. Disguised or undisguised coquetry in gait, look, or speech betrays,

especially  in  women,  the  hysterical  character  type.  In  the  case  of  men,besides softness and excessive politeness, a feminine facial expression and a

feminine bearing also appear. We gave a thorough account of such a case in

Chapter IV.

  These characteristics appear with more or less distinct anxiousness that is

manifested most strongly when the goal sought by the sexual behavior is

close at hand. At such a time, the hysterical character will always shrink back

or assume a passive, apprehensive attitude. There is a quantitative correlation

between hysterical coquetry and the passivity which follows it. In the sexual

experience, however, there is another variation: overt displays of excitation in

the  act  without  corresponding  gratification.  Under  analysis,  these  pseudo-

passionate displays turn out to be the expression of a severe anxiety, which is

overcome by activity.

  The facial expression and the gait of the hysterical character are never

severe and heavy, as they are in the compulsive character; never arrogant and

self-confident,  as  they  are  in  the  phallic-narcissistic  character.  The

movements of the archetype have a kind of lilting quality (not to be confused

with  elastic),  are  supple  and  sexually  provocative.  That  the  hysterical

character is easily excited can be inferred from the appearance as a whole.

The  appearance  of  the  compulsive  character,  on  the  other  hand,  suggests

restraint.

  Whereas  shyness  and  anxiousness  paired  with  coquetry  as  well  as

physical agility are conspicuous in the behavioral expressions of a hysterical

character,  the  additional  specific  hysterical  character  traits  are  concealed.

Among these we find fickleness of reactions, i.e., a tendency to change one’s

attitudes  unexpectedly  and  unintentionally;  a  strong  suggestibility,  which

never appears alone but is coupled with a strong tendency to reactions of

disappointment. A hysterical character, as opposed to a compulsive character,

can be easily persuaded of the most improbable things. By the same token he

will readily give up his beliefs when others, just as easily acquired, replace

them. Hence, an attitude of compliance is usually followed by its opposite,swift deprecation and groundless disparagement. The hysterical character’s

openness to suggestion accounts for his susceptibility to passive hypnosis on

the one hand and his propensity for fantastic ideas on the other hand. This is

related to the exceptional capacity for sexual attachment of a childish nature.

The  vivid  imagination  can  easily  lead  to  pseudologia;  that  is,  fantasized

experiences are reproduced and grasped as real experiences.

  While it is true that many hysterical characteristics are expressed in the

physical bearing, there is also a strong tendency to embody pyschic conflicts

in somatic symptoms. This is easily explained in terms of the libido structure.

    Specifically, the hysterical character is determined by a fixation in the

genital stage of childhood development, with its incestuous attachment. From

this fixation the hysterical character derives his strong genital aggression as

well as his anxiety. The genital incest ideas are of course repressed, but they

are in full possession of their cathexis; they have not, as in the case of the

compulsive  character,  been  replaced  by  pregenital  strivings.  Inasmuch  as

pregenital,  oral,  anal,  and  urethral  strivings  form  a  part  of  the  hysterical

character—as is always the case—they are embodiments of genitality or at

least allied with it. In the hysterical character, the mouth and the anus always

stand for the female genital organ. In other character types, e.g., melancholia,

these zones fulfill their original pregenital function. The hysterical character,

as  Ferenczi  put  it,  “genitalizes”  everything;  the  other  forms  of  neuroses

substitute pregenital mechanisms for genitality or, as opposed to hysteria,

allow genitalia to function as breast, mouth, or anus. Elsewhere I called this

the flooding of the genital with pregenital libido. As a result of the genital

anxiety which operates both as a genital fixation and as an inhibition of the

genital function, the hysterical character always suffers from a severe sexual

disturbance. At the same time he is plagued by an acute stasis of unabsorbed

genital libido. Hence, his sexual agility has to be as vehement as his tendency

to anxiety reactions. In contrast to the compulsive character, the hysterical

character is overladen with unabsorbed sexual tension.  This leads us to the nature of his armoring. It is far less compact and

stable  than  the  armoring  of  the  compulsive  character.  In  the  hysterical

character, the armoring constitutes, in the simplest possible way, an anxious

ego defense against the genital incest strivings. While it is certainly strange, it

cannot  be  denied  that,  in  archetypes  of  the  hysterical  character,  genital

sexuality places itself at the service of its own defense. The more anxiety-

ridden the attitude as a whole is, the more urgent the sexual manifestations

appear. Generally, the meaning of this function is as follows: the hysterical

character has exceptionally strong and ungratified genital impulses that are

inhibited by genital anxiety. Thus, he always feels himself at the mercy of

dangers which correspond to his infantile fears. The original genital striving

is used, as it were, to explore the source, magnitude, and proximity of the

danger.  For  instance,  if  a  hysterical  woman  displays  strong  sensuality,  it

would be wrong to assume that she is expressing genuine sexual willingness.

Quite the contrary: on the first attempt to take advantage of this apparent

willingness,  one  would  find  that,  in  cases  of  extreme  hysteria,  the  overt

expression  would  be  immediately  transformed  into  its  opposite,  that  the

sexual manifestations would be replaced by anxiety or defense in some other

form, including precipitate flight. Thus, the sexual displays in the hysterical

character are an attempt to find out whether dangers are present and where

they  might  be  coming  from.  This  is  also  clearly  demonstrated  in  the

transference  reaction  in  the  analysis.  The  hysterical  character  never

recognizes the meaning of his sexual behavior; he violently refuses to take

cognizance of it and is shocked by “such insinuations.” In short, one soon

sees that what stands out here as sexual striving is basically sexuality in the

service  of  defense.  Not  until  this  defense  has  been  unmasked  and  the

childhood  genital  anxiety  analytically  taken  apart  does  the  genital  object

striving emerge in its original function. As this occurs, the patient also loses

his exaggerated sexual agility. That other secondary impulses are expressed

in this sexual behavior, e.g., primitive narcissism or the desire to dominateand impress, is of little importance.

  Insofar as mechanisms other than genital mechanisms or their substitute

formations  are  found  in  the  hysterical  character,  they  do  not  belong

specifically  to  this  type.  For  example,  we  often  encounter  depressive

mechanisms. In these cases, the genital incestuous fixation is replaced by

regressions to oral mechanisms or by new formations in the course of the

process. The hysterical character’s strong inclination to regress, especially to

oral stages, can be accounted for by the sexual stasis in this zone as well as

by the fact that the mouth, in its role as a genital organ, attracts a great deal of

libido to itself in the “displacement from below upwards.” In this process,

melancholia-like reactions, which belong to the original oral fixation, are also

activated. Thus, the hysterical character presents himself in a pure form when

he  play-acts,  and  is  nervous  and  vivacious.  When  he  is  depressive,

introverted, autistic, however, he betrays mechanisms other than those which

specifically belong to him. Yet one can speak of hysterical depression as

opposed to melancholic depression. The difference lies in the degree to which

genital libido and object relationship are combined with oral attitudes. At the

one  extreme,  we  have  unadulterated  melancholia;  at  the  other,  where

genitality predominates, we have unadulterated hysteria.

  One final characteristic must be stressed: the hysterical character exhibits

little interest in sublimations and intellectual accomplishments, and reaction

formations are much fewer than in other forms of neurotic characters. This,

too, ties in with the fact that, in the hysterical character, the libido does not

advance toward sexual gratification, which could reduce the hypersexuality,

nor  is  sexual  energy  adequately  bound.  Rather,  this  energy  is  partially

discharged  in  somatic  innervations  or  partially  transformed  into  fear  or

anxiety.  From  these  libido  mechanisms  of  the  hysterical  character,  some

people  like  to  deduce  the  alleged  antithesis  between  sexuality  and  social

accomplishments. But they overlook the fact that the extreme disturbance of

the  ability  to  sublimate  is  the  direct  result  of  the  sexual  inhibition  withunattached genital libido and that social accomplishments and interests are

possible only after the capacity for gratification has been realized.

  In terms of the prophylaxis of neurosis and sexual economy, it becomes

meaningful to ask why the hysterical character cannot somehow transform

his genital stasis, in the same way that other character types transform their

pregenital strivings. The hysterical character uses his genital libido neither for

reaction  formations  nor  for  sublimations.  Indeed,  not  even  the  character

armoring  is  solidly  developed.  If  these  facts  are  considered  together  with

other characteristics of the genital libido, we arrive at the conclusion that

fully developed genital excitations are ill suited for purposes other than direct

gratification.  Their  inhibition  severely  hinders  the  sublimation  of  other

libidinal strivings because it imbues them with too much energy. Although

the specific quality of genitality might be the reason for this process, the

more likely explanation is the quantity of the libido used in the excitation of

the genital zone. The genital apparatus, as opposed to all the other partial

drives,  is  physiologically  the  most  strongly  equipped  because  it  has  the

capacity for orgastic discharge; and in terms of libido economy, it is the most

vital. Thus, we can assume that its impulses have a far greater similarity with

hunger, as far as inflexibility and tenacity are concerned, than they have with

impulses from other erogenous zones. This may well be a powerful blow to

certain ethical concepts—but that cannot be helped. Indeed, the resistance to

these  findings  can  also  be  explained:  their  recognition  would  have

revolutionary consequences.


                  2. THE COMPULSIVE CHARACTER


  If  the  character’s  most  general  function  is  to  ward  off  stimuli  and  to

secure psychic balance, this should not be difficult to prove in the compulsive

character.  For  this  type  is  one  of  the  most  thoroughly  studied  psychic

formations. There are fluid transitions from the known compulsive symptoms

to the character’s mode of behavior. Even if the neurotic compulsive sense oforder is not present, a pedantic sense of order is typical of the compulsive

character.  In  both  big  and  small  things,  he  lives  his  life  according  to  a

preconceived, irrevocable pattern. A change in the prescribed order causes at

the very least an unpleasant sensation. In cases which can already be regarded

as neurotic, a change arouses anxiety. If this trait constitutes an improvement

of  one’s  capacity  for  work  because  it  is  combined  with  thoroughness,  it

entails an extreme limitation of the capacity for work because it does not

allow any spontaneity in one’s reaction. Advantageous to an official, this trait

will prove to be detrimental to productive work, to the play of new ideas.

Hence, compulsive characters are seldom found among great statesmen. They

are  more  likely  to  be  encountered  among  scientists,  whose  work  is  not

incompatible with such a trait even though it wholly precludes speculation

and will stand in the way of fundamentally new discoveries. This is related to

another  character  trait,  the  ever-present  penchant  for circumstantial,

ruminative thinking. There is a marked inability to focus attention on what is

rationally important about an object and to disregard its superficial aspects.

Attention  is  evenly  distributed;  questions  of  secondary  importance  are

accorded  the  same  thoroughness  as  those  at  the  center  of  professional

interests. The more pathological and rigid this trait is, the more attention is

concentrated  on  things  of  secondary  importance  and  the  rationally  more

important  matters  are  sidetracked.  This  is  the  result  of  a  well-understood

process,  the  displacement  of  unconscious  cathexes,  the  replacement  of

unconscious ideas which have become important, by irrelevant, secondary

matters. This is part of the larger process of progressive repression directed

against repressed ideas. Usually, these ideas, childish musings on forbidden

things,  are  not  allowed  to  penetrate  to  the  real  issue.  This  thinking  and

musing  also  move  along  prescribed  paths,  in  accordance  with  definite,

historically determined schemata, and considerably obstruct the flexibility of

one’s thinking. In some cases, an above-average capacity for abstract, logical

thinking  compensates  for  this  rigidity.  The  critical  capacities—within  theframework of logic—are better developed than the creative capacities.

  Frugality, often pushed to the point of parsimony, is a character trait in all

compulsive characters and is intimately related to the others we have named.

Pedantry, circumstantiality, tendency to compulsive rumination, and frugality

are all derived from a single instinctual source: anal eroticism. For the most

part, they represent the direct derivatives of reaction formations against the

childhood tendencies prevalent during the period of toilet training. Insofar as

these reaction formations have not been wholly successful, traits having a

nature completely opposite to the ones already discussed exist and constitute

an inherent part of the compulsive character. In more concrete terms, they

constitute  breakthroughs  of  the  original  tendencies.  Then  we  have

manifestations of extreme sloppiness, inability to husband money, thorough

thinking only within circumscribed limits. If one adds the strong passion for

collecting  things,  then  the  ensemble  of  the  anal-erotic  derivatives  in  the

character is complete. Whereas we can easily grasp the qualitative connection

between  these  traits  and  the  interest  in  the  functions  of  evacuation,  the

connection between compulsive rumination and anal eroticism is not obvious.

While  we  always  find  ruminations  about  where  babies  come  from,  the

transformation of the interest in defecation to a definite kind of thinking,

whose existence is unquestioned, appears to be subject to unknown laws. The

investigations of Abraham, Jones, Ophuijsen, and others built upon Freud’s

first work on this subject offer the most complete orientation in this area.

  We will briefly name a few other character traits which derive not from

the anal but from the sadistic impulses pertaining specifically to this stage.

Compulsive characters always exhibit a marked proclivity for reactions of

pity and guilt feelings. This of course is not a refutation of the fact that their

other traits are not exactly pleasant for their fellow man. In their exaggerated

sense of order, pedantry, etc., their hostility and aggression often extort a

direct gratification. In keeping with the compulsive character’s fixation on

the anal-sadistic stage of libido development, we find in these traits all thereaction  formations  against  the  original  contrary  tendencies.  We  must

emphasize,  however,  that  we  are  justified  in  speaking  of  a  compulsive

character only when the full ensemble of these traits is present—not when

someone is merely pedantic and does not exhibit any of the other traits of the

compulsive character. Thus, it would be incorrect to speak of a compulsive

neurosis when a hysterical character is orderly or ruminative.

  Whereas the character traits that we have named so far are manifestations

of direct transformations of certain partial drives, there are other typical traits

which  demonstrate  a  more  complicated  structure  and  are  the  results  of  a

series  of  interacting  forces.  Among  these  we  have indecision, doubt, and

distrust.  In  external  appearance,  the  compulsive  character  exhibits  strong

reserve and self-possession; he is just as ill disposed toward affects as he is

acutely inaccessible to them. He is usually even-tempered, lukewarm in his

displays  of  both  love  and  hate.  In  some  cases,  this  can  develop  into  a

complete affect-block. These latter traits are already a matter of form rather

than content and thus lead us to our actual theme, the dynamics and economy

of the character.

  The reserve and methodicalness in life and thought that go together with

indecisiveness indeed have a definite relation to it and constitute the point of

departure for our analysis of the form of the character. They cannot, as in the

case of character traits imbued with a specific content, be derived directly

from  individual  drives.  Rather,  these  traits  give  the  person  his  distinctive

quality.  In  analysis,  they  constitute  the  central  element  of  the  character

resistance as well as the tendency to avoid the termination of a situation,

including the analytic treatment. We learn from clinical experience that the

traits of doubt, distrust, etc., operate as a resistance in the analysis and cannot

be eliminated until the pronounced affect-block has been broken through.

Hence, this deserves our special attention. We shall limit our discussion to

those phenomena which are expressed as form, especially in view of the fact

that the other traits are well known. This investigation is new territory.  To begin with, we have to refresh our memory regarding what is known

about the libido development of the compulsive character. Historically, we

have a central fixation on the anal-sadistic stage, i.e., in the second or third

year of life. Toilet training, because of the mother’s own particular character

traits, is carried out too soon. This leads to powerful reaction formations, e.g.,

extreme self-control, even at an early age. With the rigid toilet training, a

powerful  anal  obstinacy  develops  and  mobilizes  the  sadistic  impulses  to

strengthen  itself.  In  the  typical  compulsion  neurosis,  the  development

continues to the phallic phase, i.e., genitality is activated. However, partially

because  of  the  person’s  previously  developed  inhibitions  and  partially

because of the parents’ anti-sexual attitude, it is soon relinquished. Insofar as

genitality is developed, it is dependent upon the prior development of the

anality and sadism in the form of phallic-sadistic aggression. Needless to say,

a male child will sacrifice his genital impulses to the castration anxiety—i.e.,

will repress them—that much more readily, the more aggressive his acquired

sexual constitution and the more extensive the character inhibitions and guilt

feelings from earlier periods which impinge upon the new phase. Hence, in

the compulsion neurosis the repression of the genitality is typically followed

by a withdrawal to the immediately preceding stage of feces interest and the

aggression  of  this  stage.  From  now  on,  i.e.,  during  the  so-called  latency

      1
period—which is especially pronounced in the compulsive character—the

anal and sadistic reaction formations usually grow more intense and mold the

character into a definite form.

  When  such  a  child  reaches  puberty,  when  he  is  exposed  to  the  most

powerful  stresses  of  physical  maturation,  he  will,  if  the  armoring  of  his

character is strong, have to repeat briefly the old process, without attaining

the fulfillment of the demands of sexual maturity. Usually, in the beginning,

there are violent fits of sadism against women (beating and rape fantasies,

etc.)  which  are  accompanied  by  feelings  of  affective  weakness  and

inferiority. These feelings cause the youth to make narcissistic compensationsin  the  form  of  strongly  emphasized  ethical  and  aesthetic  strivings.  The

fixations on the anal and sadistic position are strengthened or regressively

reactivated following a brief, usually unsuccessful advance toward genital

activity;  this  causes  further  elaborations  of  the  corresponding  reaction

formations. As a result of these in-depth processes, the pubertal and post-

pubertal period of the compulsive character proceeds in a typical way, and we

are therefore able to draw definite a posteriori conclusions about this period.

There  is,  first  of  all,  a  progressive  stunting  of  the  emotional  capacity,  a

stunting  which  sometimes  impresses  the  average  person  as  a  mark  of

especially good social “adjustment.” This may also appear to be the case to

the person himself, as, indeed, in a certain sense it is. Simultaneously with the

affect-block, however, there is a feeling of inner desolation and an intense

desire “to begin a new life,” which is usually attempted with the most absurd

means. One such patient constructed a complicated system for the purpose of

dealing with his small and large tasks. He had to master them so he could

begin a new life on a certain day; he even went so far as to calculate the exact

second at which his new life would begin to take shape. Since he was never

able to fulfill the prescribed conditions, he always had to begin anew.

  As a prototype of disturbances in the compulsive character manifested as

a “form” of the character rather than as a “content” of a character trait, we

would do well to investigate his affect-block. Although it impresses us as a

helpless attitude on the part of the ego, this is not at all the case. On the

contrary, in almost no other character formation does analysis show such

intense and avid defense work. What is warded off, and how is it done? The

compulsive character’s typical means of repression is to separate the affects

from  the  ideas,  thus  very  often  allowing  the  latter  to  emerge  into

consciousness without interference. One such patient dreamed and thought

about incest with his mother and even about violent rapes, yet he remained

unaffected. Genital and sadistic excitation was totally absent. If such patients

are  analyzed  without  at  the  same  time  concentrating  on  the  affect-block,additional  unconscious  material  is  obtained—occasionally  even  a  weak

excitation—but never the affects which would correspond to the ideas. What

has  become  of  these?  When  symptoms  exist,  the  affects  are  partially

absorbed in them; when there are no symptoms, they are mainly absorbed in

the  affect-block  itself.  The  proof  of  this  assertion  is  immediately  evident

when one succeeds in breaking through the block by means of consistent

isolation and interpretation. When this has been accomplished, the sought-

after affects reappear spontaneously, at first usually in the form of anxiety.

  It is noteworthy that at first only aggressive impulses are set free; the

genital impulses appear much later. Thus, we can say that bound aggressive

energy makes up the outer layer of the character armor. By what is it bound?

The aggression is bound with the help of anal-erotic energies. The affect-

block represents one enormous spasm of the ego, which makes use of somatic

spastic conditions. All the muscles of the body, but especially those of the

pelvic floor and pelvis, the muscles of the shoulders, and those of the face (cf.

the “hard,” almost mask-like physiognomy of compulsive characters), are in

                                  2
a state of chronic hypertonia. This ties in with the physical awkwardness so

often  encountered  in  the  compulsive  character.  Hence,  the  ego,  to  put  it

graphically, has taken anal holding-back tendencies from the repressed layers

and put them to use in its own interest as a means of warding off sadistic

impulses.  Whereas  anality  and  aggression  are  parallel  forces  in  the

unconscious, anality, i.e., holding back, operates against aggression (and vice

versa) in the function of defense. Thus, unless we break down the affect-

block, we shall not get at the anal energies either. We are reminded of our

affect-blocked patient who, for months on end, passed his hand over the fly

of his pants three times before each session while reciting the Götz quotation

three times. It was as if he wanted to say: “I would so much like to kill you,

but I have to control myself—so you know what you can do…”

  The passive-feminine character also wards off aggression with the help of

anal tendencies, but in a way different from the compulsive character. In theformer, anality operates in the original direction as an object-libido striving;

in the latter, it is manifested in the form of anal holding back, i.e., already as

a reaction formation. In the purely developed compulsive character, therefore,

passive  homosexuality  (which  of  course  belongs  to  the  category  of  the

hysterical character) is not so close to the surface and relatively unrepressed

as it is in the passive-feminine character.

  How is it possible that anal holding back in the character can have such

far-reaching ramifications, causing those who suffer from it to become living

machines?  This  is  not  solely  because  of  the  anal  reaction  formation.  The

sadism which is bound in the affect-block is not only its object but also the

means it employs to ward off anality. Thus, interests in anal functions are

also warded off with the help of aggressive energy. Every affective, lively

expression arouses in the unconscious the old excitations that had never been

resolved. The result is a constant anxiety that a misfortune could take place,

that  something  might  preclude  the  reestablishment  of  self-possession.  We

observe that this is the point of departure for the unraveling of the whole

childhood conflict between urge to evacuate and the need to hold back, out of

fear of punishment. And we learn from clinical experience that, if the analysis

of the affect-block is carried out correctly, the breakthrough into the central

conflict is a success and the corresponding cathexes are restored to the old

positions. This is equivalent to the dissolving of the armor.

  By way of the affect-block, we also arrive at the affective anchoring of

the  first  identifications  and  the  superego:  the  demand  to  exercise  control,

originally imposed by the outer world upon a rebelling ego, is complied with.

But  this  compliance  does  not  stop  there;  it  becomes  a  chronic,  inflexible

mode of reaction. And this can be accomplished only with the help of the

repressed energies of the id.

  Further  probing  into  the  dynamics  of  the  affect-block  shows  that  two

kinds of sadistic impulses are consumed in it. Through systematic resistance

analysis, they can be extracted in fairly pure, separate forms. Usually, analsadism,  whose  goal  is  beating,  stomping,  crushing,  etc.,  is  liberated  first.

After it has been worked through and the anal fixations have been loosened,

phallic-sadistic impulses move more and more into the foreground (sticking,

piercing, etc.). That is, the regression is eliminated; the road to the cathexis of

the phallic position is paved. At this point usually, affective castration anxiety

finally becomes manifest and the analysis of the genital repressions begins. In

compulsive characters, the old childhood phobia often reappears in this stage.

  Hence, we find two layers of repressions in the compulsive character: the

outer layer consists of sadistic and anal impulses, while the deeper layer is

made up of phallic impulses. This corresponds to the inversion which takes

place in the regression process: those impulses which receive a new cathexis

lie closest to the surface; whereas object-libidinal genital strivings are deeply

repressed, “covered over” by layers of pregenital positions. These structural

relations  reveal  that  it  would  be  a  serious  technical  error,  through

interpretations,  to  make  the  patient  affectively  aware  of  the  weak

manifestations of genital-object strivings before the superimpositions have

been worked through. Everything would be received coldly, warded off with

doubt and distrust.

  We have in this connection to pause a moment to consider ambivalence

and doubt. They constitute the severest obstructions to analysis if we do not

succeed, from the outset, in disentangling the various strivings that comprise

ambivalent  emotions.  Ambivalence  reflects  a  conflict  between  two

simultaneously present potentials, one to love and the other to hate the same

person;  at  a  deeper  layer  it  is  an  inhibition  of  the  libidinal  as  well  as

aggressive strivings by the existing fear of punishment. If all manifestations

are  indiscriminately  and  simultaneously  analyzed,  the  ambivalence  will

hardly be mastered. And this could easily lead one to assume that man is

biologically, i.e., immutably, ambivalent. If, on the other hand, we proceed in

keeping with the structural and dynamic relations, hate will soon move into

the foreground and can be resolved with relative ease through analysis, thuspaving the way to the extrication of the libidinal strivings. The best procedure

to effect this separation of the ambivalent strivings is to analyze thoroughly

the contemporary distrust, right at the outset of the analysis.

  In this discussion we have had to restrict ourselves to the essential traits

of the compulsive character, leaving many secondary features untouched. It is

enough if we have succeeded in explaining the basic makeup of the character.


        3. THE PHALLIC-NARCISSISTIC CHARACTER


  The designation of the “phallic-narcissistic character” resulted from the

necessity  of  defining  character  forms  which  stand  between  those  of  the

compulsion neurosis and those of hysteria. They exhibit circumscribed traits

which differ sharply, in both the way they originate and the way they become

manifest,  from  those  of  the  other  two  forms,  so  that  the  distinction  is

justified. The term “phallic-narcissistic character,” sometimes less accurately

referred  to  as  “genital-narcissistic  character,”  has  been  incorporated  into

psychoanalytic  terminology  in  the  course  of  the  past  few  years.  The

description of this type was first presented in a previously unpublished paper

read at the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society in October 1926.

  The phallic-narcissistic character differs even in external appearance from

the compulsive and the hysterical character. The compulsive is predominantly

inhibited,  reserved,  depressive;  the  hysteric  is  nervous,  agile,  fear-ridden,

erratic. The typical phallic-narcissistic character, on the other hand, is self-

assured,  sometimes  arrogant,  elastic,  energetic,  often  impressive  in  his

bearing. The more neurotic the inner mechanism is, the more obtrusive these

modes of behavior are and the more blatantly they are paraded about. In

terms  of  physique,  the  phallic-narcissistic  character  is  predominantly  an

athletic type, hardly ever an asthenic type and only in isolated cases a pyknic

type (as defined by Kretschmer). His facial features usually exhibit hard and

sharp masculine lines. Very often, however, despite his athletic habitus, we

find feminine, girlish features (the so-called baby face). Everyday behavior isnever cringing, as in the case of the passive-feminine character; it is usually

arrogant,  either  coldly  reserved  or  contemptuously  aggressive.  And

sometimes his behavior is “bristly,” as a representative of this type once put

it. The narcissistic element, as opposed to the object-libidinal element, stands

out in the attitude toward the object, including the love object, and is always

infused with more or less concealed sadistic characteristics.

  In everyday life, the phallic-narcissistic character will usually anticipate

any  impending  attack  with  an  attack  of  his  own.  The  aggression  in  his

character is expressed less in what he does and says than in the way he acts.

Particularly, he is felt to be totally aggressive and provocative by those who

are not in control of their own aggression. The most pronounced types tend to

achieve leading positions in life and are ill suited to subordinate positions

among the rank and file. When such is the case, as in the army or similar

hierarchal  organizations,  they  compensate  for  the  necessity  of  having  to

subordinate themselves by dominating those beneath them. If their vanity is

offended,  they  react  with  cold  disdain,  marked  ill-humor,  or  downright

aggression. Their narcissism, as opposed to that of other character types, is

expressed not in an infantile but in a blatantly self-confident way, with a

flagrant display of superiority and dignity, in spite of the fact that the basis of

their nature is no less infantile than that of the other types. A comparison of

their structure with the structure, for example, of a compulsive character,

yields the clearest insights into the difference between pregenital and phallic-

based  narcissism.  Notwithstanding  their  overwhelming  concern  for

themselves, they sometimes form strong relationships to people and things of

the  world.  In  this  respect,  they  show  a  close  resemblance  to  the  genital

character. They differ from the latter, however, in that their actions show a far

deeper and broader tendency to be influenced by irrational motives. This type

is  encountered  most  frequently  among  athletes,  pilots,  military  men,  and

engineers. Aggressive courage is one of the most outstanding traits of their

character, just as temporizing caution characterizes the compulsive characterand the avoidance of dangerous situations characterizes the passive-feminine

character.  This  courage  and  pugnacity  of  the  phallic-narcissistic  character

have, as opposed to the genital character, a compensatory function and also

serve to ward off contrary impulses. This is of no special importance as far as

their respective achievements are concerned.

  The  absence  of  reaction  formations  against  his  openly  aggressive  and

sadistic  behavior  distinguishes  the  phallic-narcissistic  character  from  the

compulsive  character.  We  shall  have  to  demonstrate  that  this  aggressive

behavior itself fulfills a function of defense. Because of the free aggression in

the  relatively  unneurotic  representatives  of  this  type,  social  activities  are

strong, impulsive, energetic, to the point, and usually productive. The more

neurotic the character is, the more extravagant and one-sided the activities

appear—although they are not necessarily that extravagant and one-sided in

actual fact. Between these actions and the creation of paranoic systems lie the

many variations of this character type. The behavior of the phallic-narcissistic

character differs from that of the compulsive character in its demonstration of

greater boldness and less thoroughness with respect to details.

  In  phallic-narcissistic  men,  erective  potency,  as  opposed  to  orgastic

potency, is very well developed. Relationships with women are disturbed by

the  typical  derogatory  attitude  toward  the  female  sex.  Nonetheless,  the

representatives of this character type are looked upon as eminently desirable

sexual objects because they reveal all the marks of obvious masculinity in

their appearance. Though not a rarity, the phallic-narcissistic character among

women is far less frequently found. The neurotic forms are characterized by

active homosexuality and clitoral excitability. The genitally healthier forms

are characterized by enormous self-confidence that is based on physical vigor

or beauty.

  Almost all forms of active male and female homosexuality, most cases of

so-called moral insanity, paranoia, and the related forms of schizophrenia,

and, moreover, many cases of erythrophobia and manifestly sadistic maleperverts, belong to the phallic-narcissistic character type. Productive women

very often fall under this category.

  Now let us turn our attention to the structure and genesis of this character.

First  of  all,  we  have  to  distinguish  those  impulses  which  attain  direct

gratification in the phallic-narcissistic behavior from those which form the

narcissistic defense apparatus, though the two are intertwined. One typical

feature brought out through analysis is an identification between the ego as a

whole and the phallus; in the case of phallic-narcissistic women, there is a

very strong fantasy of having a penis. This ego, moreover, is openly vaunted.

In erythrophobia, this impulse is repressed and breaks through in the form of

an  intensely  neurotic  feeling  of  shame  and  blushing.  At  the  basis  of  and

common to these cases is a fixation on that phase of childhood development

in which the anal-sadistic position has just been left, while the genital object-

libidinal position has not been fully attained, and is, therefore, governed by

the proud, self-confident concentration on one’s own penis. This explanation

does  not  tell  the  whole  story.  The  phallic-narcissistic  character  is

characterized not only by this phallic pride but more so by the motives which

compel him to become arrested at this stage of development.

  Along with pride in the real or, as the case may be, fantasized phallus,

there is a strong phallic aggression. Unconsciously, the penis, in the case of

the  male  of  this  type,  serves  less  as  an  instrument  of  love  than  as  an

instrument of aggression, wreaking revenge upon the woman. This accounts

for the strong erective-potency characteristic of this type, but also for the

relative incapacity for orgastic experience. In the childhood histories of the

phallic-narcissistic  character,  the  most  severe  disappointments  in  love  are

found  with  surprising  regularity,  disappointments  precisely  in  the

heterosexual objects, i.e., in the mother in the case of boys and in the father in

the case of girls. And, in fact, these disappointments are experienced at the

height of the striving to win the object by phallic exhibition. In the case of the

male representatives of this type, the mother is very often the stricter parent,or the father died at an early age or was not married to the mother and was

never present.

  The  inhibition  of  the  further  development  to  genital  object-love  in

childhood  because  of  a  severe  frustration  of  genital  and  exhibitionistic

activities  at  the height  of  their  development,  typically  by  that  parent  or

guardian  on  whom  the  genital  interests  had  begun  to  focus,  results  in  an

identification with the genitally desired parent or guardian on a genital level.

Boys, for example, relinquish and introject the female object and shift their

interests to the father (active homosexuality, because phallic). The mother is

retained as a desired object but only with narcissistic attitudes and sadistic

impulses of revenge. Again and again such men seek unconsciously to prove

to women how potent they are. At the same time, however, the sexual act

constitutes a piercing or destroying—closer to the surface, a degrading—of

the  woman.  In  phallic-narcissistic  women,  genital  revenge  upon  the  man

(castration) during the sexual act and the attempt to make him or have him

appear impotent becomes, in an analogous way, the leading tendency. This is

certainly not at variance with the sexual attraction exercised by these strongly

erotic characters on the opposite sex. Hence, we often meet with a neurotic-

polygamous  inability  to  stick  to  one’s  partner,  the  active  inducing  of

disappointments, and passive flight from the possibility of being deserted. In

other  cases,  where  narcissistic  sensitivity  disturbs  the  mechanism  of

compensation, we find a weak potency, which the individual will not admit.

The  more  disturbed  the  potency  is,  the  more  unstable  the  general  mood

usually is. In such cases, there are sudden vacillations from moods of manly

self-confidence to moods of deep depression. Capacity for work is likewise

severely disturbed.

  The phallic-exhibitionistic and sadistic attitude serves simultaneously as a

defense against diametrically opposite tendencies. The compulsive character,

following  genital  frustration,  regresses  to  the  earlier  stage  of  anality  and

develops reaction formations here. The phallic-narcissistic character remainsat the phallic stage—indeed, he exaggerates its manifestations; but he does

this with the intent of protecting himself against a regression to the passive

and anal stages. In the course of the analysis of such characters, we meet

with more and more intense and concentrated, while at the same time rigidly

warded off, anal and passive tendencies. However, these tendencies do not

directly  constitute  the  character.  Rather,  it  is  mainly  determined  by  the

defense  against  these  tendencies  in  the  form  of  phallic  sadism  and

exhibitionism, a defense proceeding from an ego that has become phallic-

narcissistic. There is a marked difference here between the passive-feminine

and  the  phallic-narcissistic  character.  Whereas  the  former  wards  off  his

aggression  and  his  genital  impulses  with  the  help  of  anal  and  passive

surrender, the latter wards off his anal and passive-homosexual tendencies

with the help of phallic aggression. We often hear analysts describe such

characters as anal and passive homosexual. However, just as the passive-

feminine character cannot be designated as phallic-sadistic because he wards

off these impulses, the phallic-narcissistic character cannot be described as

anal-passive because he successfully subdues these impulses in himself. The

character is determined not by what it wards off but by the way in which it

does it and by the instinctual forces which the ego uses for this purpose.

  In cases of moral insanity, active homosexuality, and phallic sadism, as

well as in sublimated forms of these types, e.g., professional athletes, this

defense  succeeds  well;  the  warded-off  tendencies  of  passive  and  anal

homosexuality  are  merely  expressed  in  certain  exaggerations.  In  cases  of

paranoia, on the other hand, the warded-off tendencies break through in the

form of delusions. Erythrophobia is closely related to the paranoic form of

this character; the representation of pathological blushing is often found in

the  anamnesis  of  paranoid  schizophrenia.  A  patient  suffering  from

erythrophobia falls victim to a symptomatic breakthrough of the warded-off

passive  and  anal  homosexuality  inasmuch  as  he  gives  up  masturbation

because  of  acute  castration  anxiety.  The  sexual  stasis  which  builds  upweakens  the  defense  function  of  the  ego  and  affects  vasomotor  activity.

Active homosexuality, phallic sadism, and moral insanity, on the other hand,

have a strong ego defense, provided there is effective libido gratification. If,

for one reason or another, this gratification is interrupted for any length of

time, the passive and anal tendency also breaks through in these cases, either

symptomatically or openly.

  Among the phallic-narcissistic-sadistic characters, one often finds addicts,

especially alcoholics. Not only warded-off homosexuality lies at the root of

these addictions, but also another specific trait of this character type, likewise

the result of phallic frustration. Let us take the case of the male. Along with

the mother’s frustration of phallic exhibition and masturbation, there is an

identification  with  her.  This  has  a  provocative  effect  upon  the  recently

relinquished  anal  position  and,  consequently,  upon  the  passive-feminine

behavior.  This  is  immediately  offset  by  an  accentuation  of  the  phallic-

exhibitionistic and aggressive, i.e., masculine, impulses. However, when the

identification with the woman takes place at the phallic stage, the woman is

fantasized as having a penis and one’s own penis becomes associated with

          3
the breast. We therefore find a tendency toward passive and active fellatio in

the sexually active forms of this character type, in addition to a maternal

attitude toward younger men in the case of the male, and to younger and

feminine women in the case of the female. In alcoholism, there is also a

regression to the oral position. Accordingly, the typical traits of the phallic-

narcissistic character are effaced in the alcoholic.

  In the phallic-narcissistic character, the transitions between the healthy,

object-libidinal form on the one hand and the acutely pathological, pregenital

forms of addiction and chronic depression on the other hand are far more

numerous  and  diverse  than  they  are  in  other  character  types.  In

psychopathology, much is said about the affinity between the genius and the

criminal. However, the type they have in mind is a product neither of the

compulsive nor of the hysterical nor of the masochistic character; he derivespredominantly  from  the  phallic-narcissistic  character.  Most  of  the  sex

murderers of recent years belong to this character type, e.g., Haarmann and

Kürten. Because of severe childhood disappointments in love, these men later

exercised phallic-sadistic revenge on the sexual object. Landru as well as

Napoleon and Mussolini belong to the phallic-narcissistic character type. The

combination  of  phallic  narcissism  and  phallic  sadism  accompanied  by

compensation  of  passive-  and  anal-homosexual  impulses  produces  those

psychic  constitutions  most  strongly  charged  with  energy.  Whether  such  a

type  will  turn  his  energy  to  active  endeavors  or  crime  on  a  large  scale

depends, first and foremost, upon the possibilities which the social climate

and situation provide for this character to employ his energies in a sublimated

form.

  Next in importance is the extent of genital gratification. It determines the

amount  of  surplus  energy  which  the  destructive  impulses  receive  and,

therefore, how urgent the need for revenge becomes and what pathogenic

forms it assumes. In contrasting the social and libido-economic conditions,

we do not want to obscure the fact that the inhibition of gratification is also

dependent upon socio-familial factors. In terms of their constitutions, these

character  forms  probably  produce  an  above-average  amount  of  libidinal

energy, thus making it possible for the aggression to become that much more

intense.

  The analytic treatment of phallic-narcissistic characters is one of the most

gratifying  tasks.  Since,  in  these  patients,  the  phallic  stage  has  been  fully

achieved and the aggression is relatively free, it is easier to establish genital

and social potency, once the initial difficulties have been mastered, than it is

in patients of other character forms. The analysis is always promising if the

analyst  succeeds  in  unmasking  the  phallic-narcissistic  attitudes  as  the

warding off of passive-feminine impulses and in eliminating the unconscious

attitude of revenge toward the opposite sex. If this fails, the patients remain

narcissistically inaccessible. Their character resistance consists in aggressivedeprecation of the treatment and of the analyst in a more or less disguised

form, in narcissistic usurpation of the interpretation work, in the rejection and

warding  off  of  every  anxious  and  passive  impulse  and,  above  all,  of  the

positive  transference.  The  reactivation  of  phallic  anxiety  succeeds  only

through the energetic and consistent unmasking of the reactive narcissistic

mechanism.  The  indications  of  passivity  and  anal-homosexual  tendencies

should  not  be  immediately  pursued  in  depth;  otherwise  the  narcissistic

defense will usually build up to a point of complete inaccessibility.                                  CHAPTER XI





            THE MASOCHISTIC CHARACTER




NOTE:  “The  Masochistic  Character”  first  appeared  in  the Internationalen

Zeitschrift  für  Psychoanalyse,  XVIII  (1932–33).  It  represents  Wilhelm

Reich’s clinical break with Freud’s theory of the death instinct. For the first

time in the history of sexual pathology, it was proven on the basis of clinical

investigations that:

  1) The phenomena used to substantiate the hypothesis of the theory of the

death instinct can be traced back to a specific form of orgasm anxiety.

  2)  Masochism  is  not  a  biologically  determined  drive;  rather,  it  is  a

secondary drive in the sex-economic sense, i.e., the result of a repression of

natural sexual mechanisms.

  3) There is no biological striving for unpleasure; hence, there is no death

instinct.

  In  1933,  this  paper  was  incorporated  into  Wilhelm  Reich’s Character

Analysis.

  In the years following its publication, parts of this clarification of the

problem of masochism were adopted by various psychoanalysts, without any

mention of its source. However, no one discussed or presented the central

element of the problem, namely the specific masochistic inhibition of the

orgasm  function,  which  became  manifest  as  a fear  of  dying  or fear  of

bursting. Hence, the solution of the problem of masochism has remained the

exclusive scientific accomplishment of sex-economy.

  The  publication  of  this  essay  in  1932  was  not  devoid  of  dramaticconcomitants. Freud, who was the editor of the Internationalen Zeitschrift für

Psychoanalyse,  would  allow  the  article  to  appear  in  this  journal  only  on

condition that it be accompanied by an editorial note. In this note, the reader

was supposed to be informed that Wilhelm Reich had written this article

against the theory of the death instinct, “in the service of” the Communist

Party. A number of Berlin analysts rejected this nonsense and suggested a

different way out of the difficulty; namely, that Reich’s essay on masochism

be  published  together  with  a reply.  This  reply  was  written  by  Siegfried

Bernfeld  and  it  appeared  in  the  same  issue,  under  the  title “Die

kommunistische Diskussion der Psychoanalyse.” The reply had nothing to do

with the problem of masochism, however. Instead, it dealt with and sharply

rejected Wilhelm Reich’s contributions to Marxian sociology. In other words,

since Wilhelm Reich’s clinical arguments were incontestable, the attempt was

made  to  weaken  his  theory  of  masochism  by  ascribing  it  to  emotionally

tinged political motives. This attempt was a total failure. We leave it to the

reader to decide whether this theory rests on clinical investigations and data

or was motivated by political-ideological interests. It is necessary to point out

that  the  sex-economic  elucidation  of  the  problem  of  masochism,  i.e.,  the

clinical refutation of the theory of the death instinct, represents an enormous

step forward in the understanding of neuroses. For now it was no longer

possible  to  ascribe  human  suffering  to  an  immutable  “biological  will  to

suffer,”  i.e.,  a  “death  instinct,”  but  to dismal  social  impingements  on  the

biopsychic apparatus.  And  this  paved  the  way  to  a  critique  of  neuroses-

engendering social conditions, a way previously blocked by the hypothesis of

a biological will to suffer.

  The sex-economic solution of the problem of masochism also provided an

approach to the biological basis of neuroses. Indeed, the fear of “bursting,” a

fear which characterizes masochism, led (at first merely at a speculation, later

                                                                                    1
as a viable theory) to the understanding of the vegetative life apparatus.

  The publication of this essay today is as justified as it was twelve yearsago. It is indicative of certain kinds of ostensibly scientific criticisms that not

a single one of the assertions which were made against Reich’s theory of

masochism twelve years ago could be published today. They are no longer

valid—they belong to the dead past.


                          1. SUMMARY OF VIEWS


  Since analytic characterology presupposes certain ideas about instincts,

we  have  selected  the  masochistic  instincts  to  illustrate  a  special  type  of

neurotic character.

    Pre-psychoanalytic  sexology  was  essentially  of  the  opinion  that  the

tendency to find gratification in the endurance of pain or moral degradation

constituted masochism, which was considered a special instinctual aim. Since

there is an absence of pleasure in both goals, there has been from the very

beginning a question about the nature of masochism: how can something

which  is  unpleasurable  be  instinctively  desired  and  even  provide

gratification? To resort to technical terminology is merely to postpone the

solution; the term “algolagnia” was supposed to explain that one wants to

obtain pleasure from being beaten or degraded. Some authors divined correct

relationships when they contested the notion that the masochist really wants

to  be  beaten;  they  contended  that  the  beating  itself  played  merely  an

intermediary role in the experience of pleasurable self-degradation (Krafft-

Ebing). However that may be, the essential formulation remained: what the

average person senses as unpleasurable is perceived by the masochist as

pleasurable or at least serves as a source of pleasure.

  The psychoanalytic investigation of the latent content and dynamics of

masochism, in both its moralistic and its erogenic components, produced a

                          2
wealth of new insights. Freud discovered that masochism and sadism are not

absolute opposites, that the one instinctual aim is never present without the

other.  Masochism  and  sadism  appear  as  an  antithetical  pair;  the  one  can

change suddenly into the other. Thus, it is a matter of a dialectical antithesis,which is determined by the reversal of an active attitude to a passive attitude,

                                                        3
while the ideational content remains the same. Freud’s theory of libidinal

development  further  distinguishes  the  three  stages  of  childhood  sexuality

(oral, anal, and genital) and, in the beginning, relegated sadism to the anal

phase.  Later  it  was  found  that  every  stage  of  sexual  development  is

characterized by a corresponding form of sadistic aggression. Following up

this  problem,  I  was  able  to  find  in  each  of  these  three  forms  of  sadistic

aggression a reaction of the psychic apparatus to the specific frustration of the

corresponding partial libidinal impulse. According to this concept, the sadism

of each stage results from the mixture between the sexual demand itself and

                                                                                    4
the destructive impulse against the person responsible for its frustration; oral

sadism  (frustration  of  sucking→destructive  impulse,  biting); anal  sadism

(frustration of anal pleasure→crushing, stomping, beating) ; phallic sadism

(frustration of genital pleasure→piercing, puncturing). This concept was in

complete  agreement  with  Freud’s  original  formulation  that  destructive

feelings  (whose  most  frequent  cause  is  the  frustration  of  an  instinct)  are

initially directed against the outer world and turn against the self only later,

i.e.,  when  they  too  are  inhibited  by  frustration  and  fear,  and  end  in  self-

destruction. Sadism becomes masochism when it is turned against the person

        5
himself;  the  superego  (the  representative  of  the  person  responsible  for

frustration or, to put it another way, the representative of the demands of

society  in  the  ego)  becomes  the  agent  of  punishment  toward  the  ego

(conscience).  The  guilt  feeling  results  from  the  conflict  between  the  love

striving and the destructive impulse.

  The concept that masochism is a secondary formation was later given up

by Freud himself in favor of another, namely that sadism was masochism

directed toward the outer world. In this new formulation, there was supposed

to be a primary biological tendency toward self-destruction, a primary or

                        6
erogenic  masochism.  Freud’s  statement  was  founded  on  the  more  basic

assumption of a “death instinct,” postulated as the antithesis of eros. Thus,primary  masochism  was  said  to  be  the  independent  manifestation  of  the

biologically rooted death instinct, based on the processes of dissimilation in

                                                                  7
every cell of the organism (also “erogenic masochism”).

  The exponents of the theory of the death instinct made every effort to

support their assumptions by calling attention to the physiological processes

of decomposition. Yet a convincing substantiation was nowhere to be found.

A  recent  article  which  takes  a  stand for  the  reality  of  the  death  instinct

deserves special attention because it approaches the problem clinically and

offers  physiological  arguments  which,  at  first  glance,  give  one  pause  for

                            8
thought. Therese Benedek bases her arguments on the research of Ehrenberg.

This  biologist  discovered  that  even  in  the  unstructured  protozoon  a  self-

contradictory process can be found. Certain processes in the protoplasm not

only  determine  the  assimilation  of  food  but  at  the  same  time  lead  to  a

precipitation of substances previously existing in solution. The first structural

formation  of  the  cell  is  irreversible  inasmuch  as  dissolved  substances  are

converted into a solid, undissolved condition. What assimilates is part of the

life process; what comes into existence through assimilation is a change in

the cell, a higher structurization which, from a certain point on, namely when

it predominates, is no longer life, but death. This makes sense, especially

when we think of the calcification of the tissues in old age. But this very

argument  refutes  the  assumption  of  a tendency  toward  death.  What  has

become fixed and immobile, i.e., what remains behind as the slag of the life

process, hinders life and its cardinal function, the alternation of tension and

relaxation, the basic rhythm of metabolism in the fulfillment of the need for

food and sexual gratification. This disturbance of the life process is the exact

antithesis, of what we have come to know as the basic characteristic of the

instinct.  The  process  of  rigidification  increasingly  disrupts  the  rhythm  of

tension and relaxation. To accept these processes as the basis of an instinct,

we would have to change our concept of instincts.

  If,  furthermore,  anxiety  were  the  expression  of  the  “liberated  deathinstinct,”  it  would  still  have  to  be  explained  how  “fixed  structures”  can

become free. Benedek herself says that we regard the structure, i.e., what is

firmly frozen, as something inimical to life only when it predominates and

inhibits the life processes.

  If the structure-forming processes are synonymous with the death instinct;

if, moreover, as Benedek states, anxiety corresponds to the inner perception

of this preponderant rigidification, i.e., dying, then we shall have to assume

further that anxiety is absent in the years of childhood and adolescence and

appears increasingly with age. The exact opposite is the case. It is precisely in

periods of sexual efflorescence that the function of anxiety is most strongly in

evidence,  i.e.,  because  of  the  condition  of  inhibition.  According  to  this

assumption, we would also have to find the fear of death in gratified human

beings,  for  they  too  are  subject  to  the  same  biological  process  of

decomposition as those who are ungratified.

  By consistently pursuing Freud’s theory of actual anxiety, I was able to

change the original formula—anxiety arises through the conversion of libido

—to read: anxiety is a phenomenon of the same process of excitation in the

vaso-vegetative  system,  that  in  the  sensory  system  is  perceived  as  sexual

        9
pleasure.

  Clinical observation teaches us that, initially, anxiety is nothing other than

the sensation of constriction, a condition of stasis (anxiety = angustiae); fears

(imagined  dangers)  become  emotionally  charged  anxieties  only  when  that

specific stasis occurs. Should it eventually turn out that the socially imposed

restrictions  upon  sexual  gratification  accelerate  the  sexual  stasis  that

accompanies  the  structure-forming  processes,  thus  also  accelerating  the

process of dying, this would not be proof of the derivation of anxiety from

these processes but only of the life-damaging effect of sex-negating morality.

  This new formulation of the concept of masochism results automatically

in a change in the etiological formula of neurosis. The essential meaning of

Freud’s original conviction was that psychic development is carried out onthe basis of the conflict between instinct and outer world. A second concept

followed which did not, it is true, annul the first but very much reduced its

importance. Now the psychic conflict was conceived of as the result of the

conflict between eros (sexuality, libido) and the death instinct (urge to self-

annihilation, primary masochism).

  The clinical basis for this hypothesis, which from the outset aroused the

deepest doubts, was the peculiar, indeed puzzling fact that certain patients

appear  not  to  want  to  give  up  their  suffering  but  seek  out  unpleasurable

situations again and again. This was at variance with the pleasure principle.

Thus,  one  had  to  assume  that  there  was  an  inner,  concealed  intention  to

                                                    10
maintain the suffering or to reexperience it. It remained questionable how

this “will to suffer” was to be conceived of, as a primary biological tendency

or  as  a  secondary  formation  of  the  psychic  organism.  It  was  possible  to

ascertain a need for punishment which—according to the hypothesis of the

death  instinct—appeared  to  gratify  through  self-inflicted  suffering  the

demands  of  an  unconscious  feeling  of  guilt.  And  subsequent  to  the

publication of Beyond the Pleasure Principle, psychoanalytic literature, as

expounded particularly by Alexander, Reik, and Nunberg, modified, without

                                                                        11
really being aware of it, the formula of the neurotic conflict. Originally, the

neurosis was said to result from the conflict between instinct and outer world

(libido—fear of punishment). Now it is said that the neurosis results from the

conflict  between  instinct  and  the need  for  punishment  (libido—desire  for

                                                                                    12
punishment), i.e., the exact opposite of what had been said previously. This

concept was in complete harmony with the new theory of instincts based on

the antithesis between eros and the death instinct. This new theory traced the

psychic  conflict  back  to  inner  elements  and  more  and  more  eclipsed  the

                                                                      13
supreme role of the frustrating and punishing outer world. In the original

theory, suffering was said to derive “from the outer world, from society.”

Now it was said to derive “from the biologic will to suffer, from the death

instinct  and  the  need  for  punishment.”  This  new  formulation  blocked  thedifficult path into the sociology of human suffering, into which the original

psychological  formula  on  the  psychic  conflict  had  made  considerable

headway. The theory of the death instinct, i.e., the theory of self-destructive

biological instincts, leads to a cultural philosophy of human suffering (cf.

Civilization and Its Discontents). Human suffering is said to be ineradicable

because destructive impulses and impulses striving toward self-annihilation

                      14
cannot be mastered. The original formulation of the psychic conflict, on the

other hand, leads to a critique of the social system.

  In  the  shifting  of  the  source  of  suffering  from  the  outer  world,  from

society, to the inner world, and in its reduction to a biological tendency, one

of  analytic  psychology’s  original  and  cardinal  principles,  the  “pleasure-

unpleasure  principle,”  was  severely  undermined.  The  pleasure-unpleasure

principle is a basic law of the psychic apparatus, according to which pleasure

is sought and unpleasure is avoided. In the previous concept, pleasure and

unpleasure—or, otherwise expressed, the psychic reaction to pleasurable and

unpleasurable  stimuli—determined  psychic  development  and  psychic

reactions.  The  “reality  principle”  was  not antithetical  to  the  pleasure

principle; it merely implied that, in the course of development and because of

the influence of the outer world, the psychic apparatus has to get used to

postponing  momentary  gains  of  pleasure  and  to  forgoing  some  entirely.

                                                      15
These “two principles of psychic functioning” could be valid only so long

as masochism was regarded as the desire to endure suffering arising from an

inhibition of the tendency to inflict pain or suffering upon another person—

was  regarded,  that  is,  as  inverted  sadism.  So  conceived,  masochism  lay

wholly within the framework of the pleasure principle, though the problem

remained as to how suffering can be pleasurable. From the very beginning,

this was at variance with the nature and meaning of the pleasure function.

While it was possible to understand how ungratified or inhibited pleasure

could  be  transformed  into unpleasure,  it  was  hard  to  understand  how

unpleasure could become pleasure. In short, even the original concept of thegenerally  accepted  pleasure  principle  did  not  solve  the  basic  enigma  of

masochism, for to say that masochism consisted in the pleasure derived from

unpleasure did not explain anything.

  The  postulation  of  a  “repetition  compulsion”  was  accepted  by  most

analysts  as  a  satisfactory  solution  to  the  problem  of  suffering.  It  fit  in

extremely well with the hypothesis of the death instinct and the theory of the

need  for  punishment,  but  it  was  very  dubious  in  two  respects.  First,  it

invalidated  the  generally  sound  pleasure  principle,  so  heuristically  and

clinically valuable. Second, it introduced into the empirically well-founded

theory  of  the  pleasure-unpleasure  principle  an  indisputably  metaphysical

element, an unproven and “unprovable” hypothesis that caused a great deal of

unnecessary confusion in the development of analytic theory. There was said

to  be  a  biological  compulsion  to  repeat  unpleasurable  situations.  The

“principle of the repetition compulsion” was of no great import if conceived

of  as  a  basic  biological  principle,  for  as  such  it  was  merely  a  term.  The

formulation of the pleasure-unpleasure principle, on the other hand, could be

substantiated by the physiological laws of tension and relaxation. Insofar as

the repetition compulsion was understood to mean the law that every instinct

strives  to  establish  the  state  of  repose  and,  moreover,  to  reexperience

pleasures once enjoyed, there was nothing to object to. Thus understood, this

formulation  was  a  valuable  supplement  to  our  understanding  of  the

mechanism of tension and relaxation. When conceived of in this way, the

repetition  compulsion  lies  wholly within  the  framework  of  the  pleasure

principle;  indeed,  the  pleasure  principle  itself  explains  the  compulsion  to

repeat. In 1923, rather awkwardly I defined instinct as the nature of pleasure

                        16
to have to be repeated. Thus, within the framework of the pleasure principle,

the repetition compulsion is an important theoretical assumption. However, it

was precisely beyond the pleasure principle that the principle of the repetition

compulsion gained its most significant formulation, as a hypothesis for the

explanation  of  facts  for  which  the  pleasure  principle  was  allegedlyinsufficient.  It  was  not  possible  to  prove  clinically  that  the  repetition

compulsion  was  a primary  tendency  of  the  psychic  apparatus.  It  was

supposed to clarify so much, and yet it itself could not be substantiated. It

seduced  many  analysts  into  assuming  that  there  was  a  super-individual

“ananke.”  This  was  superfluous  as  an  explanation  of  the  striving  to

reestablish the state of repose, for this striving is fully explained on the basis

of the function of the libido to bring about a relaxation. This relaxation, in

every  instinctual  sphere,  is  nothing  other  than  the  establishment  of  the

original  state  of  repose  and  is  implicit  in  the  concept  of  the  instinct.

Parenthetically, we might point out that even the hypothesis of a biological

striving  after  death  becomes  superfluous  when  we  bear  in  mind  that  the

physiological involution of the organism, its gradual decease, begins as soon

as the function of the sexual apparatus, the source of the libido, weakens.

Hence, dying need not be based on anything other than the gradual cessation

of the functioning of the vital apparatus.

  The clinical problem of masochism, more than anything else, demanded a

solution  and  led  to  the  unfortunate  hypothesis  of  a  death  instinct,  of  a

repetition  compulsion  beyond  the  pleasure  principle,  and  of  a  need  for

punishment as the basis of the neurotic conflict. In a polemic directed against

            17
Alexander, who built a whole theory of the personality on these hypotheses,

I endeavored to reduce the theory of the need for punishment to its proper

perspective. Even with respect to the will to suffer, I relied on the old theory

of  masochism  as  the  final  possible  explanation.  The  question  of  how

unpleasure can be striven after, i.e., can become pleasure, was already in the

air, but I had nothing to contribute at that time. Nor did the hypothesis of an

erogenic masochism, a specific disposition of buttock and skin eroticism to

perceive pain as pleasurable (Sadger), offer any satisfaction, for how could

buttock eroticism be related to the perception of pain as pleasure? And why

did  the  masochist  sense  as  pleasure  what  others  sensed  as  painful  and

unpleasant  in  the  same  erogenic  zone  while  being  beaten?  Freud  himselfpartially unraveled this question. In the fantasy “A Child Is Being Beaten,”

he traced the original pleasurable situation to: “Not I, but my rival, is being

        18
beaten.”  But  this  did  not  answer  the  question  why  being  beaten  was

accompanied by pleasure. All masochists avow that pleasure is associated

with the fantasy of being beaten or with actual self-flagellation, that they can

sense pleasure or reach sexual excitation only with this fantasy.

  Long  years  of  research  on  cases  of  masochism  did  not  provide  any

solution.  It  was  not  until  I  began  to  have  doubts  about  the  veracity  and

correctness of the patients’ statements that a ray of light finally broke through

this darkness. One could not help but be amazed, notwithstanding long years

of analytic work, at how little one had learned to analyze the masochistic

experience of pleasure itself. In probing deeply into the function of pleasure

in the masochist, I was suddenly struck by a curious fact which was deeply

puzzling at first, but at the same time provided a complete clarification of the

sex-economy and, consequently, of the specific basis of masochism. What

was  surprising  and  at  the  same  time  puzzling  was  that  the  formula,  the

masochist experiences unpleasure as pleasure, proved to be incorrect. Rather,

the masochist’s specific mechanism of pleasure consisted precisely in that,

while he strives after pleasure like any other person, a disturbing mechanism

causes  this  striving  to  miscarry.  This,  in  turn,  causes  the  masochist to

perceive  sensations,  which  are  experienced  as  pleasurable  by  the  normal

person,  as  unpleasurable  when  they  exceed  a  certain  intensity.  The

masochist,  far  from  striving  after unpleasure,  demonstrates  a strong

intolerance  of  psychic  tensions  and  suffers  from  a  quantitative

overproduction of unpleasure, not to be found in any other neurosis.

  In discussing the problem of masochism, I want to proceed not—as is

usual—from the masochistic perversion, but from its reaction basis in the

character. To illustrate this, I shall use a patient who was under analysis for

almost  four  years.  His  case  provided  answers  to  questions  which  several

previously treated cases had left unanswered. These cases were understoodonly  in  retrospect  from  the  results  of  this  case,  which  serves  here  as  an

example.


2. THE ARMORING OF THE MASOCHISTIC CHARACTER


  Very few masochistic characters develop a masochistic perversion. Since

an understanding of the masochist’s sexual economy can be arrived at only

through an understanding of his character reactions, we will pursue, in our

presentation, the path generally followed in every psychoanalysis in which

the analyst is not content with a theoretical explanation of the case but wants

the patient to achieve genital primacy with orgastic potency.

  Every  character  formation,  as  we  pointed  out  earlier,  fulfills  two

functions: first, the armoring of the ego against the outer world and against

the instinctual demands; second, the economic function, i.e., the consumption

of the surplus sexual energy produced by the sexual stasis—basically, hence,

the binding of the continually produced anxiety. If this holds true for every

character formation, then the way these basic functions are fulfilled by the

ego is specific, i.e., in terms of the nature of the neurosis. In this process,

every character type develops its own mechanism. Needless to say, it is not

enough to know the basic function of the patient’s character (defense and the

binding of anxiety); it is necessary in the shortest time possible to learn in

what special way the character fulfills this task. Since the character binds the

essential parts of the libido (or anxiety); since, moreover, we have to liberate

these essential elements of sexual energy from their chronic entrenchment in

the  character  and  channel  them  to  both  the  genital  apparatus  and  the

sublimation system, we penetrate—under therapeutic necessity and with the

help of the analysis of the character—to the central element of the function of

pleasure.

  Let us summarize the salient traits of the masochistic character. They are

found individually in all neurotic characters and do not stand out in their

totality as a masochistic character until they all converge and predominantlydetermine the basic tone of the personality and its typical reactions. A typical

masochistic character trait is a chronic, subjective feeling of suffering which

is manifested objectively and especially stands out as a tendency to complain.

Additional traits of the masochistic character are chronic tendencies to inflict

pain upon and to debase oneself (“moral masochism”) and an intense passion

for  tormenting  others,  from  which  the  masochist  suffers  no  less  than  his

object.  Common  to  all  masochistic  characters  is  an awkward,  ataxic

behavior,  especially  prevalent  in  their  mannerisms  and  intercourse  with

people. In some cases, these traits can take on the nature of pseudo-dementia.

Other  character  traits  are  sometimes  present,  but  they  do  not  make  any

noticeable change in the total picture.

  What is important is that, in some cases, this character-neurotic syndrome

presents  itself  openly,  while  in  other  cases  it  is  concealed  by  a  surface

disguise.

  As is true of every other character attitude, the masochistic attitude is

mirrored  not  only  in  the  behavior  toward  an  object  but  also  within  the

masochist himself. The attitudes originally directed toward objects are also

(and this is often important) retained toward the introjected objects, toward

the superego. What was originally external and then internalized has to be

externalized in the analytic transference. The patient’s behavior toward the

analyst in the transference repeats what was acquired in relation to the object

in childhood. In terms of genetic history, it is irrelevant that, in the meantime,

the same mechanism also operated within the ego.

  The  patient  whose  analysis  we  will  follow  in  its  essential  features,

without going into the full details of his illness, began the treatment with the

following complaints: he had been wholly incapable of work and socially

apathetic  since  he  was  sixteen.  In  the  sexual  sphere,  there  was  a  severe

masochistic perversion. He had never cared for intercourse with girls but had

masturbated  nightly  for  hours  in  the  way  characteristic  of  the  pregenital

libido structure. He would roll around on his stomach, and squeeze his peniswhile fantasizing that a man or a woman was beating him with a whip. In

short, he did not masturbate in the normal way, i.e., exciting the penis by

regular friction, but by kneading it, clamping it between his thighs, rubbing it

between the palms of his hands, etc. When he sensed that he was about to

ejaculate, he would hold back and wait until the excitation had subided, in

order, then, to begin anew. He masturbated in this way night after night,

often during the daytime also, until finally, completely exhausted, he would

yield to an ejaculation in which the semen did not spurt out rhythmically but

merely flowed out. Afterwards, he felt battered, extremely tired, incapable of

doing anything, fretful, “masochistic,” tormented. He had an especially hard

time dragging himself out of bed in the morning. In spite of an overwhelming

sense of guilt, he was not able to put a stop to this “loafing in bed.” He later

described the whole thing as “masochistic bog.” The more he rebelled against

it, the less he succeeded in extricating himself from this “masochistic mood,”

the more deeply he was engulfed by it. When he entered analysis, this kind of

sexual experience had been going on for years. The effects on his personality

and on his emotional life had been devastating.

  My first impression of him was that of a man who could barely keep

himself going even with the fullest expenditure of his energy. True, he made

a strenuous effort to appear well-bred and composed, struck a noble pose and

talked about his plans; he wanted to become a mathematician. In the analysis,

this ambition turned out to be an intricately worked out delusion in which he

pictured himself wandering through the woods of Germany for years on end,

cogitating  a  mathematical  system  which  could  calculate  and  change  the

whole  world.  The  outer  shell  of  his  personality  fell  away  very  soon  in

analysis as I succeeded in explaining to him that it served as a compensation

for his feeling of complete worthlessness, a feeling intimately related to and

continually  reproduced  by  his  experience  of  masturbation  as  something

“dirty” and “squalid.” From childhood on, the “mathematician,” conceived of

as  the  pure,  asexual  man,  had  the  function  of  covering  up  the  “man  ofsqualor.” It is not essential for our discussion that the patient had all the

earmarks of incipient schizophrenia of the hebephrenic type. Here it is merely

important that “pure” mathematics had the function of erecting a wall against

the “dirty” feeling he had about himself that stemmed from the anal type of

masturbation.

  With the relinquishing of his sexual demeanor, the masochistic attitude

appeared  in  its  full  magnitude.  Every  session  began  with  a  complaint,

followed by openly childish provocations of a masochistic sort. If I asked him

to  supplement  or  to  give  me  a  more  precise  formulation  of  one  of  his

communications,  he  would  attempt  to  reduce  my  efforts  to  absurdity  by

exclaiming: “No, I won’t! No, I won’t! No, I won’t!” In this connection it

was revealed that, between the ages of four and five, he had gone through a

phase  of  violent  stubbornness  accompanied  by  attacks  of  screaming  and

kicking.  The  most  trivial  incident  was  enough  to  bring  on  those  “fits  of

crying,” which, as he said, reduced his parents to despair, helplessness, and

rage. Such attacks might go on for days, to the point of total exhaustion. Later

he himself was able to identify this period of stubbornness as the precursor of

the actual masochism. His first fantasies of being beaten appeared when he

was about seven years old. Before going to bed, he not only fantasized that he

was  put  across  someone’s  knees  and  beaten;  often  he  would  go  into  the

bathroom, lock the door, and try to whip himself. A scene from his third year

of  life,  which  didn’t  appear  until  the  second  year  of  analysis,  could  be

identified as traumatic. He had been playing in the garden and had—as was

clearly evident from the entire situation—soiled himself. Since guests were

present, his severely psychopathic, sadistic father got very upset, carried him

into the house, and laid him on a bed. The boy immediately turned over on his

stomach and waited for the blows with great curiosity, which was mixed with

anxiety. The father gave him a sound thrashing, but the boy had a feeling of

relief—a typical masochistic experience, which he had for the first time.

  Had the blows given him pleasure? The analysis clearly established thathe  had  feared  far  greater  harm  at  that  time.  He  had  turned  over  on  his

                                                                    19
stomach so quickly to protect his genital from his father. The blows on his

buttocks were therefore received with a tremendous sense of relief; they were

relatively harmless compared with the expected injury to his penis. His fears,

therefore, were allayed.

  This basic masochistic mechanism must be clearly understood in order to

comprehend masochism as a whole. But we are anticipating the course of the

analysis, for this did not become clear until the analysis was well into its

second  year.  Until  this  point,  the  treatment  had  been  taken  up  with  the

attempt, at first unsuccessful, to master the patient’s masochistic reactions of

stubbornness.

    Describing the way he masturbated in later years, the patient usually said:

“It was as if I were turned from my back to my stomach with screws.” At first

I was of the opinion that this was an intimation of phallic sexuality; only later

I recognized that it depicted a defensive movement. The  penis  had  to  be

protected; sooner be beaten on the buttocks than suffer an injury to the penis!

This basic mechanism also determined the role of the fantasy of being beaten.

What  was  originally  a  fear  of  punishment  later  became  the  masochistic

desire. In other words, the masochistic fantasy of being beaten constituted an

anticipation of more severe punishment. Alexander’s formulation that sexual

pleasure is bargained for through the gratification of the need for punishment

also  has  to  be  reinterpreted  in  this  light.  One  does  not  punish  oneself  to

assuage or “bribe” one’s superego, in order, then, to enjoy pleasure free of

anxiety. The masochist approaches pleasurable activity just like any other

person, but the fear of punishment intervenes. Masochistic self-punishment is

not  the  execution  of  the  feared  punishment  but  rather  the  execution  of  a

milder, substitute punishment. Thus, it represents a special kind of defense

against  punishment  and  anxiety.  The  passive-feminine  surrender  to  the

punishing person typical of the masochistic character is also to be understood

in this context. Our patient once stuck out his buttocks in order, as he said, tobe beaten; in reality, this desire to be beaten was really the desire to give

himself as a woman (entirely in keeping with the Freudian interpretation of

the passive beating fantasy as the substitute of a passive-feminine desire).

The  non-masochistic  passive-feminine  character  fulfills  this  function  of

warding off the danger of castration through pure anal surrender. He has no

need of the masochistic idea or of the fantasy of being beaten to help him

ward off anxiety.

  This discussion leads us directly to the question whether unpleasure can

be striven after. However, we want to postpone this question in order, first, to

establish the foundation for it through the character analysis of the masochist.

  In  our  patient,  a  period  of  infantile  spite  became  reactivated  in  the

analytic  treatment  in  a  completely  uninhibited  and  unconcealed  way.  The

phase of the analysis dealing with his fits of screaming lasted for some six

months,  but  it  also  succeeded  in  completely  eliminating  this  mode  of

reaction. After that, it did not reappear in this infantile form. In the beginning,

it was not easy to get the patient to reactivate the stubborn actions of his

childhood.  His  pose  as  a  mathematician  served  as  a  defense  against  this.

After all, a noble man, a mathematical genius, did not do such things. And

yet there was no avoiding it. To unmask and to eliminate this layer of the

character as defense against anxiety, it had to be fully reactivated. When the

patient resorted to his “No, I won’t! No I won’t!” I tried at first to interpret it,

but my efforts were completely ignored. So I began to imitate the patient, i.e.,

I followed up each interpretation of his behavior with a “No, I won’t!” It was

the specific analytic situation itself which prompted me to adopt this measure.

I would not have gone as far with him as I eventually did in any other way.

Once he reacted with involuntary kicking to my consistent attempts to reduce

his resistance to absurdity. I seized the opportunity and told him to let himself

go completely. At first he could not understand how anyone could ask him to

do such a thing. Finally, however, plucking up more and more courage, he

began to toss about on the couch, leading up to emotionally charged cries ofdefiance  and  bellowing  of  inarticulate  animal-like  sounds.  A  particularly

violent attack occurred when I told him that he defended his father merely to

mask the inordinate hatred he felt for him. Nor did I hesitate to tell him that

there was a certain amount of rational justification in his hatred. Now his

actions began to take on a startling character. He bellowed so horribly that the

neighbors became afraid. We could not allow ourselves to be deterred by this,

for we knew that this was the only way of reaching his deep affects. It was

the only way he could reexperience his childhood neurosis completely and

affectively—and  not  merely  as  a  recollection.  Again  and  again  this

reenactment enabled him to get an insight into his behavior. It represented a

tremendous provocation of the adults and, in the transference, of me. But why

did he provoke?

  Other masochistic patients provoke the analyst by means of the typical

masochistic silence. Our patient did it in the form of infantile spite. It took me

quite some time to make him understand what had become clear to me very

soon, namely that these provocations were attempts to make me strict and

drive me into a frenzy. But this was merely the superficial meaning of his

behavior.  It  was  necessary  to  go  deeper.  This  is  seldom  done,  however,

because one holds to the view that the masochist strives after punishment as

such, as a gratification of a guilt feeling with the motive force and scope of an

instinct. This view is generally regarded as an explanation for the deepest

meaning of masochistic provocation. In actual fact, it is not at all a question

of punishment but of putting the analyst or his prototype, the parent, in the

wrong, of causing him to act in a way which would give a rational foundation

to the reproach “See how badly you are treating me.” This provocation of the

analyst  is,  in  every  case,  one  of  the  main  difficulties  in  analyzing  a

masochistic character. Unless its deepest intent is understood, no progress

can be made.

  There  must  be  a  meaning  in  the  fact  that  the  masochist  provokes  the

analyst to put him in the wrong. The meaning is: “You are a bad person; youdon’t like me; on the contrary, you treat me horribly; I am right in hating

you.” This justification of the hatred and the diminishing of the guilt feeling

through  this  mechanism  are  merely  an  intermediate  process.  The  main

problem of the masochistic character is not his guilt feeling or his need for

punishment, though both are factors in each case. If guilt feeling and need for

punishment are conceived of as manifestations of a biological death instinct,

then,  it  is  true,  the  unmasking  of  this  rationalization  of  hate  and  the

provocation of the object will be regarded as the ultimate explanation. Since

this is not our view, we must go on to ask why the masochist tries to put his

object in the wrong.

    Genetically and historically, a deep disappointment in love lies behind the

provocation.  The  masochist  is  especially  fond  of  provoking  those  objects

through whom he suffered a disappointment. Originally, these objects were

intensely loved, and either an actual disappointment was experienced or the

love  demanded  by  the  child  was  not  sufficiently  satisfied.  It  is  already

possible  to  note  that  a  strong  need  for  love  goes  along  with  the  real

disappointments  experienced  by  the  masochistic  character.  This  need

precludes a real gratification and has a specific inner source, which we shall

discuss later.

  As time went on and the patient came to realize that he could not reduce

me to a frenzy, his behavior remained the same but its intention was different.

Now, apparently, he began to enjoy letting himself go in the analysis. The

acting out became a hindrance, for he consumed the entire hour with childish

kicking and screaming. Now it was possible to show him that, originally, his

provocation had compassed the important secondary goal of testing to what

extent  he  could  let  himself  go,  i.e.,  how  much  I  would  take  before

withdrawing  my  love  and  attention  and  switching  to  punishment.  He  had

persuaded himself that he had no need to be afraid—he could carry on as

much  as  he  pleased  without  being  punished.  By  continually  conducting

himself in a disagreeable fashion, he neutralized the steadily flowing fear ofpunishment; therefore, being bad was a source of pleasure. It had nothing to

do  with  a  desire  to  be  punished.  Though  especially  attentive,  I  found  no

evidence of such a desire.

  Parallel  to  this  behavior,  however,  there  were  continuous  complaints

about his terrible condition, about the morass from which he was not able to

free himself (and from which I was not helping him to get out). His manner

of  masturbation  continued  unchanged  and  daily  put  him  in  the  “squalid”

mood which was regularly vented in complaints, i.e., disguised reproaches.

But it was not possible to get down to concrete analytic work. It was out of

the question to forbid the acts of spite; to do so would have been to risk the

entire future success of the treatment. Hence, I began to hold up a mirror to

his behavior. When I opened the door to let him in, he would be standing

there with a sullen, pain-distorted, spongy face, the epitome of a bundle of

misery. I imitated his appearance. I began to speak to him in his childish

language; I also lay on the floor and kicked and screamed the same way he

did. At first he was astonished, but broke out in a spontaneous laugh one

time, completely mature, completely unneurotic. The breakthrough had been

effected, but only temporarily. I continued these procedures until he himself

began to analyze. Now we were able to continue.

  What was the meaning of the provocation? This was his way of asking for

love, a way peculiar to all masochistic characters. He needed proofs of love to

reduce  his  inner  tension  and  anxiety.  This  demand  for  love  was  directly

dependent upon the degree of tension produced by his unsatisfactory form of

masturbation. The more “squalid” he felt, the more strongly he displayed

masochism in his behavior, i.e., the more urgent became his demand for love,

which  he  sought  to  fulfill  with  every  possible  means.  But  why  was  this

demand for love made in this indirect, veiled manner? Why did he defend

himself so tenaciously against every interpretation of his attachment? Why

did he go on complaining?

  His complaints showed the following stratification with respect to theirmeaning,  corresponding  to  the  genesis  of  his  masochism:  “You  see  how

miserable I am—love me!” “You don’t love me enough—you are mean to

me!” “You have to love me; I will force you to love me. If you don’t love me,

I’ll make you angry!” The masochistic passion for torment, the complaints,

the provocation, and the suffering can, in terms of their meaning—we shall

discuss their dynamics later—be explained on the basis of the fantasized or

actual non-fulfillment of a quantitatively inordinate demand for love. This

mechanism is specific to the masochistic character. It is not found in any

other  form  of  neurosis;  if  it  appears  in  other  forms,  the  corresponding

masochistic feature in the character is also present.

  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  inordinate  demand  for  love?  Information

about this is supplied by the analysis of the predisposition to anxiety which is

always found in masochistic characters. There is a direct correlation between

the  masochistic  attitude  and  the  demand  for  love  on  the  one  hand  and

unpleasurable tension and the predisposition to anxiety (or danger of loss of

love) on the other hand. The former is not antithetical to the predisposition to

anxiety  as  a  source  of  masochistic  reaction,  for  again  it  is  typical  of  the

masochistic character to check the threat of anxiety by demanding love. Just

as  the  complaining  represents  a  disguised  demand  for  love  and  the

provocation,  a  desperate  attempt  to  force  love,  the  total  formation  of  the

masochistic character represents an abortive attempt to rid oneself of anxiety

and unpleasure. It is abortive because, no matter how hard he tries, he never

frees himself from the inner tension which constantly threatens to change into

anxiety. Thus, the feeling of suffering corresponds to a concrete fact, namely

the continually high-pitched inner excitement and predisposition to anxiety.

We shall understand this situation better when we compare it with the affect-

block of the compulsion neurotic character. Here the binding of the anxiety

has been carried out with complete success, with the forfeiture of psychic

mobility. But the inner tension is completely consumed by a well-functioning

character apparatus. There is no restlessness. When it is present, restlessnessis an impairment or, more correctly, a decompensation of the character armor.

  The masochistic character seeks to bind the inner tension and threat of

anxiety  by  an inadequate  method,  namely  by courting  love  through

provocation and defiance. Naturally, there is a special reason for this, i.e.,

this manner of expressing the demand for love is specific to the masochistic

character. It doesn’t succeed, because the defiance and the provocation are

directed at the person who is loved and from whom love is demanded. In this

way, the fear of losing love and attention is increased, just as the guilt feeling

which one wants to be rid of is not diminished but intensified, for the beloved

person is in fact tormented. This explains the extremely peculiar behavior of

the masochist, who becomes more and more enmeshed in the situation of

suffering, the more intensely he tries to extricate himself from it. It could not

be otherwise, for these attempts to bind anxiety in the character are doomed

from the outset.

  We find these attitudes, individually, in other characters also; they relate

specifically  to  the  masochistic  character  only  when  they  appear  together.

What causes such a combination of attitudes?

  We have spoken thus far of the inordinate demand for love on the part of

the masochistic character. Now we have to add that this demand for love is

based on a fear of being left alone that was intensely experienced in very

early childhood. The masochistic character cannot endure being alone any

more than he can endure the possibility of losing a love relationship. The fact

that masochistic characters so often are lonely is ascribable to the success of a

secondary mechanism embodied in the attitude: “See how unhappy, alone,

and deserted I am.” Once, while discussing his relationship to his mother, our

patient exclaimed in great excitement: “To be left alone is to be dead—my

life is cut off!” I have often heard this feeling expressed by other masochistic

characters,  merely  phrased  differently.  The  masochistic  character  cannot

endure the loss of an object (masochistic clinging to the love object) any

more than he can divest it of its protective role. He cannot endure the loss ofcontact.  When  this  happens,  he  will  seek  to  reestablish  it  in  his  own

inadequate  way,  i.e.,  by  courting  sympathy  through  misery.  Many  such

characters are very susceptible to the feeling of being alone and deserted in

the universe. We see no reason to interpret this feeling in the Rankian sense

of womb anxiety, even if it is a common attitude. The fact is that in every

masochist, whether he is masochistic solely in the moralistic sense or in the

openly erogenic sense, we find a specifically erogenic basis for this feeling.

In  saying  this,  however,  we  are  anticipating  the  later  discussion  of  the

masochist’s sexual structure.

  The fact that skin eroticism plays a special role in masochists is known

from several psychoanalytic authors (Sadger, Federn, and others). However,

they attempted to regard skin eroticism as the direct basis for the masochistic

perversion, whereas analysis shows that the skin assumes this special role in a

very complicated and roundabout way, namely only when various elements

of disappointment coincide. Only the fear of being left alone is based directly

on the fear which arises when the contact with the skin of the loved person is

lost. Let us begin by seeking out the syndrome which pertains to the skin in

the erogenic masochists. We always find in one form or another an urge for

activity involving the skin, or at least corresponding fantasies: being pinched,

rubbed with brushes, beaten with whips, tied up—anything which causes the

skin to bleed. The buttocks assume an important role in this connection, but

only in the indirect way of the anal fixation. Common to these strivings is the

desire to feel the warmth of the skin—the original intent is not a desire for

pain. The object of being whipped is not to suffer pain; rather, pain is put up

with  for  the  sake  of  the  “burning.”  Coldness,  on  the  other  hand,  has  a

repelling effect. Some masochists even go so far as to fantasize that their skin

is being burned. Our patient’s “loafing in bed” can also be traced back to this,

i.e., the gratification of a desire for warmth of the skin.

  In terms of the physiology of anxiety, the contraction of the peripheral

vessels heightens anxiety (pallor in the case of fright; sensation of cold in theanxiety state; chills brought on by fear, etc.). On the other hand, the sensation

of warm skin caused by the stronger flow of blood through the peripheral

vessels is a specific attribute of pleasure. Physiologically, inner tension is

determined by the restriction of the flow of blood. The strong flow of blood

through the body periphery, on the other hand, relieves the inner tension and,

consequently, the physiological basis of the anxiety. From the physiological

point of view, the fear-resolving effect of the orgasm is essentially based

upon  this  process,  which  represents  a  remarkable  change  in  the  blood

circulation  with  peripheral  vessel  dilation  and  discharge  of  tension  in  the

center (splanchnic vessels).

  It is not easy to understand why body contact with the loved person has

the effect of resolving anxiety. In all likelihood, this can be explained by the

fact  that,  physiologically,  body  warmth  in  the  above  sense  and  the

innervation of the body periphery in the expectation of maternal protection

                                                    20
resolve or at least alleviate the inner tension. A thorough discussion of these

facts will follow later.

  For  the  purpose  of  our  present  investigation,  it  is  sufficient  that  the

peripheral  vasodilatation,  which  relieves  the  inner  tension  and  anxiety,

represents the erogenic basis of the masochistic character. His later endeavor

to  avoid  the  loss  of  contact  is  merely  the  psychic  duplication  of  a

physiological process of innervation. To be left alone in the world means to

be cold and unprotected, i.e., an intolerable condition of tension.

  The question could be raised in this connection as to the role played by

oral fixation in the masochist. On the basis of what we know so far, we

cannot ascribe any specific importance to it. It is, however, always present to

a marked degree, as it is in all characters having pregenital fixations. There

can  be  no  doubt  that  the  oral  demands  contribute  considerably  to  the

insatiability of the masochistic demands for love. But the oral greediness in

masochism  is  much  more  likely  the  regressive  result  of  an  early

disappointment in the love object, followed by the fear of being deserted,than a primary cause of the masochistic need for love. Several cases clearly

revealed that the inordinate need for love stemmed from a different source.

Here  the  fear  of  being  left  alone  could  be  traced  back  to  that  phase  of

development  in  which  violent  aggressions  and  incipient  infantile  sexual

curiosity,  as  opposed  to  the  oral  and  anal  impulses,  met  with  severe

frustrations  by  the  loved  parent  or  guardian.  The  enormous  fear  of

punishment which obstructs the advance to genitality is the direct result of

this  contradiction  between  sexual  impulses  that  are  not  only  not  frowned

upon but even encouraged and those threatened with severe punishment. Our

patient was allowed to eat as much as he wanted; indeed, he was encouraged

to eat. He was allowed to lie in bed with his mother, to embrace her, pet her,

etc. His bowel functions were faithfully taken care of. However, when he set

about to explore further possibilities of sexual gratification, to take an interest

in his mother’s genital, to want to touch her, etc., then he experienced the full

severity of parental authority.

  Insofar as oral demands contribute to masochism, they account for the

mood of depression, as they do in the other forms of neurosis. On the basis of

what is presently known, the special combination of skin eroticism, anality,

and the fear of being left alone which seeks resolution through body contact

is specifically characteristic of masochism.

  This erogenic disposition is one of the essential causes of the inordinate

demand for love, which has the specific undertone of “warm me” (= “protect

me”).  “Beat  me”  is  an  expression  of  the  same  striving,  but  its  form  has

already been changed. It would seem that the masochistic character had not

received sufficient love and, for this reason, had developed such a strong

demand for love. This is true as far as it goes. But it must also be borne in

mind  that  he  also  suffered  severe  frustrations  of  love.  Often,  indeed,

exaggerated coddling gives rise to it. This excessive demand for love, in turn,

is itself the result of the miasma which is part and parcel of the patriachal

system of education. The masochistic character is more than a disposition toanal or skin eroticism; rather, it is the result of a specific combination of

external influences exercised upon the erogenic susceptibility of the skin and

upon the entire sexual apparatus. This combination of influences specifically

determines the masochistic character. Only after we have recognized these

influences can we comprehend the other character traits of the masochist.


  3. INHIBITED EXHIBITIONISM AND THE PASSION FOR

                                SELF-DEPRECATION


  We shall now discuss some of the other masochistic character traits, those

relating specifically to sexual structure.

  It took about a year to loosen sufficiently the character armor of spite,

provocation, complaining, etc., to enable us to penetrate into the phase of

early childhood and, above all, to reach the point where the patient began to

take an active part in the analytic work. I shall pass over the known and in

this instance not very important findings which masochism, like every other

neurosis,  yields  in  the  analysis,  e.g.,  the  passive  beating  fantasy  which

conceals the desire to surrender oneself anally as a woman to the father, the

typical  Oedipus  complex,  the  guilt-feeling  reactions  stemming  from  the

repressed  hatred,  the  ambivalence,  etc.  They  are  not  specific  to  the

masochistic character. I shall set forth merely those traits which, through their

special  combination,  have  to  be  regarded  as  pertaining  specifically  to

masochism. I shall also discuss the causes of the masochistic disturbance of

the pleasure mechanism.

  After  the  structure  of  our  patient’s  character  was  loosened,  especially

after the repression of the hatred against the father and the fear of him was

eliminated,  there  was  a  powerful  breakthrough  of  genitality.  He  had

erections; masturbation in the masochistic form ceased; and he began to have

genital longings for a woman. His first attempt to have intercourse with a

woman was a failure, but it led to the analysis of his deep love for his mother,

which had heavy anal overtones. In the rapid improvement of his condition,the following stood out:

  His approach to women was exceptionally strong, but he could not get

free of the feeling of inner tightness and constraint. This provided him with a

continuous  excuse  for  masochistic  complaining,  e.g.,  in  spite  of  external

improvement, he did not feel well: “The mood of masochistic squalor is the

same as ever.”

  He tended to be readily disappointed on the most insignificant grounds

and  withdrew  from  reality  into  masochistic  fantasies  at  the  slightest

difficulty.  This  vacillation  between  vigorous  attempts  to  establish  genital

contact  with  reality  and  rapid  retreats  into  masochism  lasted  for  many

months. I knew that his castration anxiety had not been dissolved and was

responsible for this instability. The concentration of the work in this area

produced a wealth of interesting analytic results. Until this time, the patient

had not shown any trace of genital interest. Now it was revealed that he was

full of anxiety notions about the genitals. Here are a few examples: the vagina

is a “mire” swarming with snakes and vermin; his phallus is nipped off at the

tip; one plunges into an abyss and does not find one’s way out. However, the

discussion of all these anxieties failed to effect any change in his apathetic

condition. Week after week and month after month, he began each and every

session  with  the  same  masochistically  uttered  complaint  that  he  was

“inwardly broken.” The transference had to be analyzed time and again, in

the course of which new material on his passive-anal strivings was unearthed.

Above all, it was discovered that he immediately withdrew from the woman

when a rival appeared. The idea that he had a small penis could not be easily

dislodged. He developed an envious attitude toward every rival, which was

immediately  camouflaged  by  a  passive-feminine  bearing.  This  is  a  well-

known mechanism of binding the fear of the father. Deep analysis of these

attitudes did not bring about any change in his feeling that he had remained a

masochist, in spite of external improvements.

  The  first  attempts  at  coitus  in  which  he  was  potent  but  remainedunsatisfied were attended by a syphilis phobia. One day he showed me his

penis and asked me whether a small erosion was not a sign of an infection. It

was immediately clear that the intent behind this was exhibitionism. Now the

analysis led directly to a clarification of an important aspect of his genital

development. As a child he had reached the genital phase only in the form of

exhibiting  his  penis,  an  act  which  had  been  immediately  and  strictly

forbidden  by  his  mother.  The  genital  disappointment  was  all  the  worse

because he had been allowed to indulge in anal exhibitions as much as he

pleased in front of his mother, who had been intensely concerned with his

functions of evacuation. At the age of ten, he was still taken to the bathroom

by his mother. His pleasure in exhibiting his buttocks was clearly the reason

why he introduced the genital phase precisely with the exhibition of his penis.

The  analysis  revealed  that  his  first  attempts  at  a  genital  approach  to  his

mother were of an exhibitionistic nature. His intentions had been immediately

repressed,  and  this  later  resulted  in  the  severe  inhibition  of  his  general

bearing.  In  his  attempts  to  have  intercourse,  he  never  ventured  to  show

himself  naked  to  the  woman  or  allowed  her  to  take  hold  of  his  penis.

Following the analysis of this element of his neurosis, he began earnestly to

cast about for a profession and he became a photographer. The first step in

this direction was the purchase of a camera, with which he took pictures of

just about everything. Here again we see how essential the elimination of

genital  repression  is  for  sublimation.  Today  he  does  quite  well  as  a

photographer. For a long time, however, he derived no inner pleasure from

his profession: “I don’t really feel myself; and when I do, so masochistically

miserable.”

  The introduction of the genital phase in childhood through exhibitionism,

followed immediately by the severe frustration and repression of this pleasure

and complete inhibition of further genital development, belongs, according to

                                                                          21
my  experience,  specifically  to  the  masochistic  character;  just  as  the

introduction of genitality through phallic-sadism and its inhibition, combinedwith anal-sadistic fixation, relates specifically to the compulsive neurosis. A

number of typical character traits which form the basis of the masochist’s

insecure,  atactic,  and  awkward  bearing  can  be  traced  back  to  these

exhibitionistic  impulses  and  their  immediate  frustration.  Our  patient  once

gave a drastic description of this inner condition. He said: “I always feel like

an officer who, with drawn sword and cries of victory, marches far ahead of

his troops, suddenly looks back and discovers that no one has followed him.”

  A further character trait is connected with this feeling, which is only very

superficially related to guilt feeling. Masochistic characters cannot endure

praise and tend toward self-deprecation and self-abasement. In spite of his

great ambition, our patient could not endure it when he was considered a

good student in school. “If I had continued to be a good student, I would have

fancied myself as standing naked in front of a large crowd with an excited

penis.”  This  remark,  though  made  parenthetically,  as  is  often  the  case  in

analysis, went straight to the core of the matter. Through the inhibition and

repression  of  genital  exhibition,  the  foundation  is  eroded  upon  which

sublimation,  activity,  and  self-confidence  can  be  later  developed.  In

masochists, this inhibition of exhibitionism can lead to the development of

completely  opposite  traits.  The  genital-narcissistic  character  exhibits  in  a

disguised  form  (cf.  erythrophobia).  The  masochistic  character  employs  an

opposite reaction formation: a passion for self-deprecation in order not to

stand out. He lacks the essential element of the narcissistic structure of the

genital character: the ability to stand out.

  The masochistic character, for the reasons set forth above, cannot assume

a  leadership  role,  although  he  will  usually  construct  glorious  fantasies  of

heroism. His true nature, his ego, is rooted in passivity because of the anal

fixation. As a result of the inhibition of exhibitionism, moreover, his ego has

developed an intense inclination toward self-deprecation. This structure of the

ego stands in opposition to and prevents the realization of an active phallic

          22
ego-ideal. The result of this is again an intolerable tension, which serves asa further source of the feeling of suffering and thus nourishes the masochistic

process. The image of the advancing officer mirrors this ego-ideal, which one

has to be ashamed of, which one has to conceal, because the ego (the troops)

doesn’t—can’t—follow.

  In  this  connection  there  is  another  character  trait  which  is  very  often

found in masochistic characters and in children who tend toward masochism:

feeling oneself to be stupid or, the counterpart of this, acting as if one were

stupid. It is very much part of the masochistic character structure to exploit

every inhibition in order to debase oneself. Another patient once said that he

could not endure praise because he felt himself to be on exhibition with his

pants pulled down. It should not be underestimated how much importance the

anal fixation, the preoccupation with the baring of the buttocks, has for the

child’s genital development. Anal shame is brought into the genital phase and

oppresses it with particular shyness. To the masochist, any kind of praise

represents a provocation of exhibitionistic tendencies. Wherever he stands

out, he is assailed by severe anxiety. Hence, it is necessary for him to debase

himself  to  ward  off  anxiety.  This,  naturally,  is  a  fresh  reason  for  feeling

neglected—which provokes the whole complex of the need for love.

  “Making oneself stupid” or “acting as if one were stupid” is also a part of

this. Once our patient described an infantile scene in which he had pretended

to be stupid. “I want something that is not given to me, then I get mad and act

stupid. But how much am I loved even when I pretend to be stupid? If I am

not loved, then I am not worthy of being loved and have, therefore, to be

really stupid and ugly.”

  Now it is time to answer the question of why the masochistic character

expresses his demand for love in such a disguised form, why he is wholly

incapable of showing or demanding love in a direct fashion. Another patient,

having  strong  feelings  of  suffering  and  a  tendency  toward  masochistic

complaining, had a habit of showing himself to be miserable whenever he

wanted to win a woman. He had a terrible fear of offering the woman his lovedirectly. He was afraid she might get angry and make fun of or punish him.

He suffered from the same inhibited exhibitionism as our patient.

  All  this,  taken  together,  causes  a  feeling  of  inner  ataxia,  often  a

tormenting  feeling  of  shame  because  of  one’s  external  appearance.  The

inhibition  of  the  ability  to  demonstrate  or  demand  love  openly  entails

distorted  expressions  and  makes  a  person,  as  our  patient  put  it,

“bureaucratic,” i.e., unnatural and stiff. Behind this lies the ever-present fear

of being disappointed or rejected. Once our patient said: “I am faced with the

task of pushing a penis which doesn’t stand up into a vagina which is not

offered me.”

  The hysterical character develops anxiety in place of an open testimony of

love;  the  compulsive  character  manifests  hate  and  feelings  of  guilt;  the

masochistic character demonstrates and demands love in the roundabout way

of complaining, provoking, or putting on a show of misery. All these various

forms are wholly in keeping with the respective geneses of these types: the

hysterical character has fully developed his genitality but it is interfused with

fear; the compulsive character has replaced his genitality with phallic sadism;

the masochistic character has arrived at genitality through exhibitionism, has

then repressed it, and now persists in the distorted expression of love.


4. UNPLEASURABLE PERCEPTION OF THE INCREASE OF

    SEXUAL EXCITATION: THE SPECIFIC BASIS OF THE

                        MASOCHISTIC CHARACTER


  Every neurotic structure has a genital disturbance in one form or another

which causes sexual stasis and thus provides the neurosis with its source of

energy.  The  masochistic  character  always  reveals  a  specific  kind  of

disturbance of the genital function. And, unless it is evident from the outset,

it does not come to light until the impotence or anesthesia have been largely

eliminated.  This  explains  why  the  disturbance  has  been  completely

overlooked in the past. Let us attempt now to pick up our discussion wherewe  left  off.  We  established  that  the  masochistic  character  generates  an

excessive amount of unpleasure, which provides a real basis for his feeling of

suffering. We observed that the psychic apparatus is constantly attempting to

master this tension and predisposition to anxiety in an inadequate way. In his

attempts to bind anxiety, the masochistic character becomes more and more

immersed in tension and unpleasure, thus strengthening the predisposition to

anxiety.  We  learned  further  that  this  very  inability  to  bind  anxiety  in  an

adequate way constitutes what is specific to the masochistic character. We

found, moreover, that the punishment which the masochistic character thinks

he fears is only a substitute for the punishment he really fears.

  Could an experience of fear such as our patient had when he was three

years old bring about the masochistic fixation of the fantasy of being beaten?

The answer is no. It was possible for the patient unconsciously to give up

completely the sexual demand which provoked the punishment he feared so

terribly. (Other character types do this.) It was not absolutely necessary for

him to hit upon a specifically masochistic means of extricating himself from

the punishment situation. There must be another element or elements, then,

which, when added to what we already know, specifically account for the

masochistic mechanism as a whole.

  This mechanism can be traced only after the patient has been brought to

the genital stage, i.e., when his genital desires become resuscitated or develop

for  the  first  time.  Then  a  new  difficulty  is  encountered:  the  patient  now

develops  strong  genital  desires  which  momentarily  eliminate  much  of  his

masochistic  attitude.  When,  however,  in  his  first  attempt  to  have  genital

intercourse,  he  experiences  not  pleasure  but unpleasure  he  is  once  again

thrown  back  into  the  “masochistic  squalor”  of  anal  and  sado-masochistic

pregenitality. It took many years to solve this puzzle and to understand that

the “incurability of the masochist, who doesn’t want to give up his suffering,”

was to be ascribed to our very imperfect knowledge of his sexual apparatus.

It  would  have  been  impossible  to  find  an  answer  had  we  adhered  to  thetheory that the masochist is fixated on suffering because of a repressed guilt

feeling or a need for punishment, supposedly the manifestation of a death

instinct.

  These findings are not intended to gainsay the fact that self-punishments

are capable of relieving the conscience. For us, it is solely the validity of our

clinical  formulations  that  is  important.  The  alleviation  of  guilt  feelings

through punishments affects not the core but the surface of the personality.

Such “expiatory” sufferings can be totally eliminated without bringing about

the  cessation  of  a  neurotic  process;  they  appear  seldom  and,  moreover,

constitute a symptom, not the cause, of a neurosis. On the other hand, the

conflict between sexual desire and fear of punishment is central in every

neurosis. There is no neurotic process without this conflict. The prevailing

psychoanalytic assessment of the need for punishment led to a misguided

modification of the analytic theory of neurosis, had a negative effect upon the

theory of therapy, obscured the problems of the prophylaxis of neurosis, and

concealed the sexual and social etiology of the neurosis.

  The  masochistic  character  is  based  on  a  very  peculiar  spastic  attitude

which  controls  not  only  his  psychic  but,  first  and  foremost,  his  genital

apparatus. It  immediately  inhibits  every  strong  sensation  of  pleasure  and

transforms it into unpleasure. In this way, the suffering which is the basis of

the masochistic character reactions is continuously nourished and increased.

No matter how deeply and thoroughly we analyze the meaning and genesis of

the masochistic character, we cannot achieve a therapeutic effect unless we

succeed in penetrating to the genesis of this spastic attitude. Otherwise, we

shall not succeed in establishing the patient’s orgastic potency, the capacity

for complete surrender in the genital experience. For orgastic potency alone is

capable of eliminating the inner source of unpleasure and anxiety. Let us

return to our patient.

  When he attempted to have sexual intercourse for the first time, he had, it

is true, an erection, but he did not venture to move inside the vagina. At firstwe thought that this was due to embarrassment or lack of knowledge—it

wasn’t  until  much  later  that  we  discovered  the  real  reason. He had been

afraid of the intensified pleasure. This was certainly very strange behavior.

We always encounter this fear in the cure of the orgastic disturbance of frigid

women. In masochists, however, it has a particular character. To understand

this, we shall have to return to the analytic material.

  After our patient had had sexual intercourse a number of times, which

considerably augmented his genital self-confidence, it was revealed that he

experienced less pleasure during intercourse than he did during masochistic

masturbation. Yet he was able to form a vivid concept of the sensation of

genital  sensuality,  and  this  concept  became  a  powerful  incentive  in  the

treatment.  The  patient’s  weak  genital  experience  was  very  critical,  for

pregenital pleasure can be uprooted only through the establishment of the

naturally more intense genital pleasure. The absence of pleasure during the

sexual act was certainly no encouragement to the development of genitality.

Further attempts at coitus revealed a new disturbance. The penis became soft

during the act. Was it merely castration anxiety, or was it more than that?

Further analysis of his notions of castration failed to bring about any change

in his condition. Finally, it turned out that the contraction of the musculature

of  the  pelvic  floor  before  ejaculation  in  masturbation  had  a  greater

significance than we had originally assumed. I shall summarize the infantile

material which shows that, in spite of his seemingly free and excessive anal

and urethral gratification, the masochist has an anal and urethral inhibition

and anxiety stemming from earliest childhood, which is later carried over to

the genital function and creates the immediate physiological basis for the

excessive production of unpleasure.

  From  the  ages  of  three  to  six,  our  patient  developed  a  fear  of  the

bathroom, sustained by the fantasy that an animal could crawl into his rear

end. The dark hole of the toilet itself aroused anxiety. He began to hold back

his bowel movements, which, in turn, aroused the fear that he would evacuatein  his  pants.  When  one  evacuates  in  one’s  pants,  one  is  beaten  by  one’s

father. The unforgettable scene at the age of three had provided ample proof

of  this.  When  one  is  beaten  by  one’s  father,  there  is  also  the  danger  of

castration. Hence, the blows have to be diverted to the buttocks, so that they

don’t accidentally hit the penis. Nonetheless, in the “cultural” educational

procedures  which  his  father  adopted  and  drastically  applied,  he  was

continually tormented by the fear that, by lying on his stomach, he might get

a splinter in his penis. Everything together produced a spastic condition in the

bladder and in the bowels, from which the child could not extricate himself.

This, in turn, gave his mother further cause to be especially attentive to his

bowel  movements,  thus  creating  a  fresh  contradiction.  The  mother  was

pleased with and took care of his bowel functions, whereas the father beat

him for it. In this way, his Oedipus complex became predominantly anchored

in the anal zone. At first, the additional anxiety developed that the bladder

and bowels might burst, that, in short, holding back served no purpose in the

long run, and he would again become the victim of his father’s rage, for the

latter was not to be trifled with in such things, even if he, the father, did not

impose any anal restraints upon himself. Thus, we have the typical picture of

a  bleak  and  wretched  situation,  whose  roots  are  to  be  traced  back  not  to

biological but to purely sociological factors. We must not forget to mention

that the father was especially fond of pinching his children on the buttocks

and, among other things, took pleasure in letting it be known that he would

“skin them alive” if they misbehaved.

  Thus, to begin with, the child had an anal fear of the father which was

combined with the anal fixation on the mother and beating himself (reflective

of  the  fear  of  punishment  by  the  father).  Because  of  the  release  and

gratification  connected  with  them,  the  child  looked  upon  his  bowel

movements as punishable, and so he began to beat himself out of fear of

being punished by the father. It is evident that this simple process was of far

greater importance for the pathology of the case than the identifications withthe punishing father and the masochistic attitudes toward the nascent anal

superego. Such pathological identifications are of course themselves neurotic

                                                                                          23
formations, essentially consequences, not causes, of the core of the neurosis.

We of course found all the complicated relations between ego and superego,

but we did not stop there. Rather, we went on to the more important task of

deciding  exactly  which  factors  of  masochism  were  dependent  upon  the

concrete behavior of the father and which factors were dependent upon inner

erogenic strivings. In this case as well as in other similar cases, I came to one

conclusion: our methods of education deserve far greater attention than is

usually given to them, and we divide our attention very poorly when we allot

98 percent of it to analytic embellishments and scarcely 2 percent of it to the

gross injuries inflicted upon the children by the parents. This is why, thus far,

we have not succeeded in utilizing psychoanalytic findings for a critique of

patriarchal and familial upbringing.

  This  childhood  conflict  situation,  essentially  the  result  of  the

contradictory  attitude  of  the  patient’s  parents  toward  his  anality,  was

responsible not only for the feminine surrender to the male father but also for

the feeling of emptiness and impotence. Later, every time the patient came

into contact with an adult man, he felt impotent. Out of fear, he immediately

withdrew his cathexis from the genital zone and became anal-passive—which

was expressed as admiration of these men.

  It  is  now  possible  to  draw  the  following  conclusions:  the  usual  toilet

training (too soon and too harsh) causes anal pleasure to take precedence over

other forms and the libido to become fixated in this phase. The idea of being

beaten which is related to anality is definitely devoid of pleasure and, in the

beginning,  charged  with  anxiety.  Thus,  it  is  not  the unpleasure  of  being

beaten that becomes pleasurable. Rather, it is the fear of being beaten that

blocks the sensation of pleasure. In the course of development, this fear is

carried over to the genital zone.

  Even after the patient was well into adolescence, he still often slept withhis  mother  in  the  conjugal  bed.  When  he  was  sixteen,  he  developed  the

phobia  that  his  mother  could  become  pregnant  by  him.  Her  physical

closeness and warmth had a very stimulating effect on his masturbation. The

ejaculation had the meaning of urinating at his mother; nor could it have had

any other meaning in view of his previous development. If the mother bore a

child, this would constitute the corpus delicti of his urethral incest. Strict

punishment would have to be feared. So now he began to hold his semen

back and at the same time to have vivid masochistic fantasies. His definitive

illness  commenced  at  this  point.  His  school  work  deteriorated  markedly.

Following a brief and unsuccessful attempt to restore himself through “self-

analysis,” psychic debility set in, together with the protracted nightly anal-

masochistic masturbation.

  The final breakdown was brought on by a severe actual neurosis which

culminated  in  a  state  of  continuous  tension,  insomnia,  and  migraine-like

headaches.  At  this  time,  the  inhibited  adolescent  suffered  from  a  strong

accumulation of genital libido. He was in love with a girl but was afraid to

approach her. He was afraid that he would “asphyxiate” her (i.e., by passing

wind), the very thought of which filled him with shame. He chased after

every girl from a distance, vividly fantasizing that he and she “were pressing

their bellies together.” This would be sure to result in a child which would

betray them. The fear of being rejected because of his anal tendencies also

had a decisive effect in this. We see here a typical pubertal fate: inhibition of

genital  primacy  due  partly  to  social  barriers,  partly  to  neurotic  fixations

caused by the earlier impairment of the sexual structure on account of faulty

toilet training.

  At first, in addition to the genital tension, there was also the anal tension

created by the continuously constrained urge to evacuate and pass wind. The

patient did not permit a genital release. It was not until he was seventeen that

he had his first emission, which was brought on with the help of protracted

fantasies of passive beatings. The actual neurosis became milder after this,but the first ejaculation was experienced traumatically. For fear of soiling the

bed, the patient sprang up during the ejaculation, seized the chamber pot, and

was inconsolable that some semen had spilled on the bed.

  As he began to establish his genitality during the course of treatment, he

had considerable difficulty in retaining his erection during the sexual act. In

this  genital  phase,  masturbation  was  begun  with  normal  masculine  and

phallic libido. As soon as the pleasure began to mount, however, masochistic

fantasies  set  in.  The  analysis  of  this  sudden  change  from  genitality  to

masochism during the sexual act yielded the following facts. As long as the

sensation of pleasure was slight, the genital fantasy remained. However, as

soon  as  the  pleasure  began  to  increase;  when,  as  the  patient  put  it,  that

“melting feeling” began to take possession of him, he grew afraid; his pelvis

became  spastic  instead  of  relaxed  and  transformed  the  pleasure  into

unpleasure. He described exactly how he perceived the “melting,” usually an

orgastically  pleasurable  sensation,  as  unpleasurable  or,  more  specifically,

with a sense of anxiety: he was afraid that the penis might dissolve. This

feeling might cause the skin of the penis to melt away; the penis might burst

if it continued to expand (as is normal in the sexual act). He had the feeling

that the penis was a sac filled with fluid to the point of bursting. Here we had

the incontestable proof that, in masochists, it is not unpleasure that becomes

pleasure but the exact opposite: by means of a mechanism that is specific to

the masochistic character, every pleasure which increases beyond a certain

measure is inhibited and changed into unpleasure. It is also necessary to point

out that the patient conceived of castration as referring to the skin of the

penis: “In sex, I get as hot as a cooked chicken from which the skin can be

peeled off.”

  The ever-present fear of punishment causes the “melting” sensation of

warmth, which accompanies the increase of pleasure toward the climax, to be

looked upon as the realization of the expected penis catastrophe. This inhibits

the course of excitation and results in a purely physiological, unpleasurablesensation to the point of pain. We can summarize the three phases of this

process as follows:

  1) “I am striving for pleasure.”

  2) “I am ‘melting’—this is the feared punishment.”

  3) “I have to suppress this sensation to save my penis.”

  Here an objection will be raised: the inhibition of the sensation of sexual

pleasure due to infantile anxiety is found in every neurosis. In some cases,

indeed, it has destroyed genitality altogether. Hence, this inhibition cannot

constitute  the  specific  factor  of  masochism.  For  why  does  not  every

inhibition of the involuntary increase of the sensation of pleasure lead to the

development of the masochistic mechanism? This objection can be countered

as follows:

  There  are  two  possibilities  for  such  an  inhibition  of  the  sensation  of

pleasure.  In  the  first,  the  “melting”  feeling  of  pleasure  is  originally

experienced without  anxiety;  later,  anxiety  supervenes  and  inhibits  the

completion of the sexual excitation, but pleasure is still perceived as pleasure.

In the second, the sensation of pleasure and the sensation of unpleasure run

side  by  side.  This  holds  true  for  every  non-masochistic  inhibition  of  the

orgasm. In masochism, on the other hand, the melting feeling of the pleasure

leading up to orgasm is itself perceived as the expected harm. The anxiety,

experienced in the anal zone as a result of the attainment of anal pleasure,

lays the foundation of a psychic attitude that causes the later genital pleasure,

which is of course significantly more intense, to be perceived as the signal of

injury and punishment.

  Hence, we have the paradox that, though continually striving to realize a

pleasurable sensation, the masochistic character is invariably plunged into an

unpleasurable  sensation.  The  impression  is  created  that  he  strives  for  the

unpleasurable  sensation.  What  really  happens,  however,  is  that  anxiety

intervenes between the instinct and its goal, causing the desired pleasure to be

perceived as the anticipated danger. In short, instead of pleasure, unpleasureis the final result of the initial striving.

  This  also  solves  the  problem  of  the  repetition  compulsion beyond  the

pleasure  principle.  It  appears  that  a  person  wants  to  reexperience  an

unpleasurable situation. But analysis reveals that this is not the case. Quite

the contrary: the goal is originally conceived of as pleasurable. The striving is

cut short by frustration, fear of punishment, or anxiety, which completely

conceal the goal or make it appear unpleasurable. Thus, we can conclude that

a  repetition  compulsion beyond  the  pleasure  principle  does  not  exist;  the

corresponding  phenomena  can  be  explained within  the  framework  of  the

pleasure principle and the fear of punishment.

  We  have  to  return  to  our  case  once  again.  The  shallowness  and

protraction of his masturbation are to be ascribed to this disturbance of the

pleasure mechanism. He avoided every increase of the sensation of pleasure.

When this had become clear, he once said: “It is impossible to allow these

sensations to pour into one—it is wholly unbearable.” Now we comprehend

why he masturbated for hours on end; he never attained gratification because

he did not allow any involuntary increase in excitation to take place.

  In addition to fear, there is another factor involved in this inhibition of the

increase of sensation. The masochistic character is used to the low-curved,

non-climactic (one is tempted to say “lukewarm”) pleasure of the anal zone.

He carries over the anal practice and experience of pleasure to the genital

apparatus, which functions in an entirely different way. The intense and rapid

increase of pleasure in the genital apparatus is not only unaccustomed but

also quite apt to arouse terror in a person familiar only with anal pleasure—

which is anything but overwhelming. If the anticipation of punishment is

added  to  this,  then  all  the  conditions  are  present  for  the  immediate

transformation of pleasure into unpleasure.

  In retrospect, many facts from previously treated cases become clear on

the basis of these new findings. This is especially true of the large number of

cases in which unsatisfying sexual activity was followed by a masochisticmood of suffering. Now we know that this activity was unsatisfying due to a

disturbance specific to masochism. It was also possible to arrive at a much

better libido-economic understanding of the strong masochistic tendencies of

the  patients  whom,  in Der  triebhafte  Charakter  and Die  Function  des

Orgasmus,  I  described  as  having  orgastic  disturbances.  A  female  patient

having  a  masochistic  perversion  was  described  as  follows:  “She

masturbated … with the masochistic fantasy that she was wholly stripped (!),

bound, and locked in a cage, where she was forced to starve. It was at this

point that the inhibition of the orgasm came into play. Suddenly she had to

muse about a contraption which was designed to remove her feces and urine

automatically, for she was bound and not allowed to move…” In analysis,

when the transference increased to the point of sexual excitement, she was

usually overcome by an uncontrollable urge to defecate and urinate. When

she masturbated with the idea of having intercourse, “masochistic fantasies

intervened just before the orgasm was about to begin.”

    Sex-economically  viewed,  therefore,  the  masochistic  attitude  and  the

fantasy pertaining to it originate from the unpleasurable perception of the

sensation of pleasure and serve to master unpleasure through the psychically

formulated attitude: “I am so miserable—love me!” Now the beating fantasy

comes into play because the demand for love also contains genital claims

which force the patient to divert the punishment from the front to the rear:

“Beat  me,  but  don’t  castrate  me!”  Thus,  the  masochistic  reaction  has  a

                              24
specifically actual-neurotic basis.

  Hence,  the  problems  of  masochism  cluster  around  the  peculiar

disturbance  of  the  pleasure  function.  It  became  clear  that  the  fear  of  the

distintegrating or “melting” feeling of the sensation of pleasure leading up to

orgasm forces the masochist to cling to the low-curved sexual excitation. Is

this the result of anal fixation or genital inhibition? No doubt both factors

contribute to this, just as both factors determine the chronic neurasthenic state

of excitation. Anality mobilizes the entire libido apparatus but is not capableof  also  providing  for  the  resolution  of  the  tension.  The  inhibition  of

genitality,  not  only  the  result  of  anxiety,  itself  constitutes  a  fear-arousing

process, which only augments the discrepancy between tension and factual

resolution. It remains to be explained why the beating fantasy first comes into

play or becomes especially intense just before the climax.

  It is interesting to observe how the psychic apparatus seeks to reduce the

discrepancy between tension and gratification, how the urge for relaxation

nonetheless breaks through in the beating fantasy. Our patient was adamant

on this point: “To be beaten by the woman is exactly the same as secretly

masturbating  in  the  presence  of  the  woman”  (=  mother).  This,  of  course,

corresponds to the actual experience: as a child and also as an adolescent, the

patient had masochistically masturbated while sleeping in the same bed with

his mother, that is, he would squeeze and rub his penis, being careful not to

have an ejaculation (procreation phobia). Only when he added the fantasy of

being beaten by his mother did he have an emission. This had the following

meaning, which the patient remembered consciously: “I had the impression

that my penis was boiling hot. At the fifth or sixth blow it would surely have

to explode, the bladder would have to burst open.” Thus, the purpose of the

blows was to bring about the release which was forbidden in other ways, i.e.,

autoerotically. If, as a result of the blows of the mother, his bladder burst; if,

for the same reason, his penis exploded and the semen was ejaculated, then it

was not he who was responsible—it was the tormentor who had caused this

to happen. Fundamentally, therefore, the yearning for punishment had the

purpose of bringing about the release in a roundabout way, of making the

punishing person responsible, i.e., of exonerating oneself. The mechanism is

the same on the surface and in the depth of the character. In the former, its

meaning  is:  “Love  me  so  that  I  won’t  be  afraid!”  The  meaning  of  the

complaint is: “It is you who are responsible—not I.” The function of the

beating fantasy is: “Beat me so that, without making myself guilty, I can

release myself!” There can be no doubt that this is the deepest meaning of thepassive beating fantasy.

  Since I first came to recognize this deepest function of the passive beating

fantasy, I have observed the above mechanism in a number of other patients

who had not developed any manifest perversion but, rather, had been able to

hold the masochistic tendency in a latent stage through character changes in

the  ego.  Here  are  a  few  examples.  A  compulsive  character  developed  a

masturbation fantasy that he had been placed among primitives who forced

him to have intercourse and to behave in a completely uninhibited fashion.

Another  patient,  a  passive-feminine  character  not  having  any  manifest

perversion,  fantasized  that  he  was  brought  to  the  point  of  ejaculation  by

blows on the penis. But he had to be bound in order to endure the blows and

to  prevent  him  from  running  away.  In  this  category  we  also  have  the

masochistic sexual attitude of neurotic women, which is regarded by some

analysts as normal female behavior. The woman’s passive rape fantasy serves

merely to exonerate her of guilt feelings, i.e., she wants to experience the

sexual act without guilt. This is possible only under the condition that she is

raped. The formal resistance offered by some women in the real act has the

same meaning.

  This leads us to the problem of so-called pleasure anxiety, which plays a

major role in masochism. Let us give an example from another analysis.

  A patient remembered that, as a child of some four years old, he was in

the habit of consciously producing pavor nocturnus. He would crawl beneath

the covers, masturbate, be seized by fear, and free himself from it by abruptly

throwing the covers away from his body. In such a case, how tempting it is to

assume that the repetition compulsion lies at the root of it. First he had pavor

nocturnus  and  now,  evidently,  he  wanted  to  reexperience  fear.  In  this

connection, it is necessary to make two points clear: in reality, it was not fear

that he wanted to reexperience but the feeling of sensuality. This, however,

always became interfused with fear. Furthermore, the freeing of himself from

the fear was itself a source of pleasure. What was essential in this process,however, was the fact that the arousal of fear provoked anal and urethral

sensations,  for  whose  sake  the  fear  was  put  up  with.  The  fear  does  not

become pleasure as such but merely forms the basis for the development of a

                            25
special kind of pleasure. Often, children experience the tension-resolving

sensations  only  in  a  state  of  anxiety;  usually  they  deny  themselves  these

sensations out of fear of punishment. The release experienced by a sudden

evacuation or urination in a fear-ridden situation often constitutes the main

reason for wanting to reexperience anxiety. However, to want to comprehend

these phenomena beyond the pleasure principle is to misunderstand the facts

completely.  Under  certain  conditions,  pain  and  anxiety  become  the  sole

possibility of experiencing a release one is otherwise afraid of. Thus, the term

“the pleasure of pain” or “pleasure anxiety” can only refer—not in a very

expedient way—to the fact that pain and anxiety can become the basis of

sexual excitation.

  The fact that, in our patient, the “bursting of the penis” does represent the

instinctual goal does not contradict our comprehension of masochism. On the

one hand, this idea is a representation of anxiety, of punishment, in a certain

context. On the other hand, it is a representation of the final gratification, of

the release which is instinctually desired. This dual psychic meaning of the

idea of the bursting of the bladder or of the bowels causes the final pleasure

itself to be perceived as the feared execution of punishment.


  5. OBSERVATIONS ON THE THERAPY OF MASOCHISM


  The establishment of a healthy sexual life, of a regulated libido economy

can only result from two kinds of therapeutic processes: the liberation of the

libido from the pregenital fixations and the elimination of genital anxiety.

Clearly,  this  is  brought  about  through  the  analysis  of  the  pregenital  and

genital Oedipus conflict (through the elimination of the repressions). In this

connection, however, it is necessary to stress one point relating to technique.

If  the  pregenital  fixations  are  dissolved  through  the  elimination  of  therepressions without simultaneously overcoming the genital anxiety, there is

the danger of an increase of sexual stasis, while the sole road to adequate

orgastic discharge remains closed. This danger can build up to the point of

suicide precisely when the analysis of the pregenitality succeeds. If, on the

other  hand,  the  genital  repression  is  eliminated  without  dissolving  the

pregenital fixations, genital primacy remains weak—the genital function is

not capable of relieving the total amount of anxiety.

  For the therapy of masochism, it is of special importance how the analyst

penetrates the barricades of the patient’s character, how he breaks down the

patient’s  tendency  to  make  use  of  his  suffering  to  put  the  analyst  in  the

wrong,  come  what  may.  The  uncovering  of  the  sadistic  nature  of  this

masochistic behavior is the first and most urgent step. It guarantees success

inasmuch as it brings to the surface the original sadism behind the masochism

and replaces passive anal-masochistic fantasies with active-phallic sadistic

fantasies. Once infantile genitality has been reactivated or restructured in this

way, it is much easier to reach the castration anxiety, which, until then, had

been concealed and consumed by the masochistic reactions.

  Needless to say, these therapeutic measures have no effect whatever on

the  patient’s  masochistic  character.  His  complaints,  spiting,  self-

destructiveness, and his awkwardness, which serve as a rational reason for

withdrawing  from  the  world,  usually  persist  until  the  disturbance  of  his

pleasure mechanism in masturbation has been eliminated. Once an adequate

orgastic discharge of the libido has been achieved, the patient’s personality

usually makes a rapid change for the better. But the tendency to take refuge

in  masochism  at  the  slightest  disappointment,  frustration,  or  ungratifying

situation  continues  for  a  while.  Consistent  parallel  work  on  the  genital

anxiety and the pregenital fixation can achieve success only if the damage to

the  genital  apparatus  was  not  too  severe  and  if  the  patient’s  immediate

environment is not such that it repeatedly forces him back into a masochistic

reaction pattern. It follows, therefore, that the analysis of a young masochisticbachelor will succeed much more easily than that of a masochistic woman

who is in her menopause or is economically tied to an unfortunate family

situation.

  Only  by  consistently  working  through  the  masochistic  character  traits

during the first months of treatment can the analyst achieve a breakthrough to

the  core  of  the  neurosis.  But  this  work  must  be  continued  indefatigably

throughout the analysis to avoid running into difficulties during the frequent

relapses which occur in the process of establishing genital primacy. It must

also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  definitive  dissolution  of  the  masochistic

character  can  result  only  after  the  patient  has  led  a  sex-economically

satisfactory life of work and love for some time, i.e., after the termination of

the treatment.

  There  is  good  reason  to  be  very  skeptical  about  the  success  of  the

treatment of a masochistic character, particularly of those having manifest

perversions, as long as the character reactions have not been understood (and

therefore  not  dissolved)  in  detail.  However,  there  is  every  reason  to  be

optimistic  when  this  has  been  achieved,  i.e.,  when  the  advance  toward

genitality, though at first only in the form of genital anxiety, has taken place.

When that is the case, there is no need to be alarmed by repeated relapses. It

is  of  course  known  from  general  clinical  experience  that  the  cure  of

masochism is one of our most difficult tasks—which is not to say that the rest

of our tasks are in any way easy. To do justice to these tasks, however, it is

necessary to adhere consistently to that psychoanalytic theory which is firmly

grounded in empirical data. Hypotheses such as those criticized here are very

often  an  indication  of  a  premature  capitulation  to  the  problems  of

psychoanalytic practice.

  If the patient’s masochism is traced back to an irreducible death instinct,

then the patient’s view of himself is confirmed, that is to say, his desire to

suffer is supposedly verified. But we have demonstrated that it has to be

unmasked  as  disguised  aggression.  This  corresponds  to  the  reality  of  thesituation, and it alone renders possible a therapeutic success.

  In  addition  to  the  two  therapeutic  tasks  named  above  (reduction  of

masochism to its original condition of sadism; advancement of pregenitality

to  genitality),  there  is  a  third  task  which  is  specific  to  the  treatment  of

masochistic characters. This is the analytic dissolution of the anal and genital

spastic attitude which, as we pointed out, is the actual source of the symptom

of suffering.

  This  representation  of  the  masochistic  process  is  far  from  offering  a

solution  to  all  the  problems  of  masochism.  But  it  can  be  asserted  that

reincorporating  the  problem  of  masochism  into  the  framework  of  the

pleasure-unpleasure principle will facilitate the clarification of the remainder

of the problems, which was delayed by the hypothesis of the death instinct.                                  CHAPTER XII





        SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE BASIC


      CONFLICT BETWEEN NEED AND OUTER

                                                    1
                                    WORLD




To appreciate the theoretical significance of what has been set forth in the

preceding chapters, it is necessary to pursue our subject further and to make

some observations on the theory of instincts in general. Clinical experience

has afforded ample opportunity to verify Freud’s basic assumption of the

fundamental dualism of the psychic apparatus; at the same time, it provided

opportunity to eliminate some contradictions in it. It would be misplaced in

this  clinical  framework  to  attempt  to  investigate  the  connections  between

instinct and outer world as thoroughly as the material deserves. However, it is

necessary,  by  way  of  anticipation,  to  say  a  few  words  about  these

relationships  in  order  to  give  the  explanations  of  this  work  a  theoretical

conclusion, as well as to provide a counterbalance to the over-biologization

of analytic psychology.

  In his theory of instincts, Freud postulates a number of opposing pairs of

instincts, as well as tendencies in the psychic apparatus which counteract one

another.  With  this  consistently  adhered-to  dichotomization  of  psychic

tendencies (which, though antithetical, are nonetheless interacting), Freud,

even  if  unconsciously,  established  the  foundation  for  a  future  functional

psychology.  Originally,  the  instinct  of  self-preservation  (hunger)  and  the

sexual  instinct  (eros)  were  postulated  as  opposites.  Later  the  instinct  ofdestruction or the death instinct came to represent the counter-tendency of

sexuality.  The  original  analytic  psychology  was  based  on  the  antithesis

between ego and outer world. To this corresponded the antithesis between

ego libido and object libido. The antithesis between sexuality and anxiety,

while not regarded as a basic antithesis of the psychic apparatus, played a

fundamental role in the explanation of neurotic anxiety. According to the

original hypothesis, when libido is prevented from entering consciousness

and attaining its object, it is converted into anxiety. Later, Freud no longer

                                                                            2
insisted on the close correlation between sexuality and anxiety, although in

my opinion there was no clinical justification for the change in his concept, It

can  be  demonstrated  that  there  is  more  than  an  accidental  relationship

between  these  various  antitheses;  they  are  derived  from  one  another

dialectically. It is merely a matter of understanding which antithesis is the

original one and how the development of subsequent antitheses takes place,

i.e., what influences impinge upon the instinctual apparatus.

  In  our  cases  as  well  as  in  every  other  case  which  is  analyzed  deeply

enough, we are able to discover that at the basis of all reactions exists not the

antithesis between love and hate, and certainly not the antithesis between eros

and  the  death  instinct,  but  the  antithesis  between ego  (“person”;  id  =

pleasure  ego)  and  outer  world.  On  an  elementary  level,  there  is  but  one

desire  which  issues  from  the  biopsychic  unity  of  the  person,  namely  the

desire  to  discharge  inner  tensions,  whether  they  pertain  to  the  sphere  of

hunger  or  of  sexuality.  This  is  impossible  without  contact  with  the  outer

world. Hence, the first impulse of every creature must be a desire to establish

contact with the outer world. The psychoanalytic concept that hunger and

libidinal need are opposites and nonetheless intertwined at the beginning of

the infant’s psychic development (since libidinal stimulation of the mouth

—“sucking pleasure”—ensures the absorption of food) leads to strange and

surprising consequences when pursued further, i.e., when Hartmann’s views

on the function of surface tensions on the unity of the organs are applied toour questions. If we assume that Hartmann’s theory is correct (certain aspects

of which were supplemented by the investigations of Kraus and Zondek),

psychic  energy  must  derive  from  simple  physiological  and  mechanical

surface  tensions,  grounded  in  the  chemistry  of  the  cells,  tensions  which

develop in the various tissues of the human body, most prominently in the

vegetative system and the related organs (blood and lymph system). In this

view, the disturbance of the physiochemical equilibrium which is brought

about by these tensions turns out to be the motor force of action—in the final

analysis,  most  likely  also  the  motor  force  of  thinking.  Fundamentally,

however, these disturbances, e.g., in the osmotic equilibrium of the organ

tissues, are of a twofold nature. The one form is characterized by a shrinking

of the tissues as a result of the loss of tissue fluid; the other, by an expansion

of the organ tissues as a result of the increase of the fluid content. In both

cases, unpleasure is experienced. In the former, the decrease of the surface

tension produces a low pressure and a corresponding feeling of unpleasure,

which can be eliminated only by the absorption of new substances. In the

latter, on the other hand, there is a direct correlation between actual tension

and the sensation of unpleasure. Hence, the tension can be eliminated only by

a release,  i.e.,  by  the elimination  of  substances.  Only  the  latter  form  is

connected  with  specific  pleasure;  in  the  former,  it  is  merely  a  matter  of

reducing the unpleasure.

  An “instinct” is involved in both cases. In the first we recognize hunger

and thirst; in the second we recognize the prototype of orgastic discharge

peculiar  to  all  erogenic,  i.e.,  sexual,  tensions.  Biophysiologically,  the

primitive organism, e.g., a protozoon, discharges centrally and overcharges

with plasma peripherally; it has to expand when it absorbs a particle of food,

i.e., when it wants to eliminate an inner low pressure. Put into our language,

it has to approach the outer world with the help of a libidinal mechanism to

eliminate its “low pressure,” i.e., its hunger. Growth, copulation, and cell

division, on the other hand, are entirely a part of the libidinal function, whichis characterized by peripheral expansion followed by release, i.e., decrease in

the  surface  tension.  Hence,  sexual  energy  is  always  in  the  service  of  the

gratification of hunger, while the absorption of food, conversely, introduces

those substances which, through a physiochemical process, eventually lead to

libidinal tensions. Just as food absorption is the basis of existence and of

libidinal functions, so the latter are the basis of productive achievements,

including the most primitive one, locomotion. These biophysiological facts

are completely confirmed in the higher organization of the psychic apparatus:

it is not possible to sublimate hunger, whereas sexual energy is changeable

and  productive.  This  is  based  on  the  fact  that,  in  the  case  of  hunger,  a

negative  condition  is  eliminated—no  pleasure  is  produced.  In  the  case  of

sexual need, on the other hand, there is a discharge, i.e., production in its

simplest form. Over and above this, there is the pleasure afforded by release.

This pleasure, according to a law which is in no way understood yet, impels a

repetition of the action. It is quite possible that this repetition constitutes an

essential aspect of the problem of memory. Thus, hunger is an indication of

the loss of energy; the gratification of the need for food does not produce any

energy which would appear concretely as an achievement (expenditure of

energy). It is merely the elimination of a lack. As obscure as this fact still is,

the empirical psychoanalytic thesis that work is a conversion of the libidinal

energy process—that, furthermore, disturbances of one’s capacity for work

are  intimately  related  to  disturbances  of  the  libidinal  economy—is  based

finally on the described difference of the two basic biological needs.

  Now let us return to the question of the antithesis of the strivings. We see

that  originally  they  do  not  lie  within  the  biopsychic  unit,  disregarding

possible phylogenetic factors. One pole of the antithesis is represented by the

outer world. Is this at variance with Freud’s hypothesis of an inner antithesis

between the strivings? This is obviously not the case. It is merely a question

of determining whether the inner antithesis, the inner dualism, is a primary

biological  factor  or  whether  it  results  later  from  the  clash  between  the                                                                        3
apparatus governing physiological needs and the outer world. Moreover, it is

a question of deciding whether the original antithesis within the personality is

an instinctual one or something different. Let us begin by investigating the

phenomenon of ambivalence.

  The “ambivalence of feelings” in the sense of simultaneous reactions of

love  and  hate  is  not  a  biological  law.  It  is,  rather,  a  socially  determined

product  of  development.  In  the  anlage,  there  is  only  the  ability  of  the

biopsychic apparatus to react to stimuli of the outer world in a way that can—

although not necessarily—develop into a chronic attitude which we designate

as ambivalent. Ambivalence represents a vacillation between hate and love

strivings only on the surface layer of the psychic apparatus. At a deeper level,

corresponding  to  an  earlier  stage  of  development,  vacillation,  hesitation,

indecision as well as other characteristics of ambivalence have a different

explanation.  They  are  the  manifestations  of  a  clash  between  a  libidinal

impulse  ceaselessly  striving  for  expression  and  fear  of  punishment  which

inhibits it and prevents it from being translated into action. Often (in the

compulsive character, always) the love impulse is replaced by a hate impulse

which, in the depth, pursues the goal of the love impulse but is also inhibited

by the same anxiety as the sexual impulse. Thus, depending upon its genesis

and the depth of its function, ambivalence has three meanings:

  a) “I love you, but I am afraid of being punished for it” (love-fear).

  b) “I hate you because I am not allowed to love you, but I am afraid of

gratifying the hate” (hate-fear).

  c) “I don’t know whether I love or hate you” (love-hate).

  This  yields  the  following  picture  of  the  genesis  of  the  psychic

contradictions.  From  the  original  antithesis  between  ego  and  outer  world,

which later appears as the antithesis between narcissism and object libido,

there results the antithesis between libido (as a striving in the direction of the

outer  world)  and anxiety  (as  the  first  and  most  basic  expression  of  a

narcissistic  escape  back  into  the  ego  from  the unpleasure  suffered  at  thehands of the outer world). This is the first contradiction within the person.

The stretching forth and pulling in of the pseudopodia in the protozoon is, as

we shall demonstrate thoroughly elsewhere, much more than a mere analogy

for the “stretching forth” and “pulling in” of the libido. If, on the one hand,

unpleasure experienced in the outer world causes the libido to be pulled back

or to seek refuge “within” (narcissistic flight), it is, on the other hand, the

unpleasurable tension created by ungratified needs that urges the person to

seek  contact  with  the  outer  world.  If  the  outer  world  would  bring  only

pleasure and gratification, there would be no phenomenon of anxiety. Since,

however, unpleasurable and danger-producing stimuli originate in the outer

world, the striving of the object libido has to be provided with a counterpart,

namely the tendency to take refuge in narcissistic escape. The most primitive

expression  of  this  narcissistic  escape  is  anxiety.  Libidinal  stretching  forth

toward the world and narcissistic escape from it are merely paraphrases of a

very  primitive  function  which  is  present  without  exception  in  all  living

organisms. Even in the protozoon, it is expressed as two opposite directions

of plasma currents: the one flowing from the center toward the periphery and

                                                          4
the other from the periphery toward the center. Turning pale with fright,

trembling with fear (“hair standing on end”) correspond to a flight of the

cathexis from the periphery of the body to the center of the body, brought

about  by  the  contraction  of  the  peripheral  vessels  and  the  dilation  of  the

central vessel system (anxiety brought about by stasis). The turgor of the

peripheral skin tissues, the flushing of the skin, and the feeling of warmth in

sexual  excitation  are  the  exact  opposites  of  this  and  correspond  to  a

physiological as well as psychic flow of the cathexes in the direction, center

→ body periphery → world. The erection of the penis and the moistening of

the  vagina  are  the  manifestation  of  this  direction  of  energy  in  a  state  of

excitation; the shrinking of the penis and the becoming dry of the vagina,

conversely, are nothing more than manifestations of the opposite direction of

the cathexes and the body fluids from the periphery to the center. The firstantithesis, sexual excitation-anxiety, is merely the intrapsychic reflection of

the  primal  antithesis, ego-outer  world,  which  then  becomes  the  psychic

reality of the inner contradiction: “I desire—I am afraid.”

  Thus, anxiety is and always must be the first manifestation of an inner

tension,  whether  this  is  brought  about  by  an  external  frustration  of  the

advance toward motility or the frustration of the gratification of a need, or

whether it is brought about by a flight of the energy cathexes into the center

of the organism. In the first case, we are dealing with stasis or actual anxiety;

in the second case, with real anxiety. In the latter, however, a condition of

stasis results of necessity and consequently there is also anxiety. Hence, both

forms of anxiety (stasis anxiety and real anxiety) can be traced back to one

basic phenomenon, i.e., the central stasis of the energy cathexes. Whereas,

however, the stasis anxiety is the direct manifestation of anxiety, real anxiety

is  initially  merely  an  anticipation  of  danger;  it  becomes  affective  anxiety

secondarily when the flight of cathexes toward the center creates a stasis in

the central vegetative apparatus. The original flight reaction in the form of

“crawling into oneself” later occurs in a phylogenetically younger form of

flight, which consists in increasing the distance from the source of danger. It

is dependent upon the formation of an apparatus of locomotion (muscular

flight).

  In addition to the flight into the center of one’s body and the muscular

flight,  there  is  a  second,  more  meaningful  reaction  on  a  higher  level  of

biological  organization:  the  removal  of  the  source  of  danger.  It  can  only

                                    5
appear as a destructive impulse. Its foundation is the avoidance of the stasis

or anxiety which is brought on by narcissistic flight. Basically, therefore, it is

merely a special kind of avoidance or resolution of tension. At this stage of

development, there are one of two motives for striving toward the world: (1)

the gratification of a need (libido) or (2) the avoidance of a state of anxiety,

i.e., by destroying the source of danger (destruction). A second antithesis

between libido (“love”) and destruction (“hate”) is now developed upon thefirst  inner  antithesis  between  libido  and  anxiety.  Every  frustration  of  an

instinctual  gratification  can  either  give  rise  to  anxiety  (i.e.,  the  first

counterpart of the libido) or, to avoid anxiety it can produce a destructive

impulse (i.e., the genetically younger counterpart). Each of these modes of

reaction  corresponds  to  a  character  form  whose  reaction  to  danger  is

irrationally motivated and fixated. The hysterical character retreats in the face

of danger; the compulsive character wants to destroy the source of danger.

The masochistic character, since he is equipped neither with the capacity to

approach  the  object  in  a  genital-libidinal  way  nor  with  the  destructive

tendency to destroy the source of danger, has to endeavor to resolve his inner

tensions through an indirect expression, through a disguised beseeching of

the object to love him, i.e., to permit and make possible for him the libidinal

release. Obviously, he can never succeed in this.

  The function of the second antithetical pair, libido-destruction, undergoes

a  fresh  change,  for  the  outer  world  frustrates  not  only  the  libidinal

gratification  but  also  the  gratification  of  the  destructive  impulse.  This

frustration  of  destructive  intentions  is  again  carried  out  with  threats  of

punishment  which,  by  imbuing  every  destructive  impulse  with  anxiety,

strengthen  the  narcissistic  mechanism  of  flight.  Hence,  a  fourth  antithesis

                                            6
emerges, destructive  impulse-anxiety.  All  new  antithetical  strivings  are

formed in the psychic apparatus from the clash between previous strivings

and  the  outer  world.  On  the  one  hand,  the  destructive  tendency  is

strengthened  by  the  person’s  libidinal  intentions.  Every  frustration  of  the

libido  provokes  destructive  intentions;  these,  in  turn,  can  easily  be

transformed  into  sadism,  for  the  latter  embodies  the  destructive and  the

libidinal impulse. On the other hand, the destructive tendency is strengthened

by  the  propensity  to  anxiety  and  the  desire  to  avoid  or  to  resolve  fear-

inducing  tensions  in  the  usual  destructive  manner.  However,  since  the

emergence of each new impulse provokes the punitive attitude of the outer

world, an unending chain ensues, the first link of which is the fear-inducinginhibition of the libidinal discharge. The inhibition of the aggressive impulse

by  the  threat  of  punishment  stemming  from  the  outer  world  not  only

increases  anxiety  and  obstructs  the  discharge  of  the  libido  far  more  than

formerly;  it  also  gives  rise  to  a  new  antithesis.  In  part,  it  reverses  the

destructive impulse which is directed against the world and turns it against

the ego, in this way adding counterparts to two impulses; i.e., the impulse to

self-destruction  becomes  the  counterpart  of  the destructive  impulse,  and

masochism becomes the counter-impulse of sadism.

  In this connection, the feeling of guilt is a late product—the result of a

conflict  between  love  and  hate  toward  the  same  object.  Dynamically,  the

feeling of guilt corresponds to the intensity of the inhibited aggression, which

is the same as the intensity of the inhibiting anxiety.

  In deriving a complete theoretical picture of psychic processes from the

clinical study of neuroses, particularly masochism, we learn two things. (1)

Masochism  represents  a  very  late  product  of  development.  (This  is  also

confirmed by a direct observation of children.) It seldom emerges before the

third or fourth year of life; for this very reason, therefore, it cannot be the

manifestation of a primary biological instinct. (2) All the phenomena of the

psychic  apparatus,  from  which  it  is  believed  that  a  death  instinct  can  be

deduced, can be unmasked as indications and consequences of a narcissistic

(not  a  muscular)  flight  from  the  world.  Self-destructiveness  is  the

manifestation  of  a  destructive  impulse  turned  upon  itself.  Physical

deterioration because of chronic neurotic processes is the result of the chronic

disturbance of the sexual economy, the chronic effect of unresolved inner

tensions  having  a  physiological  basis.  It  is  the  result  of  chronic  psychic

suffering which has an objective basis but is not subjectively desired.

    Conscious longing for death, peace, nothingness (“the nirvana principle”),

occurs only under the condition of hopelessness and the absence of sexual, in

particular genital, gratification. It is, in short, the manifestation of complete

resignation, a retreat from a reality which has become solely unpleasurableinto  nothingness.  Because  of  the  primacy  of  the  libido,  this  nothingness

figures merely as another form of libidinal goal, e.g., being at peace in the

womb, being cared for and protected by the mother. Every libidinal impulse

which is not directed toward the outer world, i.e., which corresponds to a

withdrawal into one’s own ego—in short, every phenomenon of narcissistic

regression—is brought forth as proof of existence of the death instinct. In

reality, they are nothing but reactions to actual frustrations of the gratification

of libidinal needs and the appeasing of hunger, frustrations caused by our

social  system  or  other  worldly  influences.  If,  even  without  concrete

contemporary causes, this reaction is fully developed, we have in analysis a

suitable instrument for demonstrating that early infantile frustrations of the

libido necessitated the retreat from the world into one’s own ego and created

a  psychic  structure  which  later  renders  the  person  incapable  of  using  the

given possibilities of pleasure in the world. Indeed, melancholia, so often

held  up  as  proof  of  the  death  instinct,  demonstrates  clearly  that  suicidal

inclinations  are  secondary.  They  represent  a  grandiose  superstructure  on

frustrated orality, which becomes an oral fixation because of the complete

inhibition  of  the  genital  function.  Moreover,  it  is  based  on  a  strongly

developed  destructive  impulse  corresponding  to  this  early  stage  and

magnified by the immense libido stasis. This impulse, inhibited and turned

against itself, simply can find no other way out than self-destruction. Thus,

one destroys oneself, not because one is urged to it biologically, not because

one “wants” to, but because reality has created inner tensions which become

unbearable and can be resolved only through self-annihilation.

  Just  as  the  outer  world  becomes  an  absolute  unpleasurable  external

reality, one’s own instinctual apparatus becomes an absolute unpleasurable

inner reality. However, since the ultimate motor force of life is tension with

the promise of a possibility of release—i.e., the attainment of pleasure—a

creature externally and internally deprived of these possibilities must want to

cease  to  live.  Self-annihilation  becomes  the  only  and  final  possibility  ofrelease, so we can say that, even in the will to die, the pleasure-unpleasure

principle is expressed.

  Every other concept passes over the deep clinical findings, avoids the

confrontation  with  the  question  of  the  structure  of  our  real  world  (a

confrontation which leads to a critique of the social system), and gives up the

best possibilities of helping the patient. For it is through analysis that the

analyst enables him to overcome the fear of the punishment of this world and

to  resolve  his  inner  tensions  in  the  only  way  which  is  biologically,

physiologically,  and  sex-economically  sound—orgastic  gratification  and

contingent sublimation.

  The facts pertaining to masochism invalidate the assumption of a primary

need  for  punishment.  If  it  does  not  hold  true  for  masochism,  it  will  be

difficult to find in other forms of illness. Suffering is real, objectively given

but not subjectively desired. Self-abasement is a defense mechanism because

of the danger of genital castration; self-injuries are anticipations of milder

punishments  as  defense  against  those  which  are  really  feared;  beating

fantasies are the last possibilities of a guilt-free release. The original formula

of  neurosis  is  still  valid:  the  neurosis  originates  in  a  conflict  between

instinctual  sexual  need  and  the  threat  of  being  punished  by  a  patriarchal,

authoritarian  society  for  engaging  in  sexual  activity.  On  the  basis  of  this

formula, however, even the conclusions we draw are fundamentally different.

Suffering issues from society. Hence, we are fully justified in asking why

society produces suffering, who has an interest in it.

  It follows logically from Freud’s original formula (i.e., frustration issues

from  the  outer  world)  that  one  part  of  the  psychic  conflict,  frustration,

originates in the conditions of existence of our social system. To what extent,

however, this formulation has been obliterated by the hypothesis of the death

instinct is demonstrated by Benedek’s line of reasoning: “If we accept the

theory of the dualism of the instincts solely in the sense of the old theory, a

gap ensues. Then the question remains unanswered why mechanisms havedeveloped in man which operate antagonistically to the sexual instinct.” We

see, thus, how the hypothesis of a death instinct causes us to forget that those

“inner mechanisms” which operate antagonistically toward the sexual instinct

are  moral  inhibitions  representing  the  prohibitions  imposed  by  the  outer

world,  by  society.  Hence,  we  are  not  “forcing  an  open  door”  when  we

contend  that  the  death  instinct  is  supposed  to  explain  biologically  facts

which,  by  pursuing  the  former  theory  consistently,  are  derived  from  the

structure of present-day society.

  It remains to be demonstrated that the “uncontrollable destructive drives”

which  are  held  accountable  for  man’s  suffering  are  not  biologically  but

sociologically  determined;  that  the  inhibition  of  sexuality  by  authoritarian

upbringing transforms aggression into an uncontrollable demand, i.e., that

inhibited sexual energy is converted into destructiveness. And the aspects of

our cultural life which appear to be self-destructive are not manifestations of

“instincts  of  self-annihilation”;  they  are  manifestations  of  very  real

destructive intentions on the part of an authoritarian society interested in the

suppression of sexuality.                            PART THREE


      From Psychoanalysis to Orgone


                                Biophysics                                  CHAPTER XIII





        PSYCHIC CONTACT AND VEGETATIVE


                                    CURRENT





        (A Contribution to the Theory of Affects and


                    Character-Analytic Technique)




                                      PREFACE


The  work  which  follows  is  an  elaboration  on  the  talk  I  gave  at  the  13th

International  Psychoanalytic  Congress  in  Lucerne,  August  1934.  It  is  a

continuation of the discussion of the difficult character-analytic and clinical

material and  problems which I considered in great detail in Part I of the

present volume. Above all, it is an attempt to comprehend two groups of facts

which  were  not  dealt  with  in  Part  I:  (1) psychic contactlessness  and  the

psychic mechanism which attempts to compensate for this by establishing

substitute contacts; (2) the antithetical unity of the vegetative and psychic

manifestations of affect life. The latter is a direct continuation of my work on

the “Urgegensatz des vegetativen Lebens,” which was printed in Zeitschrift

für politische Psychologie und Sexualökonomie, 1934.

  Again, it is merely a short, though clinically well substantiated, advance

from the sphere of what is already known and established into the dark and

difficult  problems  of  the  relationship  between  psyche  and  soma.  The

application of my technique of character analysis will enable anyone to verifythese findings once he has mastered the initial technical difficulties.

  A discussion of the views set forth in the works of other authors on the

problem of “totality” and the homogeneity of psychic and somatic functions

was intentionally avoided. Sex-economy approaches the problem from the

perspective  of  an  otherwise  neglected  phenomenon,  the orgasm,  and

consciously applies the methods of functionalism. Even for this reason, a

critical  discussion  would  be  premature,  for  it  would  presuppose  a  certain

completeness in my own view and that other authors had already taken a

stand on the orgasm problem. Neither is true.

  There was good reason why the clinical refutation of Freud’s theory of

the death instinct had to be retained. Deep analysis of the so-called striving

for nirvana was especially instrumental in strengthening my view that the

hypothesis of the death instinct was an attempt to explain facts which could

not yet be explained and, moreover, attempted to do this in a misleading way.

  To  those  psychoanalysts  with  a  functional  orientation,  the  young  sex-

economists and the character analysts, this essay is perhaps more suited than

previous  essays  to  offer  some  theoretical  clarity  and  practical  help  in  the

application  of  the  character-analytic  technique.  The  character-analytic

concept and technique of dealing with psychic disturbances is again in a state

of flux as a result of the discovery of psychic contactlessness and the fear of

establishing contact. It may well be that the ideas set forth in this writing will

soon prove to be incomplete, perhaps incorrect here and there. This would

demonstrate that only through living practice can one keep abreast of the

development of a new idea. Those who are seriously endeavoring to learn the

character-analytic technique will have no difficulty in recognizing in their

clinical work, and making full use of, the relationships between the mode of

psychic contact and vegetative excitability described here for the first time.

These relationships not only can help extricate our psychotherapeutic work

from the mystical atmosphere of present-day psychotherapy but also, under

fortuitous conditions, can guarantee otherwise unattainable successes. At thesame  time,  I  must  warn  the  analyst  not  to  become  overzealous  in  his

therapeutic expectations. There can no longer be any doubt of the superiority

of character analysis. But it is precisely the end stages of character-analytic

treatment, in particular the reactivation of the orgastic contact anxiety and its

overcoming, that are still too little understood and, therefore, insufficiently

mastered. Even by friends, the theory of the orgasm is grossly misunderstood.

There is still great ignorance regarding the uninhibited spontaneity of orgastic

surrender,  which  is  usually  confused  with preorgastic  excitation.  It  is

nonetheless certain that only by chance can character-analytic treatment be

successfully terminated without security in the orgasm question.

  The lecture upon which this essay is based terminated my membership in

the International Psychoanalytic Association. Its leadership no longer wanted

to identify itself with my views.


February 1935


  1. MORE ABOUT THE CONFLICT BETWEEN INSTINCT

                            AND OUTER WORLD


  To begin with, I want to call to mind the older psychoanalytic theories

which  my  work  takes  as  its  point  of  departure.  An  understanding  of  the

results of character-analytic research is not possible without a knowledge of

these theories.

  The  first  psychoanalytic  views  were  based  on  the  conflict  between

instinct and outer world. The complete disregard of this basic concept by

present-day  theories  has  no  effect  on  its  validity.  It  is  the  most  pregnant

formulation of all analytic psychology and its presence will be unmistakably

clear to every clinician in every case. The psychic process reveals itself as the

result of the conflict between instinctual demand and the external frustration

of this demand. Only secondarily does an inner conflict between desire and

self-denial  result  from  this  initial  opposition.  The  self-denial  is  the  basic

element of what is called “inner morality.” It is my intent to show at everypossible opportunity how this formula gives rise to basic theoretical views

about  the  psychic  conflict.  If  one  inquires  into  the  origin  of  instinctual

frustration, one goes beyond the compass of psychology, enters the field of

sociology, and encounters a fundamentally different complex of problems

than  those  encountered  in  the  field  of  psychology.  The  question  of  why

society demands the suppression and repression of instincts can no longer be

answered  psychologically.  They  are social,  more  correctly,  economic

                                                                                          1
interests  that  cause  such  suppressions  and  repressions  in  certain  eras.

Politics, which my opponents reproach me for mixing with science, tie in

directly with this rigidly—I should say, solely—scientific line of reasoning.

  When a young man discovers that the inhibition of his natural sexual

strivings is not necessitated by biological considerations, is not dictated by

the  death  instinct,  but  fulfills  definite  interests  of  those  who  wield  social

power; when he discovers that parents and teachers are merely unconscious

executors of this social power, then he will not take the position that this is a

highly interesting scientific theory. He will comprehend the misery of his life

in a new light, deny its divine origin, and begin to rebel against parents and

their taskmasters. He might even become critical for the first time and begin

                                                                                        2
to think about things. This and only this is what I understand as sex-politics.

  We know that the ego’s task is to mediate between such social influences

—which later become internalized as morality or inner instinct inhibition—

and biological needs. If we pursue the psychic manifestations of the latter,

i.e.,  the  id  phenomena,  far  enough,  we  reach  a  point  at  which  our

psychological methods of investigation are no longer adequate, for we have

entered the field of physiology and biology. Here is an important point of

difference between my opponents and me. I find it necessary to recognize

limits to the psychological method; my opponents “psychologize” sociology

and biology. After this, it will appear somewhat strange that the subject of

my investigation is precisely the development of vegetative excitations from

the character, i.e., psychic formations, and that I intend to accomplish thiswith the help of a psychological procedure. Am I guilty of a transgression of

my own principle? We prefer to postpone the answer until later.


            2. SOME TECHNICAL PRESUPPOSITIONS


  The relationships between psychic apparatus and vegetative excitation, as

I have attempted to describe them here, will remain incomprehensible if one

does not first free oneself from a source of error inherent in our method of

theoretical  cognition.  Theory  and  practice  are  inseparably  intertwined. An

incorrect theoretical attitude must of necessity lead to an incorrect technique,

and  an  incorrect  technique  produces  incorrect  theoretical  views.  If  we

attempt to discover the reasons behind the postulation of a death instinct, we

find, apart from reasons of a social nature—which I discussed elsewhere—

quite a few which cluster around the problem of technique. Many of those

who took part in the work of the Vienna Seminar for Psychoanalytic Therapy

will certainly remember how much trouble we had in mastering the problem

of the latent  negative  transference  of  our  patients,  both  theoretically  and

practically.

  It certainly would be no exaggeration to say that it wasn’t until sometime

between  1923  and  1930  that  we  gained  a practical  understanding  of  the

negative transference, i.e., long after it had been clinically established and

theoretically  formulated  by  Freud.  The  clinical  basis  upon  which  Freud

postulated his theory of the death instinct is the so-called negative therapeutic

reaction.  This  formulation  means  that  some  of  our  patients  react  to  our

analytic work of interpretation not by showing signs of improvement but by

developing  stronger  neurotic  reactions.  Freud  assumed  that  this

intensification was tied in with an unconscious guilt feeling or, as he called it

from then on, a “need for punishment” which compels the patient to resist the

therapeutic work and to persist in his neurosis, i.e., in his suffering. I admit

that I shared this view in the first years following the publication of The Ego

and the Id, and only gradually began to have doubts about it. In the technicalreports given at the Vienna seminar, three things became clear which shed

considerable light upon the secret of the negative therapeutic reaction: (1) the

patient’s negative tendencies, i.e., those springing from his repressed hate,

were not at all or only very inadequately analyzed; (2) analysts, even the

most  experienced,  operated  almost  exclusively  with  the  patient’s  positive

transferences, i.e., strivings for love; (3) the analyst usually regarded as a

positive transference what was merely secret, concealed, and repressed hate.

  It  wasn’t  until  shortly  before  the  Congress  of  the  Scandinavian

Psychoanalysts  in  Oslo  in  1934  that  I  succeeded  in  arriving  at  a  correct

formulation of the negative therapeutic reaction. Through our analytic work

we liberate psychic energy which urges toward discharge. If the patient’s

transferences  are  exclusively,  predominantly,  or  from  the  very  beginning

analyzed  as positive  transferences,  if  the  negative  manifestations  are  not

thoroughly uncovered before this is done, the following will be the result: the

liberated demands for love clamor for gratification and meet with strict denial

in the analysis, in part, also with the inner inhibitions which are formed from

the  repressed  hate  impulses  directed  against  the  love  object.  In  short,  we

believe that we have “liberated” the love impulses, but in reality the patient

has  remained  incapable  of  love.  According  to  the  laws  of  the  psychic

apparatus,  frustrated  love  is  transformed  into  hate.  The  undeveloped  hate

impulses which have remained in the unconscious act like a magnet on this

artifically produced hate. The two reinforce one another, the secondary hate

also becoming unconscious. Since it does not experience any discharge, it is

transformed into self-destructive intentions. Thus, the need for punishment

which we ascertain in our patients is, as I pointed out as early as 1926 in my

polemic  against  Alexander,  not  the  cause  but  the  product  of  the  neurotic

conflict. And the negative therapeutic reaction can be traced back to the lack

of a technique for handling the latent negative transference.

  As proof of the validity of this statement, I can allege that there is no

negative therapeutic reaction when two rules are followed: (1) The patient’sconcealed negative attitude is worked out before any other analytic work is

taken up; the patient is made conscious of this attitude; an outlet is secured

for all liberated aggression; every masochistic impulse is treated not as a

manifestation of a primary will to self-destruction but as aggression which, in

reality,  is  directed  against  objects  of  the  outer  world.  (2)  The  patient’s

positive expressions of love are not analyzed until they either are converted

into  hate,  i.e.,  become  disappointment  reactions,  or  finally  become

concentrated in ideas of genital incest. At this point, I am reminded of an

objection raised by Freud when I acquainted him with my initial views on

character-analytic technique. At one time or another, it has been raised by just

about all my colleagues, repeatedly by some. The gist of their argument is

that the analyst has no right to select; he has to deal with all material as it

presents itself. I gave the answer to this objection in Part I of the present

volume, so I can spare myself a repetition here. However, this objection leads

to a fundamental clarification of the theory behind the technique which I have

advocated  during  the  past  years.  I  want  to  summarize  it  briefly,  for  a

knowledge  of  it  is  indispensable  for  the  understanding  of  the  theoretical

results as well as the means of arriving at them.

  The first principle of analysis is to make the unconscious conscious. We

call this the work of interpretation. It is determined by the topographical

point  of  view.  However,  if  the  work  of  interpretation  is  to  fulfill  its

therapeutic function, it is necessary to take into account that resistances exist

between the patient’s unconscious psychic material and our interpretations

and that these resistances must be eliminated. This point of view corresponds

to the dynamics of the psychic process. On the basis of our experiences in

monitored analyses and in the Vienna seminar, it can be said that, while the

analyst is theoretically familiar with both points of view, he analyzes almost

exclusively according to the first, the topographical. This comes through very

clearly, for example, in both Stekel’s and Rank’s concept of analytic work.

But we would be guilty of a lack of self-criticism if we didn’t admit that all ofus have more or less neglected the dynamic point of view in our practical

work, simply because we did not know how to handle it.

    Character-analytic  work  adds  the structural  and  the economic  to  the

topographical and dynamic points of view in technique. This inclusion of all

our views of the psychic process in the method of our work had, for me at

least, a far greater revolutionary effect upon practice than the change from

direct interpretation of the unconscious contents to the resistance technique.

Once you include the structural and economic points of view, you can no

longer contend that the analyst should deal with whatever happens to appear.

I want to cite a few basic principles and outline what I attempted to establish

with thorough clinical evidence in Part I of the present volume.

  The material offered in the course of an analytic session is manifold; it

derives from various psychic layers as well as various historical stages of

development. Therapeutically and dynamically, then, the material is not of

equal value. Sex-economy imposes upon us a rigidly prescribed path which

begins with the analysis of the patient’s pregenital and negative attitudes and

ends  with  the  concentration  of  all  liberated  psychic  energy  in  the  genital

apparatus. The establishment of orgastic potency—this follows logically from

the theory of the orgasm—is the most important therapeutic goal.

  It  is  economically  determined  that,  essentially  from  the  contemporary

modes  of  behavior,  by  consistent  analysis  of  the  patient’s  bearing,  the

historically disarranged affects can be brought to the surface, related to the

contents of childhood ideas, and thus resolved.

  Character  analysis,  hence,  is  a  psychic  operation  which  proceeds

according  to  a  definite  plan  that  is  evolved  from  the  patient’s  particular

structure.

    Character analysis that has been correctly carried out, notwithstanding the

endless diversity in content, conflicts, and structures, exhibits the following

typical phases:

  1. Character-analytic loosening of the armor  2. Breaking down of the character armor, or, put another way, specific

destruction of the neurotic equilibrium

  3. Breakthrough of the deepest layers of strongly affect-charged material;

reactivation of the infantile hysteria

  4. Resistance-free working through of the unearthed material; extraction

of the libido from the pregenital fixations

  5. Reactivation of the infantile genital anxiety (stasis neurosis) and of

genitality

  6.  Appearance  of  orgasm  anxiety  and  the  establishment  of  orgastic

potency—upon which depends the establishment of the almost full capacity

for functioning

  Though the establishment of genitality appears obvious to many analysts

today,  orgastic  potency  is  not  known  and  not  recognized.  Until  1923,

“condemnation of the instincts” and sublimation were the only recognized

goals  of  therapy.  Impotence  and  frigidity  were  not  regarded  as  specific

symptoms of the neurotic organism but as symptoms among others, which

might or might not be present. It was known, to be sure, that there is an

orgasm and a climax, but it was contended that there are any number of

severe neuroses with “wholly undisturbed orgasms”; i.e., the sex-economic

nature and function of the orgasm were unknown. Neuroses were held to be

the manifestations of a sexual disturbance in general; from the point of view

of sex-economy, on the other hand, a neurosis could not result without a

disturbance in the genitality and could not be cured without the elimination of

this disturbance. Freud, Sachs, Nunberg, Deutsch, Alexander, and most of the

other  analysts  rejected  my  view  of  the  psycho-economic  and  therapeutic

importance of genitality. In Freud’s Introductory Lecture on Psychoanalysis

(1933!),  the  complex  of  questions  pertaining  to  the  genital  orgasm  is  not

mentioned at all, nor is it mentioned in Nunberg’s Neurosenlehre. Hence, the

question of the source of the energy of the neurosis remained unanswered.

  From the very beginning, the inclusion of the function of the orgasm inthe theory of the neurosis was felt to be a nuisance and it was dealt with

accordingly. As a matter of fact, it was not the result of purely psychological

                                                                          3
investigations  but  of  psycho-physiological  investigations.  Ferenczi’s

attempts to arrive at a theory of genitality were merely a “psychologization”

of  physiological  and  biological  phenomena.  The  orgasm  is  not  a  psychic

phenomenon. On the contrary, it is a phenomenon brought about solely by

the reduction of all psychic activity to the primal vegetative function, i.e.,

precisely by the suspension of psychic fantasizing and imaginative activity. It

is  nonetheless  the  central  problem  of  psychic  economy.  Its  inclusion  in

psychology not only permits a concrete treatment of the quantitative factor in

psychic life and the establishment of the connection between the psychic and

the physiological factor (i.e., vegetative factor). Over and above this, it leads

of necessity to a significant change in the psychoanalytic view of the neurotic

process. Formerly, the Oedipus complex was regarded as an explanation of

neurotic illness. Today we realize that whether or not the Oedipus complex

leads to neurosis depends upon other factors: the child-parent conflict does

not become pathogenic unless there is also a disturbance in the child’s sexual

economy;  this  early  disturbance  lays  the  groundwork  for  the  subsequent

malfunctioning  of  the  libido  economy  in  adulthood;  it  derives  its  energy

precisely from what helped to bring it about, i.e., the stasis of genital-sexual

      4
energy. In this way the accent was shifted from the content of the experience

to the economy of vegetative energy.

  Thus, the amount of material which the patient produced in the beginning

and  how  much  was  learned  about  the  patient’s  past  receded  into  the

background. Instead, the decisive question was whether those experiences

which operate as vegetative-energetic concentrations of energy were actually

obtained correctly.

  There are many analysts sympathetic to sex-economy who did not go

through this evolution of the cleavage in the theory of the neurosis and hence

do not comprehend the central importance of the orgasm question. If, further,one considers that only the application of the character-analytic technique

successfully leads to a penetration of the physiological phenomena of the

orgastic disturbance and its psychic representatives and that this technique is

partially  rejected  and  partially  not  mastered,  then  it  is  not  surprising  that

analysts are amazed to find that masochists are essentially characterized by a

particular kind of fear of the orgastic sensation. Yet the same thing applies

here as for the psychoanalytic conviction in general. Those who have not

experienced character analysis cannot criticize its findings, simply because

they lack the sense organ for it and the experience of it. At best, they can

grasp  it  intellectually;  the  essence  of  the  theory  of  the  orgasm  remains

inaccessible to their understanding. I have had occasion to analyze trained

and experienced analysts. They came to me with the familiar skepticism or

with the conviction “of having known all about this for a long time.” They

were  always  able  to  persuade  themselves  of  the  significant  difference

between the usual psychoanalytic procedure and character analysis and had to

admit  that  they  could  not  have  known  what  they  came  to  know  through

character analysis, for the simple reason that it would never have come to the

surface without the application of a definite technique. This is especially true

of the genuine orgastic sensations which appear for the first time during the

automatic contraction of the genital musculature.

  I am going to content myself with this not very extensive summary. The

inclusion of the patient’s psychic structure and libido economy in the analytic

work has considerably changed and complicated the picture, the mode of

procedure, and indeed, the basic view of technique. The work of analysis has

become much more difficult, which is certainly not a drawback, for this is

more than offset by the greater security and more durable and comprehensive

results which are achieved whenever the analyst succeeds in unraveling the

case in accordance with the character-analytic technique. Unfortunately, it

still cannot be contended that this approach succeeds in all cases.

  During  the  past  twelve  years,  technique  has  undergone  considerablechanges,  as  have  our  views  on  the  dynamics  of  the  psychic  apparatus.

Consequently, those analysts who have not followed this development are not

in a position to comprehend my views on technique and theory. I fear that the

gap has become difficult to bridge, even where it is maintained that my views

are shared by others.

  I want to take this opportunity to clarify a misunderstanding which comes

up every time I attempt to explain my views. One group of analysts contends

that everything I have to say is banal and has long been known to them, while

another group declares that my technique no longer has anything to do with

psychoanalysis, that it is misleading and faulty. How is this possible? Once

we understand how new scientific findings are made, we will no longer be

puzzled. On the one hand, my character-analytic technique grew out of the

Freudian resistance technique; as I see it, it represents its most consistent

development to this day. Hence, it must have fundamental similarities with

the Freudian technique. Because of these similarities, the first group of critics

I mentioned believes it is applying the same technique as I. However, on the

basis of innumerable cases taken over from other analysts, I can affirm that

this is not the case at all. The responsibility which I bear obliges me to make

this  assertion.  In  addition  to  the  similarities,  there  are  far-reaching  and

fundamental differences.

  On the other hand, the inclusion of new points of view, particularly the

setting of orgastic potency as the therapeutic goal, has changed the technical

procedure as a whole to such an extent that the second group of critics no

longer  recognizes  the  analytic  technique  in  it.  This  explanation  is

incontestable and is confirmed by the history of all sciences. New findings,

views, methods never grow out of a void; they are based on a firm foundation

—the painstaking work of other researchers. The differences and personal

antipathies  which  result  in  divergences  of  opinion  are  an  unfortunate  but

evidently  unavoidable  consequence  of  the  fact  that  a  quantitative  and

qualitative enrichment of certain aspects of knowledge is transformed intoqualitative changes of the whole.


      3. THE CHANGE OF FUNCTION OF THE IMPULSE


  We have to pursue our technical discussion a bit further. We shall see that

the theoretical results I arrived at in the end can be attained and demonstrated

only when the character-analytic as opposed to the straightforward resistance

technique, or even the obsolete technique of direct interpretation, is applied.

  One of the fundamental principles of the character-analytic technique is

that the repressed material is never loosened and made conscious from the

perspective of the instinct but always and solely from the perspective of the

        5
defense.

  Accordingly, the most important theoretical question here concerns the

organization,  function,  and  genesis  of  the  ego  structure,  from  which  the

defense proceeds; for only to the extent that we understand the ego defense

will our therapeutic work be effective. And, vice versa, a knowledge of the id

far less than a knowledge of the ego leads to an improvement of our technical

    6
skill. In this respect, the character-analytic line of questioning coincides with

the problem which has been a major concern of psychoanalytic research for

some  fourteen  years: how  does  the  ego  function?  We  all  remember  how

greatly impressed we were when Freud told us that until now we have studied

and understood merely what is repressed. We know too little about the origin

of the repression and about the structure of the ego defense. It was strange

that  so  much  less  was  known  about  the  ego,  that  it  was  so  much  more

difficult  to  arrive  at  an  understanding  of  it  than  it  was  to  arrive  at  an

understanding of what is repressed. Yet there can be no doubt that this is the

way it was, and this too must have its reasons. They are to be found not just

in the difficulties of psychological understanding.

  In The Ego and the Id, Freud posed the question of the origin of the

energy of the ego instinct; this was a great novelty for us at that time, 1922.

In answering this question, Freud made use of his theory of the death instinct,which he arrived at on the basis of the difficulties offered by the patient’s ego

to  the  elimination  of  the  repressions  and  to  the  cure.  According  to  this

concept, these difficulties derived from the need for punishment or, to put it

another way, from unconscious guilt feelings; in the final analysis, they were

said to be the expressions of primary masochism, i.e., the will to suffer. For

all that, the question of the structure of the ego defense and of the suppression

of the libidinal forces in man was not answered by the formulation of the

death instinct any more than was the question: what is the ego instinct?

  Let us briefly refresh our memory regarding some of the obscurities that

have always existed in analytic theory with reference to the nature of the ego

instinct. Originally, hunger, as opposed to sexuality, was conceived of as the

ego instinct serving the ends of self-preservation. This view was at variance

with the function of the ego instincts as antagonists of sexuality. Moreover,

several considerations of a sex-economic nature led to the insight that, in the

strict sense of the word, the hunger instinct cannot be regarded as an instinct

because  it  is  not  the  manifestation  of  an  overproduction  of  energy  as

sexuality is; it is, on the contrary, the manifestation of the lowering of the

energy level in the organism. Furthermore, we have long since conceived of

the need for food as belonging, in terms of its structure, to the id and not to

the ego. Thus, hunger could not constitute the energy of the ego instinct.

  Schilder once sought to contrast the ego instincts with the sexual instincts,

depicting the former as grasping and holding instincts. This view was not

tenable either, for there can be no doubt that the need to grasp and to take

hold of belongs to the function of the muscular apparatus and, therefore, is

part  of  the  reservoir  of  vegetative  energy.  Freud’s  ultimate  attempt  to

introduce  the  death  instinct  as  the  antagonist  of  sexuality  in  place  of  the

mysterious ego instincts merely substituted for the antagonism between ego

and id the antagonism between dual tendencies in the id itself. The problem

was more complicated than ever before.Diagram showing the change of function of the drive, inner
dissociation, and antithesis
wl

of

1 Primal conflict between drive (D) and outer world (W)

w

D V
11 Dissociation of the unitary striving under the influence

of the outer warld wl
b

h

I Antithesis of the dissociated strivings. (Id = Id in the
function of the ego instinct_(defense, change of func-

tion) w
l 1d

D
IV Drive (D) in double function (Id = defense and
S = substitute contact)
F = place where the instincts function changes
C = structural lack of contact
Defense (1d) and contemporary situation of the outer
world become a unity (inner morality = social ide-

ology)

  
  A detailed study of character-analytic work on the ego defense yielded an

answer that was actually quite obvious. It was then a question of finding out

why theoretical research had not hit upon it, though hints of it were abundant

in analytic theory.

  Once again we shall take as our point of departure the basic scheme of the

psychic  conflict  between  instinct  and  outer  world.  The  drive  (D)  whichstrives  toward  worldly  objects  comes  into  conflict  with  the  frustrating

counter-force of the outer-world prohibition (diagram I). The next question is

where the prohibition of the outer world obtains its energy to carry out its

function. Upon brief reflection, we see that only the content of the prohibition

stems from the outer world; the energy or, as we usually call it, the cathexis

with which the prohibition is carried out is drawn from the energy reservoir

of the person himself. Under the influence of a pressure exerted by the outer

world, an antithesis develops within the person; a dissociation or cleavage of

a unitary striving causes one drive to turn against another drive or even one

and the same drive to split up in two directions: one which continues to strive

toward the world and another which turns against itself. The turning of a

drive against itself is described by Freud in Trieb und Triebschicksale. The

new  problem  begins  where  we  run  up  against  the  process  of  inner

dissociation and opposition.  Let  us  cite  a  concrete  example:  when  a  boy

wants to masturbate with incest fantasies, then his self-love and his object-

libidinal  striving  constitute,  in  this  state,  a  unity;  the  striving  toward  the

mother lies in the same direction as self-love—they do not run counter to one

another. The prohibition of masturbation by the mother has the effect of a

frustration of the object-libidinal striving and threatens the boy’s narcissistic

inviolability  with  the  punishment  of  castration.  However,  at  that  moment

when the external frustration begins to take effect, the narcissistic striving for

self-preservation  opposes  the  striving  for  object-libidinal  masturbation

(diagram II and III). A variation of this is the cleavage of the affectionate tie

to the mother (the fear of the loss of love) and the sensuous sexual excitation.

Originally,  the  affectionate  component  and  the  sensuous  component

constituted a unity. Thus, the dissociation of the homogeneous striving is

followed by the opposition of the one part of the cleaved striving against the

other. It is now clear that the prohibition of the outer world can have an effect

only with the help of this energy which has become divided against itself.

  To  elaborate  on  this  schematic  representation,  I  shall  cite  anotherexample, which will lead us even closer to the problems of technique that

concern  us  here.  I  shall  choose  a  patient  who  was  characterized  by  an

exaggerated readiness to help, an inability to assume an aggressive attitude, a

characterological need to cling to people, and essentially passive behavior.

All the traits of his passive-feminine character were concentrated in a certain

obtrusive bearing, which served the purpose of constantly establishing and

maintaining contact with other people. It was not difficult to see that the

instinctual force with which he sustained these attitudes was his passive anal

homosexuality.  In  short,  the  patient’s  ego  made  use  of  an  id  impulse  to

maintain object relationships. This was the object-libidinal, world-oriented

function of his anality; in short, the id function.

  In the analysis, the patient’s character proved to be a powerful resistance

to  the  analytic  work.  From  the  point  of  view  of  character  analysis,  this

behavior  could  not  and  must  not  be  interpreted  as  the  manifestation  of

unconscious anal-homosexual strivings, though “in itself” one would have

been objectively correct in doing so. The economic and structural point of

view  pointed  in  another  direction.  If  my  formula  is  correct  that,  in  the

analytic  treatment,  the  most  important  character  trait  becomes  the  most

important  character  resistance,  then  the  question—where  is  the  defense

energy?—assumes greater significance than the banal fact that the patient

experiences anal-passive-feminine object strivings. The interpretation of the

ego defense was of no help here. It was quite some time before the search for

the defense energy of this behavior was completed, and then in a strange way.

It  turned  out  that  the  anal-passive-homosexual  striving  which  one  time

sustained the relationships to the outer world fulfilled the defense function of

the  ego  another  time  or  even  at  the  same  time.  Thus,  one  and  the  same

striving was split and served opposing functions, some times alternately and

other times simultaneously: one time as the striving toward an object, another

time as defensive ego drive.

  Minute  investigation  of  this  peculiar  fact  in  other  cases  which  wereanalyzed at this time and earlier demonstrated that this transformation, or,

rather, change of function in one and the same instinctual demand, that this

functioning simultaneously in the service of the id and in the service of the

ego  defense,  is  a  general  phenomenon.  Before  we  draw  a  theoretical

conclusion about this, let us cite a few clinical examples which are familiar to

all analysts. The sexual coquetry found in hysteria also shows this duality in

function. Flirtation is the expression of repressed genital desires, i.e., directed

toward the world. At the same time it is a defense against genitality, the

expression of an anxious “feeling out” of the object, to determine, as it were,

where  the  genital  danger  is  coming  from.  This  is  the  only  possible

explanation for the extensive sexual life of hysterical women suffering from

severe genital anxiety. The same holds true for the sadistic behavior of the

compulsive  neurotic  woman  who,  with  her  aggression  toward  the  loved

object,  simultaneously  gratifies  her  sadistic  relationship  to  the  object  and

wards off her own vaginal desires for intercourse.

  In  short,  the  ego  instincts  are  nothing  other  than  the  sum  total  of

vegetative demands in their defense function. We are merely building upon

well-established ideas when we say that the ego instinct is the id instinct

directed either against itself or against another instinct. The entire psychic

process  appears  to  be  characterized  by  the  cleavage  and  subsequent

opposition  between  tendencies  which  functioned  as  a  unit.  But  this  still

requires  extensive  clinical  proof.  These  findings  would  be  of  academic

interest  only  and  would  merely  constitute  theoretical  refinements  of  our

knowledge of the psychic apparatus if it were not for their consequences.

  First of all, there is the theoretical consequence: if the concept is correct

which  we  have  developed  of  the  structure  of  the  ego  and  the  defense

function,  then  the  systems,  “ego”  and  “id,”  appear  merely  as  different

                                      7
functions of the psychic apparatus and not as separate spheres of the psyche.

Once before, a similar question demanded an answer, namely: how is the

infantile, historical experience preserved in the present? The clinical datashowed that it did not rest as a kind of deposit in the unconscious but was

absorbed  into  the  character  and  expressed  essentially  as  formal  modes  of

behavior. And from these modes of behavior the content of past experiences

can be extracted, in the same way, for example, as sodium can be extracted

from sodium chloride. Even if not so clear-cut, relationships in the psychic

system are very similar. That which is repressed and that which wards off do

not  constitute  two  individual,  topically  separate  spheres  or  forces;  though

antithetical,  they  constitute  a  functional  unity.  Thus,  the  topographical

concept of the psychic apparatus is merely a helpful expedient, and Freud

was right in refusing to relegate the system unconscious to a deeper layer of

the nervous system. For example, the perception which the ego accomplishes

is no less a function of the vegetative system than is an instinct.

  The technical consequence is as follows: experience shows that we do not

or only insufficiently obtain the original energy of the repressed instinct if we

begin by interpreting its id function. In this case, it may well be that the

patient occasionally acquires a good intellectual understanding as well as a

deep conviction of the theoretical correctness of the analytic work. However,

the actual goal, the liberation of the instinct from repression, is achieved only

to a highly unsatisfactory degree. The structure of the instinct changes but

little. It is a different matter entirely if we begin by thoroughly destroying the

defense function of the same instinct. A large number of clinical observations

show that in this case and only in this way the vegetative sources of the

personality begin to flow anew. In short, we do not—this is the ineluctable

conclusion—really  eliminate  the  repression  when  we  work  with  id

interpretations.  Even  at  the  present  time,  it  is  possible  to  get  at  these

repressions with a definite legitimacy only if we extract the repressed instinct

from the character’s defense formation not as something repressed but, in the

first  place,  as  something repressive.  To  return  to  the  example  of  the

aforementioned patient; He remained unaffected in his total personality as

long  as  it  was  not  completely  clear  to  him  that  his  devoted  attituderepresented  not  love,  not  attachment,  not  helpfulness,  not  even

homosexuality, but, more basically, a warding off of something else. This

something  else  was—and  this  is  not  difficult  to  divine—strong  envy,

inhibited aggression, destructive intentions, and more of the same.

  Another patient exhibited sudden and uncoordinated changes of posture

of which he was not aware. Unquestioningly, he was suffering from some

          8
kind of tic. Had I given him a direct interpretation of the libidinal motives of

these movements, i.e., showed him their connection to masturbation, there

can be no doubt that the following would not have been forthcoming. To

begin  with,  I  persuaded  him  that  these  movements  were  motivated  by

embarrassment for the purpose of warding off a painful perception of his

external appearance. His vanity was opposed to the recognition of certain

physical traits. My interpretation of this defense immediately released great

excitation,  intensified  the  tic  and  the  self-consciousness,  and  led,  to  my

surprise, to violent convulsions of the pelvic musculature. These convulsions

turned out to be the warding off of blows which he fantasized were falling

upon his “pregnant” stomach. These convulsions of the pelvic muscles were

interpreted not as an expression of mother identification but as a warding off

of aggressive impulses toward an object. The patient’s immediate reaction to

this  interpretation  was  kicking  of  the  feet,  followed  by  violent  pelvic

movements with masturbation and orgasm during the session. It was not at all

necessary  for  me  to  interpret  the  tic-like  movement  as  a  substitute  for

masturbation.  He  experienced  the  connection  directly  and  unmistakably.

Even the slightest deviation from the rule of treating all attitudes as defense

would have thwarted this success.

  One  will  want  to  know  at  this  point  what  constitutes  the  essential

manifestation of the affective rearrangement in both cases. It consists in the

fact that, when the instinct’s defense function is correctly analyzed and every

interpretation of its id function is avoided, states of vegetative excitation and

tension  regularly  appear,  of  which  the  patient  was  not  previously  aware.When, on the other hand, the id functions are interpreted, these states are

absent  or  appear  only  by  chance—not  legitimately,  i.e.,  predictably.  The

above  patient,  for  example,  again  experienced,  for  the  first  time  since

suffering  a  strong  wave  of  repression  in  puberty,  hot  flashes,  severe

oppression  in  the  cardiac  region,  and  the  characteristic  sensations  in  the

region of the diaphragm indicative of the excitations of the coeliac ganglion.

They were sensations like those experienced on a swing or in a descending

elevator.  In  other  cases,  such  physical  sensations  appear  together  with  a

change of the kinesthetic feelings of the body (sensations of floating, falling,

etc.).

  The  nascent  indications  of  vegetative  excitation  can  be  essentially

summarized as follows: feeling of constriction in the region of the heart;

sensations of tension in the musculature, especially in the upper thigh and the

crown of the head; sensations of currents and nascent feelings of sensual

pleasure,  such  as  those  experienced  subsequent  to  a  gratifying  sexual

experience; sensations of pressure within the cranium; agitation; sensations of

hot  and  cold;  cold  shudders  along  one’s  spine;  itching  sensations,  quite

frequently in the urethra and at the perineum; salivation or dryness in the

mouth; feelings of strangulation; shortness of breath; feelings of dizziness;

feelings of nausea; “pulling” in the genital zone (as in falling); feelings in the

pit of the stomach similar to those experienced on a swing or in an elevator;

involuntary  twitching  of  the  musculature;  itchy  or,  rather,  “pleasurable”

feelings of contraction in the twitching of smooth muscle groups.

  Before we attempt to arrive at a theoretical formulation of the abundant

phenomena  of  this  kind,  we  have  to  return  once  again  to  our  point  of

departure, the structure of the character armor, from which, as is now quite

clear,  we  liberate  the  vegetative  energy  with  the  technique  of  character

analysis.


          4. THE INTELLECT AS DEFENSE FUNCTION  To begin with, we shall cite a clinical example to demonstrate once again

how precisely a person’s character conserves and at the same time wards off

the function of certain childhood situations.

  It is commonly assumed that the human intellect has a solely objective

function and that it is directed toward the world; ethics and philosophy in

particular  conceive  of  reason  and  intellect  exclusively  in  the  sense  of  an

absolute  non-emotional  activity  capable  of  comprehending  reality

“incorruptibly.” Two things are overlooked here: (1) the intellectual function

itself is a vegetative activity; and (2) the intellectual function may have an

affect charge whose intensity is no less than any purely affective impulse.

Over and above this, character-analytic work reveals another function of the

intellect which ties in very well with the inversion and opposition of drives

discussed earlier. Intellectual activity can be structured and directed in such a

way that it looks like a most cunningly operating apparatus whose purpose is

precisely to avoid cognition, i.e., it looks like an activity directing one away

from  reality.  In  short,  the  intellect  can  operate  in  the  two  fundamental

directions of the psychic apparatus: toward the world and away from the

world. It can function correctly in unison with the most lively affect and it

can  also  take  a  critical  stand  toward  the  affect.  There  is  no  mechanical,

absolutely antithetical relationship between intellect and affect but, rather, a

functional one.

  Until now, deriving the intellectual function from the vegetative function

has seemed very difficult. However, certain character-analytic experiences

pave the way to an understanding of this problem also. We’d like to illustrate

this through a patient in whom the affective genesis of a clever and cunning

intellectual function was evident in an interesting way.

    Character  analysis  had  succeeded  in  unmasking  and  eliminating  the

patient’s politeness and apparent devotedness as deception and the warding

off of strong aggressions. Now he began to develop the following defense.

Exceptionally intelligent, he sought to divine everything he concealed in theway of unconscious mechanisms and, in fact, he succeeded in destroying

most of the affect situations by divining them beforehand. It was as if, from a

secret hiding place, he continually illuminated and examined everything with

his intellect in order to preclude any surprises. It became more and more clear

that the intellect fulfilled a defensive function and was spurred by severe

anxious  anticipations.  For  example,  he  was  always  extremely  skilled  in

finding out what I happened to be thinking about him at any one moment. He

was  able  to  infer  this  from  various  factors  and  from  the  course  of  the

treatment. He was also able to divine and foresee what would happen at any

one point. From the point of view of character analysis, this behavior was

looked  upon  as  anything  but  cooperation;  rather,  it  was  attacked  as  an

extremely cunning way of avoiding deep insights. The first task was to render

this  weapon  unusable  to  the  patient,  and  this  could  be  done  only  by  the

consistent  analysis  of  its  function,  and  by  being  very  sparse  with  my

communications. The patient continued for a while to use his intellect as a

defense mechanism, but gradually became insecure and uneasy and finally

began to protest violently that I did not want to understand him, that his

intellectual help was a clear demonstration of his cooperation, etc. I became

that much more consistent in my analysis of his intellectual activity as a

defense against surprises. One day a term occurred to me for his behavior. I

told him that it reminded me of a cunning fox or lynx. And then, following a

short period of excitation, his defensive behavior fell to pieces. It happened

this way: once again he began the session by despairing that I no longer

understood him. Then, gradually, his attention was focused on a scene from

his  third  year  of  life  which  he  had  recounted  earlier  in  passing,  without

details and affect.

  He had taken a bad fall and severely injured his left arm, which required

medical attention. His father took him in his arms and carried him across the

street to a surgical hospital. Crying uncontrollably, he now remembered the

following  details:  he  passed  by  a  store  in  which  stuffed  animals  weredisplayed. He distinctly remembered two of them: a fox and a reindeer with

large antlers. During this hour, he was not able to remember what took place

between this observation and the operation. Then, however, he was able to

see himself lying on the operation table, his arms bound, his shoulders drawn

back in tense expectation. Suddenly he recalled the chloroform mask, after he

had momentarily hallucinated the smell of chloroform. The mask was about

to be placed on him and he thought: “This is a fox’s face which I am getting

here!” As a matter of fact, a fox’s head has a great similarity to a chloroform

mask. Even as a child, he knew that foxes are caught in traps; in his native

country, they were caught in steel traps with spikes that fasten upon one of

the animal’s legs and “break its bones.” On the way to the hospital, the boy

had strained his intellect to see how he might elude this calamity. This was

perhaps the first time that his intellect had served the purpose of warding off

a great and imminent danger. And the analytic treatment was warded off as a

danger  in  the  same  way,  cunningly,  “like  a  fox.”  The  patient  distinctly

remembered how, after a strained search for an escape, he had come to the

conclusion: “It’s useless, it’s altogether useless! I’m trapped.” Now it was

understandable how one of his most crucial weaknesses was established: he

had  become  cunning  and  cautious  to  such  a  degree  that  he  was  capable

neither of acting upon his political convictions nor—out of fear—of pursuing

a definite plan of action. He had been a fox in the trap his whole life and, as a

cunning fox, had actively bound the childhood fear of being caught in a fox

trap himself.


5. THE INTERLACING OF THE INSTINCTUAL DEFENSES


  It would be altogether misleading to assume that, through the loosening or

elimination of one defense, the conditions for libidinal flow are automatically

established or that this enables the patient to associate freely. Often, to be

sure, following the removal of a layer of the defense apparatus, liberated

affects begin to flow, together with the infantile material pertaining to them.The analyst would deprive himself of every further possibility of completely

breaking down the armor, however, if, in this intermediary phase, he did

anything more than extract from the flowing material what directly relates to

the  contemporary  transference  situation.  If  the  analyst  fails  to  follow  this

procedure, he will find that the resultant breach soon closes again and the

armor continues to function unaffected. The small breakthroughs following

the removal of individual layers of defense should not be confused with the

final breakdown of the armor. The reason for this is found in the specific

structure  of  the  armored  psychic  apparatus,  which  we  designate  as  the

interlacing of the defensive forces. The following example will illustrate this.

  If  the  analyst  has  unmasked  as  a  defense  function  and  eliminated  an

obtrusively polite attitude which represents the topmost layer of the psychic

apparatus, the warded-off impulses (e.g., aggression) appear and produce a

change in the patient’s bearing. From the point of view of character analysis,

it would be wrong at this time to point out to the patient that he is living out

his infantile aggression; it would be wrong even when this aggression appears

in an undisguised manner. As we have pointed out, this aggression is not only

the expression of an infantile relation to the world but also, and at the same

time, a warding off of what lies deeper, e.g., anal passive strivings. If now the

analyst  succeeds  in  removing  this  layer  of  defense,  what  may  rise  to  the

surface is not the expected passivity but a total absence of psychic contact, an

indifference  toward  the  analyst,  etc.  This  lack  of  contact  is  unequivocal

defense, i.e., the warding off of a fear of being disappointed. If, by analyzing

this  contactlessness,  the  analyst  succeeds  once  again  in  bringing  to  the

surface this fear of being disappointed, then the lack of contact too might

assume the character of a deep infantile fear of losing the loved object; at the

same time, however, it wards off deeper aggressive impulses toward that love

object  which  once  withdrew  its  love.  Our  example  can  be  varied,

complicated, or simplified at will, according to the type. For example, the

deeper layer of aggression which emerges could itself be the expression oforiginal destructive impulses; at the same time, however, it could also have

the function of warding off very intense oral-narcissistic demands for love.

From  the  point  of  view  of  character  analysis,  it  would  again  have  to  be

interpreted as defense and not as a vegetative instinctual expression. Hence,

the layers of the armor are interrelated, i.e., every impulse which has been

warded  off  serves  at  the  same  time  to  ward  off  more  deeply  repressed

impulses.  The  final  breakthrough  is  achieved  only  after  the  analyst  has

worked through the many defense functions.

  In our patient, therefore, the vegetative excitation quite possibly would

not break through until after the oral-narcissistic demands for love had been

analyzed as a warding off of genuine, original love impulses of an oral or

genital nature. Working through the various stages of the defense formations

requires  exceptional  patience  and  the  conviction  that  eventually  original

instinctual impulses will appear which no longer figure as defense. When this

point has been reached, a new cathexis of the patient’s genitality has usually

already taken place. However, the interrelation of the defense functions still

requires a very thorough clinical supplementation.

  In  this  connection,  it  is  necessary  to  discuss  the  point  of  view

                            9
promulgated  by  Kaiser  that  interpretations  could  be  dispensed  with

altogether. First of all, a misunderstanding arises from the fact that Kaiser

takes interpretation to mean only the making conscious of what has been

warded off. In my discussion of the character-analytic technique, I use the

term for every form of analytic communication. Kaiser’s restriction of the

concept  of  interpretation  may  even  have  certain  advantages;  according  to

him, the establishment of a superficial analytic connection or the isolation of

a character trait would not be an interpretation in the strict sense of the word.

Even with this reservation in mind, I can concur with Kaiser in theory only if

he  means  that  consistent  resistance  analysis  not  only  makes  every

interpretation superfluous but even excludes it as an error. He seems to forget

that my formulation of the “interpretation at the end” is a practical necessityas long as the character-analytic technique has not been perfected to such a

degree  that  we  can  feel wholly  secure  in  dealing  with  the  defense

mechanisms.  Thus,  his  contention  holds  true  only  for  the  ideal  case  of

character-analytic work. I must admit that I am still a long way off from this.

At the present time, I am still struggling with the analysis of the defense

formation, especially with the problems of contactlessness and the interlacing

of the defense functions. Perhaps what makes correct character-analytic work

so difficult at present is a consideration that I find lacking in Kaiser, namely

the consideration of the sex-economic point of view of working in such a way

that as much as possible of all sexual excitation becomes concentrated in the

genital zone and appears there as orgasm anxiety.


                          6. CONTACTLESSNESS


    Originally, character analysis conceived of the psychic armor as the sum

total of all repressing defense forces; it could be dynamically broken down

through the analysis of the formal modes of behavior. Later it was shown that

this concept did not embrace the psychic armor in its totality; indeed, that it

probably overlooked the most important factor. We gradually came to see

that, even after the formal modes of behavior had been completely broken

down,  even  after  far-reaching  breakthroughs  of  vegetative  energy  were

achieved, an undefinable residue always remained, seemingly beyond reach.

One had the feeling that the patient refused to part with the last reserves of

his “narcissistic position” and that he was extremely clever in concealing it

from himself and from the analyst. Even as the analysis of the active defense

forces and of the character reaction formations seemed to be complete, there

was no doubt that an elusive residue existed. Here the analyst was faced with

a  difficult  problem.  The  theoretical  concept  of  the  armor  was  correct:  an

aggregate of repressed instinctual demands which were directed toward the

outer  world  stood  in  opposition  to  an  aggregate  of  defense  forces  which

maintained  the  repression;  the  two formed  a  functional  unity  within  theperson’s specific character. In short, while we understood both what had been

warded off and what warded it off, we still had no conclusive insight into the

residue.

  The explanation that one and the same instinct is simultaneously directed

toward the world and serves as a defense function against one’s own ego

broadened our knowledge of the ego structure, but it did not really solve the

problem.  I  want  to  use  a  clinical  example  to  illustrate  that psychic

contactlessness constitutes the elusive residue of the armor.

  In the patient discussed earlier, analysis revealed that, behind the reactive

passive-feminine behavior, there was a deep estrangement from the world,

from its objects and goals, which was expressed as apathy and inflexibility.

The patient himself had no immediate awareness of this; on the contrary, his

passive-feminine dependency glossed over this estrangement and gave him

the impression of having especially intense relations to the outer world. I was

faced with a contradiction difficult to resolve. On the one hand, there was his

libidinal  stickiness,  his  readiness  to  be  of  help  and  to  be  obliging,  i.e.,

relationships which seemed to be very intense; at the same time, this was a

clear case of contactlessness. The problem was solved as it became possible

to comprehend the origin of the patient’s attachment and dependency. These

attitudes,  it  turned  out,  not  only  fulfilled  the  function  of  holding  in

suppression  the  repressed  aggressive  tendencies  but,  over  and  above  this,

they compensated for his inner estrangement from the world. Thus, we must

distinguish the following:

  First: the repressed demands.

  Second: the repressing defense forces.

  Third:  a  layer  of  the  psychic  structure  between  the  two,  the

contactlessness, which, at first, appears not as a formation of dynamic forces

but as a rigid, static manifestation, as a wall in the psychic organism, the

result of the contradiction between two libidinal currents pulling in opposing

directions.  This  structure  can  be  best  comprehended  when  its  history  isknown.

  After discovering this special form of contactlessness in our patient, we

undertook a review of our clinical experiences. This contactlessness, it turned

out, is as general a phenomenon of neurosis as is the change of function of

the  instinct.  But  before  giving  another  clinical  example  to  illustrate  the

genesis of this formation, let me offer a brief summary of the theoretical

concept of contactlessness. When libidinal tendencies flow toward the outer

world—we keep intentionally to this image—and a prohibition from the outer

world  checks  this  flow,  then,  in  certain  situations,  an  equilibrium  is

established between the instinctual force on the one hand and the frustrating

force on the other hand. It might be said that this equilibrium is a seemingly

static condition in the person’s libidinal flow corresponding to an inhibition.

And this dynamic condition may perhaps lie at the basis of the fixation of

instincts at earlier stages of development, as well as at the basis of psychic

inhibition in general.

  This condition will become much clearer as we go along. It can even be

described differently, though we have nothing different in mind. When an

instinct is taken over by the ego for the purpose of gratification and it meets

with a frustration, it can, as we pointed out, split up or dissociate. One part of

it  turns  against  itself  (reaction  formation);  another  part  continues  in  the

original direction toward the outer world. When this happens, however, the

dynamic  relations  have  changed.  At  the  point  where  the  current  directed

toward the outer world and the current turned toward one’s own ego diverge,

a condition of paralysis or rigidity arises. This is more than just a heuristic

hypothesis. Once the analyst has thoroughly grasped this process and has

instructed his patients to give him an exact description of their feelings, he

will find that they experience this inhibition distinctly and directly in all their

object relations. The manifestations of this dynamic-structural condition are

different; I shall merely name a few of the more frequent clinical ones.

  At the top of the list we have the feeling of inner isolation. This feeling issometimes  present  in  spite  of  an  abundance  of  social  and  professional

relationships.  In  other  cases,  we  meet  with  a  feeling  described  as “inner

deadness.”  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  compulsive  neurotic  or,  more

specifically, schizoid depersonalization belongs to this group. The dualistic

perceptions  of  schizophrenic  patients  are  a  direct  manifestation  of  this

condition.  When  patients  complain  about  being  estranged,  isolated,  or

apathetic, their feeling can be traced back to this contradiction between the

object-libidinal current and the tendency to escape into oneself. Cleavage and

ambivalence are direct manifestations of this paradox; the apathy is the result

of  the  equilibrium  created  by  the  two  opposing  forces.  Thus,  our  earlier

concept of contactlessness as a wall is not altogether correct. It is more an

interplay between dynamic forces than a passive attitude. The same is true of

the affect-block in the compulsion neurosis and catatonic rigidity. We must

content ourselves with these examples.

  After we have succeeded in breaking through the armor, we observe an

alternation between vegetative current and affective block in our patients.

The transition from the condition of motility to that of rigidity is one of the

most  important  therapeutic  and  theoretical  problems  if  one’s  goal  is  to

reestablish the capacity for vegetative streaming. Similar conditions of the

blocking of the affects or of the development of apathy were met with during

the  war  and  they  were  described  by  political  prisoners  who  had  been

subjected to terroristic treatment. Here, apparently, the affects of aggressive

rage are offset by the inhibition imposed by the external power. Since this

continual oscillation from one direction to the other is neither economical nor

tolerable for the psychic apparatus, the individual becomes stultified. This

state, however, is not a passive attitude or a final ossification of a dynamic

condition; it is, as we have said, the result of a conflict of forces. This can be

proven by two facts. First, external conditions or character-analytic efforts

can dissolve this dulling into its dynamic components. To the extent that this

dulling  gives  way,  sexual  strivings,  aggression,  as  well  as  anxiety,  i.e.,centripetal  tendencies  of  flight,  reappear  in  the  individual.  This  further

confirms  the  sex-economic  concept  of  sexuality  and  anxiety  as  two

antithetical directions of currents.

  What we later meet in our patients as repressed instinct, repressing force,

and intermediate inner estrangement operating simultaneously in fact arose in

a definite historical sequence. This will be demonstrated by the following

example.

  A patient who suffered acutely from the feeling of inner deadness (as

opposed  to  the  other  patient,  who  did  not  sense  this  condition)  was

characterized  by  an  exaggeratedly  formal,  polite,  and  reserved  bearing;

people with free-flowing vegetative motility found him rigid and unalive. A

certain dignity which he displayed completed the picture. His most intense

secret wish was “to feel the world” and “to be able to flow.” The character-

analytic  loosening  of  his  affects  from  these  attitudes  led  to  a  complete

reactivation  of  those  childhood  situations  that  formed  the  basis  of  his

contactlessness and yearning for psychic vitality. The following symptoms

stood out in his neurosis: an extremely intense fear of object-loss, strong

depressive  reactions  when  he  failed  to  have  an  immediate  erection  while

kissing a woman, and more of the same. First of all, it was learned that the

immediate cause of these symptoms was—in addition to the yearning for a

vital object relationship—a strong inner inclination to retreat, a tendency to

give up the object at the drop of a hat. This inclination stemmed from the fear

of  his  own  hatred  toward  the  very  object  through  which  he  sought  to

experience “a flowing feeling.” It is important that he suffered from penis

anesthesia or, to put it another way, from a lack of the feeling of vegetative

contact. Especially pronounced manifestations of such conditions are found

in  compulsive  characters.  Their  formula  of  the  “new  life”  that  they  are

constantly on the verge of beginning, their feeling that they have the capacity

to be “different,” i.e., vital and productive and not rigid, unalive, and “dead,”

is merely an expression of the last traces of vegetative motility and is usuallythe strongest incentive to recover. To return to our patient: when the penis

anesthesia was eliminated, the feeling of contactlessness also disappeared;

but  it  immediately  returned  when  the  genital  disturbance  reappeared.  The

correlations  between  psychic  contactlessness  and  physiological  lack  of

feeling on the one hand and the capacity for contact and vegetative sensitivity

on the other had their roots in the patient’s early history. Briefly summarized,

it is as follows:

  The patient had had a strong genital-sensual attachment to his mother and

had been rejected when he attempted to approach her in a sensual and genital

way. It is important that the mother not only did not prohibit non-genital

surface  contacts,  e.g.,  lying  together  side  by  side,  embracing,  etc.,  but

specifically encouraged them. When his genital impulses were repulsed, he

retained  the  genital  tendency  toward  the  mother  but  simultaneously

developed a strong aggressive-sadistic attitude toward her which gradually

supplanted  the  genital  tendency  altogether.  This  attitude  too  had  to  be

repressed because of frustration and fear of punishment. From then on, he

found  himself  entangled  in  a  conflict  between  affectionate  love  for  his

mother, culminating in the striving for physical contact with her, and hatred

of her, fear of the hatred as well as of the genital striving and the fear of

losing the love object. Later, no matter how often he approached a woman, a

sadistic  attitude  overcame  the  genital  striving,  which  was  more  or  less

repressed, and caused him to retreat. To meet the demands of the childhood

repression, it had been necessary to deaden the genital sensation in his penis.

Even  today,  we  cannot  explain  how  this  is  possible.  In  this  case,  the

aggressive  impulse  probably  checked  the  sexual  impulse  and  vice  versa.

Where erective potency is present, the absence of genital sensation (vaginal

anesthesia is the same) is the direct expression of the loss of the capacity for

contact as well as its most salient characteristic. We can assume that we are

dealing here not only with a psychic process but also with a change, probably

of the electro-physiological functions on the skin of the penis. At a deeperlevel, the feeling of deadness had the same meaning to the patient as not

having a penis or not feeling his penis. The rational reason for this was the

fact that the penis had lost its capacity to feel. His deep depression resulted

                      10
from this condition.

  His deep estrangement from the world, then, developed at the point where

his natural, original genital striving came into conflict with the aggression

toward  the  object  and  the  inclination  to  retreat  which  resulted  from  that

conflict. One would certainly be justified in generalizing about this process:

wherever natural, adequate instinctual impulses are denied direct relationship

to objects of the world, the result is anxiety, as the expression of a crawling

into oneself, and the development of a wall of contactlessness. This is seen in

the child following the first severe phase of genital repression, as well as in

the young adolescent when, because of external reasons or inner inability, he

cannot attain the object. It is also the case among couples who have been

married for a long time when the genital relationship has lost its aliveness and

other forms of sexual gratification have been suppressed. In all these cases, a

picture  emerges  of  psychic  dulling,  characterized  by  resignation,  apathy,

feelings of isolation, and severe impairment of one’s activity and objective

interests.

  In the attempt to comprehend the dynamics of the character, one meets

difficulties of a linguistic nature at every step. To describe the function of

inhibition and contactlessness as faithfully as possible, we have to make a

further  correction  in  our  present  concept,  one  that  requires  a  far-reaching

change in our thinking regarding the psychic apparatus. We pointed out that,

between the layer of what is repressed and what represses (the defense), we

find  a  layer  of  contactlessness.  This  intermediate  layer  corresponds  to  an

inhibition which results from the opposition between two instinctual impulses

or the cleavage of a single instinctual impulse.Tnhibition

Inhibition

 

Antithesis Dissociation
Schema of the inhibition


  In  this  formulation,  however,  we  neglected  the  fact  that  the  neurotic

psychic  apparatus  consists  not  of one  warded-off  and one  warding-off

impulse but of an infinite number of strivings which are partially dissociated

and partially set off against one another. Further, in the interlacing of the

defense forces, an impulse that has risen to the surface from the depth of the

armor  can  exercise  a  defense  function.  It  is  very  likely,  indeed,  that  all

psychic  tendencies  are  dissociated  into  those  operating  simultaneously

“toward the world,” “away from the world,” and in opposition to one another.

In short, we get the picture of a complicated web of forces (armor structure),

in which warded-off and warding-off elements are not neatly separated, as

our complacency would have it. Rather, these elements are entangled in an

extremely irregular manner. Only our character-analytic work brings order

into  the  picture  corresponding  to  the  history  of  the  structure.  In  no  way

whatever  is  this  structural  view  compatible  with  any  concept  of  a

topographical stratification. What is warded off and what wards off are linked

together in a functional unity, let us say, in a character inhibition, as Na and

Cl in NaCl, or positive and negative electric forces in a “neutral” condition. If

one considers the infinite multitude of such unifications of various tendencies

and of single tendencies which have become split, then it becomes clear that

any  effort  to  comprehend  these  phenomena  through  a  mechanistic  andsystematic thought-process will fail. Functional and structural thinking and

imagination  are  required  here.  The  development  of  the  character  is  a

progressive unfolding, splitting, and antithesis of simple vegetative functions.

Perhaps the following diagram of forces operating in various directions will

provide some idea of this:



















Schema of the structure of the armor


  Hence,  contactlessness  is  not  a  layer  between  two  layers  of  opposing

forces; it is a phenomenon corresponding to the positions of a concentration

or  special density  of  antitheses  and  dissociations.  What  we  perceive  in

character analysis as a compact, tenacious, or entangled formation is just such

a concentration of opposing forces in the character. We have already stressed

how important it is to approach and analyze such a character formation from

the “right end.”

  During  the  treatment,  character  traits  such  as  reserve  and  reticence

become  a  compact  character  resistance,  e.g.,  in  the  form  of  a  stubborn,

apprehensive silence. It is completely alien to character analysis to overcome

such silences by urging, demanding, or persuading the patient to talk. The

patient’s silence is usually the result of an inability to articulate his innerimpulses.  Urging  and  persuading  intensify  the  stubbornness;  they  do  not

eliminate the disturbance of the patient’s ability to express himself but make

it worse. The patient of course would like to talk, to open his heart to the

analyst. For some reason or other, however, he cannot. No doubt, the very

fact of having to talk inhibits him. He does not know that he is not able to

express himself, but is usually of the opinion that he does not want to. In

secret, he hopes that the analyst will understand him in spite of his inability to

open himself. This desire “to be understood” is usually accompanied by a

warding off of any help: a stubborn attitude is assumed. This makes the work

difficult but not impossible.

  Instead  of  urging,  persuading,  or  even  resorting  to  the  well-known

“silence technique,” the analyst consoles the patient, assuring him that he

understands his inhibition and, for the time being, can do without his efforts

to communicate. In this way, the patient is relieved of the pressure of “having

to” talk; at the same time he is disarmed of any contemporary reason for

being  stubborn.  If  now  the  analyst  succeeds  in describing  the  patient’s

attitudes  to  him  in  a  simple  and  precise  manner,  without  expecting  any

immediate changes, the patient readily feels himself “understood,” and his

affects begin to stir. At first he struggles against them by intensifying his

silence, but eventually he grows restless. This nascent restlessness is the first

movement away from the condition of rigidity. After several days, or at most

weeks,  of  careful  description  and  isolation  of  his  attitudes,  he  gradually

begins to talk. In most cases, the character trait of silence is caused by a

constriction of the throat musculature of which the patient has no awareness;

this constriction chokes off “emerging” excitations.

  Technically, therefore, it is by no means sufficient to want to destroy

contactlessness. Merely to reconstruct the history of its development or to

uncover the instinctual and defensive forces upon which it rests, i.e., which

constitute it, is not enough. It must, rather, as with every character attitude, be

isolated and objectified before it is taken apart analytically. This can be donein  various  ways,  depending  on  the  case.  Essentially,  however,  it  is

accomplished by a thoroughgoing description of the patient’s behavior. It can

also be done by continually stressing the disparity between the person’s ideal

demands and the actual barrenness of his or her mode of existence; through

demonstration of his objective lack of interest, which results in failure or

contradictions  in  his  work;  unmasking  the  deep  and  palpable  psychic

bleakness of his experiences, in spite of the seeming intensity of his love life.

In this way, the contactlessness is pushed to the outer limits of agony. Its

complete  unfolding  and  subsequent  dissolution  are  usually  achieved  only

when  the  demands  for  living  contact  with  reality,  as  a  result  of  liberated

sexual excitations, have become urgent. Once the patient has begun to sense

the first, even though weak, sensations of orgastic streaming in his body,

especially in the genital, the feeling of contactlessness is no longer tolerable.

Just as the general feeling of contactlessness, regardless of which psychic

layer it is found in, is merely the general reflection of orgasm anxiety, that is,

fear of orgastic contact, so too it completely disappears of its own accord

when the capacity for orgastic contact has been realized.

  The investigation of those psychophysical mechanisms which lead from

the  condition  of  full  experience  to  the  condition  of  inner  emptiness  or

confinement cannot yet be regarded as complete. Much still lies in the dark

here. What is most puzzling is the fact that the withdrawal of sexual interest

or the inhibition of an outwardly striving impulse is directly experienced as a

growing  feeling  of  “coldness,”  “numbness,”  “hardness,”  “deadness.”  “My

soul is like a frozen-over lake,” a patient once said. Our earlier explanation of

this phenomenon as the “inhibition” caused by two opposing forces is correct

but incomplete. And the explanation that it is libido which is drawn off does

not  add  to  it.  Words  cannot  replace  dynamic  comprehension.  We  simply

don’t  know  the  answer  yet.  There  is  a  way  of  investigating  this  life-

destroying phenomenon, however, if we allow the patient to reexperience the

precise  history  of  the transition  from  being  vitally  alive  to  being  utterlyfrozen; and if, in the treatment, we pay minute attention to the oscillation

from the one condition to the other. Strange inner modes of behavior are

revealed  when  this  procedure  is  followed.  One  patient,  for  example,

experienced  the  transition  in  the  following  way.  He  had  to  repeat

mechanically: “It’s useless; it’s utterly useless,” etc. The meaning behind this

was: “What’s the use of trying, of competing, of sacrificing, even of loving?

The other person does not understand me anyhow.” Certainly one of the most

tragic experiences of children results from the fact that at an early age not

every feeling and desire can be expressed and articulated. The child must find

some  other  way  to  appeal  for  understanding  of  the  unexpressible  psychic

condition. But parents and teachers, being what they are, are seldom capable

of divining what is going on in the child. In vain the child makes his appeal,

until finally he gives up the struggle for understanding and grows numb: “It’s

utterly useless.” The road between vital experiencing and dying inwardly is

paved  with  disappointments  in  love.  These  disappointments  constitute  the

most frequent and most potent cause of internal dying. This, however, bitter

as it is, still does not explain the mechanism involved in the process.

  What very often sets this process in motion and sustains it is a fear of

contact  with  things,  experiences,  and  persons,  operating  at  the  center  of

which,  according  to  my  experience,  is  the  fear  of  orgastic  contact.  It  is

usually acquired from the infantile masturbation anxiety. Accordingly, the

fear of orgastic contact constitutes the core of the fear of genuine, direct

psychic  contact  with  persons  and  with  the  processes  of  reality.  The

overcoming of this fear is one of the most important and most difficult tasks

of character-analytic therapy. Again and again patients, even those who have

been completely liberated from their infantile fixations, relapse immediately

into  their  old  neurotic  conditions  when  they  are  faced  with  realizing  the

capacity  for  genital-orgastic  contact.  This  requires  the  overcoming  of  the

orgasm anxiety. In every correctly executed character-analytic treatment, this

phase, which is sharply delineated in most cases, sets in some time after thearmor has been dissolved. Its characteristics are: superficiality of the analytic

communications; dreams and fantasies of falling; general intensification of

the  attitude  of  reticence,  such  as  intentional  avoidance  of  the  subject  of

genital  desires;  greater  frequency  of  more  or  less  clear  ideas  of  physical

disintegration  (these  are  not  to  be  confused  with  castration  fantasies);

annulment  of  all  prior  therapeutic  accomplishments;  escape  from  every

sexual or objective relationship to the world; reactivation of early childhood

modes  of  reaction;  reappearance  of  the  inner  feeling  of  emptiness  and

desolation, etc. This phase requires a thorough analysis of the attitudes and

sensations  which  the  patient  has  during  masturbation  and/or  intercourse.

When these attitudes and sensations are thoroughly analyzed, it is observed

that  at  a  certain  point  the  patients  in  some  way  inhibit  the  increase  of

excitation. They do not allow the wave of excitation to mount; they disrupt

the excitation by means of short, rapid movements; they constrict their pelvic

muscles without being aware of it; they distract themselves unconsciously by

means of associations; they refuse to yield to the impulse to stretch the pelvis

far  forward;  they  very  frequently  stop  the  movement  and  hold  still  the

moment they begin to experience the orgastic sensation, instead of letting

themselves go and increasing the release in spontaneous, rhythmic friction.

The most difficult orgastic inhibition to dispel is the one in which no external

sign of the kind described above is found, and the excitement simply dies

away. This “going cold” is often difficult to understand.

  I  want  to  call  special  attention  to  a  conspicuous  (and  regularly

overlooked) attitude in the act of intercourse. If there is a fear of orgastic

contact and the psychic contactlessness pertaining to it, then the vegetative

impulse to produce friction is always missing. When, however, preorgastic

contact is complete, this impulse operates automatically. In the former case,

what  happens  is  that,  to  overcome  the  contactlessness  and  to  arrive  at  a

release in spite of the fear, a forced, impetuous, consciously produced friction

often  takes  the  place  of  the  gentle,  self-regulating,  emotionally  governedrhythm. The fear of genital contact cannot be uncovered and eliminated until

this form of friction has been analyzed as a warding off of sensations and as a

constricted  desire  for  release.  Patients  usually  offer  strong  resistance  to

giving up this form of friction and opening themselves to a vegetative kind of

friction. They do not want to be taken by surprise by the orgastic convulsion.

    Generally, it can be said that correct and successful character analysis is

characterized by three phenomena.

  1) A thorough dissolution of the armor

  2) Complete development of the fear of orgastic contact

  3) Complete overcoming of the orgastic inhibition and establishment of

totally uninhibited, involuntary movement at the moment of climax

  The effort required in most cases to bring about a concentration of the

excitation in the orgasm anxiety and then to overcome this anxiety is amply

rewarded by the rapid and complete change in the patient’s general behavior,

i.e., his free-flowing vegetative motility.


                        7. SUBSTITUTE CONTACT


  The more extensively vegetative motility is suppressed in childhood, the

more difficult it will be for the adolescent to develop relationships to the

world,  to  love  objects,  to  his  work,  and  to  reality  in  general,  which  are

commensurable with this stage of life. In such a case, it is that much easier to

sink into the condition of estranged resignation, and the substitute relations

which are formed will be that much more unnatural. Most of what official

adolescent psychology considers the “characteristics of puberty,” turn out in

character-analytic work to be the artificially produced effect of obstructed

natural sexuality. This holds true for daydreaming as well as for inferiority

feelings. The latter express an imagined inferiority and ideals too divorced

from  reality;  they  are  also  reflective  of  a  concrete  contradiction  in  the

structure. The feeling of inferiority is the inner perception of the gap between

actual performances in the sexual and social spheres and the latent capacitiesand possibilities inhibited by the paralysis of vegetative motility. Most people

are actually far less potent than they imagine themselves in their dreams, and

are endowed with far greater qualities and capacities than they translate into

action. This grotesque contradiction in the structure of modern man is one of

the consequences of the destructive regulation of sexuality imposed upon him

by the society. To eliminate this contradiction is one of the most important

tasks that a new social order will have to accomplish. The productive power,

“working power,” depends essentially upon how closely actual achievement

approximates  the  latent  capacity  for  it,  i.e.,  upon  the  reestablishment  of

vegetative motility.

  These conditions are psychically unbearable and socially damaging in the

long run. The psychic apparatus, which is sustained by constantly flowing

vegetative energy, rebels against this contradiction, perceives it more or less

consciously as a severe impairment of life, and attempts to come to terms

with it in various ways. We shall not go into the neurotic symptoms which

result from the sexual stasis. For us, it is more important to investigate the

character functions which arise for the first time in this struggle. Once the

immediate vegetative contact with the world has been more or less destroyed,

when the remaining traces of vegetative contact are no longer sufficient to

preserve  the  relationship  to  the  outer  world,  either substitute  functions

develop or there are attempts to establish a substitute contact. Let us give

some clinical examples to illustrate the difference between substitute contact

and direct vegetative contact. The difficulty lies in the fact that the substitute

contact is also sustained by vegetative instinctual energy (this is what the

former has in common with the latter). But the similarities are less important

than  the  differences.  Thus,  while  the  passive-feminine  behavior  of  the

passive-feminine character is sustained by anal excitations, this behavior is a

substitute contact which has taken the place of a natural contact precluded by

the situation of frustration. So, even as an adult, the young man has to rebel

against a domineering and authoritarian father to secure his independence andto  unfold  his  own  capacities.  He  is  not  in  possession  of  the  aggression

necessary for such a course, however, because it is repressed. To hold this

aggression in repression, he develops a passive-feminine mode of behavior

and  attempts,  instead  of  coming  to  grips  with  the  world  with  sublimated

aggression,  to  map  out  a  way  of  life  based  on  neurotic  compliance  and

requiring the greatest personal sacrifices.

  The  sadistic  attitude  of  the  compulsive  neurotic,  genitally  disturbed

woman  toward  the  male  has  the  function  not  only  of  warding  off  her

genitality  but,  over  and  above  this,  of  compensating  for  the  libidinal

estrangement which resulted from this process, as well as the function of still

preserving the contact with the original love object, even if in a different

form. In the same way, the artificial, spurious, exaggerated expressions of

affection exchanged between spouses are substitute contact functions in the

absence of a genuine sexual relationship. By the same token, the neurotically

aggressive behavior of querulous couples is a warding off and compensation

for passive-feminine impulses toward the man or natural genital impulses

toward the woman; over and above this, it is an attempt, prompted by the

absence of immediate vegetative contact, to remain in touch with the world.

Masochistic behavior is not only the expression and, in a certain sense, the

warding off of repressed sadistic aggression; it is also a substitute function

for natural relations to the outer world. The masochistic character is incapable

of direct expressions of love.

  Once the difference between the manifestations of free-flowing, direct

vegetative  contact  and  of  spurious,  secondary,  circuitous  substitute

relationships has been thoroughly comprehended, it is no difficult matter to

pick out the manifold manifestations of the latter in everyday life. At this

point, I should like to name a few atypical but characteristic examples of

artificial behavior: loud, obtrusive laughter; exaggeratedly firm handshake;

unvarying,  dull  friendliness;  conceited  display  of  acquired  knowledge;

frequent  repetition  of  empty  astonishment,  surprise,  or  delight,  etc.;  rigidadherence to definite views, plans, goals (e.g., a paranoic system, neurotic

inability  to  change  one’s  mind);  obtrusive  modesty  in  demeanor;  grand

gestures  in  speaking;  childish  wooing  of  people’s  favor;  boastfulness  in

sexual matters; exaggerated display of sexual charm; promiscuous flirtation;

unregulated  promiscuous  sexual  intercourse;  markedly  dignified  conduct;

affected, pathetic, or overrefined manner of speech; markedly authoritative

(“the  big  wheel”),  haughty,  or  patronizing  behavior;  pseudo-exuberant

fellowship;  adherence  to  conventional  conversational  tone;  rowdy  or

lascivious  behavior;  sexual  giggling  or  obscene  talk;  Don  Juanism;

bashfulness.  In  the  same  way,  most  superfluous  movements  express,  in

addition to narcissistic tendencies, a substitute relationship to the object, e.g.,

affectedly shaking one’s hair into place; repeatedly passing one’s hand over

one’s forehead in a characteristic way; suggestively looking into the eyes of

the other person while talking; affected swaying of the hips; cocky or athletic

gait, etc.

    Generally, wherever a character trait stands out from the total personality

in an isolated or contradictory way, there is a substitute function governed by

a more or less deep estrangement. One is reluctant to admit it, but character

analysis again and again confirms it: the character trait popularly looked upon

as “bad,” “disagreeable,” or “troublesome” is usually identical with neurotic

behavior; the same is true of most of the modes of behavior which rule the

life of the so-called “better people,” i.e., where form takes precedence over

content. On the other hand, most of the character traits commonly regarded as

“simple,”  “natural,”  “sympathetic,”  “engaging”  seem  to  coincide  with  the

non-neurotic  behavior  of  the  “genital  character.”  (“Neurotic”  here

specifically means a psychic condition which came into being through the

repression of an instinctual impulse and is sustained by an energy-consuming

counter-cathexis).

  One is again and again amazed at the double life which people are forced

to lead. The surface behavior, which varies according to social situation andclass, turns out to be an artificial formation; it is in continual conflict with the

true, direct, vegetatively determined nature which, quite often, it is hardly

capable of concealing. The most formidable and feared policeman; the most

high-minded and reserved academician; the elegant, inaccessible “socialite”;

the “dutiful” bureaucrat who functions like a machine—they all turn out to be

harmless characters having the simplest longings, anxieties, hate impulses. I

am  making  a  special  point  of  this  only  because  of  the  incredible  respect

which the so-called simple man has for the mask of the character.

  In character-analytical terms, the difference between living sexual rhythm

and calculated sex appeal; between natural, unaffected dignity and put-on

dignity;  between  genuine  and  sham  modesty;  between  the  direct  and  the

pretentious expression of life; between vegetative muscular rhythm and the

swaying  of  hips  and  squaring  of  shoulders  in  imitation  of  it;  between

faithfulness stemming from sexual gratification and faithfulness stemming

from fear and conscience—one could go on at random—is the same as the

difference  between  a  nascent  revolutionary  psychic  structure  and  an

unyielding  conservative  psychic  structure,  between  living  life  and

meaningless  substitutes  for  life.  In  these  differences  we  find  a  direct

representation of the material, psychic-structural basis of ideologies which, at

least in principle, are accessible to human experience.

  In the ideology of all authoritarian social organizations, vegetative life,

represented as animal-like and primitive, has always been absolutely set off

against the “cultural” substitute life, represented as differentiated and highly

developed. In reality, the latter, since it was torn away from the former, since

it represents merely a substitute function and not a continuation of the former,

is unproductive, frozen into rigid forms and formulas, as devoid of fruit as a

dried-up plant. The vegetative life, on the other hand, is inherently productive

and endowed with endless possibilities of development. And the reason for

this  is  quite  simple:  its  energy  is  not  chronically  frozen  and  bound.  The

vegetative  substitute  formations  did  not  give  birth  to  culture;  all  humanprogress sprang from the leftover traces of the direct vegetative contact with

the world. This gives us some idea of just how much energy is waiting to be

developed  if  we  could  succeed  in  freeing  human  structures  from  their

substitute  functions  and  restoring  the  immediacy  of  their  relationship  to

nature and society. Fortunately, a new religion cannot result from this, e.g., a

new  yoga  movement  giving  instruction  “in  the  function  of  immediate

contact.”  This  change  in  the  human  structure  presupposes  changes  in  the

social system, of which the student of yoga has no comprehension.

  If man is the sole creature denied the realization of his native potentials

and there is no death instinct which would drive him to commit suicide; if,

moreover, the necessity to live, to have social relationships, is rooted in the

vegetative  system,  then  the  substitute  contact  which  man  establishes  is

merely the expression of a compromise between a will to live and socially

induced fear of life. The psychic formation of a substitute contact, as opposed

to  the  immediate  vegetative  contact,  is  structured  exactly  like  a  neurotic

symptom. It represents a substitute function for something else, serves as a

defense, consumes energy, and attempts to harmonize contradictory forces.

As in the case of the symptom, the result of the performance is in no way

commensurate with the amount of energy necessary to accomplish it. Hence,

the substitute contact is one of the many manifestations of a disordered social

economy and of the disturbed personal sexual economy dependent upon it.

Since the function of the substitute contact as such was unknown and since its

manifestations in the social framework have become traditional, they have

become  associated  with  the  idea  of  being  immutable  natural  phenomena.

However, in its role as a social phenomenon and as an element of modern

man’s  structure,  this  function  of  the  substitute  contact  is  a  historical

formation,  i.e.,  one  that  originated  at  a  definite  point  in  history  and  is

therefore transient. A person making a trip on a poor train is hesitant to leave

it as long as a new and better one is not available to take him securely to his

destination. Moreover, that person begins to develop a very peculiar capacityto persevere and also begins to cherish illusions about the nature of trains. By

the same token: if we are to free those forces sufficient to replace one form of

life with another, the idea of a regulated sexual economy of human life must

first become as embedded in man’s consciousness as is the present idea of the

immutability of unregulated sexual economy.

  If man’s present life is a substitute life, his work an imposed duty, his

love a substitute love, and his hate a substitute hate; if the character-analytic

dissolution of the psychic armor destroys these substitute functions; if this

predominantly  reactively  functioning  human  structure  is  the  result  and

exigency of the present social organization, the question arises: what takes

the  place  of  this  form  of  psychic  functioning  after  a  successful  character

analysis? How is its structure changed? What is the relation between social

achievement and sexuality after a successful character analysis? Difficult and

momentous  questions,  indeed!  The  theory  of  the  orgasm  and  character

analysis  have  already  shed  some  light  on  these  questions  which  are

epitomized  in  the  difference  between  the  “neurotic”  character  and  the

“genital” character.

  The investigation of the mode of functioning of the psychically healthy

individual is still in its initial stages, however, and has to reckon with the

strongest  resistance  on  the  part  of  a  world  chaotically  sustained  by  the

moralistic and authoritarian management of its affairs as a whole. In all its

institutions, ethical norms, and political organizations, the world stands in

opposition to a psychic structure which is governed not moralistically but

sex-economically,  whose  work  springs  not  from  duty  but  from  objective

interest, whose vegetative sources flow freely and have immediate access to

the environment. The clinical basis of this psychic structure is in the process

of development, insofar as it is not already known. One of the most difficult

theoretical and practical tasks will be the application of individual character-

analytic  restructurization  to  the  collective  restructurization  of  the  great

majority through education.  8. THE PSYCHIC REPRESENTATION OF THE ORGANIC


a) The idea of “bursting”


  The  fact  that  biophysiological  conditions  are  reflected  or  presented  in

psychic  modes  of  behavior  is  definitely  borne  out  by  our  knowledge  of

psychophysical  relationships.  It  is  very  strange  and  still  wholly

incomprehensible, however, that language as well as the feeling that one gets

about  another  person’s  behavior  reflect,  in  an  entirely  unconscious  but

apparently  definite  way,  the  corresponding  physiological  condition  not

merely graphically but directly. A few examples may help to illustrate this.

  Analysis shows that people who are described as “inaccessible” or “hard”

are also hypertonic physically. Analysis also shows that the energy employed

to mold the character of patients who feel “slimy” and “dirty” is essentially of

anal origin. Terms such as “free,” “flowing,” “direct,” “relaxed,” “natural”

used  to  describe  the  genital  character  are  entirely  in  keeping  with  the

biophysical structure of the genital character’s vegetative apparatus. Those

who have a “false” nature display in analysis an intricate development of

substitute contact mechanisms and only the most minor traces of free-flowing

genital libido. It would be valuable to make an exact and detailed study of

these  strange  relations  between  the  perception  of  a  person’s  vegetative

temperament and its linguistic formulation. We shall set this aside for a later

time; at the moment we want to pursue only one trend which results from

these relationships.

  In character-analytic practice, as opposed to the straightforward resistance

technique,  we  regularly  meet  with  the  following  circumstance.  In  the

beginning, the patient senses the analyst’s attack on the character armor as a

threat to the self. This explains why the analytic situation regularly becomes

associated  with  the  fear  of  physical  harm  (castration  anxiety);  the  patient

fears the success of the character-analytic treatment as he would a physical

catastrophe. Intellectually and, insofar as the patient consciously desires toestablish orgastic potency, also affectively, the patient wants the imminent

attack to succeed, i.e., wants his psychic rigidity to be destroyed. He urgently

desires, then, something which, at the same time, he is mortally afraid of. Not

only is the breakdown of the character armor looked upon and feared as a

catastrophe;  the  fear  of  losing  one’s  grip  on  oneself  is  added  to  this  and

causes this simultaneous desiring and fearing of one and the same thing to

become a typical resistance. What is meant here is not the attitude of the ego

toward  its  own  impulse,  but  the  attitude  toward  the  help  which  the  ego

expects from the analyst.

  Until the character armor has been broken down, the patient can neither

associate freely nor have a vital feeling about himself. He expects the analyst

in some magical way to do everything for him and, without really knowing it,

he assumes a passive attitude, whose substance is anything but passive. It is

to be expected at this point that the patient will mobilize his masochistic

impulses and put them at the service of the resistance. The psychic content of

the resistance runs as follows: “You are not helping me; you can’t do a thing;

you neither love nor understand me; I am going to force you to help me, i.e., I

shall be stubborn and I shall reproach you.” In reality, however, the patient

himself  wards  off  any  analytic  influence.  In  many  cases,  such  attitudes

eventually become concentrated in a peculiar situation, into which until now I

had no insight: unconsciously, the smashing of the armor and the penetration

into the patient’s unconscious secrets are represented as a feeling of being

pricked open or brought to the bursting point. Indeed, the passive-feminine

fantasy of being pricked open or pierced is fully developed in both male and

female  patients.  Especially  in  male  patients,  there  is  a  variation  of  this

unconscious fantasy which is represented as follows: because he lacks genital

self-confidence, the patient feels himself impotent. To escape this feeling, he

fantasizes,  at  first  on  a  superficial  level,  that  the  analyst  lends  him  his

potency, his capacity—in the final analysis, his penis. At a deeper level, the

idea occasionally exists that, during the act of intercourse with a woman, theanalyst penetrates the patient’s anus, fills out, strengthens, and stiffens the

patient’s penis so that he can prove himself to be potent toward the woman. If

the  identification  with  the  analyst  and  the  demand  to  be  helped  can  be

explained on the basis of these unconscious fantasies, the warding off of this

help can also be explained in terms of these fantasies, for unconsciously the

help constitutes an injury, a being pricked open.

  As we know, the masochistic striving is characterized by the patient’s

inability to achieve a physiological release on his own accord, because he

senses  the  mounting  of  the  pleasure  as  a  danger  of  melting  or  bursting.

However, since it is precisely this feared situation which, for natural reasons,

he  most  ardently  yearns  for,  he  develops  the  attitude  of  expecting  and

beseeching others to help him to achieve release, i.e., help him to burst, a

sensation which he simultaneously fears and wards off. This circumstance is

discovered only after the first orgastic impulses have become manifest in the

musculature  of  the  genital  apparatus.  Until  then,  these  impulses  remain

concealed and incomprehensible to those analysts who have not acquired the

technique of establishing the capacity for orgastic excitation.

  So much for the clinical-analytic data. A momentous question arises from

it: the sensation of melting or dissolving is undoubtedly a direct expression of

the excitation processes in the muscular and vascular systems during orgasm.

Seen  as  an  expulsion,  the  ejaculation  is  analogous  to  the  release  brought

about  by  puncturing  a  tautly  filled  bladder.  This  is  imbued  with  fear  for

patients who are orgastically impaired. The question is this: how is it possible

that a physiological function can be so directly manifested and represented as

an  attitude  of  the  psychic  apparatus?  I  have  to  admit  that,  to  me,  this

relationship is as puzzling as it is important. It is altogether likely that its

clarification  will  considerably  extend  our  knowledge  of  the  connections

between  the  physiological  and  psychic  functions.  For  the  present,  I  have

                          11
nothing to say about it. However, this clinical observation leads us to a very

important question: how is the idea of death psychically represented?b) On the idea of death


  The  question  regarding  the  psychic  representation  of  biophysiological

processes coincides at certain points with the question regarding the existence

of a will to die. This field is not only one of the least accessible but one of the

most dangerous, for nowhere else have premature speculations blocked every

path to a concrete ascertaining of the facts. As we pointed out, the hypothesis

of a death instinct is an attempt to use a metaphysical formula to explain

phenomena which on the basis of our present knowledge and method, cannot

yet be explained. Like every metaphysical view, the hypothesis of the death

instinct probably contains a rational core, but getting at this rational core is

difficult because its mystification has created erroneous trains of thought. The

theory of primary masochism contends that the will to suffer and to perish is

biologically  determined  and  that  it  is  explained  by  the  so-called  nirvana

principle. However, the sex-economic investigation of the mechanisms which

produce and inhibit pleasure led to the theory of the orgasm. At this point I

want to summarize the tentative formulations set forth in the chapter on “The

Masochistic Character.” These formulations never claimed to be complete.

  1.  Masochism,  which  is  generally  conceived  of  as  a  striving  for

unpleasure  transcending  the  pleasure  principle,  is  a secondary  neurotic

formation of the psychic organism. It can be analytically broken down into its

component parts and, for this reason, is not a primary biological fact. When

Rado recently came forward with a “new” theory of the neurosis which traces

all anxiety back to the “breakthrough of primary masochism,” he not only

misconstrued the libido theory but made the same mistake Alfred Adler made

previously: his explanation ceased precisely where the line of questioning

begins in earnest. Namely: how can the living organism desire unpleasure or

death?

  2. The apparent striving after unpleasure can be traced back to the fact

that a frustration, imposed under definite conditions and in a definite way,

intervened between an originally pleasurable aim and the desire to achievethis aim. In his strivings after pleasure, the patient repeatedly runs into the

same situation of frustration and appears to want it subjectively; in reality, he

is striving toward the pleasurable goal which lies behind it or is concealed in

it. Hence, the suffering which the masochist brings upon himself is objectively

determined but it is not subjectively wanted. It is important not to obscure this

difference.

  3.  The  masochist  suffers  from  a  specific  disturbance  of  his  pleasure

mechanism,  and  solely  through  character-analytic  techniques  for  breaking

down the psychic armor can this disturbance be exposed. This disturbance

consists in the fact that, beyond a certain degree, the patient perceives every

increase of his orgastic sensation as unpleasurable and fears it as a danger of

“perishing.” The reason for this lies in the spasm of certain muscles, i.e., the

orgastic release is conceived of as a bursting, perishing, or melting in the

physical sense and is warded off by spasms. The passive beating fantasy has

the function of achieving the yearned-for and at the same time feared release

without  incurring  guilt,  i.e.,  without  bringing  it  about  through  one’s  own

efforts. This can be clearly ascertained in all cases of erogenous masochism.

The inducing of a lesser danger for the purpose of avoiding a greater danger

is merely an intermediate mechanism.

  4. If, as a result of the external inhibition and internal frustration of the

striving after pleasure, the external and internal psychic reality has become a

totally unpleasurable situation, then, even in destroying itself, the organism is

still  following  the  pleasure-unpleasure  principle.  This  is  the  case  in

melancholia,  for  example.  As  a  last  resort,  the  melancholic  seizes  upon

suicide to resolve the unpleasurable tension.

  While it was encouraging, in our clinical study of masochism, to arrive at

formulations  which  were  not  at  variance  with  the  pleasure-unpleasure

principle and which enabled us to include this phenomenon in our general

knowledge  of  the  psychic  apparatus,  there  was  no  reason  whatever  to  be

content.  A  number  of  questions  still  remained  unanswered,  above  all  thequestion  of  the  fear  and  of  the  idea  of  death.  It  follows  from  character

analysis that the “death instinct” is an indication of a biopsychic inhibition

and that there is no primary masochism. Indeed, there is good reason to doubt

that masochism can be called an independent instinctual aim which strives

after  unpleasure.  In  the  meantime,  fresh  complications  were  added  to  the

problem from another side.

  In  the  search  for  facts  which  would  make  the  comprehension  of  the

nirvana  principle  as  complete  as  possible,  I  ran  into  strivings  after

disintegration, unconsciousness, non-being, dissolution, and similar longings

in my patients. I found, in short, psychic material which seemed to confirm

the existence of an actual original striving after death. I was always willing to

revise my position on the question of the death instinct and to admit that my

opponents were correct, if I could find justification for their view in clinical

material.

  But my earnest efforts to find clinical substantiation for the theory of the

death instinct were in vain. Indeed, just when I began to waver in my firm

rejection of the theory of the death instinct, I found a further incontestable

argument against it. To begin with, this intense striving after disintegration,

etc., is predominantly manifested at the end of the treatment, at a time, in

other  words,  when  the  patient  is  faced  with  the  task  of  overcoming  his

orgasm anxiety. This was extremely confusing, to say the least. Furthermore,

this striving was seldom found in masochists; on the contrary, it was found

precisely in patients who had developed the masochistic mechanisms to a

very slight degree and the genital mechanisms to a very high degree. This

increased the confusion, for why should patients who were on the verge of

recovery, whose masochistic mechanisms were hardly developed, and who

had not demonstrated any negative therapeutic reactions toward the cure, i.e.,

had  no  unconscious  need  for  punishment—why  should  precisely  these

patients have allowed the “silent” death instinct to have such a strong effect?

  In examining older theoretical formulations, I came across an allusion inmy book Die Funktion des Orgasmus which showed me that, as early as

1926, I had, without really knowing it, hit upon a clinical observation which

only now I am capable of explaining satisfactorily. I made mention in this

book of the very peculiar fact that the orgasm anxiety frequently appears in

the guise of death anxiety, and that the idea of complete sexual gratification

is, in some neurotic people, associated with the idea of dying.

  I  want  to  use  a  typical  clinical  example  to  illustrate  a  previously

overlooked fact that appears to be generally present here. I must stress once

more  that  these  clinical  phenomena  cannot  be  confirmed  without  the

application  of  the  character-analytic  technique,  which  fully  liberates

vegetative excitation. A female hysteric developed severe genital anxiety at

the end of the treatment, some time after the armor had been broken down.

She  fantasized  the  sexual  act  as  a  brutal  penetration  into  her  vagina,

developed the idea that an enormous penis was being forced into her much

too  small  vagina,  causing  it  to  burst.  These  fantasies  had  their  origin  in

apprehensions and also sexual games of her earliest childhood. To the extent

that  her  genital  anxiety  was  dissolved,  she  became  aware  of  previously

unknown orgastic sensations in the genital organs and in the musculature of

the upper thighs. She described these sensations as “flowing,” “sensuous,”

“sweet,” “like being electrified,” and finally as a strong voluptuous melting.

Yet there was still a trace of undefinable genital anxiety. One day she began

to have fantasies about a doctor who wanted to perform a painful operation

on  her,  and  in  connection  with  this  fantasy,  she  remembered  the  severe

anxiety she had had around the age of two or three regarding physicians. It

was clear that we were dealing with a genital striving toward the analyst

distorted by anxiety, a striving which made use of the childhood fear of a

genital operation as defense. So far, there was nothing strange about this case.

  Now, however, she began to have highly pleasurable fantasies about a

genital operation conceived of as a brutal penetration. “It is so beautiful. One

perishes  in  the  process,  one  dies,  one  finally  has  peace.”  She  fantasizedalmost ecstatically about the sensations experienced under general anesthesia.

She described how one loses oneself in the process, becomes “one with the

world,” hears sounds “and yet doesn’t hear them,” withdraws into oneself and

dissolves. One could not imagine a better description of the death instinct.

However, further analysis revealed the true function of this strange behavior.

Gradually, the fantasies became more concrete and could be clearly separated

into two categories, one unpleasurable and the other pleasurable. In terms of

their  content,  the  unpleasurable  fantasies  were  a  precondition  to  the

realization of the pleasurable fantasies. The apprehensive, i.e., masochistic,

experience  for  which  she  seemed  to  be  striving  could  be  broken  up  into

components. The apprehensive fantasy as such had the following content:

“The  physician  is  going  to  take  away  my  penis  or  ‘something’  from  my

genitalia.” The concealed pleasurable fantasy was as follows: “The physician

is going to give me another one for it, a better one, namely a male genital.”

  To give the reader a better understanding of the connection between these

two fantasies, I want to mention that the patient had a brother two years her

senior whom she very much envied because of his penis. She had the idea

that a girl could not obtain as much pleasure as a boy. Thus, she desired to be

rid of her female genital and to have herself equipped with a male genital. In

this way, she thought, she would be able to obviate a number of anxieties, for

example,  being  exploded  by  a  male  genital  in  the  act  of  intercourse,  or

bursting  in  the  act  of  giving  birth  to  a  child  or  during  the  release  of

excrement. In reality, therefore, what she was striving after was the highest

possible orgastic sensation. She thought this sensation could be achieved in

the desired degree only with the help of a male genital. The feelings which

she  used  to  express  her  striving  after  death  were  the  very  same  she

experienced in the orgastic sensation itself. In short, orgasm and death were

both  represented  as  disintegration,  perishing,  losing  of  oneself,  melting;

under one condition, these sensations could become the object of deepest

striving; under another condition, the cause of the most intense anxiety.  This association of the idea of the orgasm and the idea of dying is a

universal one. On the basis of these typical clinical examples, we arrive at the

following  conclusion: the  striving  after  non-existence,  nirvana,  death,  is

identical  with  the  striving  after  orgastic  release,  i.e.,  the  most  essential

experience of the living organism. Thus, an idea of death stemming from the

actual demise of the organism does not and cannot exist, because an idea can

reflect only what has already been experienced. No one, however, has ever

experienced his or her own death. At present, the ideas of death and dying

which we meet in analysis are expressed in one of two ways: either they exist

as ideas of severe injury or destruction of the psychophysical organism, in

which case they are accompanied by severe anxiety and center on the idea of

genital castration; or they exist as ideas of the highest orgastic gratification

and pleasure in the form of the idea of physical dissolution, disintegration,

etc., in which case they are basically ideas of the sexual goal. Under special

conditons, such as, for example, in the masochist, the orgastic sensation itself

is experienced apprehensively and, as paradoxical as it may sound to the

theorists of the death instinct, a desire for nirvana is seldom found. In short, it

is precisely in the masochist that we find but little stasis anxiety and meagerly

developed ideas of death.

  Only  now,  some  twelve  years  after  the  initial  difficult  differentiation

between the metaphysical death-instinct theory and the clinical orgasm theory

within the scope of psychoanalysis, is it possible to formulate the essential

difference  between  them.  These  two  views,  so  diametrically  opposed,  are

based  on  the  patient’s  negative  therapeutic  reactions  to  the  direct

interpretation of symptoms. They developed parallel to one another and were

concerned with the same problem. Both views moved in a biophysiological

direction. The former ended in the assumption of an absolute will to suffer

and to die; the latter opened the road to a whole complex of problems having

to  do  with  character  structure  and  psychological  and  psychophysiological

relationships. Perhaps this most important controversy regarding the correctapprehension of underlying facts will one day be settled by the discovery of

relationships directly linked to the life process. Even now, however, it can be

intimated that what the theory of the death instinct attempted to represent as

the dissolution of life is precisely what orgasm research is on the verge of

                                                                                          12
comprehending as the most essential characteristic of the living organism.

In view of the fact that this is basically a biological controversy, it will not be

decided in the field of psychology. There is no longer any doubt that much

depends on how it is finally settled, that this is not a matter of trivialities but a

decisive point of natural science. We are dealing here with the question of the

nature  and  function  of  the  striving  after  release  which  governs  all  living

organisms, which, until now, has been encompassed in the vague concept of

                          13
the “nirvana principle.”


    9. PLEASURE, ANXIETY, ANGER, AND MUSCULAR

                                      ARMOR


  In character-analytic practice, we discover the armor functioning in the

form  of  a  chronic,  frozen,  muscular-like  bearing.  First  and  foremost,  the

identity of these various functions stands out; they can be comprehended on

the basis of one principle only, namely of the armoring of the periphery of

the biopsychic system.

    Sex-economy approaches these problems from the point of view of the

psychic function of the armor and, in this respect, it has something to say. It

proceeds  from  the  practical  demand  of  restoring  the  patient’s  freedom  of

vegetative movement.

  In addition to the two primary affects, sexuality and anxiety, we have a

third affect, anger or, more accurately, hate. As in the first two affects, here

too we must assume that, in expressions such as “boiling with anger” and

“consuming anger” to describe anger which is not discharged, the vernacular

reflects an actual biophysiological process. It is our opinion that the full scale

of affects can be comprehended on the basis of these three basic affects. Allmore complicated affect impulses can be deduced from these three. However,

it will have to be proven whether and to what extent the anger affect can be

deduced from the vicissitudes of the first two affect impulses.

  We found that sexual excitation and anxiety can be comprehended as two

antithetical directions of current. How is the function of hate related to the

two primary affects?

  Let  us  proceed  from  the  clinical  study  of  the character  armor.  This

concept was created to offer a dynamic and economic comprehension of the

character’s  basic  function.  According  to  the  sex-economic  view,  the  ego

assumes a definite form in the conflict between instinct (essentially libidinal

need)  and  fear  of  punishment.  To  carry  out  the  instinctual  inhibition

demanded by the modern world and to be able to cope with the energy stasis

which  results  from  this  inhibition,  the  ego  has  to  undergo  a  change.  The

process we have in mind, though we are talking about it in absolute terms, is

definitely of a causal nature. The ego, i.e., that part of the person that is

exposed to danger, becomes rigid, as we say, when it is continually subjected

to  the  same  or  similar  conflicts  between  need  and  a  fear-inducing  outer

world. It acquires in this process a chronic, automatically functioning mode

of reaction, i.e., its “character.” It is as if the affective personality armored

itself, as if the hard shell it develops were intended to deflect and weaken the

blows of the outer world as well as the clamoring of the inner needs. This

armoring makes the person less sensitive to unpleasure but also restricts his

libidinal  and  aggressive  motility  and  thus  reduces  his  capacity  for

achievement and pleasure. We say the ego has become less flexible and more

rigid; and that the ability to regulate the energy economy depends upon the

extent  of  the  armoring.  We  regard  orgastic  potency  as  a  measure  of  this

ability, since it is a direct expression of vegetative motility. The character

armoring requires energy, for it is sustained by continual consumption of

libidinal or vegetative forces, which otherwise (under the condition of their

motor inhibition) would produce anxiety. This is how the character armorfulfills its function of absorbing and consuming vegetative energy.

  When  the  character  armor  is  broken  down  through  character  analysis,

bound aggression regularly rises to the surface first. But is the oft-mentioned

binding of aggression or anxiety concretely represented?

  If,  further  along  in  the  character  analysis,  we  succeed  in  freeing  the

aggression  bound  in  the  armor,  the  result  is  that  anxiety  becomes  free.

Anxiety,  then,  can  be  “transformed”  into  aggression  and  aggression  into

anxiety.  Is  the  relation  between  anxiety  and  aggression  analogous  to  that

between anxiety and sexual excitation? It is not easy to answer this question.

  To  begin  with,  our  clinical  investigations  reveal  a  number  of  peculiar

facts. The inhibition of aggression and psychic armor go hand in hand with

increased tonus; sometimes there is even a rigidity of the musculature of the

extremities and the trunk. Affect-blocked patients lie on the couch as stiff as

boards, wholly rigid and immobile. It is not easy to bring about a change in

this kind of muscle tension. If the analyst tries to persuade the patient to

relax,  the  muscle  tension  is  replaced  by  restlessness.  In  other  cases,  we

observe that patients make various involuntary movements, the inhibition of

which  immediately  engenders  feelings  of  anxiety.  On  the  basis  of  these

observations,  Ferenczi  was  inspired  to  develop  his  “active  technique  of

interference.”  He  recognized  that  the  hindering  of  the  chronic  muscular

reactions increases the stasis. We agree with this, but we feel that there is

more  to  be  inferred  from  these  observations  than  quantitative  changes  in

excitation. It is a matter of a functional identity between character armor and

muscular hypertonia or muscular rigidity. Every increase of muscular tonus

and rigidification is an indication that a vegetative excitation, anxiety, or

sexual sensation has been blocked and bound. When genital sensations arise,

some  patients  succeed  in  eliminating  or  weakening  them  through  motor

restlessness. The same holds true in the absorption of feelings of anxiety. In

this connection, we are reminded of the great importance motor restlessness

has in childhood as a means of discharging energy.  It is often observed that there is a difference in the state of muscular

tension before and after a severe repression has been resolved. Usually, when

patients  are  in  a  state  of  resistance,  i.e.,  when  an  idea  or  an  instinctual

impulse is barred from consciousness, they sense a tension in the scalp, the

upper  thighs,  the  musculature  of  the  buttocks,  etc.  If  they  succeed  in

overcoming  this  resistance  on  their  own  or  it  is  resolved  by  the  analyst

through correct interpretation, they feel suddenly relieved. In such a situation

a female patient once said: “It is as if I had experienced sexual gratification.”

  We know that every remembrance of the content of a repressed idea also

brings about psychic relief. However, this alleviation does not constitute a

cure, as the uninitiated believe. How does this alleviation come about? We

have always contended that it is brought about by a discharge of previously

bound  psychic  energy.  Let  us  disregard  the  alleviation  and  the  feeling  of

gratification which are connected with every new realization. Psychic tension

and alleviation cannot be without a somatic representation, for tension and

relaxation are biophysical conditions. Until now, apparently, we have merely

carried over these concepts into the psychic sphere. Now it has to be proven

that  we  were  right  in  doing  this.  But  it  would  be  wrong  to  speak  of  the

“transfer” of physiological concepts to the psychic sphere, for what we have

in mind is not an analogy but a real identity: the unity of psychic and somatic

function.

  Every  neurotic  is  muscularly  dystonic,  and  every  cure  is  directly

manifested in a “relaxation” or improvement of the tonus of the musculature.

This process can be observed best in the compulsive character. His muscular

rigidity is expressed in awkwardness; unrhythmical movements, particularly

in  the  sexual  act,  lack  of  mimetic  movement,  a  typically  taut  facial

musculature  which  often  gives  him  a  slightly  mask-like  expression.  Also

common to this character type is a wrinkle stretching from above the side of

the  nose  to  the  corner  of  the  mouth,  as  well  as  a  certain  rigidity  in  the

expression of the eyes, caused by the rigidity of the eyelid musculature. Themusculature of the buttocks is almost always tense. The typical compulsive

character develops a general muscular rigidity; in other patients this rigidity

is paired with a flabbiness (hypotonus) of other muscle areas, which does not,

however,  reflect  relaxation.  This  is  frequently  seen  in  passive-feminine

characters. And then, of course, there is the rigidity in catatonic stupor which

accompanies  complete  psychic  armoring.  This  is  ordinarily  explained  as

disturbances  of  extrapyramidal  innervations.  We  have  no  doubt  that  the

related nerve tracts are always involved in changes of muscular tonus. In this

innervation,  however,  we  again  perceive  only  a  general  disturbance  of

function which is expressed through it. It is naive to believe that something

has been explained when the innervation or its path has been ascertained.

  The  psychic  rigidity  of  post-encephalitics  is  not  the  “expression”  of

muscular rigidity, nor does it result from it. Muscular rigidity and psychic

rigidity are a unit, the sign of a disturbance of the vegetative motility of the

biological  system  as  a  whole.  And  it  is  an  open  question  whether  the

disturbance  of  the  extrapyramidal  innervation  is  not  itself  a  result  of

something,  effective  at  a  primary  level,  which  has  already  damaged  the

vegetative  apparatus  itself,  not  just  the  affected  organs.  Mechanistic

neurology, for example, explains a spasm of the anal sphincter on the basis of

the continual excitation of the nerves belonging to it. The difference between

the  mechanistic-anatomical  and  the  functional  view  can  be  easily

demonstrated  here:  sex-economy  conceives  of  the  nerves  only  as  the

transmitters of general vegetative excitation.

  The spasm of the anal sphincter, which is the cause of a number of very

severe  intestinal  disturbances,  is  brought  about  by  a  fear  of  defecation

acquired in childhood. It constitutes a block. Explaining it on the basis of the

pleasure derived from holding back one’s bowel movements does not appear

to get to the core of the matter. Berta Bornstein describes the holding back of

evacuation in a one-and-a-half-year-old child. For fear of soiling the crib, the

child was in a continual state of spasm and was able to sleep at night only in acrumpled-up  sitting  position  with  clenched  hands.  The  muscular  pushing

back and holding back of feces is the prototype for repression in general and

is its initial step in the anal zone. In the oral zone, repression is manifested as

a tightening of the musculature of the mouth and a spasm in the musculature

of the larynx, throat, and breast; in the genital zone, it is manifested as a

continual tension in the pelvic musculature.

  The freeing of vegetative excitation from its fixation in the tensions of the

musculature of the head, throat, jaws, larynx, etc., is one of the indispensable

presuppositions for the elimination of oral fixations in general. According to

our  experiences  in  character  analysis,  neither  the  remembrance  of  oral

experiences and desires nor the discussion of genital anxiety can have the

same therapeutic value. Without it, the patient remembers but he does not

experience  the  excitations.  These  are  usually  very  well  concealed.  They

escape notice by concealing themselves in conspicuous modes of behavior

which appear to be part of the person’s natural makeup.

  The most important secrets of pathological displacements and the binding

of  vegetative  energy  are  usually  contained  in  phenomena  such  as  the

following: a toneless, languid, or high-pitched voice; speaking with a tight

upper lip; a mask-like or immobile facial expression; even slight suggestions

of a so-called baby face; an inconspicuous wrinkle of the forehead; drooping

eyelids; tensions in the scalp; a concealed, undetected hypersensitivity in the

larynx; a hurried, abrupt, constrained manner of speech; faulty respiration;

noises  or  movements  in  the  act  of  speaking  which  appear  to  be  merely

incidental; a certain way of hanging one’s head, of shaking it, of lowering it

when looking, etc. Nor is it difficult to persuade oneself that the anxiety of

genital contact does not appear so long as these symptoms in the regions of

the head and neck have not been uncovered and eliminated. Genital anxiety

in particular is, in most cases, displaced toward the upper part of the body

and bound in the contracted musculature of the neck. A fear of a genital

operation in a young girl was expressed in the way she held her head whilelying on the couch. After she had been made aware of this peculiar way of

holding her head, she herself said: “I am lying here as if my head were nailed

to the couch.” As a matter of fact, she did give the appearance of being held

down by the hair by an invisible force and was not able to move.

  It will be asked, and justifiably, whether these concepts do not contradict

another assumption. The increased tonus of the musculature is of course a

parasympathetic-sexual  function;  the  decreased  tonus  and  paralysis  of  the

musculature,  on  the  other  hand,  are  a sympathetic-anxious function. How

does this tie in with the fact that an apprehensive holding back of feces or a

speech inhibition in a child go hand in hand with a muscular contraction? In

going over the theory relating to these facts, I had to ask myself this question

and, for a long time, was not able to find an explanation. However, as always

happens  when  such  difficulties  crop  up  in  the  investigation  of  various

relations, it was precisely its puzzling aspect that led to a deepening of the

insight.

  First of all, it had to be understood that the process of muscular tension in

sexual excitation could not be the same as the process of muscular tension in

anxiety. In expectation of danger, the musculature is tense, as if ready for

action. Visualize a deer on the verge of taking flight. In a state of fright, the

musculature is suddenly depleted of excitation (“paralyzed with fright”). The

fact that, in the case of fright, an involuntary evacuation can take place as a

result  of  the  sudden  relaxation  of  the  anal  sphincter  also  fits  in  with  our

concept of the relation between anxiety and the sympathetic function. In this

way,  a  sympathetic,  fear-induced  diarrhea  in  the  case  of  fright  can  be

distinguished from a parasympathetic diarrhea produced by pleasure in the

case  of  sexual  excitation.  The  former  is  based  on  the  paralysis  of  the

sphincter  (sympathetic  function);  the  latter  on  increased  peristalsis  of  the

intestinal musculature (parasympathetic function). In sexual excitation, the

musculature  is  contracted,  i.e.,  prepared  for  motor  action,  for  further

contraction  and  relaxation.  In  an  expectation  fraught  with  anxiety,  on  theother  hand,  the  musculature  is  gripped  in  a continual  tension  until  it  is

released  by  some  form  of  motor  activity.  Then,  either  it  gives  way  to

paralysis if the fright reaction takes place, or it is replaced by a reaction of

motor flight. The musculature can, however, remain tense, i.e., not resolve

itself in either of the two forms. In this event, that condition sets in which, in

contrast  to fright  paralysis,  can  be  designated  as fright  rigidity  (“scared

stiff”).  Observation  shows  that,  in  fright paralysis,  musculature  becomes

flaccid, is exhausted by excitement; the vasomotor system, on the other hand,

reaches  a  state  of  full  excitation:  acute  palpitations,  profuse  perspiration,

pallidness. In the case of fright rigidity, the peripheral musculature is rigid,

the  sensation  of  anxiety  is  missing  or  is  only  partially  developed;  one  is

“apparently calm.” In reality, one cannot move and is as incapable of physical

flight as of vegetative escape into the self.

  What is the lesson of these facts? Muscular rigidity can take the place of

the  vegetative  anxiety  reaction.  To  express  it  another  way,  the  same

excitation which, in the fright paralysis, takes flight inwardly uses, in the

case of fright rigidity, the musculature to form a peripheral armoring of the

          14
organism.

  It can be observed that a person operated upon under local anesthesia

displays the same muscular rigidity. If voluntary efforts are made to relax,

anxiety  is  immediately  intensified  in  the  form  of  palpitations  and

perspiration. Thus, the muscular tension that is present and is not resolved in

a  motor  discharge  consumes  excitation  which  would  otherwise  appear  as

anxiety; in that way the anxiety is avoided. In this process we recognize the

prototype of the binding of anxiety through aggression which, when it too is

inhibited, leads to an affect-block. This binding of anxiety is very familiar to

us from neurotic formations.

  These clinical findings are of great importance for the theory of affects.

Now we have a better comprehension of the interrelation of:

  1. Character block or armor and muscular rigidity  2. Loosening of the muscular rigidity and the liberation of anxiety

  3. Binding of anxiety and the establishment of muscular rigidity

  4. Muscular tension and libidinal inhibition

  5. Libidinal relaxation and muscular relaxation

  Before  we  formulate  a  theoretical  conclusion  on  the  basis  of  these

findings, let us cite further clinical facts that pertain to the relation between

muscle tonus and sexual tension. When, in the course of character analysis,

the  muscular  tension  begins  to  give  way  because  of  the  loosening  of  the

character encrustation, then—as we have pointed out—what comes to the

surface is anxiety and/or aggression, or libidinal impulse. We conceive of the

libidinal  impulse  as  a  flowing  of  excitation  and  body  fluids  toward  the

periphery, and we conceive of anxiety as a flowing of excitation and body

fluids toward the center. The aggressive excitation also corresponds to an

excitation  directed  toward  the periphery,  but  one  relating solely  to  the

musculature of the extremities. If the excitation flowing in all three directions

can  be  liberated  from  the  muscular  rigidity,  from  the  increased  chronic

muscular tonus, then we must conclude that chronic muscular hypertonicity

represents an inhibition of the flow of every form of excitation (pleasure,

anxiety, rage) or at least a significant reduction of vegetative streaming. It is

as  if  the  inhibition  of  the  life  functions  (libido,  anxiety,  aggression)  was

brought  about  by  the  formation  of  a  muscular  armor  around  a  person’s

biological core. If the formation of the character has such a close relation to

the tonus of the musculature, we can assume that there is a functional identity

between neurotic character and muscular dystonus. We will cite additional

findings which confirm this assumption; we will also cite findings that might

perhaps limit the validity of the functional identity of character armor and

muscular armor.

  From a purely phenomenological standpoint, it is clear that attractiveness,

i.e.,  sexual  appeal,  can  be  chiefly  described  by  the  relaxed  quality  of  a

person’s  musculature  which  accompanies  flowing  psychic  agility.  Therhythmicity  of  one’s  movements,  the alternation  of  muscular  tension  and

relaxation  in  movement,  go  together  with  the  capacity  for  linguistic

modulation and general musicality. In such people, one also has the feeling of

direct psychic contact. The sweetness of children who have not been subject

to any severe repressions, particularly in the anal zone, has the same basis.

On the other hand, people who are physically stiff, awkward, without rhythm,

gives us the feeling that they are also psychically stiff, wooden, immobile.

They speak in a monotone and they are seldom musical. Many of them never

“loosen up”; others are induced “to let go a bit” only under conditions of

intimate  friendship.  In  this  event,  the  trained  observer  can  immediately

ascertain  a  change  in  the  tonus  of  the  musculature.  Psychic  and  somatic

rigidity,  then,  are  not  analogous  manifestations;  they  are  functionally

identical.  Men  and  women  of  this  kind  give  us  the  impression  of  being

deficient in eroticism as well as anxiety. Depending upon the depth of such

armoring,  the  rigidity  can  go  together  with  more  or  less  strong inner

excitation.

  In observing melancholic or depressive patients, one finds that they betray

a stiffness in their speech and facial expressions, as if every movement were

possible only through the overcoming of a resistance. In manic patients, on

the  other  hand,  all  impulses  appear  to  flood  the  entire  personality

precipitately.  In  catatonic  stupor,  psychic  and  muscular  rigidity  coincide

completely; for this reason, the dissolution of this condition restores psychic

and muscular mobility.

  From  this  vantage  point,  it  is  also  possible  to  pave  the  way  to  an

understanding of laughter (the “joyous” facial expression) and sorrow (the

depressive facial expression). In laughter, the facial musculature contracts; in

depression, it becomes flaccid. This is entirely in keeping with the fact that

muscular contraction (clonus of the diaphragm in the case of laughter, “belly-

shaking laugh”) is parasympathetic and libidinal, while muscular flaccidity is

sympathetic and anti-libidinal.                                          15
  In the so-called genital character who does not suffer from any stasis of

excitation or chronic inhibition of excitation, the question arises whether he

does not or cannot develop a muscular armor. This would be an argument

against  my  thesis  that,  fundamentally,  the  character  armor  is  functionally

identical with muscular armor. For the genital character, too, has developed a

“character.” The investigation of such character types shows that they, too,

can develop an armor, that they, too, have the ability to immure themselves

against unpleasure and to spare themselves anxiety through an encrustation of

the periphery. When this is the case, however, there is a greater austerity in

bearing and facial expression. Under such conditions, sexual excitation and

the capacity for sexual pleasure are negatively affected, but not necessarily

the capacity for work. However, work which is usually performed effortlessly

and  with  a  feeling  of  pleasure  is  replaced  by  a  mechanical,  pleasureless

performance. Therefore, a gratifying sexual life provides the best structural

basis for productive achievement. The difference between the armor of the

neurotic character and the armor of the genital character lies in the fact that,

in the former, muscular rigidity is chronic and automatic, whereas in the latter

                                              16
it can be used or dispensed with at will.

  The following example will illustrate the functional relationship between

a  character  attitude  and  muscular  tension  and  vegetative  excitation.  The

character  analysis  of  a  patient  was  marked  by  a  superficiality  of

communication; the patient himself felt it to be “mere chatter,” even when he

was discussing the most serious matters. This superficiality, it soon became

clear,  had  become  the  central  character  resistance.  What  better  means  of

destroying every affective impulse! To begin with, the analysis revealed that

the  “chatter”  and  “superficiality”  represented  an  identification  with  his

stepmother, who had the same character traits. This identification with the

mother figure contained the passive-feminine attitude to the father; and the

chattering  was  an  attempt  to  win  the  homosexual  object,  to  amuse  it,  to

dispose it favorably, to “pet” it as one would a dangerous lion. But it alsofunctioned  as  a  substitute  contact,  for,  while  identifying  with  the  mother

figure,  the  patient  had  no  relationship  whatever  to  his  father.  He  felt

estranged from him, a fact which did not come out until late in the analysis.

The repression of a strong aggression toward the father lay at the root of and

sustained  this  estrangement.  Hence,  chattering  was  also  the  expression  of

passive-feminine wooing (vegetative function), the warding off of aggressive

tendencies (armor function), and a compensation for the contactlessness. The

psychic  content  of  the  superficiality  could  be  formulated  somewhat  as

follows: “I want and have to win my father over to my side, I have to please

him and amuse him; but I don’t at all like having to do this; I don’t care a

hoot about him—I hate him, deep down. I have no relationship to him at all,

but  I  can’t  let  this  come  out.”  In  addition  to  these  psychic  attitudes,  the

patient’s awkwardness and muscular rigidity were immediately obvious. He

lay there in a way very familiar to the character analyst: stiff as a board, rigid

and immobile. It was clear that every analytic effort would be hopeless until

this muscular armor had been loosened. Though he gave the impression of

being afraid, the patient said he was not aware of having any anxieties. In

addition to the above traits, he exhibited severe states of depersonalization,

and he had a lifeless feeling about himself. His highly interesting childhood

experiences were not important as such or in their relation to his neurotic

symptoms; at this point, solely their relationship to this armor interested us. It

was  a  question  of  breaking  through  this  armor,  of  extracting  from  it  the

childhood experiences as well as the moribund vegetative excitations.

  To  begin  with,  the  superficiality  turned  out  to  be  a  “fear  of  depth,”

specifically  a  fear  of  falling.  In  this  connection,  the  patient  produced

convincing reports that the fear of falling had indeed dominated his life. He

was afraid of drowning, of falling into a mountain gorge, of falling overboard

from the deck of a ship; he was afraid of riding on a toboggan, etc. It soon

became  clear  that  these  anxieties  were  connected  with  and  rooted  in  an

avoidance  of  the  typical  sensations  experienced  in  the  region  of  thediaphragm while swinging and descending in the elevator. In my book Die

Funktion des Orgasmus I was able to demonstrate that, in some instances, the

fear of orgastic excitation is concretely experienced as a fear of falling. It will

not surprise us, therefore, that the patient suffered precisely from a severe

orgastic disturbance of this kind. In short, the superficiality was more than a

passive attitude or an “inborn” character trait; it had a very definite function

in the patient’s psychic operations. It was an active attitude, a warding off of

the “fear of depth” and the sensations of vegetative excitation. There had to

be a connection between these two warded-off conditions. I reflected that the

fear of falling had to be identical with the fear of vegetative excitation. But

how?

  The patient remembered that, when as a child he was on a swing, he

immediately  made  himself  stiff,  i.e.,  cramped  his  muscles  as  soon  as  he

sensed the diaphragmatic sensations. His muscular habitus, characterized by

awkwardness and a lack of coordination, stemmed from this period. It will be

of interest to the musicologist that he appeared to have no ear for music

whatever.  But  this  lack  of  musicality  could  also  be  traced  back  to  other

childhood experiences. In connection with the history of his contactlessness

and his muscular armor, the analysis produced proof that this defect also

served to ward off vegetative excitation. He remembered that his mother was

in the habit of singing sentimental songs to him which tremendously excited

him,  put  him  in  a  state  of  tension,  caused  him  to  be  restless.  When  the

libidinal relationship to his mother was repressed because of disappointment

in her, musicality also fell victim to repression. This was the case not only

because the relationship to the mother was essentially sustained by musical

experiences but also because he could not endure the vegetative excitations

aroused  by  her  singing.  And  this  was  related  to  excitation  which  he

experienced in childhood masturbation and which had led to the development

of acute anxiety.

  In their dreams, patients often represent their resistance to uncoveringunconscious material as a fear of going into a cellar or of falling into a pit.

We  know  that  this  resistance  and  its  representation  in  the  dream  are

connected, but we do not as yet understand it. Why should the unconscious

be associated with depth, and fear of the unconscious with the fear of falling?

This puzzling situation was solved in the following way: the unconscious is

the reservoir of repressed vegetative excitations, i.e., excitations not allowed

to discharge and flow freely. These excitations are experienced in one of two

forms:

  (1)  sexual  excitement  and  feelings  of  gratification,  as  in  the  case  of

healthy men and women; or (2) feelings of anxiety and constriction, growing

more and more unpleasant, in the region of the solar plexus in the case of

people who suffer from disturbances of vegetative motility. They are similar

to  the  sensations  in  the  region  of  the  heart  and  diaphragm  and  in  the

musculature which are experienced in fright or during a rapid descent. Also

to  be  mentioned  in  this  connection  are  the  sensations  experienced  in  the

region of the genitalia when one is standing on the edge of a steep precipice

looking  down.  In  this  situation,  a  feeling  of  genital  contraction  usually

accompanies  the  idea  of  falling.  The  fact  is  that,  at  the  mere  thought  of

danger,  the  organism  acts  as  if  the  dangerous  situation  were  real  and

withdraws  into  itself.  In  the  case  of  fright,  as  I  explained  earlier,  energy

cathexes in the form of body fluids flow toward the center of the organism

and thus create a stasis in the region of the genitalia and the diaphragm. In the

case  of  falling,  furthermore,  this  physiological  process  is  an  automatic

reaction on the part of the organism. Hence, the idea of depth and the idea of

falling must be functionally identical with the sensation of central excitation

in  the  organism.  This  also  enables  us  to  understand  the  otherwise

incomprehensible fact that swinging, rapid descents, etc., are experienced by

so many people with a mixture of anxiety and pleasure. According to sex-

                  17
economic theory, anxiety and pleasure are twins, sprung from one stem and

later  opposed  to  one  another.  To  return  to  our  patient:  it  is  objectivelyjustified to describe his fear of the unconscious as being identical with his

fear of depth. From the point of view of sex-economy, therefore, we see that

our patient’s superficiality was an active character attitude for the avoidance

of vegetative excitations of both anxiety and pleasure.

  The  affect-block  also  falls  into  this  category.  The  relation  between

muscular  rigidity  on  the  one  hand  and  character  superficiality  and

contactlessness on the other still remains to be explained. It can be said that,

physiologically,  the  muscular  armor  fulfills  the  same  function  that

contactlessness and superficiality fulfill psychically. Sex-economy does not

conceive of the primal relation between the physiological and the psychic

apparatus as one of mutual dependency but as one of functional identity with

simultaneous antithesis, i.e., it conceives of the relation dialectically. Hence,

the  further  question  arises  whether  muscular  rigidity  is  not  functionally

identical  with  character  armor,  contactlessness,  affect-block,  etc.  The

antithetical relationship is clear: the physiological behavior determines the

psychic behavior, and vice versa. The fact that the two mutually influence

one  another,  however,  is  far  less  important  for  the  comprehension  of  the

psychophysical  relation  than  everything  which  supports  the  view  of  their

functional identity.

  I want to cite one more clinical example which shows unmistakably how

the  vegetative  energy  can  be  precisely  liberated  from  the  psychic  and

muscular armor.

  This patient was characterized by his intense phallic-narcissistic warding

off  of  passive-homosexual  impulses.  This  central  psychic  conflict  was

revealed in his external appearance: he had a gaunt leathery body, and his

character was aggressive in a compensatory way. Great analytic effort was

required to make him aware of this conflict, for he put up strong resistance to

the recognition and breakthrough of the anal-homosexual impulses. When the

breakthrough  finally  occurred,  the  patient  suffered,  to  my  surprise,  a

vegetative shock. One day he came to the analysis with a stiff neck, severeheadache, dilated pupils, his skin alternating between mottled redness and

pallor, and severe oppression. The pressure in his head subsided when he

moved it and grew worse when he held it still. Severe nausea and feelings of

giddiness completed the picture of sympatheticotonia. The patient recovered

quickly. The incident was a glaring confirmation of the validity of my views

on the relation between character, sexual stasis, and vegetative excitation. It

seems to me that these findings also provide an insight into the problem of

schizophrenia, for it is precisely in psychoses that the functional relations

between the vegetative and the characterological components are so typical

and  so  conspicuous.  And  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  new

perspective which we have outlined here will one day provide a consistent

and satisfactory explanation of these relations. What is new here is not the

knowledge that psychic apparatus and vegetative system are related to one

another, or that they have a mutual functional relation. What is new is:

  1. The basic function of the psyche is of a sex-economic nature.

  2.  Sexual  excitation  and  sensations  of  anxiety  are  identical  and

antithetical at one and the same time (i.e., they derive from the same source

of  the  biopsychic  organism  but  flow  in  opposing  directions)  and  they

represent the irreducible basic antithesis of vegetative functioning.

  3. The formation of the character is the result of a binding of vegetative

energy.

  4. Character armor and muscular armor are functionally identical.

  5. Vegetative energy can be liberated, i.e., reactivated from the character

armor  and  muscular  armor  with  the  help  of  a  definite  technique  and,  at

present, only with this technique.

  I  should  like  to  make  it  quite  clear  that  this  theory  which  we  have

developed on the basis of the clinical data derived from character analysis

represents merely an initial step toward a comprehensive presentation of the

functional  psychophysical  relations,  that  the  still  unsolved  problems  are

incomparably more complicated, extensive, and difficult than what we havethus  far  achieved  in  the  way  of  a  solution.  However,  I  feel  that  I  have

definitely  succeeded  in  arriving  at  some  fundamental  formulations

concerning  the  whole  complex  of  problems  that  may  very  well  serve  to

advance  our  knowledge  of  the  psychophysical  relations.  I  feel  that  my

attempt to apply the functional method of investigation has been successful

and is justified by the results. This method is diametrically opposed to the

metaphysical-idealistic  or  mechanistic-causal-materialistic  methods  applied

in  the  attempt  to  arrive  at  an  applicable  knowledge  of  psychophysical

relations. At this point, however, it would lead us too far afield to set forth

the  fundamental  epistemological  objections  to  these  methods.  The  sex-

economic  approach  differs  from  the  recent  efforts  to  comprehend  the

psychophysical organism as a “totality” and “unity” in that it makes use of a

functional method of investigation and regards the function of the orgasm as

the central problem.


          10. THE TWO GREAT LEAPS IN EVOLUTION


  Thus  far,  we  have  arrived  at  a  theoretical  formulation  of  the

psychophysical  relations  which  can  be  substantiated  by  copious  clinical

observations. On the basis of these views, it is certainly not rash to pose a

hypothesis for further work in this field, provided we are willing to discard it

if it turns out to be sterile or deceptive.

  In evolution we are able to point to two great leaps which introduced

more gradual  processes  of  development.  The  first  was  the  leap  from  the

inorganic state to the organic or vegetative state. The second was the leap

from  the  organic-vegetative  state  to  the  development  of  the  psychic

apparatus,  particularly  the  development  of  consciousness  with  its  central

ability for self-awareness. Inasmuch as the organic grows out of the inorganic

and the psychic grows out of the vegetative, they continue to function and

operate in accordance with the basic laws which governed their matrix. In

principle, we find the same chemical and physical laws in the organic that wefind  in  the  inorganic;  and  in  the  psychic  component  we  find  the  same

fundamental reactions of tension and relaxation, energy stasis and discharge,

excitability, etc., that we find in the vegetative component. Apparently, the

functional process of development of the character which we described as the

dissociation  and  antithesis  of  new  formations  also  governs  the  more

comprehensive and universal developments of the organic from the inorganic

and of the psychic from the organic-vegetative. In the organism, the organic

is  set  off  against  the  inorganic  as  the  psychic  is  set  off  against  the

          18
vegetative.  They  are  unitary  and  at  the  same  time  antithetical.  In  the

capacity of the psychic apparatus for self-perception, the most peculiar and

most puzzling function of conscious life, particularly of consciousness, we

perceive the direct manifestation of the above antithesis. In the phenomenon

of  depersonalization,  the  function  of  self-perception  is  pathologically

distorted. The use of the functional method of investigation to deepen our

knowledge of depersonalization and related phenomena might very well turn

up important clues for the solution of the problem of consciousness.

  I  should  like  these  intimations  to  be  taken  for  what  they  are:  rough

sketches of a very obscure field, the correct approach to which must still be

sought. They differ fundamentally from the previous views of the relationship

between the somatic and the psychic functions. Yet they cannot ask to be

taken seriously unless they can succeed in solving those problems which have

remained  inaccessible  and,  if  we  are  not  totally  deceived,  must  remain

inaccessible to the other disciplines (the mechanistic-materialistic, idealistic,

etc.).  At  present,  these  basic  questions  of  life  are  shrouded  in  obscurity.

Hence, we must be extremely cautious in forming new views; at the same

time we must detach ourselves from all concepts which do not bring us closer

to a solution, which are, indeed, merely premature attempts to anticipate a

solution. A path full of uncertainties and pitfalls lies ahead for functional

psychology. Only recently did sex-economy arrive at several fundamental

formulations  which  gave  it  a  solid  foundation.  Now  much  depends  uponexperimental orgasm research. Yet one thing is certain: if natural science

succeeds in solving the problems regarding the relationship of body and soul,

that is, in mastering them in such a way that a clear-cut policy of dealing with

them is the result, and not mere idle theories, then the hour of doom will have

struck for transcendental mysticism, the “absolute objective spirit,” including

all ideologies which come under the heading of religion in both the narrow

and the broad sense of the word.

  Man’s vegetative life is only part of the universal process of nature. In his

vegetative currents, man also experiences a part of nature. Once we have

fully  comprehended  natural  functioning,  there  will  be  no  room  for  life-

destroying  psychic  structures  that  prevent  the  constructive  unfolding  of

vegetative energy, thus causing both sickness and suffering. Over and above

this,  their  continued  existence  is  justified  on  the  basis  that  they  are

providential and immutable. But certain psychic structures continue to exist

only because our knowledge of their sources is so fragmentary. Man dreams,

stirred by dark “oceanic” feelings, instead of mastering his existence, and he

is destroyed in dreams. Man’s dreaming, however, is merely an intimation of

the possible fruition of his vegetative life. Science may one day succeed in

fulfilling man’s dream of earthly happiness. Then the eternally unanswerable

question of the meaning of life will fade into the background and be replaced

by the concrete fulfillment of life.                                  CHAPTER XIV





THE EXPRESSIVE LANGUAGE OF THE LIVING




  1. THE FUNCTION OF EMOTION IN ORGONE THERAPY


The  concept  “orgone  therapy”  comprises  all  medical  and  pedagogical

techniques which make use of the biological energy, the orgone. The cosmic

orgone energy, from which the concept “orgone therapy” derives, was not

discovered until 1939. Yet, long before this discovery, the goal of character

analysis was conceived of as the liberation of “psychic energy,” as it was

called at that time, from the character armor and muscular armor and the

establishment of orgastic potency. Those conversant with orgone biophysics

are familiar with the development of character analysis (1926 to 1934) into

“vegetotherapy” (from 1935 on). It was no idle desire for sensationalism that

gave birth to so many various concepts in one and the same discipline of

natural  science.  Rather,  the  consistent  application  of  the  natural  scientific

concept  of  energy  to  the  processes  of  psychic  life  made  it  necessary,  in

various phases of development, to coin new concepts for new techniques.

  The fact that it was sex-economically oriented psychiatry which made

cosmic orgone energy accessible can, in my opinion, be regarded as a great

triumph on the part of orgonomic functionalism. Not withstanding the fact

that we are dealing with a strictly physical form of energy in orgone energy,

there are good reasons why it was discovered by a psychiatrist and not a

physicist.  The  logic  of  this  discovery  in  the  field  of  biopsychiatry  is

demonstrated  by  its  development,  which  I  described  in  my  book The

Discovery of the Orgone, Vol. 1: The Function of the Orgasm.  When  the  orgasm  reflex  was  discovered  in  1935,  the  emphasis  in

treatment  was  shifted  from  the  character  to the  body.  The  term

“vegetotherapy” was coined to allow for this shift in emphasis, for, from that

point  on,  my  analytic  technique  affected  character  neurosis  in  the

physiological realm. Thus, we spoke of “character-analytic vegetotherapy” to

include  in  one  concept  the  work  on  the  psychic and  on  the  physical

apparatus. This term had many disadvantages which, at that time, I could not

help.  For  one  thing,  it  was  too  long.  Moreover,  it  contained  the  word

“vegetative,”  which,  while  it  is  correct  in  German,  is  suggestive  of

“vegetables” in English. Last but not least, it retained the psychophysical

dichotomy, which was at variance with our concept of the homogeneity of the

organism.

  The  discovery  of  the  orgone  put  an  end  to  these  terminological

difficulties. Cosmic  orgone  energy  functions  in  the  living  organism  as

specific  biological  energy.  As  such,  it  governs  the  entire  organism;  it  is

expressed in the emotions as well as in the purely biophysical movements of

the organs. Thus, for the first time since its inception and with its own means,

psychiatry took root in objective, natural scientific processes. This requires a

more detailed explanation.

  Until  the  discovery  of  the  orgone,  psychiatry  had  to  borrow  from

inorganic  physics  when  it  attempted  to  prove  its  psychological  assertions

objectively and quantitatively. Neither the mechanical brain lesions nor the

chemico-physical processes in the organism, and certainly not the outdated

cerebral  localization  of  sensations  and  ideas,  ever  succeeded  in  giving  a

satisfactory explanation of emotional processes. As opposed to these, orgone

biophysics was, from the outset, concerned with the basic problem of all

psychiatry,  the emotions.  Literally  defined,  the  word  “emotion”  means

“moving outwards” or “pushing out.” Thus, we not only can but must take the

word  “emotion”  literally  in  speaking  of  sensations  and  movements.  The

microscopic observation of living amoebae subjected to minor electric stimulireveals  the  meaning  of  the  concept  “emotion”  in  an  unmistakable  way.

Fundamentally, emotion is nothing but a plasmatic movement. Pleasurable

stimuli effect an “emotion” of the protoplasm from the center toward the

periphery.  Non-pleasurable  stimuli,  on  the  other  hand,  bring  about  an

“emotion”  or,  more  correctly,  “remotion”  of  the  protoplasm  from  the

periphery toward the center of the organism. These two basic directions of

the biophysical plasma current correspond to the two basic affects of the

psychic  apparatus,  pleasure  and  anxiety.  In  terms  of  their  function,  the

physical  plasma  motion  and  the  sensation  corresponding  to  it  are,  as  we

learned  from  experiments  on  the  oscillograph,  completely  identical.  They

cannot be separated from one another; indeed, they are inconceivable without

one another. However, they are, as we know, not only functionally identical

but also and at the same time antithetical: a biophysical plasma excitation

transmits a sensation, and a sensation expresses itself in a plasma movement.

Today these facts are a well-established foundation of orgone biophysics.

  Whether we reactivate emotions from the character armor by means of

“character analysis” or we liberate them from the muscular armor by means

of “vegetotherapy,” the fact remains that in both cases we produce plasmatic

excitations and movements. What moves in this process is nothing but orgone

energy, which is contained in the body fluids. Accordingly, the mobilization

of  plasmatic  currents  and  emotions  in  the  organism  is  identical  with  the

mobilization of orgone energy. Clinical indications of this mobilization are

clearly  evident  in  the  changes  of  the  vasomotor  functions.  In  every  case,

therefore,  whether  we  are  evoking  memories,  breaking  down  defense

mechanisms, or eliminating muscular tensions, we are always working on the

orgone energy of the organism. The difference in the various methods lies in

their  effectiveness.  A  memory  is  not  nearly  as  capable  of  achieving  the

emotional  outbreak,  for  example,  as  the  loosening  of  a  block  in  the

diaphragm.

  It  is  quite  clear,  then,  why  I  now  propose  to  include  both  character                                                                        1
analysis and vegetotherapy under the term “orgone therapy.” The common

element is reflected in the therapeutic goal, the mobilization of the patient’s

plasmatic currents. In other words, if we are really serious about the unitary

concept  of  the  organism,  i.e.,  one  with  practical  implications,  then  it  is

altogether out of the question to break up a living organism into character

traits here, muscles there, and plasma functions elsewhere.

  In orgone therapy, our work is concentrated on the biological depth, the

plasma system, or, as we express it technically, the biological core of the

organism. This, as is readily evident, is a decisive step, for it means that we

have left the sphere of psychology, of “depth” psychology as well, and have

entered  the  province  of  protoplasmatic  functions,  even  going  beyond  the

physiology  of  the  nerves  and  muscles.  These  steps  are  to  be  taken  very

seriously; they have far-reaching practical and theoretical consequences, for

they effect a fundamental change in our biopsychiatric practice. We no longer

work merely on individual conflicts and special armorings but on the living

organism  itself.  As  we  gradually  learn  to  comprehend  and  influence  the

living  organism,  the  purely  psychological  and  physiological  functions  are

automatically included in our work. Schematic specialization is no longer

possible.


        2. PLASMATIC EXPRESSIVE MOVEMENT AND

                        EMOTIONAL EXPRESSION


  It is difficult to define the living organism in a strict functional sense. The

ideas  of  orthodox  psychology  and  depth  psychology  are  chained  to  word

formations. However, the living organism functions beyond all verbal ideas

and concepts. Human speech, a biological form of expression at an advanced

stage of development, is not a specific attribute of the living organism, which

functions  long  before  a  language  and  verbal  representations  exist.  Thus,

depth psychology deals with a life function which came into existence at a

relatively  late  stage  of  biological  development.  Many  animals  expressthemselves through sounds. But the living organism functioned prior to and

functions beyond the use of sounds as a form of expression.

  Language itself reveals the key to the problem of how the living organism

expresses itself. Evidently, language derives from the sensations perceived by

body  organs.  For  example,  the  German  word Ausdruck  and  its  English

equivalent “expression” exactly describe the language of the living organism:

the  living  organism  expresses  itself  in  movements;  we  therefore  speak  of

“expressive movements.” Expressive movement is an inherent characteristic

of the protoplasm. It distinguishes the living organism from all non-living

systems. The word literally implies—and we have to take it literally—that

something in the living system “presses itself out” and, therefore, “moves.”

This  can  only  mean  the  movement  i.e.,  expansion  or  contraction,  of  the

protoplasm. Literally, “emotion” means “moving outward”; at the same time,

it is an “expressive movement.” The physiological process of the plasmatic

emotion  or  expressive  movement  is  inseparably  linked  to  an  immediately

comprehensible meaning  which  we  are  wont  to  call  the “emotional

expression.”  Thus,  the  movement  of  the  protoplasm  is  expressive  of  an

emotion,  and  emotion  or  the  expression  of  an  organism  is  embodied  in

movement. The second part of this sentence will require some modification,

for we know from orgone therapy that there is an expression in human beings

produced by immobility or rigidity.

  We are not playing with words. Language is clearly derived from the

perception  of  inner  movements  and  organ  sensations,  and  the  words  that

describe emotional conditions directly reflect the corresponding expressive

movement of the living organism.

  While  language  does  reflect  the  plasmatic  emotional  condition  in  an

immediate way, it is still not capable of getting at this condition itself. The

reason is that the beginnings of living functioning lie much deeper than and

beyond language. Over and above this, the living organism has its own modes

of expressing movement which simply cannot be comprehended with words.Every musically inclined person is familiar with the emotional state evoked

by  great  music.  However,  if  one  attempts  to  translate  these  emotional

experiences into words, one’s musical perception rebels. Music is wordless

and  wants  to  remain  that  way.  Yet  music  gives  expression  to  the  inner

movement of the living organism, and listening to it evokes the “sensation”

of some “inner stirring.” The wordlessness of music is usually described in

one of two ways: (1) as a mark of mystical spirituality, or (2) as the deepest

expression  of  feelings  incapable  of  being  put  into  words.  The  natural

scientific  point  of  view  subscribes  to  the  interpretation  that  musical

expression is related to the depths of the living organism. Accordingly, what

is  regarded  as  the  “spirituality”  of  great  music  is  merely  another  way  of

saying  that  deep  feeling  is  identical  with  having  contact  with  the  living

organism beyond the limitations of language.

  Until now, science has not had anything decisive to say about the nature

of the expressive movement of music. Undoubtedly, the artist himself speaks

to us in the form of wordless expressions of movement from the depth of the

life function, but he would be just as incapable as we of putting into words

what he expresses in his music or in his painting. Indeed, he strongly objects

to any attempt to translate the language of expression of art into human word

language.  He  attaches  great  importance  to  the  purity  of  his  language  of

expression.  Hence,  he  confirms  the  orgone-biophysical  assertion  that  the

living organism possesses its own language of expression before, beyond,

and independent of all word language. Let us see what orgone therapy has to

say about this problem. We shall cite an everyday experience.

  Patients come to orgone therapists full of afflictions. The practiced eye

can perceive these afflictions directly from the expressive movements and the

emotional expression of their bodies. If the analyst allows the patient to speak

at random, he finds that the patient tends to circumvent his afflictions, i.e., to

conceal them in one way or another. If the analyst wants to arrive at a correct

appraisal of his patient, he must begin by asking the patient not to speak. Thismeasure proves very fruitful, for as soon as the patient ceases to speak, the

emotional expressions of his body are brought into much sharper focus. After

a few minutes of silence, the analyst will usually have grasped the patient’s

most conspicuous character trait or, more correctly, will have understood the

emotional expression of the plasmatic movement. If the patient appeared to

laugh in a friendly way while he spoke, his laughter might modulate into an

empty grin during his silence, the mask-like character of which the patient

himself must readily perceive. If the patient appeared to speak about his life

with reserved seriousness, an expression of suppressed anger might easily

appear in the chin and neck during his silence.

  Let these examples suffice to point out that, apart from its function as

communication, human  language  also  often  functions  as  a  defense.  The

spoken  word  conceals  the  expressive  language  of  the  biological  core.  In

many cases, the function of speech has deteriorated to such a degree that the

words express nothing whatever and merely represent a continuous, hollow

activity on the part of the musculature of the neck and the organs of speech.

On  the  basis  of  repeated  experiences,  it  is  my  opinion  that  in  many

psychoanalyses which have gone on for years the treatment has become stuck

in this pathological use of language. This clinical experience can, indeed has

to be applied to the social sphere. Endless numbers of speeches, publications,

political debates do not have the function of getting at the root of important

questions of life but of drowning them in verbiage.

  Orgone therapy, as opposed to all other forms of therapy, attempts to

influence the organism not through the use of human language but by getting

the patient to express himself biologically. This approach leads him into a

depth which he continually flees. In this way the orgone therapist learns,

understands, and influences the language of the living organism. It is hardly

possible  to  obtain  the  primary  language  of  expression  of  the  living

protoplasm  in  the  patient  in  a  “pure”  form.  If  the  patient’s  mode  of

expression were biologically “pure,” he would have no reason to seek thehelp of an orgone therapist. We have to go through a welter of pathological,

unnatural expressive movements (i.e., movements not native to the process of

the living organism) to arrive at the genuine biological mode of expression.

Human  biopathy,  indeed,  is  nothing  other  than  the  sum  total  of  all  the

distortions of the natural modes of expression of the living organism. By

unmasking  the  pathological  modes  of  expression,  we  get  to  know  human

biopathy at a depth inaccessible to methods of cure operating with human

language.  This  is  not  to  be  ascribed  to  a  deficiency  on  the  part  of  these

methods; they are adequate in their own sphere. With its distorted expression

of life, however, biopathy lies outside the sphere of language and ideas.

  Hence, orgone-therapeutic work on the human biopathy lies essentially

outside the sphere of human language. Naturally, we too make use of the

spoken word, but the words we use do not conform to everyday concepts but

to organ sensations. There would be no point whatever in making the patient

understand his condition in physiological terminology. We do not say to him:

“Your masticatory organs are in a condition of chronic contraction, that’s

why your chin doesn’t move when you speak; that’s why your voice is a

monotone; that’s why you can’t cry; you have continually to swallow to ward

off an impulse to cry, etc.” This would make sense to the patient’s intellect

but would not enable him to effect any change in his condition.

  We work on a biologically deeper level of understanding. It is not at all

necessary for us to be able to point out exactly which individual muscles are

contracted. It would serve no purpose, for example, to put pressure on the

masseter muscles, for there would be no reaction apart from the usual pain.

We work with the language of facial and body expression. Only when we

have sensed  the  patient’s  facial expression  are  we  in  a  position  to

comprehend it. We use the word “comprehend” here to mean quite literally to

know which emotion is being expressed in it. And it makes no difference

whether the emotion is mobile and active or immobile and suppressed. We

shall  have  to  learn  to  recognize  the  difference  between  a  mobile  and  asuppressed emotion.

  We are operating with primary biological functions when we “sense” a

patient’s  “expressive  movement.”  When,  in  a  flight  of  sparrows,  a  single

sparrow becomes restless and, “sensing danger,” flies off, the whole flight

follows, whether or not the rest of the birds have noticed the cause of the

commotion.  The  panic  reaction  in  the  animal  kingdom  is  based  on  an

involuntary  reproduction  of  the  movement  expressive  of  anxiety.  Any

number of people can be brought to a standstill on the sidewalk and made to

look up into the sky if one merely pretends that one has observed something

interesting high up in the air. Let these examples suffice.

  The  patient’s  expressive  movements  involuntarily  bring  about an

imitation in our own organism. By imitating these movements, we “sense”

and understand the expression in ourselves and, consequently, in the patient.

Since every movement is expressive of a biological condition, i.e., reveals an

emotional  condition  of  the  protoplasm,  the  language  of  facial  and  body

expression becomes an essential means of communicating with the patient’s

emotions. As I have already pointed out, human language interferes with the

language  of  the  face  and  the  body.  When  we  use  the  term  “character

attitude,” what we have in mind is the total expression of an organism. This

is literally the same as the total impression which the organism makes on us.

  There  is  considerable  variation  in  the  outward  expression  of  inner

emotional states. No two people have precisely the same speech, respiratory

block,  or  gait.  Nonetheless,  there  are  a  number  of  universal,  clearly

distinguishable  modes  of  expression.  In  depth  psychology  we  draw  a

fundamental distinction between the “neurotic” character and the “genital”

character on the basis of muscular and character armoring. We say that a

character is “neurotic” when his organism is governed by an armor so rigid

that he cannot voluntarily change or eliminate it. We speak of a “genital”

character when the emotional reactions are not governed by rigid automatism,

when the person is capable of reacting in a biological way to a particularsituation.  These  two  basic  character  types  can  also  be  quite  sharply

distinguished from one another in the area of biological functioning.

  The armoring, its nature, the degree of its rigidity, and the inhibition of

the body’s emotional language can be easily assessed once the analyst has

mastered the language of biological expression. The total expression of the

armored organism is one of “holding back.” The meaning of this expression

is quite literal: the body is expressing that it is holding back. Pulled-back

shoulders,  thrust-out  chest,  rigid  chin,  superficial,  suppressed  breathing,

hollowed-out  loins,  retracted,  immobile  pelvis,  “expressionless”  or  rigidly

stretched-out legs are the essential attitudes and mechanism of total restraint.

They can be expressed schematically in the diagram here.

    Clinically, this basic body attitude on the part of the “neurotic” character

is  most  clearly  expressed  in  the  “arc  de  cercle”  of  hysteria  and  in  the

“opisthotonus” of catatonic stupor.

  There can be no doubt that the basic attitude of the armored body is not

consciously created but is autonomous. A person is not aware of his armor as

such. If the attempt is made to describe it to him in words, he usually does

not understand what one is talking about. He does not sense the armor itself

but merely the distortion of his inner perceptions of life. He describes himself

as being apathetic, rigid, confined, empty, or he complains about palpitations,

constipation, insomnia, nervous restlessness, nausea, etc. If the armor has

existed for a long time and has also had an effect on the tissues of the organs,

the patient comes to us because of peptic ulcers, rheumatism, arthritis, cancer,

or  angina  pectoris.  Since  I  presented  the  purely  clinical  facts  in  detail

elsewhere, I shall content myself with this summary. We are most concerned

here to penetrate to the functions of the biological depth and to deduce the

functioning of the living organism from them.Back

Tail end Head end
The basic biophysical attitude of the unarmored organism










The basic biophysical attitude of the armored organism: “holding back”


  The armored organism is incapable of breaking down its own armor. But

it is equally incapable of expressing its elemental biological emotions. It is

familiar with the sensation of tickling but has never experienced orgonotic

pleasure.  The  armored  individual  cannot  express  a  sigh  of  pleasure  or

consciously  imitate  it.  When  he  tries  to  do  so,  the  result  is  a  groan,  a

suppressed, pent-up roar, or even an impulse to vomit. He is incapable of

venting  anger  or  of  banging  his  fist  in  an  imitation  of  anger.  He  cannot

breathe out fully. His diaphragm is very constricted in its movements. (This

can be easily ascertained through x-rays). He is not capable of moving the

pelvis forward. Asked to do so, an armored person will often not understand

what  is  wanted  of  him  or  he  will  execute  the  wrong  movement,  i.e.,  a

movement indicative of holding back. The excessive strain on the peripheral

muscles and the nervous system causes the armored organism to be acutely

sensitive  to  pressure.  It  is  not  possible  to  touch  an  armored  organism  oncertain parts of the body without producing manifestations of acute anxiety or

nervousness. It is quite likely that what is popularly known as “nervousness”

can be traced back to this hypersensitivity of the overtensed muscles.

  The incapacity for plasmatic pulsation and convulsion in the sexual act,

i.e., orgastic impotence, is the result of this total holding back. This, in turn,

results  in  the  stasis  of  sexual  energy,  and  from  this  sexual  stasis  follows

everything which I include under the concept “biopathy.”

  The central task of orgone therapy is to destroy the armor, in other words,

to  restore  the  motility  of  the  body  plasma.  In  the  armored  organism,  the

pulsation function of all organs is impaired to a greater or lesser degree. It is

the task of orgone therapy to reestablish the full capacity for pulsation. This

takes place biophysically when the mechanism of holding back is destroyed.

The result of an ideal orgone therapy is the appearance of the orgasm reflex.

Apart from respiration, it is, as we know, the most important manifestation of

movement in the animal kingdom. At the moment of orgasm, the organism

completely  “surrenders”  itself  to  the  sensations  of  its  organs  and  the

involuntary  pulsations  of  the  body.  This  explains  the  intimate  connection

between  the  movement  of  the  orgasm  reflex  and  the  expression  of

“surrender.” Those who are familiar with our work know that we do not urge

the patient to “surrender” himself or herself. It would not serve any purpose

anyhow, for he or she would not be able to do so. If the patient could, he

would have no need to call upon our help. Nor do we allow the patient to

practice “surrender.” There is no technique capable of consciously producing

the involuntary  attitude  of  surrender. The  living  organism  functions

autonomously,  beyond  the  sphere  of  language,  intellect,  and  volition.  It

functions in accordance with definite laws of nature, and it is these laws we

shall  investigate  here.  The  orgasm  reflex,  together  with  its  physical

manifestations  of  surrender,  is,  as  will  soon  be  shown,  the  key  to  the

understanding of the fundamental processes of nature, which far transcend

the  individual  and  even  the  living  organism.  Hence,  those  who  wish  tobenefit  from  the  further  discussion  of  these  phenomena  must  prepare

themselves for a journey deep into the realm of cosmic energy. Those who

have not wholly freed themselves from burlesque concepts of sexuality will

be  bitterly  disappointed  and  will  fail  to  comprehend  even  the  most

rudimentary points.

  We have already made a thorough study of the functions of the orgasm in

the  field  of  psychology  and  physiology.  Hence,  here  we  can  concentrate

exclusively on the fundamental natural phenomenon of the “orgasm.” In the

orgasm,  strangely  enough,  the  organism  unceasingly  attempts  to  bring

together the two embryologically important zones, the mouth and the anus.

Its form is:













The emotional expression of the orgasm reflex


  I stated above that the attitude from which the orgasm reflex derives is

identical with the movement expressive of “surrender.” This is really quite

obvious.  The  organism  surrenders  itself  to  its  plasmatic  excitations  and

sensations of flowing; then it surrenders itself completely to the partner in the

sexual  embrace.  Every  form  of  reserve,  holding  back,  and  armoring  is

abandoned.  All  biological  activity  is  reduced  to  the  basic  function  of

plasmatic  pulsation.  In  man,  all  thought  and  fantasy  activity  cease.  The

organism is “surrendered” in the purest sense of the word.

  The movement expressive of emotional surrender is clear. What is notclear is the function of the orgastic pulsation. This pulsation consists in the

alternating  contractions  and  expansions  of  the  entire  body  plasma. What

function does the bringing together of the two ends of the trunk have in the

orgastic pulsation?  On  first  impression,  it  appears  to  have  no  “meaning”

whatever. The expression of this movement is incomprehensible. We said

that every movement of the organism has an intelligible expression. But this

assertion does not hold up in the case of orgastic pulsation. We cannot find in

the orgasm an intelligible expression, i.e., one capable of being translated into

human language.

  We could at this point indulge in philosophical speculations about this

problem. But this would not lead us anywhere. Hence, for the time being, we

shall content ourselves with the natural scientific explanation that, while it

appears to be unintelligible, the orgastic pulsation must nonetheless have a

concealed expression. For, like every movement of the living organism, it too

is an expressive movement; hence, its movement must of necessity have an

expression.

  We shall, in the further course of our investigations, arrive at an amazing

but incontestable answer to this basic question of the life function. But to

arrive at this answer we must first digress considerably and collect and learn

to collate correctly a large number of biological phenomena. The answer goes

deeper than the individual biological organism; hence, it is suprapersonal; at

the same time, it is not in the least metaphysical or spiritualistic. It also

explains why the orgastic yearning of living creatures is not only the very

deepest yearning but, in a preeminent way, cosmic yearning. To be sure, it is

generally known that the organism is a part of the cosmos, but until now it

has not been known how. Let us return to the clinical experiences of orgone

therapy.

  In terms of orgone biophysics, it is our task to enable the human organism

to  give  up  its  mechanism  of  holding  back  and  to  achieve  the  ability  to

surrender. In other words, as long as the two embryonic ends of the trunkbend  backwards  instead  of  bending  forward  toward  one  another,  the

organism will be incapable of surrendering itself to any experience, whether

work or pleasure. Since the muscular armor hinders every form of surrender

and causes every form of biopathic restriction of the life function, our first

task is to break down the armor. Only by eliminating muscular rigidity can

the goal of surrender be encompassed. It cannot be achieved in any other

way, be it psychoanalytic persuasion, suggestion, prayer, or gymnastics. It is

not  necessary  to  tell  our  patients  anything  whatever  about  this  goal.

Numerous  experiences  have  taught  us  that  his  total  orgasm  reflex  will

develop as a matter of course when we have succeeded in breaking down his

muscular armor. Our work has demonstrated time and again that the essential

function of the muscular armor is that of preventing the orgasm reflex.

    Elsewhere,  I  have  described  numerous  mechanisms  of  the  muscular

armor.  The  corresponding character  armor  is  described  in  Part  I  of  this

volume. Now I want to introduce a new point of view which will clarify

character  armor  and  muscular  armor  at  the  level  of  the  most  elemental

functions  of  life.  The  germane  observations  were  made  over  the  past  ten

years or so. Hence, I have no hesitation in assuming full responsibility for the

importance which these observations have in the field of biophysics.


  3. THE SEGMENTAL ARRANGEMENT OF THE ARMOR


  It has been known to psychiatry for decades that the physical disturbances

of hysteria are not governed by the anatomical and physiological processes of

the muscles, nerves, and tissues as a whole; rather, they are determined by

definite, emotionally important organs. For example, pathological blushing is

usually confined to the face and neck, despite the fact that the blood vessels

run  essentially  along  the  length  of  the  organism.  Likewise,  sensory

disturbances in hysteria are not spread along the nerve tract but are confined

to emotionally significant regions of the body.

  We  run  into  the  same  situation  in  our  work  of  breaking  down  themuscular armor. The individual muscular blocks do not follow the course of a

muscle or a nerve; they are altogether independent of anatomical processes.

In carefully examining typical cases of various illnesses in the search for a

law  that  governs  these  blocks,  I  discovered  that the  muscular  armor  is

arranged in segments.

    Biologically, this segmental arrangement is a much more primitive form

of  living  functioning  than  is  found  in  the  highly  developed  animals.  A

conspicuous example of segmental functioning is that of ringed worms and

the biological systems related to them. In the higher vertebrates, only the

segmental  structure  of  the  spine,  the  nerve  endings  corresponding  to  the

segments of the spinal cord, and the segmental arrangement of the ganglia of

the autonomic nervous system are indicative of the vertebrates’ descent from

segmentally structured organisms.

  I shall attempt in the following exposition to give only a rough sketch of

the segmental arrangement of the muscular armor. These representations are

based on the observation of armor reactions over a period of many years.

  Since the patient’s body is held back and since the goal of orgone therapy

is to restore the plasmatic currents in the pelvis, it is logically necessary to

begin the work of breaking down the armor at the parts of the body farthest

away from the pelvis. Thus, the work begins on the expression of the facial

musculature.  There  are  at  least two  clearly  distinguishable,  segmentally

arranged armorings in the head: one segment comprises the forehead, eyes,

and the region of the cheekbone; the other comprises the lips, chin, and jaws.

When I say that the armor is segmentally arranged, I mean that it functions

circularly, in front, on both sides, and in back, i.e., like a ring.

  Let us refer to the first armor ring as the ocular and the second as the oral

armor ring. In the sphere of the ocular armor segment, we find a contraction

and  immobilization  of  all  or  almost  all  the  muscles  of  the  eyeballs,  the

eyelids, the forehead, the lachrymal gland, etc. Rigid forehead and eyelids,

expressionless  eyes  or  bulging  eyeballs,  mask-like  expression,  andimmobility on both sides of the nose are the essential characteristics of this

armor  ring.  The  eyes  peep  out  as  from  a  rigid  mask.  The  patient  is  not

capable of opening his eyes wide as if to imitate fear. In schizophrenics, the

expression of the eyes is blank, as if staring into space. This is caused by the

contraction of the eyeball muscles. Many patients have lost the ability to shed

tears. In others, the opening of the eyelids has been reduced to a narrow, rigid

slit. The forehead is without expression, as if it had been “flattened out.”

Near-sightedness, astigmatism, etc., very often exist.

  The loosening of the ocular armor segment is brought about by opening

the eyes wide as in fright; this causes the eyelids and forehead to move and to

express emotions. Usually, this also effects a loosening of the upper cheek

muscles, especially when the patient is told to make grimaces. When the

cheeks are pulled up, the result is that peculiar grin expressive of defiant,

malicious provocation.

  The segmental character of this muscle group is revealed by the fact that

every emotional action in this area affects horizontally adjacent areas but

does not carry over into the oral segment. While it is true that the opening

wide of the eyelids, as in fright, is capable of mobilizing the forehead or of

producing  a  grin  in  the  upper  part  of  the  cheeks,  it  is  not  capable  of

provoking the biting impulses which are cemented in the clamped chin.

  Hence,  an  armor  segment  comprises  those  organs  and  muscle  groups

which have a functional contact with one another and which are capable of

accompanying each other in the emotional expressive movement. In terms of

biophysics, one segment ends and a different segment begins when the one

ceases to affect the other in its emotional actions.

  The armor segments always have a horizontal structure—never a vertical

one,  with  the  two  notable  exceptions  of  the  arms  and  legs.  Their  armor

functions in conjunction with the adjacent armor segments of the trunk, i.e.,

the arms with the segment which comprises the shoulders, and the legs with

the segment which comprises the pelvis. We want to take special note of thispeculiarity. It will become intelligible in a definite biophysical context.

  The second, i.e., the oral, armor segment comprises the entire musculature

of the chin, pharynx, and the occipital musculature, including the muscles

around  the  mouth.  They  are  functionally  related  to  one  another;  e.g.,  the

loosening  of  the  chin  armor  is  capable  of  producing  spasms  in  the

musculature of the lips and the related emotion of crying or desire to suck.

Likewise,  the  freeing  of  the  gag  reflex  is  capable  of  mobilizing  the  oral

segment.

  The  emotional  modes  of  expression  of  crying,  furious  biting,  yelling,

sucking, grimacings of all kinds in this segment are dependent upon the free

motility of the ocular segment. Liberating the gag reflex, for example, will

not necessarily release a suppressed impulse to cry if the armor of the ocular

ring has not already been dissolved. And even after the two uppermost armor

segments have been dissolved, it may still be difficult to release the impulse

to cry as long as the third and fourth segments further down, at the thorax, are

in  the  condition  of  spastic  contraction.  This  difficulty  in  liberating  the

emotions gives us an insight into an extremely important fact of biophysics:

  1. The armorings have a segmental, circular structure, arranged at right

angles to the spine.

  2. The plasmatic currents and emotional excitations which we resuscitate

flow parallel to the body axis.

  Thus, the inhibition of the emotional language of expression operates at

right angles to the direction of the orgonotic current.

  Two things are important in this connection: (1) the orgonotic currents

merge in the orgasm reflex only when their passage along the entire organism

is unobstructed; and (2) the armorings are arranged in segments crosswise to

the flow of the currents. It is clear, therefore, that the orgastic pulsation can

function only after all the segmental armor rings have been loosened. It is

also clear that the sensations of each body organ can merge into a sensation

of totality only when the first orgastic convulsions have begun. They prefacethe breakdown of the muscular armor. The orgonotic currents which break

through  in  the  loosening  of  every  additional  armor  ring  prove  to  be  a

tremendous help in the dissolution work as a whole. What happens is this: the

liberated body energy spontaneously attempts to flow lengthwise. It runs into

the  still  unresolved  crosswise  contractions  and  gives  the  patient  the

unmistakable sensation of a “block,” a sensation which was only very weak

or  altogether  absent  as  long  as  there  were  no  free  plasmatic  currents

whatever.

  The  reader  is  surely  aware  of  the  fact  that  these  processes  represent

primary functions of the plasma system. They are not only deeper than all

human language but also central to the functioning of the life apparatus. They

are primordial phylogenetic functions. In the segmental arrangement of the

muscular armoring, we meet the worm in man.










 
The direction of orgonotic streaming is transverse to the armor rings


  The movements of the ringed worm are governed by excitation waves

which run from the end of the tail along the axis of the body forward to the

“head.” The excitation waves are transmitted continuously from segment to

segment until they have reached the forward end. At the hind end, one wave

movement follows another in the process of locomotion. In the worm, the

segments  alternate  rhythmically  and  regularly  between  contraction  and

expansion. In the worm and the caterpillar, the function of locomotion is

inseparably  linked  with  this  plasmatic  wave  movement.  The  logical

conclusion  is  that biological  energy  is  being  transmitted  in  these  wave

movements,  for  it  could  be  nothing  else.  This  assertion  is  supported  byobservations of the inner movements of bions. The wave-like movement of

the body or-gone is slow and, in tempo and expression, wholly corresponds

to the emotional excitations which, in the pleasure function, we experience

subjectively in an unequivocal wave-like manner.

  In armored human organisms, the orgone energy is bound in the chronic

contraction of the muscles. The body orgone does not begin to flow freely as

soon  as  the  armor  ring  has  been  loosened.  The  first  reaction  is  clonic

shivering,  along  with  the  sensation  of  prickling,  or  “pins  and  needles.”

Clinically, this reaction tells us that the armor is giving way and body orgone

is  being  liberated.  Genuine  sensations  of  plasmatic  excitation  waves  are

experienced  only  when  a  whole  series  of  armor  segments,  e.g.,  muscular

blocks in the region of the eyes, mouth, throat, breast, and diaphragm, have

been  dissolved.  When  this  has  been  accomplished,  marked wave-like

pulsations  are  experienced  in  liberated  parts  of  the  body  which  move  up

toward the head and down toward the genitalia. Very often the organism

reacts to these initial currents and pulsations with fresh armorings. Spasms in

the  deep  musculature  of  the  throat,  reverse  peristalsis  of  the  esophagus,

diaphragmatic  tics,  etc.,  testify  to  the struggle  taking  place between  the

impulse of the current and the armor block. Since more orgone energy has

become  free  than  the  patient  is  capable  of  discharging;  since,  moreover,

spasms  block  the  plasmatic  current  at  numerous  points  in  the  body,  the

patient develops acute anxiety.

  These  phenomena,  which  can  be  easily  brought  about  by  an  orgone

therapist  having  some  experience  and  technical  skill,  confirm  orgone-

biophysics’s concept of the antithesis between the emotion of pleasure and

                          2
the emotion of anxiety. At this juncture, however, I have to single out a new

phenomenon which, until now, has not been described clearly enough.

  As soon as the first armor blocks have been dissolved, the movement

expressive of “surrender” appears more and more, along with the orgonotic

currents  and  sensations.  However,  its  full  unfolding  is  hindered  by  thosearmor blocks that have not yet been dissolved. Usually, it appears as if the

organism wanted to overcome these undissolved armor blocks by force. The

expression of incipient surrender is transformed into hate. This process is

typical and deserves special attention.

  When, for example, the armoring of the oral zone has been sufficiently

loosened to release a suppressed impulse to cry, while the neck and chest

armorings are still untouched, we observe how the lower musculature of the

face takes on the expression of wanting to cry but not being able to. The

expression of being on the verge of tears is transformed into a hateful grin of

the  mouth-chin  zone.  It  is  an  expression  of  desperation,  of  extreme

frustration. All this can be summarized in the following formula:

  AS SOON AS THE MOVEMENT EXPRESSING SURRENDER IS OBSTRUCTED BY AN

ARMOR BLOCK, THE IMPULSE TO SURRENDER IS TRANSFORMED INTO DESTRUCTIVE

RAGE. I shall have to come back to this transformation of an impulse after I

have described the manifestations of the other armor segments.

  The  armor  of  the third  segment  comprises  essentially  the  deep

musculature of the neck, the platysma, and the sternocleidomastoid muscles.

Let  one  but  imitate  the  movement  expressive  of  the  attitude  of  anger  or

crying  and  one  will  have  no  difficulty  in  comprehending  the  emotional

function of the neck armor. The spastic contraction of the neck segment also

includes  the  tongue.  In  terms  of  anatomy,  this  is  easily  understood.

Essentially,  the  musculature  of  the  tongue  is  joined  to  the  cervical  bone

system and not to the lower facial bones. This explains why spasms in the

musculature of the tongue are functionally connected with the pressing down

of the Adam’s apple and the contraction of the deep and surface musculature

of the throat. From the movements of the Adam’s apple, it is possible to tell

when a patient’s anger affect or impulse to cry is unconsciously and literally

“swallowed.” It is extremely difficult to eliminate this method of suppressing

emotions. While the hands can be used to get at the surface muscles of the

neck, this is not possible in dealing with the larynx musculature. The bestway to eliminate the “swallowing” of emotions is to liberate the gag reflex. In

the gag reflex, the excitation wave in the esophagus is the reverse of the

excitation wave which occurs in the “swallowing” of tears or anger. If the gag

reflex begins to function or even goes so far as to cause the patient to vomit,

then the emotions are set free which were being held back by the neck armor.

  At  this  point  the  lengthwise  course  of  the  emotional  excitation  again

becomes significant. The gag reflex is accompanied by an expansion of the

diaphragm, i.e., by the lifting of the diaphragm and expiration. Work on the

neck armor by means of the gag reflex brings about a loosening of the fourth

and fifth armor segments. In other words, we do not eliminate one armor ring

after the other in a mechanical and rigid manner. We work on an integrated

life  system,  whose  total  plasma  function  is  hindered  by  transverse  armor

rings. But the loosening of an armor segment liberates energy which, in turn,

helps to mobilize armor rings at higher and lower levels. It is therefore not

possible to give a clear description of each process involved in the dissolution

of the muscular armor.

  Now I want to turn to the fourth, the chest segment. While it is true that

the  armor  functions  of  this  segment  can  be  subdivided,  it  is  more

advantageous to treat the chest as a whole.

  The  armoring  of  the  chest  is  manifested  in  the  elevation  of  the  bony

structure,  a  chronic  attitude  of  inhalation,  shallow  breathing,  and  the

immobility of the thorax. We already know that the attitude of inhalation is

the most important instrument in the suppression of any kind of emotion. The

armoring of the chest is particularly crucial not only because it represents a

major part of the armoring of the organism in general but also because the

biopathic symptoms have an especially dangerous character in this region.

  All  the  intercostal  muscles,  the  large  chest  muscles  (pectoral),  the

shoulder  muscles  (deltoid),  and  the  muscle  group  on  and  between  the

shoulder blades are involved in the armoring of the chest. The attitude of

being “self-contained” or “self-controlled,” of “sticking to oneself,” “beingreserved,” are the major manifestations of the chest armor. Shoulders which

are pulled back express precisely what they mean—”holding back.” Together

with the neck armor, the chest armor conveys the expression of suppressed

“stubbornness” and “stiff-neckedness.” When it is not chronically armored,

the expression conveyed by the movement of the fourth segment is that of

“free-flowing  feelings.”  When  it  is  armored,  the  expression  is  that  of

“immobility” or “indifference.”

  The chronic expansion of the thorax goes together with the tendency to

high blood pressure, palpitations, and anxiety; in severe, long-standing cases,

there is also the tendency to cardiac enlargement. Various cardiac defects

result directly from this expansion or indirectly from the anxiety syndrome.

Pulmonary emphysema is a direct result of the chronic expansion of the chest

cavity.  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the disposition  to  pneumonia  and

tuberculosis is to be sought here also.

  “Raging anger,” “heartfelt crying,” “sobbing,” and “unbearable longing”

are essentially emotions which originate in the chest segment. These natural

emotions are alien to the armored organism. An armored person’s anger is

“cold”; he looks upon crying as “childish,” “unmanly,” and “characterless”;

he regards longing as “effeminate,” the sign of a “weak character.”

  Most of the emotional expressive movements of the arms and hands also

stem from the plasmatic emotions of the organs of the chest. In terms of

biophysics, these limbs are extensions of the chest segment. In the artist, who

is capable of freely unfolding his yearnings, the emotion of the chest extends

directly into the wholly synchronized emotions and expressive movements of

the arms and hands. This is equally true of the violin virtuoso and piano

virtuoso,  as  it  is  of  the  painter.  In  the  dance,  the  essential  expressive

movements derive from the organism as a whole.

  The “awkwardness” of the arms and probably a part of a person’s lack of

musicality also derive from the chest armor. It is largely responsible for the

expression of “hardness” and “inaccessibility.” In European cultural circlesand in an especially pronounced way among the “higher circles” of Asia,

total armoring of the head, neck, and chest segments invests the organism

with the mark of “nobility.” The ideals of “character firmness,” “hauteur,”

“detachment,” “grandeur,” and “control” correspond to this. Militarism the

world over makes use of the expression embodied in the armoring of the

chest, neck, and head as an emphasis of “unapproachable dignity.” It is clear

that these attitudes are based on the armor and not vice versa.

  In  some  patients  we  find  a  whole  series  of  interrelated  life  problems

which  derive  from  the  armoring  of  the  chest.  Typically,  these  patients

complain about a “knot” in the chest. This organ sensation leads us to believe

that the esophagus (similar to the globus hystericus in the pharynx) is spastic.

It is difficult to say whether the trachea is involved in this, but very likely it

is.  In  the  process  of  loosening  this  inner  “knot,”  we  learn  that  rage  and

anxiety  are  bound  in  it.  To  release  this  “knot”  in  the  chest,  it  is  often

necessary  to  press  down  the  chest  cavity  and  at  the  same  time  have  the

patient scream. The inhibition of the inner chest organs usually entails an

inhibition of those arm movements which express “desire,” “embracing,” or

“reaching for something.” It is not that these patients are handicapped in any

mechanical way. They can move their arms quite well. However, as soon as

the movement of the arms becomes associated with the expressive movement

of yearning or desiring, the inhibition sets in. Sometimes, this inhibition is so

strong  that  the  hands  and  especially  the  finger  tips  lose  their  orgonotic

charge, become cold and clammy, and, on occasion, acutely painful. It is very

likely that Raynaud’s gangrene of the finger tips is based on this specific

anorgonia. In many cases it is simply an impulse to choke which is armored

in the shoulder blades and in the hands and is responsible for vasomotor

constriction in the finger tips.

  We find the life of such patients ruled by a general inhibition of initiative

and by disturbances in their work caused by their inability to use the hands

freely. Sometimes the armoring of the chest cavity in women goes hand inhand  with  a  lack  of  sensitivity  of  the  nipples.  Disturbances  of  sexual

gratification  and  aversion  to  nursing  a  baby  are  the  direct  results  of  this

armoring.

  Between the shoulder blades, there are two painful muscle bundles in the

region of the trapezius muscles. Their armoring creates the impression of

suppressed defiance which, together with pulled-back shoulders, can be best

described by the words, “I won’t.”

  When the chest is armored, the intercostal muscles demonstrate an acute

sensitivity to tickling. That this sensitivity is not “simply not wanting to be

tickled” but a biopathic increase of excitability is evidenced by the fact that it

disappears when the chest armor has been dissolved. In one particular case,

the character, attitude of inaccessibility had essentially one function, namely

“Don’t touch me! I’m ticklish.”

  It  should  be  clear  that  it  is  not  my  intent  to  ridicule  these  character

attitudes. It is merely that we see them for what they are, i.e., not as the

embodiment of “higher” and “nobler” character traits but as the expression of

biophysical  conditions.  A  general  may  or  may  not  be  a  person  of  “high

esteem.” We want neither to glorify nor to deprecate him. Yet we will not

have ourselves deprived of the right to look upon him as an animal having a

special kind of armor. It would not bother me if another scientist wanted to

reduce my thirst for knowledge to the biological function of a puppy who

goes around sniffing at everything. Indeed, it would make me happy to be

biologically  compared  to  a  lively  and  lovable  puppy.  I  have  no  desire  to

distinguish myself from the animal.

  This much must be clear: there can be no thought of establishing orgastic

potency until the chest armor has been dissolved and the emotions of rage,

yearning, and genuine sorrow have been liberated. Essentially, the function of

surrender  is  linked  to  the  plasmatic  movement  of  the  chest  and  neck

segments.  Even  if  it  were  possible  to  mobilize  the  pelvic  segment

independently,  the  head  would  automatically  move forward  in  stubborndefense instead of moving backward, as soon as the slightest sensation of

pleasure was experienced in the pelvis.

  I have already pointed out that the armoring of the chest constitutes a

central part of the muscular armoring in general. Historically, it can be traced

back to the most crucial and most conflict-ridden turning points in the life of

the child, most likely to a point considerably before the development of the

pelvic  armor.  Hence,  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  that,  in  the  course  of

dissolving  the  chest  armor,  we  get  the  remembrances  of  traumatic

mistreatments of all kinds, frustrations of love, and disappointments in the

person  responsible  for  the  child’s  upbringing.  I  have  also  explained  why

remembering  traumatic  experiences  is  not  essential  for  orgone  therapy.  It

serves little purpose unless accompanied by the corresponding emotion. The

emotion  expressed  in  the  movement  is  more  than  sufficient  to  make  the

patient’s  misfortunes  comprehensible,  quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  the

remembrances  emerge  of  themselves  when  the  therapist  works  correctly.

What  remains  puzzling  is  how  unconscious  memory  functions  can  be

dependent upon the conditions of plasmatic excitation, how memories can be

preserved, so to speak, in plasmatic awareness.

  Now let us turn to the fifth, the diaphragm segment. The segment which

comprises the diaphragm and the organs which lie below it is, in terms of its

function, independent of the chest segment. This is borne out by the fact that,

even after the chest armor has been dissolved and rage and tears have broken

forth, the diaphragmatic block remains unaffected. It is easy to observe the

immobility of the diaphragm through a fluoroscope. While it is true that,

through forced breathing, the diaphragm is capable of moving better than

before  the  dissolving  of  the  chest  armor,  it  is  also  true  that,  until  the

diaphragmatic  block  has  been  eliminated,  there is  no  spontaneous

diaphragmatic pulsation. Thus, there are two stages in the dissolution of the

diaphragmatic block.

  In the process of loosening the chest armor, we make the patient breatheconsciously  and  deeply.  This  causes  the  diaphragm  to  move  more

expansively  but  not  spontaneously.  As  soon  as  this  forced  respiration  is

stopped,  the  movement  of  the  diaphragm  and,  with  it,  the  respiratory

movement of the chest cavity also cease. We have to extract the expressive

movement from the diaphragm armor to be able to accomplish the second

step of spontaneous diaphragm pulsation. This is a fresh confirmation of the

fact that mechanical means are of no use in reactivating biological emotional

functions. Solely through the biological expressive movement can we loosen

the armor ring.

  The fifth armor segment forms a contraction ring which extends forward

over the epigastrium, the lower part of the sternum, back along the lowermost

ribs  toward  the  posterior  insertions  of  the  diaphragm,  i.e.,  to  the  tenth,

eleventh,  and  twelfth  thoracic  vertebrae.  Essentially,  it  comprises  the

diaphragm, the stomach, the solar plexus, including the pancreas, which lies

in front of it, the liver, and two bulging muscle bundles extending alongside

the lowermost thoracic vertebrae.

  The  overt  manifestation  of  this  armor  ring  is  lordosis  of  the  spine.

Usually, the therapist can push his hand between the patient’s back and the

couch.  The  lower  front  rib  margin  is  thrust  forward  and  protruding.  It  is

difficult  or  altogether  impossible  to  bend  the  spine  forward.  On  the

fluoroscope,  we  can  see  that  the  diaphragm  is  immobile  under  usual

conditions and that it moves but little under forced breathing. If we tell the

patient  to  breathe  consciously,  he  will  always inhale.  Exhalation  as  a

spontaneous action is alien to him. If he is told to exhale, he has to make a

considerable effort. If he succeeds in exhaling a bit, his body automatically

assumes  an  attitude  which  works  counter  to  exhalation.  The  head  moves

forward  or  the  musculature  of  the  oral  armor  ring  becomes  more  acutely

contracted. The shoulder blades are pulled back and the arms are pressed

tightly against the upper part of the body. The pelvic musculature is tensed

and the back is more rigidly arched.  The diaphragmatic block is the central mechanism of this region. Hence,

the destruction of this block is one of the central tasks of the therapy.

  The dissolution of the armor in the diaphragmatic segment entails the

overcoming of many difficulties. Why is this so? The message of the body

expression which is opposed to this work is quite clear, though the patient has

no awareness of it: the organism refuses to allow the diaphragm to expand

and  contract  freely.  However,  if  the  upper  segments  have  been  properly

loosened, it can only be a matter of time until the diaphragm armor is also

dissolved. For example, forced respiration in the chest segment or repeated

freeing of the gag reflex can urge the organism toward orgastic pulsation.

Irritation of the shoulder muscles by means of pinching can have the same

effect.

    Theoretically, we understand why the resistance to the full pulsation of

the diaphragm is so strong: the organism defends itself against the sensations

of pleasure or anxiety which the diaphragmatic movement inevitably entails.

However, we cannot pretend that this statement offers anything more than a

rationalistic and psychologistic explanation. Such an explanation presupposes

that the organism “thinks” and “deliberates” rationally, somewhat as follows:

“This meticulous physician demands that I let my diaphragm expand and

contract freely. If I comply, I shall experience the sensations of anxiety and

pleasure which I experienced when my parents punished me for enjoying

myself. I have reconciled myself to the situation as it is. Hence, I shall not

comply.”

  The living organism neither thinks nor deliberates in a rational manner. It

does not do or fail to do things “in order to…” The living organism functions

in harmony with the primary plasmatic emotions, which have the function of

gratifying biological tension and needs. It is simply impossible to translate

the  language  of  the  living  organism directly  into  the  word  language  of

consciousness. It is extremely important to realize this, for the rationalistic

thinking  which  has  shaped  man’s  mechanistic  civilization  is  capable  ofsmothering  and  extinguishing  our  insight  into  the fundamentally  different

language of the living organism.

  I  should  like  to  cite  an  especially  clear  clinical  case  to  illustrate  the

novelty of the phenomena involved here:

  A patient who had considerable intellectual insight into or-gone therapy

and had already succeeded in dissolving a substantial part of the armor of the

upper body was asked to make an effort to break through the diaphragmatic

armor. We were in complete agreement about the situation. Both in talking

about and in applying himself to this task, the patient showed an affirmative

attitude. Yet, as soon as a small breach had been made in the wall of the

diaphragmatic armor, the patient’s trunk, from the diaphragm downwards to

the pelvis, began to jerk sideways. This was very puzzling, to say the least.

And it took considerable effort to understand what this movement was trying

to express.

  In its sideward movement, the lower part of the trunk expressed a resolute

NO. It is merely necessary to move one’s right hand from side to side, in such

a  way  as  to  say  “no-no,”  to  understand  the  expressive  movement  we  are

dealing with here.

    Psychologistically or, better yet, mystically, it might be assumed that the

plasma  system, beyond  word  language,  expressed  a  vehement NO  to  an

undertaking  which  “the  cortex”  and  word  language  affirmed.  Such  an

interpretation of the process would be false, and it would not lead a step

closer to an understanding of the living organism and its expressive language.

This  patient’s  abdomen  and  pelvis  did  not  “deliberate”  upon  the  demand

which  was  made  upon  the  organism.  They  did  not  “decide”  to  refuse  to

comply. There was a different process involved here, one more in keeping

with the expressive language of the living.

  As  we  pointed  out,  the  plasmatic  movements  of  a  worm  are  directed

lengthwise along the body axis. When the orgonotic excitation waves move

the body of the worm forward, we gain the “impression” that the worm isacting purposefully,  i.e.,  “volitionally.”  The  expressive  movement  of  the

worm’s living organism can be translated into the words of our language

which mean “wanting to,” “saying yes to,” etc. If, now, we take a pair of

pincers and squeeze the worm somewhere around the middle of its body so

that the orgonotic excitation is interrupted as by an armor block, the unified

purposeful  forward  movement  and,  with  it,  the  expressive  movement  of

“wanting to” and “saying yes to” momentarily cease to function. These are

replaced by another movement, namely a sideways twisting back and forth of

the lower or hind part of the body, while the front part is drawn in. The

immediate impression conveyed by this seesawing side-to-side movement of

the body is one expressive of pain or a vehement “No, don’t do that, I can’t

stand it.” We are not forgetting that we are speaking of our impression here,

i.e., an interpretation which we experience immediately while observing the

worm. But we would act exactly like the worm if someone fastened a large

clamp  around  our  trunk.  We  would  automatically  draw  in  our  head  and

shoulders and struggle sideways with our pelvis and legs.

  This comprehension of the process does not mean that we have taken up

with the subjectivists who contend that we perceive “nothing but our own

sensations”  and  that  these  sensations  do  not  correspond  to  any  reality.

Basically, everything that lives is functionally identical. It follows, therefore,

that the reactions of the worm to the pincers are identical to what ours would

be in a similar situation. The reactions of pain and the effort to ward off the

pain are the same. This functional identity between man and worm enables us

to be “impressed” in the correct, objectively true sense of the word by the

expressive  movement  of  the  wriggling  worm.  In  fact,  the  worm’s  overt

expression  conveys  what  we  sense  through  identification.  But  we  do  not

directly sense the worm’s pain and its crying of “no”; we merely perceive an

expressive movement which, under any circumstances, would be identical

with  the  expressive  movement  of  our  plasma  system  in  the  same  painful

situation.  It follows from this that we comprehend the expressive movements and

the  emotional  expression  of  another  living  organism  on  the  basis  of  the

identity between our own emotions and those of all living things.

  We have a direct  comprehension  of  the  language  of  living  organisms

based on the functional identity of the biological emotions. After we have

grasped it in this biological language of expression, we put it “into words”:

we translate it into the word language of consciousness. However, the word

“no” has as much, actually as little, to do with the language of expression of

the living organism as the word “cat” has to do with the flesh-and-blood cat

which crosses the street in front of our eyes. In reality, the word “cat” and the

specific  orgonotic  plasma  system  which  moves  there  in  front  of  us  have

nothing to do with one another. As the many various designations for the

phenomenon “cat” testify, they are merely loose, randomly interchangeable

concepts which are attached to the real phenomena, movements, emotions,

etc.

  These  observations  sound  like  “highbrow”  or  “lowbrow”  natural

philosophy. The layman is averse to natural philosophy and will, therefore,

put this book aside because it “does not rest upon the solid foundation of

reality.” The reader who shares this thought is mistaken. I shall demonstrate

in the following pages how important it is to think correctly and to use both

concepts  and  words properly.  It  will  be  shown  that  a  whole  world  of

mechanistically  oriented  biologists,  physicists,  bacteriologists,  etc.,  really

believed, from 1936 to 1945—i.e., in the period during which the functions

of the living organism were being discovered—that it was the word “cat”

moving on the street and not a complicated living product of nature.

  Let us return to the “no-no” movement of our patient. Its meaning is this:

when a plasmatic current cannot run along the body in a lengthwise direction

because it is obstructed by transverse armor blocks, a sideward movement

results which, secondarily, means NO in word language.

  “No”  in  word  language  corresponds  to  the  “no”  of  the  expressivelanguage of the living organism. It cannot be ascribed to mere chance that

“no”  is  expressed  by  a  transverse  movement  of  the  head,  while  “yes”  is

expressed by a lengthwise movement of the head. The “no-no” which our

patient expressed by the sideward seesawing of his pelvis disappeared only

after  the  block  of  the  diaphragm  had  been  dissolved.  And  it  regularly

reappeared when this block returned.

  These facts are of supreme importance for the understanding of the body

language. Our patient’s general attitude toward life was also of a negative

nature. “No” was the basic attitude of his character. Though he suffered from

and fought against this character attitude, he could not escape it. No matter

how much he consciously and intellectually wanted to say YES, to be positive,

his  character  continually  expressed NO.  Both  the  historical  and

biophysiological functions of this “no” on the part of his character were easy

to understand. As so many small children do, he had constantly had enemas

given by his severely compulsive mother. Like other children, he too had

submitted to this crime with horror and inner rage. To diminish the fury of his

rage,  to  be  able  to  endure  this  violation  by  his  mother,  “he  contained

himself,”  pulled  up  on  his  pelvic  floor,  severely  reduced  his  breathing,

generally developed the body attitude of “no-no.” Everything that was alive

in him wanted (but was not allowed) to cry out “no-no” to this violation, the

result being that he came away from this experience permanently scarred.

From then on, the overt expression of his life system became a fundamental

negation  toward  everything  and  everybody.  And  though  this  negative

character attitude represented an acute symptom, it was, at the same time, the

expression of a strong self-defense which, originally, had been rational and

justified.  But  this  self-defense,  rationally  motivated  in  the  beginning,  had

taken  on  the  form  of  a  chronic  armor,  which  was  rigidly  shut  off  to

everything.

  I explained elsewhere that a childhood experience is capable of having an

“effect from the past” only insofar as it is anchored in a rigid armor whichcontinues to operate in the present. In our patient, the original, rationally

motivated “no-no” had, over the years, been transformed into a neurotic and

irrational “no-no”. It had, in other words, become embedded in a chronic

character armor which was responsible for sustaining and expressing it. The

“no-no”  expression  disappeared  with  the  dissolution  of  the  armor  in  the

treatment. Thus, too, the historical event, the assault by the mother, lost its

pathological meaning.

  From the point of view of depth psychology, it is correct to say that, in

this patient, the affect of the defense, of the “crying no to,” was “clamped

down.” Seen from the perspective of the biological core, on the other hand, it

was not a matter of a “clamped-down” “no-no” but of the incapacity on the

part of the organism to say YES. A positive, affirmative attitude in life is

possible only when the organism functions as a totality, when the plasmatic

excitations, together with the emotions pertaining to them, can pass through

all the organs and tissues without obstruction, when, in short, the expressive

movements of the plasm are capable of flowing freely.

  As  soon  as  even  one  single  armor  block  limits  this  function,  the

expressive movement of affirmation is disturbed. Small children then cannot

become fully immersed in their games, adolescents fail in their work or in

school, adults function like a moving car with the emergency brake on. The

onlooker, the teacher, or the technical supervisor gets the “impression” that

the person is lazy, recalcitrant, or incapable. The “blocked” person himself

feels  he  is  a  failure  “no  matter  how  hard  he  tries.”  This  process  can  be

translated  into  the  language  of  the  living  organism: the  organism  always

starts out by functioning in a biologically correct way, by flowing freely and

giving.  However,  in  the  passage  of  the  orgonotic  excitations  through  the

organism,  the  functioning  is  slowed  down  and  the  expression  of  “I  take

pleasure in doing” is translated into an automatic “I won’t” or “I don’t want

to.” In short, the organism is not responsible for its own malfunctioning.

  This  process  is  of  universal  importance.  I  have  intentionally  selectedclinical examples that have general validity. This was absolutely necessary.

On the basis of these restrictions in human functioning, we shall arrive at a

deeper  and  more  comprehensive  understanding  of  a  whole  series  of

unfortunate  social  phenomena  which  remain  unintelligible  without  their

biophysical background.

  After this long but necessary digression, let us return to the fifth armor

segment. In the upper segments, once we had succeeded in liberating the

expressive  movements  from  the  armor  ring,  the  overt  expression  which

ensued  could  easily  be  interpreted.  The  inhibition  of  the  eye  muscles

expresses “empty” or “sad” eyes. A firmly clenched jaw may be expressive

of “suppressed anger.” A crying or roaring breaks loose from the “knot in the

chest.”

  Body language is easily translated into word language and the expressive

movement is immediately intelligible when we are working on the four upper

segments.  The  situation  is  more  complicated  when  working  on  the

diaphragmatic segment. Once the armor of the diaphragmatic segment has

been dissolved, we are no longer in a position to translate the language of

movement  into  word  language.  This  requires  a  detailed  explanation.  The

overt  expression  which  ensues  when  we  have  dissolved  the  armor  of  the

diaphragmatic segment leads us into the uncomprehended depths of the life

function. We meet a new problem here: in what concrete way is the human

animal related to the primitive animal world and to the cosmic function of the

orgone?

  We succeed in liberating the diaphragmatic segment from the armor by

having the patient repeatedly release the gag reflex, while strictly enjoining

him not to suspend respiration during the gagging but to continue to inhale

and  exhale  forcefully.  The  repeated  releasing  of  the  gag  reflex  leads

inevitably to the dissolution of the diaphragmatic armor. There is only one

precondition:  the  armor  of  the  upper  segments  must  have  been  dissolved

beforehand, i.e., the orgonotic currents in the regions of the head, neck, andchest must function freely.

  As soon as the diaphragm expands and contracts freely, i.e., respiration

functions fully and spontaneously, the trunk strives, with each exhalation, to

fold up in the region of the upper abdomen. In other words: the neck end

strives forward toward the pelvic end. The upper middle part of the abdomen

is drawn in. This is the picture of the orgasm reflex as it is displayed to us for

the first time. (It is still a distorted picture, for the pelvis is still not wholly

loosened.) The forward bending of the trunk accompanied by the backward

movement of the head expresses “surrender.” It is not difficult to understand

this. The difficulties begin where the convulsions start in a forward direction.

The emotional expression of the convulsions in the orgasm reflex are not

immediately intelligible. THE EXPRESSION OF THE CONVULSIONS IN THE ORGASM

REFLEX CANNOT BE TRANSLATED INTO WORD LANGUAGE. There must be a special

reason for this difficulty. We have to assume that there is some essential

difference  between  the  expressive  movements  which  we  have  become

familiar with thus far and the expressive movement of the whole trunk which

becomes manifest when the diaphragm functions freely.

  I should like to ask the reader to follow me with the utmost patience from

now on and not to withdraw trust prematurely. His patience will be amply

rewarded by the results which we shall achieve. I can assure the reader that I

myself have had to exercise the greatest patience for more than a decade to

arrive at the findings I am about to describe. Again and again during these

years I despaired in the attempt to comprehend the orgasm reflex; it seemed

absolutely  impossible  to  make  this  basic  biological  reflex  accessible  to

human  concepts.  However,  I  refused  to  give  up,  for  I  neither  could  nor

wanted  to  admit  that  the  living  organism,  which  has  an  immediately

intelligible language of expression in all other spheres, should, precisely in

the central  sphere,  the  orgasm  reflex,  express nothing.  This  seemed  so

contradictory, so completely absurd that I simply could not accept it. Time

and  again  I  told  myself  that  I  was  the  one  who  had  said  that  the  livingorganism simply functions, that it did not have any “meaning.” It seemed

correct to suppose that the “inexpressiveness” or “meaninglessness” of the

orgastic convulsions indicated precisely this: in its basic function, the living

organism does not reveal any meaning. Yet the attitude of surrender which

becomes manifest in the orgasm reflex is both expressive and meaningful.

Undoubtedly, the orgastic convulsions themselves are full of expression. I

had to tell myself, then, that natural science had simply not yet learned to

comprehend this widely diffused, indeed universal, emotional expression of

the living organism. In short, an inner “expressive movement” without overt

“emotional expression” seemed to me to be an absurdity.

  Vomiting represents one approach to the problem, for the patient often

vomits when the diaphragmatic armor is broken through. Just as there is an

inability to cry, there is also an inability to vomit. This inability is easy to

understand  in  terms  of  orgone  biophysics.  Together  with  the  armor  rings

which lie above it, the diaphragmatic block prevents the peristaltic wavelike

movement of the body energy upward from the stomach toward the mouth. In

the same way, the “knot” in the chest and “swallowing,” together with the

contraction  of  the  eye  muscles,  prevent  crying.  In  other  cases  of

diaphragmatic blocks, there is, in addition to the inability to vomit, constant

nausea. There can be no doubt that “nervous stomach” complaints are the

direct consequence of the armoring in this area, though we still do not have a

thorough understanding of the connection between the two.

  Vomiting is a biological expressive movement whose function performs

precisely what it “expresses”: convulsive expulsion of body contents. It is

based on a peristaltic movement of the stomach and esophagus in a direction

contrary to its normal function, namely toward the mouth. The gag reflex

loosens  the  armor  of  the  diaphragmatic  segment  radically  and  quickly.

Vomiting is accompanied by a convulsion of the trunk, a rapid folding in the

pit of the stomach, with the neck and pelvic end jerking forward. In the colic

of small children, vomiting is accompanied by diarrhea. In terms of energy,strong excitation waves run from the center of the body upward toward the

mouth and downward toward the anus. The emotional expression in this case

speaks such an elementary language that there can be no doubt of the deep

biological nature of this language. It is merely a question of understanding it.

  The  total  movement  which  seizes  the  trunk  in  vomiting  is,  purely

physiologically (not emotionally), the same as that of the orgasm reflex. This

is  also  confirmed  clinically:  the  dissolution  of  the  diaphragmatic  block

introduces,  with  certainty,  the  first  convulsions  of  the  trunk  which,

subsequently,  develop  into  the  total  orgasm  reflex.  These  convulsions  are

accompanied  by  deep  exhalation  and  an  excitation  wave  which  spreads

upward from the region of the diaphragm toward the head and downward

toward  the  genitalia.  We  know  that  the  dissolution  of  the  upper  armor

segments  is  an  indispensable  precondition  to  the  release  of  the  total

convulsion of the trunk. In the movement of the excitation wave toward the

pelvis, the orgonotic excitation invariably runs into a block in the middle of

the abdomen. Either the middle of the abdomen contracts sharply and quickly

or the pelvis moves backward and becomes cramped in this position.

  This  contraction  in  the  middle  of  the  abdomen  represents  the sixth

independently  functioning  armor  ring.  The  spasm  of  the  large  abdominal

muscle (Rectus abdominis) is accompanied by a spastic contraction of the

two lateral muscles (Transversus abdominis), which run from the lowermost

ribs to the upper margin of the pelvis. They can be easily palpated as hard

painful muscle cords. In the back, the lower sections of the muscles running

along  the  spine (Latissimus  dorsi,  sacrospinalis,  etc.)  correspond  to  this

segment. These muscles also can be clearly felt as hard painful cords.

  The loosening of the sixth armor segment is easier than the loosening of

all the other segments. After it has been dissolved, it is easy to approach the

armor of the seventh and last armor segment, the pelvic armor.

  In most cases, the armor of the pelvis comprises almost all the muscles of

the pelvis. The whole pelvis is retracted. The abdominal muscle above thesymphysis is painful. The same holds true for the adductors of the thigh,

those on the surface as well as those which lie deeper. The anal sphincter

muscle is contracted, hence the anus is pulled up. Let one contract the gluteal

muscles voluntarily and it will be understood why the gluteal muscles are

painful. The pelvis is “dead” and expressionless. This “inexpressiveness” is

the “expression” of asexuality. Emotionally, no sensations or excitations are

felt.  On  the  other  hand,  the  symptoms  are  legion:  constipation,  lumbago,

growths of all kinds in the rectum, inflammation of the ovaries, polyps of the

uterus,  benign  and  malignant  tumors.  Irritability  of  the  urinary  bladder,

anesthesia of the vagina and the penis surface, with hypersensitivity of the

urethra, are also symptoms of the pelvic armor. Leukorrhea accompanied by

development  of  protozoa  from  the  vaginal  epithelium  (Trichomonas

vaginalis) is frequently found. In the male, as a result of anorgonia of the

pelvis, we find either the inability to achieve an erection or apprehensive

hyperexcitability resulting in premature ejaculation. In the female, we find

complete vaginal anesthesia or spasm of the muscles of the vaginal opening.

  There is a specific “pelvic anxiety” and a specific “pelvic rage.” The

pelvic armor is the same as the shoulder armor, inasmuch as it, too, holds

bound in it impulses of rage as well as anxiety. Orgastic impotence produces

secondary impulses which achieve sexual gratification by force. No matter

how much in keeping with the biological pleasure principle the impulses of

the act of love may commence, the result is anything but pleasurable: since

the armor does not permit the development of involuntary movements, i.e.,

does  not  permit  convulsions  to  pass  through  this  segment,  the  pleasure

sensations are inevitably transformed into impulses of rage. The result is a

torturous feeling of “having to get through,” which cannot be called anything

but sadistic. In the pelvis, as everywhere else in the province of the living

organism, inhibited pleasure is transformed into rage, and inhibited rage is

transformed into muscular spasms. This can be easily confirmed clinically.

No matter how far the loosening of the pelvic armor has advanced, no matterhow mobile the pelvis has become, the fact remains: pleasure sensations in

the pelvis cannot appear as long as the rage has not been liberated from the

pelvic muscles.

  In  the  pelvis,  as  in  all  other  armor  segments,  there  is  “beating”  or

“piercing”  by  means  of  strong  forward-thrusting  pelvic  movements.  The

overt  expression  of  this  movement  is  unequivocal  and  cannot  be

misunderstood. Besides the expression of rage, the expression of contempt is

also clearly evident: contempt for the pelvis and all its organs, contempt for

the sexual act and especially contempt for the partner with whom the act is

carried out. On the basis of wide clinical experiences, I contend that it is a

matter of love in only a few cases when man and woman in our civilization

engage in the sexual act. The rage which usurps the initial love impulses,

hate, and sadistic emotion are all part and parcel of modern man’s contempt

for  sex.  I  am  not  speaking  of  the  clear  cases  in  which  the  sexual  act  is

performed for profit or subsistence. I am speaking of the majority of people

of all social strata. It is on the basis of these clinical findings that the Latin

saying, “Omne animal post coitum triste,” has become a scientific axiom.

There  is  only  one  error  in  this  statement:  man  ascribes  his  own

disappointment  to  the  animal.  The  rage  and  the  contempt  which  have  so

distorted  the  expressive  movement  of  genital  love  are  reflected  in  the

widespread  vulgar  terms  of  abuse  which  are  clustered  around  the  word

“fuck.”  In  America,  one  finds  the  words  “Knock  me”  written  on  the

sidewalks—their meaning is clear. I gave a thorough description of these

findings in Volume I of my book The Discovery of the Orgone. Hence, it is

not necessary for me to go into detail here.


    4. THE EMOTIONAL EXPRESSION OF THE ORGASM

            REFLEX AND SEXUAL SUPERIMPOSITION


  What is important for our main theme is the fact that the pelvic armor has

an  expression  which  is  easily  translated  into  word  language  and  that  theliberated emotions speak a clear language. But this holds true only for the

emotions of the armor. It does not hold true for the expressive movements

which  regularly  become  manifest  after  the  dissolution  of  the  anxiety  and

rage. These movements consist in soft forward and upward movements of the

pelvis clearly expressive of desire. It is as if the pelvic end wanted to arch

forward  in  an  extreme  way.  One  thinks  instinctively  of  the  seesaw

movements of the tail end of insects, e.g., of wasps and bees. The movement

is illustrated with special clarity in the attitude of the tail end of dragonflies

and  butterflies  in  the  sexual  act.  The  basic  form  of  this  movement  is  as

follows:











Tail end Front

Head end

Back
It continues the overt expression of surrender. Our subjective organ sensation

tells us that this attitude of surrender is accompanied by longing. “Longing”

for what? And “surrender” to what?

  Word language expresses the aim of the longing and the function of the

surrender  as  follows:  as  the  organism  develops  the  orgasm  reflex,  the

yearning for “gratification” emerges clearly and unconquerably. The yearning

for  gratification  is  clearly  focused  upon  the  sexual  act,  upon  sexual

copulation. In the sexual act itself, one is “surrendered” to the sensation of

pleasure; one “gives oneself to the partner.” This we know from observation

as well as from our subjective organ sensations.

  Word  language  appears  to  respond  unequivocally  to  this  natural

phenomenon. I say “appears.” Since word language is only a translation of

the language of expression of the living organism, we don’t know whether

the words “copulation” and “gratification” really express what the function ofthe orgasm reflex is. Apart from this, we have already pointed out that the

expressive movement of the orgastic convulsions cannot be translated into

word language. Let us venture a step further in doubting the ability of word

language  to  make  natural  phenomena immediately  intelligible.  The  reader

will be nonplused by our next question. If he thinks about it for a moment,

however, he will concede that words are often more likely to lead us away

from rather than closer to a comprehension of processes. Our question is:

  What is the origin of the extraordinary role of the genital drive? No one

has any doubts about its elemental and instinctual force. No one is capable of

escaping it; all living creatures are subject to it. Indeed, copulation and the

biological functions related to it constitute that basic function of the living

organism which guarantees the continuation of its existence. Copulation is a

basic  function  of  the  “germ  plasm,”  as  conceived  of  by  Weissman;  it  is

immortal in the strict sense of the word. Homo sapiens has merely denied but

in no way eliminated this powerful force of nature. We know the terrible

human tragedies that have resulted from this denial.

  The existence of the living organism is rooted in the SUPERIMPOSITION of

two orgonotic systems of different sex. We have to admit that we have no

answer to the simplest of all questions: What is the origin of the function of

the superimposition of two creatures of different sex? What is its importance?

What  is  its  “meaning”?  Why  is  the  perpetuation  of  living  nature  rooted

precisely in this form of movement and not in another?

  The most general form of this movement of sexual superimposition is:  Sexual superimposition goes together with orgonotic lumination of the

body  cells  and  with  the  penetration  and  fusion  of  two  orgonotic  energy

systems  into  one  functional  unit.  The  two  orgone  systems  which  have

become one discharge their energy at the height of excitation (= lumination)

in  clonic  convulsions.  In  this  process,  energetically  highly  charged

substances, i.e., sperm cells, are ejaculated and, in turn, continue and fulfill

the function of superimposition, penetration, fusion, and energy discharge.

  Here, word language is not capable of explaining anything. The concepts

which word language has formed about the process of sexual superimposition

are  themselves  derivatives  of  the  organ  sensations  which  introduce,

accompany,  and  follow  the  superimposition.  “Longing,”  “urge,”

“copulation,”  “conjugation,”  “gratification,”  etc.,  are  merely  images  of  a

natural  process  that  words  are  not  capable  of  making  intelligible.  To

comprehend this natural process, we have to seek out other primary natural

processes which have a more general validity than the sexual superimposition

of  the  organism  and  are  deeper  than  the  organ  sensations  to  which  the

concepts of word language correspond.

  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  orgasm  reflex  functions  according  to

natural laws. It always becomes manifest in every successful treatment when

the  segmental  armor  which  previously  obstructed  its  course  has  been

completely  dissolved.  Nor  can  there  be  any  doubt  that  the  sexual

superimposition  functions  according  to  natural  laws.  It  ensues  inevitably

when the orgasm reflex functions freely and no social obstacles stand in itsway.

  We shall have to make a wide detour and compile a large number of

natural phenomena in order to comprehend the expressive language of the

living organism in the orgasm reflex and in superimposition. The failure of

word language in this case points to a function of nature beyond the realm of

the living. We use the word “beyond” here not in the supernatural sense of

the mystic but in the sense of a functional relation between living and non-

living nature.

  For the time being, we must conclude that word language is capable of

describing only such phenomena of life as can be comprehended through the

organ  sensations  and  corresponding  expressive  movements,  e.g.,  rage,

pleasure, anxiety, vexation, disappointment, sorrow, surrender, etc. However,

organ sensations and expressive movements are not the final criteria. At a

certain  point,  the  natural  law  of  non-living  substance  must  of  necessity

impinge  upon  the  living  organism  and  express  itself  in  it.  This  must  be

correct if the living stems from the sphere of the non-living and sinks back

into  it.  The  organ  sensations  which  correspond  specifically  to  the  living

organism are capable of being translated into words. We cannot, on the other

hand, put into words the expressive movements of the living organism which

do not belong specifically to the living but are projected into this sphere from

the sphere of the non-living. Since the living derives from the non-living and

non-living  material  derives  from  cosmic  energy,  we  are  justified  in

concluding that there are cosmic energy functions in the living. Hence, it is

possible that the untranslatable expressive movements of the orgasm reflex in

the sexual superimposition represent the sought-for cosmic or-gone functions.

  I am well aware of the magnitude of this work hypothesis. But I see no

way of avoiding it. It has been clinically established that orgastic longing,

i.e., yearning for superimposition, always goes together with cosmic longing

and  cosmic  sensations.  The  mystical  ideas  of  innumerable  religions,  the

belief in a Beyond, the doctrine of the transmigration of the soul, etc., derive,without  exception,  from  cosmic  longing;  and,  functionally,  the  cosmic

yearning is anchored in the expressive movements of the orgasm reflex. In

the orgasm, the living organism is nothing but a part of pulsating nature. The

idea that man and animals in general are a “part of nature” is well known and

widely disseminated. However, it is easier to use a phrase than to grasp, in a

scientifically manageable way, wherein the essential functional identity of

living  substance  and  nature  concretely  exists.  It  is  easy  to  say  that  the

principle  of  a  locomotive  is  functionally  identical  to  that  of  a  simple

wheelbarrow. But a locomotive is essentially different from a wheelbarrow,

and one must be able to state how the principle of the locomotive developed

over the centuries from that of the wheelbarrow.

  We see that the problem of the expressive language of the living organism

is far more complex than one might suppose. Let us attempt to penetrate

further and to seek out the similarities which link the more highly developed

with the lesser developed forms of life.

  The technique of orgone therapy has taught us that a worm literally still

functions  in  the  human  animal.  The  segmental  arrangement  of  the  armor

rings can have no other meaning. The dissolution of this segmental armor

liberates expressive movements and plasmatic currents that are independent

of the anatomical arrangement of nerves and muscles in vertebrates. They are

much  more  in  keeping  with  the  peristaltic  movements  of  an  intestine,  a

worm, or a protozoon.

  In spite of his development from phylogenetically older forms of life,

man is still viewed predominantly as an original creature with no connection

to  the  forms  from  which  he  descended.  The  segmental  character  and,

therefore,  the  worm  character  of  the  biological  core  system  are  clearly

preserved in the segments of the spine and the ganglia. However, this core

system is segmental not only in a morphological, i.e., rigid, form. The orgone

functions  and  the  armor  rings  also  represent functional  segments,  i.e.,

functions having a highly contemporaneous importance. They are not, as canbe said of the vertebrae, remnants of a dead past in a living present. The

orgone  functions  and  the  armor  rings  represent  the  most  active  and  most

important functional apparatus of the present, the core of all the biological

functions of the human animal. The biologically important organ sensations

and the emotions of pleasure, anxiety, and rage derive from the segmental

functions of the human animal. In the same way, expansion and contraction

as functions of pleasure and anxiety were present in the living organism from

the amoeba all the way up to man. When one is happy, one carries one’s head

high; when one is afraid, one pulls it in, as a worm pulls in its front end.

  If the amoeba and the worm in the human animal continue to operate as

core  elements  of  his  emotional  functioning,  then  we  are  justified  in

attempting to relate and thereby comprehend the basic biological reflex of the

orgastic superimposition to the simplest plasmatic functions.

  We  stated  above  that  the  dissolving  of  the  diaphragmatic  block  leads

inevitably to the first orgastic convulsions of the body. We also stressed that

the limbs of the body were merely continuations of the two segments of the

chest  and  pelvis. The  largest  and  most  important  ganglion  apparatus  is

located in the middle of the trunk, near the back.

  Now we want to risk a mental leap which, on first impression, will appear

to  be  “unscientific,”  “unwarranted,”  indeed  “insane.”  Afterwards,  we  can

look back and see whether we have done any harm.

  At one time or another, everyone has seen cats clutched by the fur of their

backs and lifted into the air. The soft body of the cat appears to be doubled

up, the head end is brought close to the pelvic end; head, fore and hind legs

hang down limply, somewhat as follows:   

Plexus solaris
    Naturally, we can imagine any animal in the same position, even man.

There  is,  as  is  always  the  case  when  the  body  assumes  a  position,  an

emotional  expression.  It  is  not  easy  to  read  the  overt  expression  of  this

particular position straight off. Observing it carefully for some time, we get

the impression of a jellyfish with tentacles.

    Biophysics will have to learn to read forms of movement from body forms

and forms of expression from forms of movement. We shall have more to say

about this later. Here, the similarity of the position with that of a jellyfish

suffices. We can enlarge upon the analogy. The central nerve apparatus of the

jellyfish  is  located  in  the  middle  of  the  back,  as  is  the  solar  plexus  in

vertebrates. When the jellyfish moves, the ends of the body approach and

move away from one another in rhythmic interchange. This is the heuristic

substance of our mental leap: the expressive movements in the orgasm reflex

are, viewed in terms of identity of function, the same as those of a living and

swimming jellyfish.

  In both cases, the ends of the body, i.e., the ends of the trunk, move

toward one another in a rhythmic motion, as if they wanted to touch one

another. When they are close together, we have the condition of contraction.

When they are as far apart as they can be, we have the condition of expansion

or relaxation of the orgonotic system. It is a very primitive form of biological

pulsation. If this pulsation is accelerated, if it takes on a clonic form, we have

the expressive movement of the orgastic convulsion.

  The expulsion of spawn in fish and semen in animals is connected withthis plasmatic convulsion of the body as a whole. The orgastic convulsion is

accompanied  by  a  high  degree  of  excitation,  which  we  experience  as  the

pleasure of the “climax.” In short, the expressive movement of the orgasm

reflex  represents  a  highly  important, contemporary  mobilization  of  a

biological form of movement which goes as far back as the jellyfish stage. I

append  a  diagram  illustrating  the  bell  shape  and  the  jellyfish  form  of

movement:



















  Upon close examination, the functional identity between the movement of

the jellyfish and orgastic convulsion turns out to be far less strange than one

originally supposed. In view of the fact that, in the segmental arrangement of

the armor rings and in the sphere of the emotions, the worm continues to

function in man, there is nothing very special about the fact that the jellyfish

function is expressed in the convulsion of the body as a whole. We shall have

to learn to accept the idea that we are not dealing here with atavistic remnants

of our phylogenetic past but with contemporary, bio-energetically important

functions in the highly developed organism. The most primitive and the most

advanced plasmatic functions exist side by side and function as if they were

connected to one another. The development of more complicated functions inthe  organism  (functions  which  we  call  “higher”)  has  no  effect  upon  the

existence and function of the “jellyfish in man.” It is precisely this jellyfish in

man that represents his unity with the less developed animal world. Just as

Darwin’s theory deduces man’s descent from the lower vertebrates on the

basis  of  man’s  morphology,  orgone  biophysics  traces  man’s emotional

functions much further back to the forms of movement of the mollusks and

the protozoa.

  The functional identity of man’s life functions with those of primitive

organic forms of movement reaches far back beyond the jellyfish.

  Thus, what we call “nature in man” can be translated from the sphere of

mystic or poetic fantasy into the concrete, objective, and practical language

of natural science. We are dealing here not with metaphoric or analogous

relations, still less with sentimental perceptions; we are dealing with tangible,

visible, and controllable processes of the living organism.                                  CHAPTER XV




                                                                      1
                THE SCHIZOPHRENIC SPLIT




    1. THE “DEVIL” IN THE SCHIZOPHRENIC PROCESS


The idea of the “devil” is a true expression of the distortion of nature in man.

No  other  human  experience  lends  itself  as  well  as  the schizophrenic

experience to the study of the “devil.” The schizophrenic world in its purest

form is a mixture of mysticism and emotional inferno, of penetrating though

distorted vision, of God and devil, of perverse sex and murderous morals, of

sanity  to  the  highest  degree  of  genius  and  insanity  to  its  deepest  depth,

welded  into  a  single  horrible  experience.  I  have  in  mind  here  the

schizophrenic  process  which  in  classical  psychiatry  is  called  “dementia

paranoides”  or  “praecox,”  not  the  so-called  “catatonic  stupor”  or  the

“hebephrenic” process. Whereas the catatonic is typically characterized by

total  withdrawal  from  reality  and  total  muscular  armoring;  whereas  the

hebephrenic  process  consists  mainly  in  a  slow  torpid  deterioration  of

biophysical  functioning,  the  initial  phases  of  paranoid  schizophrenia,

especially  in  puberty,  are  characterized  by  bizarre  ideas,  mystical

experiences, ideas of persecution and hallucinations, loss of the power of

rational association, loss of the factual meaning of words, and, basically, by a

slow disintegration of organismal, i.e., unitary, functioning.

  I shall limit myself to those processes in the schizophrenic which have a

bearing  on  our  main  line  of  thought:  the  “devil”  as  the  representative  of

perverted nature in man. These include the realm of the secondary, perverse,

and antisocial drives rarely manifest in well-armored neurotics; the realm ofprimary  biophysical  sensations,  plasmatic  streamings,  and  experiences

derived from contact with cosmic functions, experiences which are almost

completely blocked off in the so-called normal human being; and finally the

ideas  of  persecution  as  experienced  by  a  sick  though  most  sensitive

biosystem.

  The  schizophrenic  world  mingles  in  one  experience  what  is  kept

painstakingly separate in homo normalis. The “well-adjusted” homo normalis

is composed of exactly the same type of experiences as the schizophrenic.

Depth psychiatry leaves no doubt about this. Homo normalis differs from the

schizophrenic only in that these functions are differently arranged. He is a

well-adjusted,  “socially  minded”  merchant  or  clerk  during  the  day;  he  is

orderly on the surface. He lives out his secondary, perverse drives when he

leaves home and office to visit some faraway city and indulges in occasional

orgies of sadism or promiscuity. This is his “middle-layer” existence, cleanly

and  sharply  separated  from  the  superficial  veneer.  He  believes  in  the

existence of a personal supernatural power and its opposite, the devil and

hell, and in a third group of experiences which is again cleanly and sharply

delineated from the two others. These three basic groups do not mingle with

one another. Homo normalis does not believe in God when he does some

tricky  business,  a  fact  which  is  reprimanded  as  “sinful”  by  the  priests  in

Sunday  sermons. Homo  normalis  does  not  believe  in  the  devil  when  he

promotes  some  cause  of  science;  he  has  no  perversions  when  he  is  the

supporter of his family; and he forgets his wife and children when he lets the

devil go free in a brothel.

  There are psychiatrists who deny the truth of these facts. There are other

psychiatrists who do not deny them but who say that “this is as it should be,”

that  this  type  of  clean  separation  of  the  devilish  inferno  from  the  social

veneer  is  only  to  the  good,  and  that  it  makes  for  security  in  social

functioning. But the true believer in the true Jesus might object to this. He

might say that the realm of the devil should be extinguished, not shut off hereonly to be opened up there. To this, another ethical mind might object that

true  virtue  is  shown  not  by  the  absence  of  vice  but  by  resisting  the

temptations of the devil.

  I do not wish to participate in this argument. I believe that, again within

this framework of thinking and living, each side may point to some truth. We

want to stay outside this vicious circle in order to understand the devil as he

appears in the daily life and in the world of the schizophrenic.

  The fact is that the schizophrenic is, on the average, much more honest

than homo normalis, if one accepts directness of expression as an indication

of  honesty.  Every  good  psychiatrist  knows  that  the  schizophrenic  is

embarrassingly honest. He is also what is commonly called “deep,” i.e., in

contact with happenings. The schizoid person sees through hypocrisy and

does not hide the fact. He has an excellent grasp of emotional realities, in

sharp contradistinction to homo normalis. I am stressing these schizophrenic

characteristics in order to make comprehensible why homo normalis hates the

schizoid mind so much.

  The objective validity of this superiority of schizoid judgment manifests

itself quite practically. When we wish to obtain the truth about social facts,

we  study  Ibsen  or  Nietzsche,  both  of  whom  went  “crazy,”  and  not  the

writings of some well-adjusted diplomat or the resolutions of the Communist

Party congresses. We find the wavy character and blueness of orgone energy

in  van  Gogh’s  marvelous  paintings,  not  in  the  works  of  any  of  his  well-

adjusted contemporaries. We find the essential characteristics of the genital

character in Gauguin’s pictures, not in any pictures by homo normalis. Both

van Gogh and Gauguin ended as psychotics. And when we wish to learn

something about human emotions and deep human experiences, we resort as

biopsychiatrists  to  the  schizophrenic,  not  to homo  normalis.  This  is  so

because the schizophrenic tells us frankly what he thinks and how he feels,

whereas homo normalis tells us nothing at all and keeps us digging for years

before he feels ready to show his inner structure. Therefore, my statementthat  the  schizophrenic  is  more  honest  than homo  normalis  seems  quite

correct.

  This appears to be a sad state of affairs. It should be the other way around.

If homo normalis is actually as normal as he claims to be; if he claims that

self-realization and truth are the greatest goals of good individual and social

living, then he should be much more able and willing to reveal himself to

himself  and  his  doctor  than  the  “crazy  man.”  There  must  be  something

basically wrong with the structure of homo normalis if truth is so hard to get

out of him. To declare, as the well-adjusted psychoanalysts do, that this is as

it should be, that homo normalis could not otherwise withstand the impact of

all his emotions amounts to complete resignation regarding the improvement

of the human lot. We cannot base improvement of conditions on broader

knowledge of man’s soul and simultaneously defend his reluctance to reveal

himself. Either we keep broadening the scope of our knowledge of man and

condemn the general evasive attitude of homo normalis, or we defend this

attitude and give up the task of understanding the mind of man. There is no

other alternative.

  In  order  to  understand homo  normalis  and  his  opposite,  the  schizoid

character, we must put ourselves outside the framework of thinking of both.

Homo  normalis  blocks  off  entirely  the  perception  of  basic  orgonotic

functioning by means of rigid armoring; in the schizophrenic, on the other

hand, the armoring actually breaks down and thus the biosystem is flooded

with deep experiences from the biophysical core with which it cannot cope.

Understandably, therefore, armored homo normalis develops anxiety when he

feels threatened by the findings of orgonomy, whereas the schizoid character

understands them instantly and easily, and feels drawn to them. For the same

reason, the mystic, who is structurally close to the schizoid character, usually

comprehends orgonomic facts, although only as in a mirror, whereas the rigid

mechanist looks with arrogant disdain on all scientific dealings in the realm

of the emotions and calls them “unscientific.”  I suggest we study the relevant details of these important human functions

by means of a concrete case of paranoid schizophrenia. This will convey a

picture of the devil’s realm much better than would any merely theoretical

abstraction of psychiatric clinical experience.

  The experimental world of the schizophrenic is boundless and so rich in

variations that we must limit ourselves to those details which have a bearing

on our main subject: how does the schizophrenic experience his biophysical

core? Why does his ego break down in such a typical manner?

  I am going to present the case history of a paranoid schizophrenic. The

clinical psychiatrist will understand that I have to disguise the case in such a

way  that  the  patient’s  identity  is  protected  and  the  typical  disease

mechanisms nevertheless emerge clearly.

  This was the first case of schizophrenia I had ever treated experimentally

with orgone therapy. I approached this case with some general theoretical

assumptions,  which  were  derived  from  my  previous  experiences  with

schizophrenics, such as the following:

  1. The psychoanalytic arrangement of mental functions according to the

three great realms of the ego, the superego, and the id has to be sharply

distinguished from the biophysical arrangement of the functions of the total

organism according to the functional realms of bio-energetic core (plasma

system), periphery (skin surface), and orgone energy field beyond the body

surface. These two theoretical structures describe different realms of nature in

a different manner. Neither is applicable to the other realm of organismic

functioning. There is only one meeting point of the two theoretical schemata,

i.e., the “id” of psychoanalytic theory, where the realm of psychology ends

and that of biophysics beyond psychology begins.

  2.  The  most  effective  therapeutic  approach  to  any  emotional  (=

biophysical) disease is, if at all possible or indicated, the withdrawal of bio-

energy from the biopathic symptoms. In order to destroy psychoneurotic or

psychotic  symptoms  it  is  unnecessary  and  even  harmful  to  delve  into  alldetails of the countless pathological ramifications; instead, opening up the

core  of  the  biosystem  and  establishing  a  balanced  energy  economy  will

automatically make the symptoms disappear, since, seen energetically, they

are results of a disorderly energy metabolism in the biosystem.

  3.  Great  danger  arises  in  neurotics  as  well  as  in  psychotics  when  the

armor begins to dissolve. Utmost caution and medical skill are required to

guide  this  process.  The  practice  of  medical  orgone  therapy  is  therefore

restricted to well-trained physicians. We know our responsibilities better than

anyone else and we do not have to be reminded of them by people who know

little about orgonomy.

  I knew well beforehand that the patient could or even would break down

when  her  armoring  dissolved  completely.  But  the  chance  that  she  would

stand the procedure was good enough to warrant the experiment. The patient

had been in mental institutions several times over long periods of years. The

diagnosis was “schizophrenia” and according to the reports, the patient was

in the process of deterioration. The eventual final breakdown was inevitable;

therefore, the risk taken in this case was not too great and the outlook was

promising enough to satisfy the conscience of the experimenting physician.

  The patient, a thirty-two-year-old Irish girl, had been brought to me by

her  relatives,  who  had  heard  about  my  new  medical  approach  to  the

biopathies. I informed them of the great danger of precipitating a breakdown.

They were ready to take the risk and to sign an affidavit to this effect. I also

warned them of the risk of a sudden outbreak of destructiveness. Since I was

well acquainted with the manifestations preceding a destructive attack, I felt

sure  that  I  would  sense  the  danger  in  time.  Therefore,  I  undertook  the

experiment outside the institution under the strict condition that a nurse or a

relative should always be around the patient and that at the first sign of unrest

and  destructiveness  the  patient  should  be  committed  to  the  institution.  A

further condition was that the patient, who at the time was on parole, should

see the parole physician regularly and that all arrangements should be madewith  the  institution,  where  the  patient  had  been  before,  for  instant

commitment in case of a breakdown. I also kept in touch with the psychiatrist

in charge of the case at the institution by mail, and secured his cooperation.

  Such precautions are indispensable if one wants to treat a schizophrenic

outside  an  institution.  One  would  prefer  to  rely  on  an  institution  which

conducts experimental orgone therapy within its walls. But, unfortunately,

mental  institutions—with  very  few  exceptions—are  not  inclined  to  bother

with new, hopeful medical efforts to treat schizophrenia. Shock therapy is too

readily  available  to  dull  schizophrenic  activities,  and  there  are  too  many

psychotics to be taken care of by too few physicians. There is no time for

extensive  and  deep-reaching  scientific  investigation.  I  understand  this

attitude,  though  I  cannot  condone  it.  A  few  cases  of  schizophrenia,  well

understood  instead  of  “shocked,”  would,  in  the  long  run,  save  society

countless millions of dollars. It seems too much to expect such foresight. It is

known that mental institutions are, in reality, jails for psychotics, with little

medical  care,  scarce  funds,  and,  in  most  of  them,  no  research  at  all.

Moreover, some medical administrators are reluctant to consider any serious

attempt to improve the condition of these patients. Sometimes they even meet

such medical endeavors with great hostility.

  This short description of the social situation may suffice to explain both

my precautions and my willingness to take the risk. I knew the danger well,

but  the  possible  future  reward  seemed  great.  And  indeed  I  was  not

disappointed. This patient, who had taken refuge in a mental institution for

many years and who was already deteriorating at the time I accepted her for

the experiment, has remained out of the institution for more than six years

since the treatment. She resumed her profession; the process of deterioration

was stopped. The patient became social in many ways.

  I  cannot  predict  whether  this  situation  will  last;  I  hope  it  will.  The

scientific  and  medical  reward  was  great: orgone  therapy  can  be  applied

successfully in certain cases of schizophrenia where all other methods fail.The result justified the risk. Furthermore, orgonomic theory was confirmed in

some of its basic assumptions and was adjusted in others. Many entirely new

facts about basic functioning in the biosystem of man were secured, and for

the  first  time  in  the  history  of  medicine  and  psychiatry,  some  central

questions about the nature of paranoid mechanisms in schizophrenia were

answered.

  I shall describe the therapeutic experiment as it developed over a period

of three months from treatment to treatment. I took notes carefully on the

most essential details immediately after each session, and I kept a special

record of the general line of development in order to find, if possible, some

consistency or law in this development. The case itself offers nothing new in

manifestations or symptomatology of the schizophrenic psychosis. What is

new, however, is the response to orgone-therapeutic measures. It revealed

some hitherto unknown connections between known schizoid functions and it

brought to light some new functions in the depth of the biosystem which are

of the greatest importance for the understanding of human biology in general.


The appearance of the patient


  The first impression was not that of a schizophrenic. She spoke about her

symptoms  and  experiences  in  a  coherent,  orderly  manner.  One  felt  great

embarrassment in the background of her behavior; she spoke in an artificially

eager manner. She seemed very intelligent and gave penetrating answers to

most difficult questions; she knew the psychiatric language in an unusually

clear way. She said that she had longed to meet a psychiatrist who would

understand her inner emotions, but the psychiatrists always thought she was

“crazy.”  Her  eyes  had  the  typical  faraway,  slightly  veiled  look  of  the

schizophrenic  character.  At  times  she  became  confused,  but  regained  her

clarity  easily.  As  the  conversation  proceeded,  one  could  clearly  discern

certain subjects which she tried to evade. When asked whether she knew of

any queer or unusual experiences, her eyes became “dark” and she said: “Iam in contact with some powerful forces, but they are not here now.”

  The subject was clearly charged with emotion, and we did not delve into

it  any  further.  It  became  clear,  furthermore,  that  she  “dissimulated”  and

disguised  her  situation.  She  declared  herself  willing  to  undergo  the

experiment of orgone therapy. She had read the literature and thought that I

was right.


First session


  I  restricted  the  work  to  an  orientation  on  her  armoring  and  character

defenses. Her mannerisms were stronger than they had been during the initial

meeting. She understood the principle of orgone therapy very well. She had

known  for  years  that  most  people  were  armored  and  therefore  did  not

understand  the  inner  life  of  the  schizophrenic  “who  feels  and  knows

everything.” I tried to find out more about the “forces,” but she refused to

talk about them. The forces had, she said, nothing whatsoever to do with her

own inner urges. She had excellent contact with the issues of the discussion.

  She  seemed not  to  breathe  at  all.  On  physical  examination  her  chest

appeared soft, not rigid as in cases of compulsion neurosis. This softness and

mobility of the chest were later found in other initial schizophrenics. It should

be further investigated whether and to what extent the lack of armoring in the

                                                                        2
chest is or is not a characteristic of the schizophrenic biopathy.

  The softness of her chest would have appeared normal if it had not been

accompanied by  lack  of  respiration.  Respiration  was  so  shallow  that  it

seemed  altogether  absent.  When  I  asked  the  patient  to  inhale  and  exhale

audibly, she refused; it was later shown that she was unable to do it. She

seemed to stop the respiration somewhere in the cervical segments.

  She became increasingly restless, looked anxiously at the walls and along

the ceiling. “There are some shadows,” she said. Suddenly she made the sign

of a cross over her chest with her hands. “I am dedicated; the forces come to

me; I can call them and make them come; the forces love me.…”  I asked her whether the “forces” had ever incited her to commit murder.

She  would  have  to  answer  this  question  very  soon,  I  said.  For  if  the

experiment was to be conducted safely, we had to know everything about the

“forces.” I asked her whether she would promise to tell me immediately when

the “forces” wanted her to do dangerous things to herself or to other people.

She said, with deep sincerity, that she would tell me immediately. She told

me that sometimes the “forces” told her to commit murder. Once she had

suddenly felt as if she had to push a woman off a station platform.

  She had scarcely finished this sentence when she became quite absent-

minded;  she  did  not  listen  to  my  questions  and  appeared  completely

dissociated. She was murmuring incoherently and unintelligibly. I could only

discern the words: “… The forces betrayed … what did I say.…”

  I knew from her relatives that she hated her mother bitterly and that at the

same  time  she  was  strongly  dependent  on  her.  The  ideas  of  “murder,”

“menstruation,” and “mother” were closely linked. The urge to murder was

also somehow connected with the experience of the “forces” or betraying the

“forces.”

  The patient recuperated after a while and regained her composure.


Second through fifth sessions


  During  the  following  four  therapeutic  sessions,  I  tried  cautiously  to

approach  her  dysfunction  of  respiration.  The  problem  was  not,  as  in  the

armored neurotic, to break down the armoring of the chest. There seemed to

be  no  armor.  The  problem  was  how  to  make  her  draw  in  and  expel  air

through the larynx. She began to struggle severely whenever I tried to bring

about full respiration. I had the impression that the function of respiration

was not stopped any by immobility due to armoring, but was inhibited as if

by  a  strong,  conscious  effort.  I  also  thought  that  her  organism  suffered

severely from this effort and that she did not feel the effort.

  She responded with severe irritation to every attempt on my part to inducerespiration. The typical armored neurotic would have appeared untouched or

he would have smiled maliciously at my efforts. Not so our schizophrenic.

She  tried  to  cooperate  intelligently  but  became  panicky  whenever  I  came

close to succeeding. Fear of the “forces” overwhelmed her with anxiety; she

felt them coming close and being all around her, on the walls, under the sofa,

etc.  She  told  me  now  that  this  same  anxiety  had  driven  her  to  me  as  a

physician in whom she could have confidence. She had understood from my

books that I would know what she was talking about.

  I gave up any further attempts to make her breathe whenever the anxiety

set in. She was told that this was one of her major pathological disturbances,

that we would have to overcome it; that she would have to help me to do so;

and that overcoming this disturbance would relieve her to a great extent. She

promised to help me; she felt sure that I was right. She had known it for a

long time.

  I was able to form the following opinion of the situation:

  Our patient did not shut off or was not able to shut off completely the

sensation of plasmatic currents, as the rigidly armored neurotic does. She felt

the orgonotic streamings in her body “very close by,” and she fought them by

not permitting the passage of air to and from the lungs. Whether she had ever

actually and fully experienced the body streamings, I could not tell and she

did not know. She had only experienced the “oncoming” of “forces,” but she

did not feel the “forces” as her own. She was terror-stricken when she felt

the “forces”; at the same time she felt “dedicated to them,” dedicated to “a

mission.” She was reluctant to say what kind of mission it was.

  It is an essential rule in working with schizophrenics (and also with non-

psychotics, for that matter) to give the patient the full understanding that one

takes his complaints seriously, that one does not think them queer or “crazy”

or “antisocial” or “immoral.” One gets nowhere if the patient does not have

or does not develop absolute confidence in his physician which allows him to

feel  that  he  is  trusted  basically  and  that  his  words  and  feelings  areunderstood, however peculiar they may appear to the layman. One must show

genuine understanding to the schizophrenic even if he threatens to kill the

physician. This absolute requirement makes orgone-therapeutic treatment of

psychotics inaccessible to the physician who is not emotionally equipped to

do the job. The further report will corroborate this statement.


Sixth session


  After  about  half  an  hour  of  careful,  painstaking  work  on  her  cervical

armoring,  the  first  outburst  of  hate  occurred.  This  first  outburst  was

accompanied by quiet crying; at the same time she developed severe anxiety,

tremor in her lips, shoulders, and also partially in her chest.

  In such situations, where different kinds of emotions are intermingled, it

is necessary to separate the emotions from one another. This can be done by

promoting the most superficial emotion, the one which fights off the deeper

emotion, and by “pushing back” the latter. Accordingly, I encouraged her

crying, which blocked the rage, and after some tearful release of sorrow, I let

her develop her rage by encouraging her to hit the couch. This is a dangerous

procedure if the patient, especially the schizophrenic, is not in perfect contact

with the physician. In order to secure this contact, one must explain to the

patient that he must stop his rage action instantly when asked to do so. It is

the task of the physician to decide when the point in emotional release is

reached where the patient is in danger of getting out of control. Only skilled

orgone therapists can accomplish this. I warn physicians who have not been

trained  in  the  technique  of  medical  orgone  therapy,  and  trained  orgone

therapists  who  do  not  have  the  necessary  experience,  against  tackling

schizophrenics. One cannot proceed in such cases without releasing the rage,

and one cannot release the rage without much experience previously gained

in less emotional situations.

  Toward  the  end  of  the  sixth  session,  the  patient  had  released  enough

emotion to relax. She uttered astonishment that such relief was possible andexpressed her thanks with tears in her eyes. She realized now for the first

time that her idea that “people looked at her” was of a delusionary nature (the

rational  element  in  the  persecotary  idea  will  be  elaborated  later).

Communications flowed freely. She had fought against the “influences” of

the “forces” as far back as she could remember. She realized that she held on

to reality only with great effort; she had felt as though she were hanging over

an abyss most of the time, especially during puberty. She always became

confused  when  her  fear  of  the  “forces”  met  with  her  love  for  them.  She

confessed that it was in such moments of confusion that murderous impulses

would surge up in her.

  This  seemed  the  proper  moment  to  tell  her  fully  about  my  worries

concerning  a  possible  uncontrolled  breakthrough  of  destructiveness.  She

understood immediately what I meant. She agreed and assured me with a

quite unschizophrenic look that she had had this worry for a long time. I told

her then that I knew from experience that most schizophrenics in the initial

phases of the disease have the same worry as to whether they will be able to

fight off the upsurge of murderous destructiveness. She agreed that there was

no other way of safeguarding herself against committing murder than the

security of an institution. She realized, quite on her own, that it was in such

emotional situations that she sought the safety of an institution. She felt safer

inside, she said, because life there made no demands on her that she was

unable  to  fulfill.  She  knew  she  would  not  commit  murder  when  in  the

institution; but she also knew that life in the institution was bad for her. She

felt that slow deterioration was inevitable because life within the walls of the

institution made her dull or furious, according to the special situation she

met. She understood the inmates fully and felt sympathy for them; at the

same time she felt horror toward their kind of existence. In her lucid phases,

she saw through the glib and superficial attitudes of so many psychiatrists

toward the psychotic, their lack of understanding, the brutality of many of the

procedures,  the  injustices  so  often  committed,  etc.;  she  had,  in  short,excellent insight when the “forces” were absent or were present “without

making too strong demands on her.”

  As  the  therapeutic  process  progressed,  one  single  question  gained  an

overall importance: DO THE “FORCES” WHICH HAUNT HER AND WHICH SHE LOVES

DEVOTEDLY REPRESENT HER BODY SENSATIONS OF STREAMINGS OF PLEASURE? IF

THIS IS THE CASE, WHY IS SHE AFRAID OF THEM? (IT IS CLEAR SHE IS devoted TO

THEM.)  WHAT  KIND  OF  MECHANISM  IN  HER  BODY  BLOCKS  THE  STREAMINGS  OF

PLEASURE? HOW DO THE BLOCKED-OFF PLASMATIC STREAMINGS TURN INTO “EVIL”

FORCES? WHAT IS THE CONNECTION BETWEEN THIS BLOCK AND THE SCHIZOPHRENIC

PROCESS?

  I began to direct my attention toward the functions which possibly would

answer these questions. My impression was that the blocking mechanism was

somehow connected with her cervical segment, especially with the peculiar

respiratory disturbance: no respiration in the presence of a soft chest.


Seventh session


  During  the  seventh  session  it  became  obvious  that  the  partial

breakthrough  of  rage  that  I  had  kept  under  control  during  the  previous

treatment had increased her physiological need for full respiration. This could

be seen in her even more desperate attempts to prevent the air from passing

fully through her throat, larynx, and trachea. I encouraged her to exhale fully

and helped by softly pressing down on her chest. She gave in to expiration

suddenly but went into a state of trance immediately afterwards. She did not

respond to my calling her; her eyes were turned toward a corner of the ceiling

in  a  staring  manner;  she  seemed  to  be  hallucinated.  Her  legs  trembled

severely and she had fascicular convulsions in the muscles of her shoulders

for about thirty minutes.

  I succeeded in bringing her out of her trance by pinching her hard enough

to make her aware of the sensation of pain. Slowly she began to return to full

consciousness. She was obviously confused; she tried to convince herself thatshe was awake by knocking at things. She grasped my hands, began to cry

out, and said: “I want to come back, oh, I want to come back…” This lasted

another ten minutes. Then she said: “I am not quite back yet … Where are

you?… With the Lord … I asked him whether I should give in to the devil …

that you are the devil…” In answer to my question, she said that she did not

“see things” any more but had “some contact” (with the forces). She had felt

the tremor in her legs and shoulders, she also had heard my voice, and yet she

“felt far, far away.” It was the first time that she could not “come back”

quickly. “It lasted so long this time … Where are you?… Please let me hold

your hands … I want to feel sure that I am here…”

  Holding my hands, she looked around the room suspiciously, along the

walls and at the ceiling. She felt exhausted and remained for more than an

hour after the treatment to compose herself.

  I told her to come back next day for further treatment, and to call me or to

have me called as soon as she felt the need to talk to me.


Eighth session


  After the experience of the previous day, she had felt very tired and had

gone to bed as soon as she got home. She felt calm and safe now, her eyes

were clear. I decided not to proceed further in breaking down her armor but

only to bring her back to where she had been the previous day.

  It is an important rule in disarmoring people to proceed slowly, step by

step, and not to advance further into the biophysical depth unless one knows

exactly what is going on and unless the patient has become accustomed to the

situation  which  has  already  been  reached.  This  is  valid  for  all  types  of

medical orgone therapy; it is especially necessary in the treatment of schizoid

characters. If one neglects this strict rule, one will lose sight of the total

process and will endanger the patient. Patients who feel better after partial

breakthroughs  often  implore  the  physician  to  proceed  faster,  to  see  them

more frequently. This should not be granted. When a certain breakthroughhas been accomplished, the organism must be given time to organize and to

assimilate the emotions which have broken through. The position from which

we proceed further must be firmly established. A certain amount of ill-being

due to the remainder of the armoring is necessary in order to proceed further

in  the  proper  manner.  One  has  to  guard  especially  against  the  mystical,

religious-like expectation on the part of the patient that now he has been

“freed,” “redeemed,” “liberated.” It is true that the first few breaks through

the  solid  armor  are  accompanied  by  feelings  of  great  relief.  This  often

disguises  the  true  situation  in  the  depth  of  the  biophysical  structure.

Therefore, the rule should be to be cautious as long as the basic orgastic

pleasure anxiety does not appear in an unequivocal manner. As long as this

deep terror of spontaneous plasmatic contraction is not at the surface and has

not been overcome, great caution is indicated.

  In  this  eighth  session,  the  patient  was  very  cooperative.  She  had  less

anxiety, permitted the clonisms to occur much more easily and willingly; but

it was clear that she still anxiously watched every bit of what was going on,

that she was “on guard” not to lose hold of herself, and that she had to fight

hard not to run away again into a state of trance.

  One should never proceed without great care as long as the basic distrust

has  not  come  forth  which  is  to  be  expected  in  every  single  case.  The

schizophrenic is far franker than the neurotic in showing this typical distrust.

In  neurotics,  one  must  dig  up  the  distrust  from  under  the  veneer  of

friendliness and politeness. Our patient asked me point blank: “Can I trust

you? Oh, if only I could trust you … [Looking at me with great fear in her

eyes] Are you a German spy?”

  It was soon after the FBI had mistaken orgone research for German (or

Russian?) spy activity and had taken me into custody (as an “enemy alien”) at

the entry of the United States into World War II. The fact that I was soon

released unconditionally after a hearing did not matter much to the patient.

What mattered was the fact that I had been suspected of subversive activities,and this, of course, was in harmony with the general attitude of neurotics as

well as psychotics to distrust everything, especially their own inner feelings.

Our patient wanted to be able to trust me because, as she said plainly, she

needed my help in her fight against the “forces.” I assured her that I was not a

German  or,  for  that  matter,  any  other  type  of  spy  and  never  had  been.

Thereupon she said that everybody thinks only in terms of his own nature or

character structure and that hence the FBI could not think of anything but spy

activity when they could not understand what I was doing. I had to agree with

this statement, and I found my liking of the schizoid mind again justified.

Schizophrenics are able in their lucid periods to see through individual and

social matters intelligently, as no other character type can. Later we shall see

that  this  lucidity  of  intelligence  in  the  schizophrenic  is  one  of  the  major

dangers which threaten his existence in present-day society.

  The patient was scheduled for a parole visit the following day at the state

hospital. I told her not to hide anything, but I also told her to be prepared for

the parole physician’s inability to understand everything she would explain to

him. We had the good luck to deal with a psychiatrist who was not one of the

brutal  shock-therapy  surgeons.  The  patient  left  this  session  quiet  and

completely orderly.


Summary after the eighth session


  1. The patient came with a remainder of a sharp sense of reality to which

she held on desperately in order not to break down completely.

  2.  The  patient  sought  my  help  because  she  felt  that  I  understood  the

“forces” and had “contact” with them.

  3. She thought she was better than the rest of the world because of her

contact with the “forces.” Her criticism of the world of homo normalis was

correct, nearly perfect and rational in accordance with her contact with the

“forces,” whatever they represented.

  4. Her armoring differed from the armoring in a simple neurotic biopathyin that it was not complete and only superficially constructed. Her chest was

mobile,  but  she  did  not  breathe  fully.  Because  of  the  weakness  of  her

armoring, she felt as though she were hanging only by a thread above an

abyss. “Beyond” were the “forces,” which were “devilish” and “attractive”

at the same time.

  5. The melting sensations of orgonotic streamings in her body had a close

connection  with  her  idea  of  “forces,”  but  these  sensations  were  projected

upon  walls  and  ceilings.  Her  schizophrenic  fear  of  breaking  down  was

somehow dependent on her contact with the “forces.”

  6.  The  perception  of  the  inner  “forces”  at  the  walls  and  the  ceiling

constituted the main riddle. The word “projection” obviously did not explain

anything.


                              2. THE “FORCES”


  The patient knew the “forces” well. She described them in detail. Some

characteristics  of  the  “forces”  were  the  same  as  those  ascribed  to  an

omnipotent  Being=God;  others  were  those  ascribed  to  the  devil—evil,

cunning,  sly  and  maliciously  tempting.  The  first  group  of  characteristics

made  the  patient  feel  safe  and  protected  and  therefore  “devoted”  to  the

“forces”; in regard to the second group of characteristics, the patient behaved

as if she had to be protected against the “forces,” their evil intentions and

temptations, such as murder. This ambiguity in the nature of the “forces”

became quite clear as the work proceeded.

  My assumption at that stage of the work was the following: if the “forces”

represented the GOOD and the EVIL in the same emotional formation, then it

was necessary to assume that the split into two diametrically opposite kinds

of experiences was due to TWO  DIAMETRICALLY  OPPOSITE  SITUATIONS  IN  HER

CHARACTER STRUCTURE which were mutually exclusive and incompatible. The

schizophrenic  split  of  the  personality  had  to  be  ascribed  to  this

incompatibility;  each  of  the  two  opposite  emotional  structures  wouldalternately take hold of the organismic functioning. In contradistinction to the

schizophrenic  structure,  the  structure  of homo normalis  keeps  one  or  the

other of the contradictory structures continually in a state of repression. Thus,

in homo  normalis,  the  split  of  the  personality  is  hidden.  The  common

functioning  principle  of  both GOD  and DEVIL  is  the basic  biophysical

functioning of the organism, the “biological core,” whose most significant

manifestation  is  the  plasmatic  current  and  its  subjective  perception  as  a

melting sensation of love, as anxiety or hate. All this had to be confirmed by

further developments in this case.


Ninth session


  The  patient  came  to  the  ninth  session  full  of  joy  and  perfectly

coordinated. She had visited the parole psychiatrist the day before. He had

told her that he knew me to be “brilliant.” She had explained to him my

method of therapy as one of “letting off steam.” The institutional psychiatrist

had encouraged her to go on with the therapy. His attitude must have meant a

support  of  her  own  hopes,  since  she  had  doubted  my  honesty  previously

(“Are you a German spy?”).

  Her respiration was physiologically nearly complete that day; her eyes

were clear, not “veiled” as usual. She reported that she had had the urge to

satisfy herself genitally. The inexperienced physician would have triumphed

about the “success.” But I knew that great danger was just ahead of us.

  A sick organism can take a slight increase in energy functioning easily

and enjoys this well-being very much, more than the healthy organism does,

because of the great difference between the usual state of tension and the

slight  release  of  tension  after  a  partial  disarmoring.  But  the  bio-energetic

system  continues  to  increase  its  energy  level  unless  periodic  releases  of

energy take place. And the only way of full release of built-up bio-energy is,

as we well know, that of full orgastic convulsions during the natural process

of mating. The problem of mental hygiene would not be as tough as it is ifnature had not made the total orgastic convulsion entirely dependent on the

absence  of  chronic  body  armoring.  We  are,  as  natural  scientists  and

physicians,  not  responsible  for  this  situation;  we  have  only  found  and

described it.

  The patient herself was well aware of the danger ahead, far more than a

simple neurotic would be. She told me that the “forces” had not been around

lately, but they “could and would surely come back, malicious as they are.”

  She asked me whether I would abandon her if the “forces” came back.

She wanted to know what exactly was the mechanism of orgone-therapeutic

cure.  Her  questions  were  very  intelligent  and  to  the  point.  She  inquired

whether she would have to resign from her present “superior” position in the

world, and whether she could become a useful member of society.

  These questions appear peculiar to one who does not know what this case

revealed in such an unequivocal manner. The schizoid character has a far

better contact with and insight into the functions of nature and society than

homo normalis. This imbues him with a rational feeling of superiority to the

average homo normalis, who lacks such insight. It is logical, then, that in

order to become a “useful member of society,” i.e., a homo normalis, she

would have to lose some of her insights and with them her superiority.

  Such feelings of superiority contain a great deal of rational truth. The

schizoid character is, on the average, really superior to the average homo

normalis  in  intelligence,  just  as  is  the  “criminal  character.”  But  this

intelligence is impractical because of the deep-seated split. It is unable to

perform lasting, rational biological activities, as in the case of what is called

“genius.”

  I took this opportunity to brace her against future dangers. I told her that

she had experienced only a first relief but that she would become frightened

to a dangerous degree when her “forces” emerged fully from the depth. She

understood and promised to keep close contact with me during the coming

procedures.  The events I am going to describe now would appear utterly incredible to

anyone who did not try to understand this case (and any other, for that matter)

from the beginning in terms of the natural functions of bio-energy and its

blocking in the biopathies. These events would appear to him just as other

examples of “crazy reactions,” “unintelligible,” “dangerous,” “antisocial,” as

good reasons for commitment of the patient to a lunatic asylum. I agree that

what was to come was dangerous, antisocial, a good reason for commitment;

but I cannot agree that it was unintelligible or that it was any more “crazy”

than the deeds, or rather misdeeds, of our dictators or warmakers, who are not

committed to institutions, but, on the contrary, are worshipped and honored

by masses of homines normales. Therefore, I cannot become excited about

the far lesser “craziness” in the schizophrenic. To put it bluntly, if worse

comes to worst, he kills himself or he threatens to kill somebody else, but he

never drives millions of innocent people from their homes for the “honor of

the fatherland”; he does not demand at the point of a gun that millions be

sacrificed for his impotent political ideas.

    Therefore, let us be reasonable; let us abandon our false righteousness.

There must be a potent reason why the schizophrenic is treated so cruelly and

the cruel homo normalis is honored so crazily all over this planet.


Tenth session


  The attitude just described saved this particular case. It could, I firmly

believe, save thousands of lives which are rotting away innocently in obsolete

mental institutions due to the typical evasiveness of homo normalis and his

cruelty  as  applied  in  irresponsible,  universal,  and  indiscriminate  “shock

therapy.”

  The  patient  had  felt  perfectly  at  ease  during  the  day.  But  when  she

undressed, I saw the figure of a cross, cut into the skin of her chest at the

sternum, about 6 cm. long and 4 cm. across. She had done it the previous

evening “quite without any conscious motive.” She “just had to” do it. Shenow felt highly “pent-up.” “I must let off some steam or I am going to burst.”

  It was immediately obvious (to the well-trained orgone therapist) that her

cervical segment was severely contracted, pale, and immobile. Severe rage

was visible in her face, which appeared nearly blue, cyanotic. It took about

ten minutes to release this severe cervical block. I succeeded by letting her

gag, until the gag reflex operated well, and by forced respiration. As soon as

the  block  in  the  throat  gave  way,  she  began  to  cry  silently.  Repeated

encouragement to cry loudly met with no success. We find this phenomenon

very often in neurotic biopathies: the emotion of crying is too strong to be let

out fully at once. Usually, there is severe rage held down by the emotion of

crying. If the patient let go in crying fully and freely, he would feel that he

had to commit murder.

  Such armoring usually results from cruel punishment for quite innocent

behavior in childhood. The mother hated the father; she wanted to murder

him, to get rid of him; he was too strong for that, and the mother was too

weak to do anything about it. So she punished the three- or four-year-old

child for making noise or for dancing in the street or for some other quite

innocent activity. The natural reaction on the part of the child is justified rage

against such cruelty; but the child is afraid to show the rage and wants to cry

instead; but crying, too, is “forbidden”; “a good boy and a good girl don’t

cry,  they  don’t  show  their  emotions.”  This  is  the  type  of  much-vaunted

“education”  of  small  children  in  the  twentieth  century  of  culture  and

civilization at the beginning of the great “atomic age” … which “will either

make humanity soar to heaven or go to hell … depending on…” … What? ON

WHETHER THE HUMAN RACE WILL OR WILL NOT SUCCEED IN ERADICATING TO THE

LAST  VESTIGE  SUCH  CRIMINAL  BEHAVIOR  ON  THE  PART  OF  SICK  MOTHERS  AND

FATHERS; ON WHETHER OUR PHYSICIANS AND EDUCATORS AND JOURNALISTS WILL

OR  WILL  NOT  MUSTER  THE  COURAGE  TO  TACKLE  THIS  SUPREMELY  IMPORTANT

PROBLEM  AND  WILL  FINALLY  SUCCEED  IN  NOT  SUPPORTING  IT,  IN  OVERCOMING

THEIR ACADEMIC EVASIVENESS, ALOOFNESS, AND “OBJECTIVITY.”  Our patient had suffered several decades of cruel monstrosities on the part

of her nagging mother. She had developed the impulse to choke her mother in

order to defend herself. Such impulses are very strong and cannot be fought

off  in  any  other  way  than  by  armoring  against  the  welling-up  of  the

murderous hate in the throat.

  Quite spontaneously, the patient asked me whether I would permit her to

choke my throat. I confess that I felt, not embarrassed, but a bit frightened;

however, I told her to go ahead and do it. The patient put her hands very

cautiously  around  my  throat  and  exerted  a  slight  pressure;  then  her  face

cleared up and she sank back exhausted. Her respiration was full now. Her

whole  body  trembled  severely  with  every  exhalation.  The  streamings  and

sensations seemed strong, to judge from the way she stretched her right leg in

order to avert the full force of the emotions. From time to time, her body

would become quite rigid in a position of opisthotonus and then relax again.

Her face became alternately red with crying or blue with anger. This process

lasted for about thirty minutes. I knew that now her psychotic ideas would

emerge with full force. When a certain degree of emotional upheaval was

reached,  I  asked  her  quietly  to  try  to  stop  the  reaction.  She  responded

instantly with full cooperation and began slowly to calm down. I had held her

hand in my palm all through the breakthrough.

  In twenty-two years of psychiatric work with psychotics and so-called

psychopaths,  I  had  acquired  a  certain  skill  in  handling  such  emotional

situations. I claim that all psychiatrists should be skilled enough to handle

them. But I also claim that nowadays few psychiatrists are equipped to do so

and,  therefore,  I  would  most  emphatically  advise against  repeating  my

experiment unless the proper skill has been acquired. I do not wish to be

made  responsible  for  a  disaster  that  might  happen  in  some  psychiatrist’s

office because of his lack of training.

  If we are to understand the schizophrenic world, we must never judge it

from the standpoint of homo normalis; the sanity of the latter has itself comeunder  sharp  scrutiny.  We  must  try  instead  to  understand  it  when  the

schizophrenic expresses rational functions in a distorted manner. Therefore,

it is necessary to judge him from beyond this “orderly” world of ours; we

must  judge  him  from  his  own  standpoint.  This  is  not  easy.  But  if  one

penetrates the distortions, a wide vista opens up on a vast realm of human

experience, rich in truth and beauty. It is the realm from which all the great

deeds of genius emerge.

  To continue with the patient: I asked her what was the meaning of the

cross on her chest. I did not scold her nor did I threaten to commit her. This

would not have achieved anything.

  She rose, her whole body trembling, and held on to her throat. Then she

said: “I don’t want to be Jewish” (she was not of Jewish origin). Since every

schizophrenic of whatever faith could have said this, I did not try to convince

her that she was not Jewish; on the contrary, I took her words seriously.

“Why not?” I asked. “The Jews crucified Jesus,” she said. Thereupon she

asked for a knife to cut a large cross into her belly.

  The situation was not clear at once. After a while, it became clear that she

was trying hard to go into the state of trance, but apparently did not succeed.

After a while, she said: “I tried to get in touch with them [the forces] again …

but … I cannot…” She began to cry. I asked her why. “Perhaps there are

three reasons: (1) I fought them too strongly. (2) I did not make the cross

deep enough. (3) They reject me because I am Jewish.”

  The exact connection between her biophysical status and these psychotic

ideas was still not clear. It was possible that the system of delusions no longer

worked as well as before; that she felt guilt toward the “forces” to whom her

life was dedicated, and that accordingly she tried hard to make a self-sacrifice

in order to regain the benevolence of the “forces.” Such mechanisms are well

known  from  so-called  “normal”  religious  behavior.  Here,  too,  the  loss  of

contact  with  “God”  will  lead  to  greater  sacrifice  in  order  to  regain  His

benevolence.  Did she identify herself with Jesus Christ?

  She calmed down after a while and went home safely. Why did I not

commit her to the institution after what had happened? I asked this question

myself.  The  answer  was  this:  I  knew  from  long  experience  with  such

emotional situatons that any threat would only have increased the danger, and

that, on the other hand, only perfectly genuine confidence in her, which she

felt, would save the situation. Somehow I had great confidence in her. But the

risk was great, too, of course. The danger of suicide was present, but that of

destructiveness  toward  somebody  else  was  not  present.  Clinically,  she

seemed close to a major change in her structure, as indicated by her inability

to get in contact with the forces. This was an important gain to be further

developed.


Eleventh session


  She came back in good humor with bright eyes, but slightly manic. She

spoke much and with great wit. Therapeutically, not much progress can be

made when the patient feels too well. One has to dig up another piece of

conflict and to increase the energy level sufficiently to proceed further. This

is done by full respiration.

  As soon as the patient started to yield to deeper respiration, she developed

strong psychotic emotions again. She began to look around the room in her

typical paranoid fashion. She became anxious, and her body began to quiver

all  over.  Her  eyes  changed:  appearing  empty  at  first,  they  later  sharply

observed the red-hot coil of the electric heater. This went on for quite a while.

She fought off anxiety and then she said: “A funny thought I had … THAT

THIS HEAT AND THE SUN ARE ALSO FORCES; that they [the “real forces”] could

think that I could prefer this other force [from the heater and the sun].”

  I was flabbergasted. What deep thought, and how close to the truth! I

assure the reader that at that time she knew nothing of the orgone phenomena

and that I had not told her anything about them. The truth she touched uponby  her  remark  was  this:  if  it  was  true  that  her  “forces”  were  distorted

perceptions of her own bio-energy; if it is further true that organismic energy

and sun energy are basically the same, then she had made a truly scientific

statement, and a great one at that. Was her organism trying to regain health

by turning away from the delusion about a reality to the reality proper? She

obviously  was  fighting  hard  to  widen  the  scope  of  her  sense  of  reality.

Replacement of the “forces” by other, natural forces seemed a logical step in

this direction. Somehow the delusional forces had lost some power over her,

as expressed in the following statement: “I also thought they could befuck

themselves … Oh, what did I say…” Great anxiety overcame her instantly

after having said this, as though she had called for the devil.

  I ventured the following work hypothesis: the respiration had increased

her bio-energy level. She had come closer to the natural forces, the “melting”

sensations, within herself. If this was correct, the delusion of “forces” from

“beyond”  had  lost  some  of  its  energy  and  thus  had  weakened. She came

closer to reality by coming closer to the real forces of life, the orgonotic

sensations, within herself. This was a major finding about the schizophrenic

delusion: the delusion of “forces from beyond” is not merely a psychotic

construction without a basis in reality; rather, it describes a deeply felt reality,

although in a distorted manner. The further progress had to prove or disprove

this assumption. It later proved it correct. Basically, this amounts to the fact

that in their delusions the psychotics tell us important things about functions

of nature. We must only learn to understand their language.

  She had come very close to the meaning of her delusion without sinking

fully  into  it.  The  function  that  was  responsible  for  this  success  was  her

improved  respiration.  Strong  clonisms  developed  during  the  rest  of  this

session which she tolerated much better and with less anxiety. But her eyes

became veiled whenever the orgonotic sensations became too strong for her.

  I felt that she wanted to tell me something but that she did not trust me

fully. I asked her whether my guess was right that she was in conflict over the“forces” and me; that she was for and at the same time against the “forces,”

and for  as  well  as against  me.  She  was  afraid  of  the  “forces”  when  she

affirmed me too much, when she applied for my help against the “forces.”

She understood this instantly and perfectly well. In fact, she had had this

thought herself.

  The clonisms continued while we talked. She felt dizzy, and I asked her to

stop the reactions of her organism. She did. In the end she told me quite

spontaneously that she had become seriously ill for the first time when the

“forces” had told her to poison the whole family with gas. She had in fact

turned on the gas one evening but had turned it off again. Soon after she told

me this, she began to murmur unintelligibly. It sounded like a mystical ritual

to placate evil ghosts. She did not leave the room for about an hour. She

stood rigidly on one spot and did not move. One had the impression of a

cataleptic posture. She did not answer my repeated questions why she did not

leave. Finally she said: “I cannot step over this spot.”

  During this session, the prospects of her therapy had become clear:

  1. The more and better contact she made with her plasmatic, bio-energetic

streaming sensations, the less the fear of the forces would be. This would also

prove  my  contention  that  the “forces”  in  schizophrenia  are  distorted

perceptions of the basic orgonotic organ sensations.

  2. This contact with her body sensations would help to establish some

degree of orgastic satisfaction, and this in turn would eliminate the energy

stasis which operated at the core of her delusions.

  3. The undistorted experiencing of her body sensations would enable her

to identify the true nature of the forces and would thus slowly destroy the

delusion.

  Before  this  could  be  accomplished,  the  patient  would  have  to  pass

through a series of dangerous situations. Delusions and catatonic reactions

were to be expected with each breakthrough of strong orgonotic streamings in

her body. She would perceive these sensations with terror; she would blockthem off by bodily rigidity, and the blocked-off plasmatic currents would be

transformed into destructive impulses. Therefore, the “secondary” impulses,

which derive from the blocking of the original, basic emotions, would have to

be handled carefully and would have to be “let out” slowly, step by step. This

danger would become especially great when the first spontaneous orgastic

contractions of her organism began to occur.


Twelfth session


  We  had  come  very  close  to  hopeful  changes  and  with  them  to  great

dangers too. She came to this session with strong anxiety and excitement. She

asked innumerable questions and fought hard and long against any attempt to

dissolve her blocking in the throat, which was particularly strong that day.

Her respiration was very shallow, and her face was quite pale and bluish.

  She wanted a knife. I told her that I would give her a knife if she told me

first what she needed it for. “I want to cut your stomach wide open…” While

saying this, she pointed to her own stomach. I asked her why she wanted to

cut open her stomach and mine. “It hurts here … you did not release enough

steam yesterday…” Did she feel strong tension there? “Yes … yes … it’s

awful … also in the throat…”

  I suddenly understood with perfect clarity why and in what emotional

situations murders are committed by schizophrenics and schizoid types of

“criminals”: when the tension in the organs, especially in the diaphragmatic

region and in the throat, becomes unbearably strong, the urge appears to cut

one’s own stomach or throat. The Japanese habit of hara-kiri, disguised as it

is  by  ideological  rationalization,  is  an  extreme  expression  of  such  a  bio-

energetic situation. The murder occurs when the impulse is directed away

from  oneself  toward  somebody  else.  Just  as  a  child  easily  develops  a

contraction in its own throat when it has the impulse to choke its mother’s or

father’s throat, so  does  the  schizoid  murderer  cut  somebody  else’s  throat

when his own choking sensation becomes unbearable.  I succeeded in forcing the patient to take several breaths and to exhale

fully  three  or  four  times.  Then  a  spasm  of  the  glottis  occurred.  Her  face

became blue, her whole body trembled, but finally the spasm gave way and

autonomic movements of her chest and legs set in. She fought desperately

against these movements, apparently without success. The close connection

between  the  autonomic  movements  and  the  development  of  her  delusion

became quite clear now.

  She turned her eyeballs upward and said in a desperate tone of voice: “Do

you think I cannot make contact with them [the forces] any more?… Did you

really do that to me?…”

  She had lost contact with the “forces” through the contact which her self-

perception had made with her own autonomic body functions.

  I answered: “I am not concerned with your ‘forces.’ I know nothing about

them. I am only concerned with bringing you into contact with your own

body.” If I had fought her idea of “forces” or had uttered personal opinions

about them, she would have reacted antagonistically, since she felt devoted to

them. My policy, therefore, was to leave the forces untouched and to work

solely on the blocks in her organism which created the delusion of forces.

  She said after a while: “I want to go to Bellevue [a psychiatric institution

in New York] to search for the ‘forces’… I must find them somewhere …

They wanted me to be superior, better, not a brute…”

  Here,  in  one  neat  grouping,  we  had  before  us  the  whole  system  of

ideologies of homo normalis  directed  against  natural  body  functions.  The

“forces” in the psychosis had a double function: one represented the primary

body functions, especially the orgonotic, biosexual streaming sensations; the

other  represented  the  contempt  of  the  body,  the  being  “superior”  to  such

“earthly” and “base” things as bodily urges. The delusion had thus brought

into ONE two diametrically opposed functions of homo normalis. But seen

from “beyond,” from outside the world of homo normalis, this unity made

good sense: it represented the functional unity of superior goodness, of beinggod-like, and the basic natural bodily streamings. This functional unity was

projected in the form of the delusion of persecuting forces. Now, when the

contact with her body sensations was made for the first time, she split this

unity into the idea of “moral superiority” as against the “brutishness of the

bodily urges.”

  These connections and interactions are rarely seen so clearly in simple

neurotic biopathies. Here the “devil” is well separated from “God” and is

kept apart safely and continuously.

  She trembled severely all through this process. Alternately she gave in

partially to the body sensations and movements, and then stiffened up again.

The struggle was tremendous. Her face became spotty, as in shock. Her eyes

were alternately clear and veiled. “I do not want to be an average human

being.” I asked her exactly what she meant. “A human being with brutal

emotions.”  I  explained  to  her  the  difference  between  primary  drives  and

secondary antisocial drives, and how the former turned into the latter. She

understood it well. Then she gave in fully and relaxed. The severe tension in

the abdominal muscles disappeared. She felt relieved and rested quietly.

  We  have  seen  how  the  sweet,  “melting”  organ  sensations,  the  most

longed-for experience in the organism, are dreaded and fought off as “brutal

flesh” in the sense of homo normalis and as evil “forces” or the “devil” in the

psychosis.

  I would like to stress this structural function of the armored human animal

most  emphatically.  To  the  biopsychiatrist  with  long  experience  in  orgone

therapy, this dichotomy and ambivalence toward one’s own organism appears

as the crux of the misery of the human animal. It is the core of all human

functions which are deviations from the natural law of living matter. It is the

core of criminal behavior, psychotic processes, neurotic deadness, irrational

thinking, of the general basic split into the world of God and the world of the

devil in human intellectual existence. What is called God turns into the devil

by exactly these distortions of living functions, i.e., by the “denial of God.”In  the  schizophrenic,  these  natural  functions  as  well  as  their  distortions

appear in quite an undisguised manner. One has only to learn to read the

schizophrenic language.

  The “high” represents the “low” and vice versa. The instincts became

“low” because of the split in the structure. The originally “high,” the “god-

like,” became unattainable and returns only as the “devil.” “God” is right

there within homo normalis, but he changed God into the devil; God became

unreachable and has to be sought for—in vain. What a tragedy! Since nobody

but the human animal himself has created his philosophies of life and his

religions, it must be true that whatever dichotomies appear in ideologies and

thinking stem from this structural split with its insoluble contradictions.

  The painful dilemma between God and devil dissolves without pain or

terror when one sees it from beyond the framework of mechanistic-mystical

thinking, from the standpoint of natural, biophysical human functioning. This

has been clearly demonstrated, but it needs further elaboration. We shall now

return to the patient for further instruction.

  I had had the impression during the last few sessions that the patient, as

she  emerged  from  the  delusion,  was  facing  one  of  the  following  two

developments:  she  would  either  fall  into  stupor,  due  to  sudden  complete

armoring against the plasmatic currents; or she would become neurotic before

reaching a satisfactory degree of health. The real process followed both lines

of reasoning, but in quite an unexpected manner.


Thirteenth session


  She was reluctant to come that day. She only wanted to talk. The day

before, after the treatment, everything was “unreal, as if a wall had been

erected around all things and people … there were no emotions at all … How

is it that, in such a state, I feel everything clearly and yet as though through a

thin wall?”

  I explained to her that she had discharged a great amount of energy; that,therefore,  her  worst  symptoms  were  temporarily  gone;  but  that  her  inner

contactlessness was laid bare. She understood perfectly well that the lack of

real contact in a certain layer of her structure made her feel things and people

“as  if  through  a  wall.”  “Yes,”  she  said,  “I  could  not  move  freely;  all

movements are so slow; I could not raise my legs or walk faster than I did…”

  Such  disturbances  cannot  be  understood  unless  one  knows  of  the

anorgonotic attacks which so often follow extreme emotional upheavals, in

simple neurotic biopathies, also. It seems as if the organism, unused to strong

emotions, becomes partially immobilized.

  Her orgasm reflex was fuller and stronger that day. Her face was strongly

flushed, with no cyanosis intervening; the clonisms occurred freely and were

not met with much anxiety.

  After a while she said: “Your eyes look like those of the Greeks … Have

you some connection with the Greek gods?… Oh, you look like Jesus…”

  I  answered  nothing  and  let  her  go  on  talking.  “Oh,  I  must  think  so

much  …  there  are  so  many  emotions,  contradictions  …  What  is  a  split

personality?”

  I explained to her that one feels as if split in two, and that one really is

split when one feels exactly what is going on around one and yet feels walled

in. She understood. Toward the end, she became anxious; sudden convulsions

in the total body occurred several times. She asked me what was meant by the

term “energy stasis.” And then, continuing instantly, she asked why I was

interested in her “forces.”

  I had the impression that her organism began to connect the “forces”

with the perception of her streamings. It appeared as if her splendid intellect

was helping to unite the delusion and the understanding of the delusion. This

was in the direction of our efforts to overcome the split which separated her

organ  sensations  from  her  self-perception.  Seemingly  unrelated  was  her

statement: “I often look at blond Christian girls … I envy them…” “But you

are a blond Christian girl yourself,” I said. “Oh, no, I am a dark Jewess…”Fourteenth session


  She  had  felt  well  during  the  three  days  since  the  last  treatment.  The

“forces” had not been there; she had not longed for them. She had gone to a

movie with a girl friend; she had been to a museum and had taken a bicycle

trip.

  She  looked  well  that  day,  but  she  was  reluctant  to  yield  to  deep

respiration; she tensed her chest and shut off her respiration again. I could not

understand this reaction. After much talking, she said: “I had the same feeling

in the movie toward a girl friend which I had had before I went to the hospital

the first time … I don’t like you today…”

  She armored strongly in the musculature of her thighs, especially in the

deep  adductor  muscles.  This  type  of  armoring  is  well  known  to  the

experienced  orgone  therapist  as  a  sign  of  strong  but  fought-off  genital

excitations.  “The  pressure  on  these  muscles  releases nasty  feelings  …

perverse feelings…”

  She  had  obviously  developed  some  homosexual  ideas  against  strong,

natural genital impulses. She gave in partially to the sensations that day and

continued to feel clear and happy.

  Her relative, who had brought her to me originally, phoned and said that

she was greatly improved. I knew, however, that the greatest danger was just

ahead  of  us  exactly  because  of  this  great  improvement.  Her  organism,

unaccustomed as it was to functioning on a high energy level, was not yet

ready  to  take  too  much  well-being  and  pleasure.  Accordingly,  I  warned

against too great optimism. My warning proved correct, as we shall soon see.


Fifteenth session


  The well-trained and experienced orgone therapist becomes very cautious

in handling the process of therapy just when great improvements develop too

suddenly. As long as the basic orgasm anxiety has not appeared and has not

been lived through, there is great danger of complete regression or, worse, ofsuicide in some severe cases. It was the first time that this danger had to be

faced in a case of schizophrenia. Therefore, all necessary precautions were

taken.

  The  patient  came  to  this  session  with  clear,  happy  eyes  and  was

apparently  perfectly  sane  and  healthy.  She  asked  me  for  advice  about  a

diaphragm and matters of mental hygiene. But she fought hard against full

respiration;  she  blocked  in  her  throat  and  around  her  mouth.  Slowly  a

scornful smile developed in her face; she understood what had happened. She

yielded again and went very far in admitting the tremor; but her face became

bluish-spotty,  as  in  shock.  Her  eyes  turned  upward  again;  she  gave  the

impression  of  a  beginning  strong  withdrawal.  She  had  quite  obviously

experienced some strong orgonotic sensations in her body. I asked her at this

point whether she gained contact with her “forces.” “Yes, nearly…,” was her

answer. Now it also seemed clear to her that the “forces” were identical with

the orgonotic streaming sensations in her body.

  After the session she remained in the room for a very long time. I let her

come at the end of my work day in order to give her more time if necessary.

From my adjoining study I suddenly heard peculiar noises. When I reentered

the room, the pillows and the mattress were strewn all over the floor, the

heater was turned over with the heat on, the leg of one chair was put on an

ashtray.

  “The forces told me to do this…” she said calmly. I told her not to worry,

but next time to tell me when the “forces” induced her to do such things.

After  all,  these  were  my  possessions,  not  those  of  the  “forces.”  She  said

“Yes,” in a dull and faraway manner.


Sixteenth session


  Her action the previous day had pointed to very severe hate impulses

against me. According to the old rule of character analysis, taken over into

orgone therapy, one must not proceed unless the hateful attitudes have beencleared up first. Therefore, I did not proceed further physically but worked

merely psychologically, by means of character analysis. I told her that she

had felt neglected by me. Had she fantasied about living in my house? She

had. Now she took revenge in a petty manner because she was very sensitive.

She had received no love at all from her mother, only nagging all her life. She

had withdrawn into a fantasy life, and there the “forces” had come in. She

listened to my explanation with disdain in her face. I told her that she would

have to overcome this attitude before I could proceed further. Otherwise I

would have to send her away.

  After a while she gave up her disdain and yielded. But her attitude was

full of meaning and typical for such situations. It occurs regularly that the

patient despises the therapist when the orgonotic streamings break through;

this happens in all cases, including neurotics; is a quite typical reaction. It

corresponds to the hate and disdain shown by impotent, armored individuals

toward healthy people and genital sexuality; usually, anti-Semitic ideas occur

at this point, in the Jew as well as in the non-Jew. The disdain usually centers

around the idea that the therapist, who deals with natural genitality, must be a

“sexual swine.”

  She accepted my explanations, but declared that she did not want to give

up her “forces.”

  The  whole  situation  seemed  perfectly  clear:  her  natural  genitality

threatened to overwhelm her and to demand gratification. Her organism could

not  stand  the  strong  excitations.  Together  with  the  weakening  of  the

schizophrenic split her impulsiveness, from which the split had once grown,

began to increase. Therefore, the next task was:

  a. To open the energetic valve of the organism: SELF-SATISFACTION.

  b. To brace her against breakdown by a thorough working-through of her

hate against me.

  c. To prevent, if possible, any attempt on her part to escape from the

perception of her high-pitched organ sensations into delusions.3. THE REMOTE SCHIZOPHRENIC EXPRESSION IN THE

                                        EYES


  It is well known that one can diagnose the presence of schizophrenia by

careful observation of the expression in the eyes. Schizoid characters and

fully developed schizophrenics have a typical faraway look of remoteness.

The psychotic seems to look right through you with an absent-minded but

deep look into far distances. This look is not there all the time. But when

emotions well up or when serious subjects are touched upon in conversations,

the eyes “go off,” as it were.

  One can see the same expression in some truly great scientists and artists,

for instance in Galileo and Beethoven. One could venture the assumption that

the great creator in science or art is deeply engrossed in his inner creative

forces; that he is and feels removed from petty, everyday noise in order to

follow  his  creativeness  more  fully  and  ably. Homo  normalis  does  not

understand this remoteness and is apt to call it “crazy.” He calls “psychotic”

what is foreign to him, what threatens his mediocrity. The psychotic is also

deeply engrossed in his inner life forces; he listens to them just as the man of

genius does; the difference, however, is great: the genius produces out of this

contact  with  his  forces  great,  lasting  accomplishments;  the  schizophrenic

becomes enmeshed in them because he is split and afraid of them, and not

united  with  his  bio-energy,  as  is  the  creative  human  structure.  But  the

expression of the eyes is deep in both cases, and not flat, empty, sadistic or

dull as in neurotic characters who have no contact with their bio-energy at all.

  I knew this symptom well, since I had worked in the psychiatric hospital

in Vienna some twenty years before I met this case. But I knew nothing about

its function in connection with the mechanism of delusion and disorientation.

Our  patient  showed  this  peculiar  symptom  in  an  especially  clear  manner.

When the “forces” came close, her eyes would become veiled, the expression

would  become  one  of  looking  into  the  far  distance,  and,  in  addition,  the

eyeballs  would  turn  sharply  upward  when  the  “melting”  organ  sensationsbecame very strong. I decided to concentrate my attention on this symptom,

and, if possible, to remove it, since it seemed to be the main mechanism by

means of which she “went off.”


Seventeenth session


  Entering the room, she asked: “Can I become a nurse again? My record is

very bad…” She had never been a nurse. I answered that I did not know. At

present  she  would  have  to  find  out  why  she  turned  her  eyeballs  upward

whenever the forces took hold of her. In orgone therapy one talks little; one

lets  the  patient  take  on  the  special  attitude  which  he  tries  to  avoid.

Accordingly, I let her turn her eyeballs upward. She did it hesitatingly; but

when she had reached a certain position with her eyeballs, she became afraid

and said: “This is the place where I usually go off … I know it now…” I

urged  her  to  try  it  again.  She  tried,  but  became  afraid.  She  said:  “Our

agreement was that we should not touch the forces … I don’t want to give

them up…”

  I did not urge her any more that day. But one thought stuck in my mind

and did not budge: is it possible that the schizophrenic attack or process is

locally anchored just as are other disease symptoms such as anorexia or a

headache or cardiac anxiety? Is it the base of the brain, the region of the

crossing  of  the  optic  nerve?  Would  it  be  reasonable  to  assume  that

schizophrenia is a true “brain disease,” induced by some specific type of

emotional upheaval, with a local contraction of special parts of the brain due

to severe anxiety? Many symptoms in schizophrenia seemed to confirm the

validity of this assumption: the typically schizophrenic look in the eyes, the

degenerative processes in the brain found in old schizophrenics (they would

be secondary structural changes in tissues due to misuse just as calcification

of  blood  vessels  is  due  to  chronic,  anxious  contraction  of  the  vascular

system);  the  report  of  so  many  schizophrenics  that  they  felt  veiled  or

“flattened”  on  the  forehead  at  the  outbreak  of  the  disease.  It  seemedimportant to pursue this chain of thoughts.


Eighteenth session


  The patient came back feeling quite well. We worked on the expression of

her eyes. I urged her to try again to “go off” and to make contact with the

“forces” by turning her eyeballs upward, and to reproduce by will the empty,

faraway  look.  She  cooperated  readily,  but  whenever  she  came  close  to  a

certain  position  and  expression  of  her  eyeballs  she  became  anxious  and

stopped. We seemed to be following the right line. Suddenly and without any

apparent reason, she said: “You are suggesting all that happens to me.”

  There was only one possible interpretation of this utterance: the deliberate

turning of the eyeballs provoked her schizophrenic mechanism. Since I had

urged  her  to  do  it,  I  was  logically  the  one  who  was  suggesting  all  that

happened to her. This idea of being influenced by me emerged from a purely

biophysical attitude. This bodily attitude obviously provoked the “beyond” in

her  self-perception  and  thus  produced  the  idea  of  being  influenced.  This

mechanism  could  possibly  apply  to  many—if  not  all—cases  of  ideas  of

persecution.

  I ventured the preliminary assumption that the “going off” in the eyes

was due to a local contraction of the nerve system at the base of the brain.

According to this assumption, this contraction had the same function as all

other  biopathic  contractions: to  prevent  too  strong  bodily  streamings  and

sensations.  I  had  thus  reached  a  first  firm  foundation  for  the  orgonomic

understanding of the schizophrenic process.


4. THE BREAKTHROUGH OF THE DEPERSONALIZATION

AND FIRST UNDERSTANDING OF THE SCHIZOPHRENIC

                                        SPLIT


  We  must  keep  in  mind  that  this  orgone-therapeutic  experiment  in  a

schizophrenic case was not done on a psychological basis. On the contrary:all  psychological  manifestations  of  the  schizophrenic  process  had  to  be

understood  in  terms  of  deep biophysical  processes  which  underlie  and

determine the functions of the mind. Our assumption is that the realm of the

psyche is much narrower than the realm of biophysical functioning; that the

psychological  functions  are  merely  functions  of  self-perception  or  the

perception of objective, biophysical plasma functions. Thus, a schizophrenic

will  fall  into  a  state  of  disorientation  when  his  self-perception  is

overwhelmed  by  strong  sensations  of  orgonotic  plasma  streamings;  the

healthy genital character will feel well, happy, and highly coordinated under

the impact of orgonotic streaming.

  Our approach to schizophrenia is a biophysical, and not a psychological

one. We try to comprehend the psychological disturbances on the basis of the

plasmatic dysfunctions; and we try to understand the cosmic fantasies of the

schizophrenic in terms of the functions of a cosmic orgone energy which

governs  his  organism,  although  he  perceives  his  body  energy  in  a

psychotically  distorted  manner.  Furthermore,  we  do  not  believe  that  the

psychological  interpretation  of  schizophrenic  ideas  can  go  beyond  the

meaning of words and historical events. It cannot, by any means, reach the

purely physical and biophysical processes, since they function beyond the

realm of ideas and words. This constitutes what is rightly called the “depth”

of the schizophrenic world, in contradistinction to the superficial world of the

neurotic.

    Schizophrenia is not a psychological disease; it is a biophysical disease

which also involves the psychic apparatus. In order to understand this process

the knowledge of the functions of orgone energy is indispensable. The core of

the problem is the disruption of the unitary, total orgone functioning and the

subjective  perception  of  this  disruption.  Certain  schizophrenic  symptoms,

such as disorientation, the experience of “world collapse,” loss of the power

of association, the loss of the meaning of words, the withdrawal of interests,

etc.,  are  secondary  reactions  to  a  shattering  of basically  organismic,biological functions. Other symptoms, such as the faraway look, the trance,

automatisms,  flexibilitas  cerea,  catalepsy,  slowdown  of  reaction,  etc.,  are

direct expressions of the biophysical disturbance and have nothing to do with

psychology. The withdrawal of libido from the world is a result and not the

cause of the disease. The general deterioration of the organism in later phases

of the process is due to chronic shrinking of the vital apparatus, as in the

cancer  biopathy,  though  different  in  origin  and  function.  The  shrinking

carcinomatous organism is not in conflict with social institutions, due to its

resignation. The shrinking schizophrenic organism is full of conflicts with the

social pattern to which it reacts with a specific split.

  If we did not keep distinct these methods of approach, we would not

obtain any practical results. We would become confused ourselves about the

nature and functions of schizophrenia. It is necessary to give a résumé of

these facts before  continuing  the  study  of  our  case.  It  will  become  quite

apparent  from  the  facts  themselves  that  what  is  commonly  called  the

“schizophrenic process” is a mixture of objective biophysical processes and

the psychological perception of and reaction to these processes. Last but not

least, a third element is involved which could not possibly have been known

before the discovery of atmospheric orgone energy.

  What is to follow now will appear utterly incredible. Therefore, I wish to

assure the reader that I had not the faintest idea of the existence of such

mechanisms. But since the treatment of this case the facts to be described

have been found in several other cases of schizophrenia. Clinically, as well as

orgone-biophysically, there can no longer be any doubt about the reality of

these facts.


Nineteenth session


  The patient came to the nineteenth session very calm and coordinated, but

slightly  absent-minded.  She  spoke  very  slowly,  as  if  against  some  great

obstacle; she said that she was very depressed. She had been shopping theday before, for the first time in many months; she had bought many things,

had enjoyed them as never before, had shown them to her friends, and had

slept  well.  The  following  morning,  however,  she  was  overcome  by  great

emptiness and tiredness. There was a “nothingness” in her; and she had felt

the  need  to  sit  quietly  in  some  corner  “and  not  to  move  at  all.”  “Every

movement was such a great effort.” She wanted to be by herself. She gave the

impression of an oncoming catatonia with immobility and perseveration.

    “Everything was very far away … I watched myself as if I were outside

of myself; I felt clearly double: a body here and a soul there … [Saying this,

she pointed outward toward the wall] … I know well that I am one person …

but I am outside myself … perhaps there where the ‘forces’ are…”

  She searched with her eyes anxiously along the walls. Then, suddenly,

she  asked: “What  is  the  aurora  borealis?  [Very  slowly,  as  if  with  great

effort] I heard about it once; there are patterns and wavy pathways in the

sky  …  [She  looked  again  searchingly  along  the  walls  of  the  room,  as  if

strongly absent] … I hear you, I see you, but somehow far away … at a very

great distance … I know very well that I am trembling now, I feel it … but it

is not me, it is something else … [after a long pause] … I would like to get

rid of this body; it is not me; I want to be there where the ‘forces’ are…”

  I was deeply moved in a quite unprofessional manner when I witnessed

her experience of the schizophrenic split and depersonalization in such an

unequivocal manner. It was the first time in my long psychiatric career that

such a thing had happened so clearly before my eyes. I explained to her that

she was experiencing the split which had been in her since childhood. “Is it

what they call the ‘split personality’?” she asked. She had not connected her

own words with what I had just explained. “All those girls [in the mental

institution] spoke about it … Is it that?”

  These  patients  apparently  experience  the  split  in  the  organism  quite

clearly,  but  can  neither  grasp  it  nor  describe  it  intellectually.  While  she

continued speaking, she trembled severely all over her body; she kept herchest high in an inspiratory position, fighting hard against exhaling fully.

Thorough exploration on my part made it quite clear that she did not perceive

the  holding  of  her  breath at  all;  her  chest  seemed  excluded  from  self-

perception. Her eyes were heavily veiled, her forehead was bluish, her cheeks

and  eyelids  spotty.  “My  brain  is  like  empty  …  It  was  never  so  strong

before…” I asked her whether this type of attack was known to her from

earlier experience. She answered in the affirmative. I explained to her that

this  attack  was  not  stronger  than  before,  but  only  more  clearly  in  the

foreground of her self-perception.

  She repeated: “What is it with the aurora borealis?… I would prefer to be

soul only, my body to be not…” Thereupon her speech began to deteriorate.

  This was clearly one of the most important sessions in her treatment and,

I must add, one of the most instructive happenings in my whole medical

experience.  Let  us  pause  for  a  while  and  try  to  understand  what  had

happened. To the disinterested institutional psychiatrist, who sees such things

happen many times every day, it means “just nothing”; only another of those

“crazy things going on in the lunatic.” To us, this experience of a living

organism is full of meaning and deep secrets. I shall try to connect these

phenomena with what we know from orgone-biophysical functioning of the

organism. As far as I know, neither psychology nor chemistry nor classical

physics could offer any plausible interpretation.

  Why  did  she  mention  the  aurora  borealis  in  connection  with  her

depersonalization? What did it mean when she said that she found “herself,”

her  “soul,”  “there  where”  her  “forces”  used  to  be?  What  was  meant  by

“there”?

  We  are  reminded  here  of  such  experiences  as  are  reported  by  great

spiritualists and mystics, such as Swedenborg. To dismiss these things with a

smile or the feeling of superiority of an ignoramus does not get us anywhere.

We must adhere to the logical conclusion, from which there is no escape, that

a living organism cannot experience anything unless there is some kind ofreality behind it. To investigate the mystical experience on a scientific basis

does not imply that one believes in the existence of supernatural forces. What

we want is to comprehend what is going on in a living organism when it

speaks of the “beyond” or of the “spirits” or of the “soul being outside the

body.” It is hopeless to try to overcome superstition without understanding

what it is and how it functions. After all, mysticism and superstition govern

the minds of the vast majority of the human race, ruining their lives. To

ignore it as “fake,” as the ignorant and therefore arrogant mechanist is wont

to do, will not accomplish anything. We must seriously try to understand the

mystical experience without becoming mystics ourselves.

  The patient had projected a part of her organism toward the walls of the

room, and had observed herself from the walls. If we want to describe exactly

what  had  happened,  we  must  say that  her  self-perception  had  appeared

where her “forces” usually appeared: at the walls of the room. Therefore,

the conclusion is warranted that the “forces” represented a certain function of

her own organism. But why at the walls?

  Hearing  voices  from  and  seeing  things  at  the  walls  is  a  common

schizophrenic experience. At the bottom of it, there must be a certain basic

function which is responsible for this typical experience. The projection of a

certain function outward is obviously responsible for the feeling of being split

in two. At the same time, the chronic split in the personality, or, in other

words, the lack of ONENESS in the organism, is the background from which

the acute splitting emerges. The psychoanalytic explanation of the projection

mechanism in terms of repressed drives which are ascribed to other people or

things outside oneself only relates the content of the projected idea to an

inner entity, but it does not explain the function of projection itself, regardless

of  the  projected  idea.  These  projected  ideas  vary  with  the  patients; the

mechanism of projection is the same in all cases. Therefore, the mechanism

of projection is far more important than its content. It is important to know

that the persecutor in the paranoic delusion is the loved homosexual object;but why does one human being project his homosexual desire whereas the

other only represses it and forms it into some type of symptom? The content

is the same in both cases. The essential thing, therefore, is the difference, that

is, the mechanism of projection, the ability to project. This, however, has

never been understood.

  Let us take the expressions of our patient seriously. Let us believe what

she says word for word. Afterwards, we can decide what has been distorted

and what is actually true. Most amazing is the statement that the perception is

“there where the forces used to be.” It is as if the perceptions were located at

some distance outside the skin surface of the organism. It is obvious that

there must exist a severe disturbance of the inner ability of self-perception

before “feeling oneself outside” is at all possible. This inner disturbance is, as

we  found  earlier,  the  splitting-off  of  self-perception  from  the  objective

biophysical process that ought to be perceived. In the healthy organism, they

are united into one single experience. In the armored neurotic individual, the

biophysical organ sensations do not develop at all; the plasmatic streamings

are greatly reduced and accordingly below the threshold of self-perception

(“deadness”). In the schizophrenic, on the other hand, the plasmatic currents

remain strong and unimpaired, but their subjective perception is impaired

and split off; the function of perception is neither repressed nor united with

the streaming; the function of self-perception appears as if “homeless” in the

experience of the schizophrenic. Since the subjective perception is not related

experientially to the objective plasmatic streamings, it seems understandable

that the schizophrenic searches for a reason for these experiences which he

does not feel as his own.

  This situation may account for the confusion which so often overcomes

the schizophrenic when the split between excitation and perception becomes

acute. He perceives something that is not his own; there must be a reason for

the  experience,  which  he  cannot  find;  people  do  not  understand  him;  the

physician says it’s crazy. This only adds to the confusion; anxiety and unrestare the logical outcome of this confusion. The schizophrenic hears himself

speak, but since his self-perception is split off from the biological process to

which it belongs, he sounds strange and far away to himself; the words lose

their  contact  with  the  things  they  are  to  connote,  as  Freud  has  so  aptly

described. This is the beginning of the disorganization of speech. It was quite

clear  in  our  patient  that  her  speech  began  to  deteriorate  whenever  the

perception of the self “at the walls” was at its peak.

  To drive the basic schizophrenic split to its peak in an acute experience of

sensory delusion, such as “being outside oneself,” requires a certain bodily

function. In our patient, it was the severe blocking of the respiration against

strongly forthcoming plasmatic sensations which constituted the immediate

cause of the projection. Her head was quite unmistakably in a state of shock

because of lack of oxygen due to blocked respiration.

  In this connection I may mention an experience I had once myself some

twenty-eight years ago during a general anesthesia. I had gone into it with the

firm  determination  to  observe  the  onset  of  the  loss  of  consciousness.  I

managed to remember quite a bit of the experience after I woke up. The most

impressive  part  of  it  was  the  feeling  that  the  voices  of  the  people  in  the

operating room receded farther and farther away, became more and more

unreal. Furthermore, I felt as if my perceiving ego were receding into some

far distance. The depersonalization due to the central effect of the drug was

experienced in this form: “I perceive that I still perceive … I perceive that I

perceive that I perceive … I still perceive that I still perceive that I still

perceive, etc.…” endlessly. At the same time, I felt my ego receding, as it

were,  into  some  far, outer  distance,  in  the  same  way  as  one  experiences

hearing voices in the far distance while the body is seen asleep in the bed.

  The complete loss of self-perception is preceded by an experience very

similar to that described by our patient. Thus, it loses much of its mystery.

    “Projection”  is  factually  the  process  of  recession  of  the  ability  to

perceive, its detachment from the organismic functions to be perceived orusually  perceived.  Its  result  is  the  delusion  of  sensory  impression  “from

outside the organism.”

  This detachment of the function of self-perception from the organismic

functions cannot be experienced in some cases in any other way than as “the

soul  leaving  the  body”  or  “the  soul  being outside  the  body.”  Since  the

perception has only a weak contact and finally no contact at all with the bio-

energetic functions which it reflects subjectively, one experiences in a very

typical  manner  “self-estrangement,”  or  “oneself  being  removed  far,  far

away.” Accordingly, the processes of projection, trance, depersonalization,

hallucination, etc., have as their basis a concrete split in the bio-energetic

system.

  The split between the bodily excitation and the psychic perception of this

excitation removes the body sensation into the distance, as it were. It does not

make  much  difference  whether  the  organ  excitation  or  its  perception  is

experienced as receding. In any case, the blocking occurs between excitation

and perception:














blocking. it

 

' Teceding fiom excitation

- orgonoticst

 

g
Schizophrenic split, due to blocking of perception of excitation; excitation is perceived as

“strange,” “foreign” or “removed”


and not, as in the “cold” compulsion neurotic, between energy source and its

motility (see below).

  In the compulsion neurotic, the flow of energy is actually reduced or isbound in a complete armor as soon as it increases. In the schizophrenic, the

energy flow is not reduced; there is no blocking of the energy production

itself, but only lack of perception of the high-pitched excitation. This lack of

perception is undoubtedly linked to a definite blocking in the region of the

base of the brain, especially in the optical nerve, as expressed in the typical

schizophrenic look. I believe, therefore, that it is correct to search for the

somatic lesion somewhere in the brain. It is, however, utterly misleading to

believe that one can remove a schizophrenic process by frontal lobotomy.

Schizophrenia as well as cancer are general biopathic processes, with local

symptoms due to disturbed functioning in the organs. To mistake the local

disturbance in the brain for the schizophrenic process would be just as bad as

to mistake the local cancer tumor for the total cancer process. Both mistakes

run counter to the medical tasks.


















Blocking excitation
e perception of block

}

emtional deadness

 

affect block —

blocked excitation

orgonotic streaming
Compulsion neurotic affect block, due to blocking of bio-energy by total armoring. Excitation is not

perceived at all: deadness; self-perception is full, but “unalive,” “dead,” or “empty”


  I  told  the  patient  everything  I  understood  about  her  illness.  She

cooperated  in  a  magnificent  manner,  although  her  speech  was  severely

disturbed and considerably slowed down most of the time.

  The function of SELF-PERCEPTION appeared severely disturbed, dependingon  how  strongly  the  split  between  excitation  and  perception  of  excitation

developed. The dissociation and the production of senseless words increased

when  the  split  increased.  The  normal  function  of  speech  and  association

returned when the split disappeared and the patient began to feel her bodily

streamings as her own again. This permitted the conclusion that the function

of  self-perception  as  a  whole  depended  on  the  contact  between  objective

excitation and the subjective feeling of the excitation. The closer this contact,

the stronger self-perception functioned. This observation was of the greatest

importance  theoretically.  It  was  now  possible  to  draw  a  hypothetical

conclusion in a more general way.


  5. THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF CONSCIOUSNESS AND

                                SELF-PERCEPTION


  The following is a first orgonomic attempt to approach the problem of

consciousness and self-perception. It does not attempt to solve this greatest

riddle in nature—however, it seems to survey the problem of self-awareness

in a rather promising manner: consciousness is a function of self-perception

in general, and vice versa. If self-perception is complete, consciousness also

is clear and complete. When the function of self-perception deteriorates, the

function  of  consciousness  in  general  also  deteriorates,  and  with  it  all  its

functions such as speech, association, orientation, etc. If self-perception itself

is not disturbed, but only reflects a rigid organism, as in the affect-blocked

neurotic, the functions of consciousness and intellect, too, will be rigid and

mechanical. When self-perception reflects dull organismic functioning, then

consciousness and intellect, too, will be dull. When self-perception reflects a

removed, faint organ excitation, consciousness will develop ideas of being

“beyond” or of “foreign and strange forces.” This is why the schizophrenic

phenomena lend themselves so well—better than any other type of biopathy

—to an understanding of the most difficult and most obscure problem of all

natural science, the ability of living matter to perceive itself and, in higherdeveloped species, to be “conscious” of itself.

  Although  self-perception  constitutes  self-awareness,  and  although  the

kind  of  self-perception  determines  the type  of  consciousness,  these  two

functions of the mind are not identical. Consciousness appears as a higher

function,  developed  in  the  organism  much  later  than  self-perception.  Its

degree  of  clarity  and  oneness  depends,  to  judge  from  observations  in

schizophrenic processes, not so much on the strength or intensity of self-

perception, as on the more or less complete integration of the innumerable

elements of self-perception into one single experience of the SELF. We can see

how in the schizophrenic breakdown this unity falls apart and how, together

with  it,  the  functions  of  consciousness  disintegrate.  Usually,  the

disintegration of self-perception precedes the disintegration of the functions

of consciousness. Disorientation and confusion are the first reactions to one’s

own  perceptional  discoordination.  Thought  association  and  coordinated

speech, which depend on it, are the next functions of consciousness in the

human animal which fall apart when the disintegration of self-perception has

gone far enough. Even the type of discoordination of consciousness reflects

the type of disintegration in self-perception.

  In  paranoid  schizophrenia,  where  self-perception  is  severely  disturbed,

association and speech are also disjointed. In the catatonic stupor, where the

organism  is  acutely  and  severely  contracted  and  immobilized,  complete

mutism, i.e., absence of speech and emotional reaction, is the rule. In the

hebephrenic disease picture, where a slow deterioration and dulling of all

biophysical processes are in progress, perception and consciousness are also,

as a rule, dulled, severely slowed down, and increasingly less effective.

  Thus, we must conclude that the mental functions of self-perception and

consciousness are directly related to, and correspond to, certain bio-energetic

states of the organism, in kind as well as in degree. This permits, accordingly,

the conclusion that schizophrenia is a truly biophysical, and not “merely” a

mental, disease. The basis of the mental dysfunctions was sought heretoforein  chemical  or  mechanical  lesions  of  the  brain  and  its  appendices.  Our

functional approach permits a different understanding of these interrelations.

  The  mental  dysfunctions  express  the  schizophrenic  process  of

disintegration of the biophysical system in an amazingly immediate manner.

The dysfunctions of self-perception and of consciousness are directly related

to dysfunctions of the emotional functions; however, the emotional functions

are functions of orgonotic plasma motility, and not of structural or chemical

conditions. Emotions  are  bio-energetic,  plasmatic,  and  not  mental  or

chemical or mechanical, functions. We must arrange the bio-energetic, the

mental,  and  the  structural  functions  with  the  emotional  functions  as  the

common functioning principle, in the following manner:








2) mental functions

/7

™y st and bio

chemical functions

 

1) Bioenergetic emotions
No other arrangement is possible. To put (3) in place of (1) would mean to

bog down in the mechanistic ways of thinking of classical psychiatry, which

led nowhere. To put (2) in place of (1) would mean to derive the emotional

disturbances from confusion and to put the functions of the mind before the

functions of the protoplasm. It would not work and would lead only into

metaphysics.

  Let us try to understand the functional relation between self-perception

and  biophysical  emotion  (=  plasma-motion).  In  my  book, The  Cancer

Biopathy,  I  have  tried  to  draw  a  rough  picture  of  the  small  child’s

development in the following manner:

  The  movements  of  a  newborn  baby  are  not  yet  coordinated  into ONE

whole function and, accordingly, there is no “purpose” or “meaning” in the

movements. True, pleasure and anxiety reactions are already clearly formed;

but we do not find as yet any coordinated movements which would indicatethe  existence  of  total  consciousness  and  self-awareness.  We  must  assume

that, in the newborn child, self-perception already exists and functions fully,

but not in a coordinated, unitary manner. The hands move for themselves

and the eyes, which to begin with are not yet centered on objects, move for

themselves too. The legs show only meaningless and purposeless motions,

without any connection with the movements of other organs. During the first

few  months  of  life,  the  coordination  of  the  independent  and  separate

movements slowly develops. We must assume that some kind of functional

CONTACT is progressively established between the many organs; and with the

more numerous contacts the oneness begins to develop. We are probably not

too far from the truth if we also concede a development and coordination of

the  functions  of  different  perceptions.  Accordingly,  on  the  basis  of  the

dependence  of  self-perception  on  plasmatic  motion,  self-perception  in  the

uterine and post-uterine existence would be only a dim one and split up into

many separate experiences of the self in accordance with the separateness of

the  plasmatic  organ  movements.  With  the  growing  coordination  of  the

movements, their perceptions also are gradually coordinated one by one with

each  other  until  the  point  is  reached  where  the  organism  moves  in  a

coordinated fashion as a whole and, therefore, the many different perceptions

of the self are united into one total perception of the moving self. Not until

then,  we  must  further  conclude,  can  we  speak  of  a  fully  developed

consciousness. “Purpose” and “meaning” of biological activity seem to arise

as secondary functions, closely linked up with this process of coordination. It

also seems dependent on its tempo of development. It proceeds much faster

in the lower animal than in man. The reason for this difference is unknown.

In the human child, the faculty of speech does not develop until the bodily

movements  and  the  corresponding  self-perception  have  reached  a  certain

oneness and, with it, purpose and meaning.

  It should be noted carefully that purpose and meaning are derived here

from  the  function  of  coordination,  and  not  vice  versa. “Purpose”  and“meaning”  are,  therefore,  secondary  functions,  entirely  dependent  on  the

degree of coordination of the single organ movements.

  We must further assume, if we follow logically, step by step, the different

levels of coordination and the corresponding functions of the organism, that

RATIONALITY,  activity  that  is  purposeful  and  meaningful  in  regard  to  the

environment and one’s own bio-energetic situation, now also appears as a

function  of  emotional  and  perceptual  coordination.  It  is  obvious  that  no

rational activity is possible so long as the organism is not functioning as a

whole in well-coordinated fashion. We see it clearly in the schizophrenic

distintegration, which is the reversal of the original process of bio-energetic

coordination,  that  rationality,  purposefulness,  meaningfulness,  speech,

association, and other higher functions of the organism disintegrate to the

extent to which their emotional, bio-energetic foundation disintegrates.

  It  is  understandable  now  why  the  schizophrenic  dissociation  is  so

regularly  found  to  be  rooted  in  prenatal  and  immediate  postnatal

development: every severe disturbance which took place during the process

of organismic coordination constitutes a weak spot in the personality where

later, under certain emotional conditions, the schizophrenic discoordination

will be most likely to set in.

  What is called in psychoanalysis “fixation in early childhood” is in fact

nothing but this weakness in the structure of functional coordination. The

schizophrenic  does not  “regress  to  childhood.”  “Regression”  is  merely  a

psychological term describing the actual, present-day effectiveness of certain

historical  events.  Childhood  experiences  could,  however,  not  be  effective

twenty or thirty years later, had they not actually damaged the process of

coordination  of  the  biosystem.  It  is  this actual  lesion  in  the  emotional

structure, and not the long past experience in childhood, which constitutes

the dynamic disease factor. The schizophrenic does not “go back to mother’s

womb.” What he actually does is to become a victim of exactly the same split

in  coordination  of  his  organism  which  he  suffered  when  he  was  in  thedeadened mother’s womb; and he has maintained the split throughout his life.

We are dealing here with actual, present-day functions of the organism, AND

NOT WITH HISTORICAL EVENTS. The U.S.A. does not function the way it does

because of the historical event of the Declaration of Independence, but solely

because this historical event has become a living, present-day reality in the

lives of Americans. The historical Declaration of Independence is effective

today only to the extent to which it was actually anchored in the emotional

structure of American citizens, and not an iota more or less than that. It is

because  psychiatry  did  not  go  beyond  merely  historical  thinking  and

exploration that it bogged down therapeutically. A memory can, but does not

necessarily, mobilize the actual emotions in the present-day organism.

    Orgone-therapeutic medicine does not attack memories but the present-

day biophysical anchoring of the historical experiences; thus it works with

high-pitched realities, and not with shadows of memories from the past. A

memory may or may not develop in this process of emotional upheaval. It is

of  no  therapeutic  importance  whether  it  does  or  not. The  factor  which

changes the human structure from “sick” to “healthy” is the emotional, bio-

energetic coordination of the organism. The orgasm reflex is merely the most

prominent  indication  that  the  coordination  has  actually  succeeded.

Respiration, breaking of muscular blocks, resolution of rigid character armor

are tools in this process of reintegration of the organism. They are, most

unfortunately, often mistaken for a therapeutic end in itself, even by some

close workers in our fields. To mistake mere tools of medical endeavors for

the  end  itself  is  the  result  of  bad  thinking  due  to  lack  of  coordinated

knowledge of the organism, i.e., a narrow judgment which does not fit the

breadth and the depth of human emotional diseases.

  With  such  a  narrow  approach  to  human  organisms,  one  will  never

penetrate to the basic bio-energetic concepts of orgonomy. One will be only a

healer or a businessman in human misery at best, but not a scientific medical

worker.  I  would  like  to  warn  especially  against  any  attempts  to  masterschizophrenic  biopathies  if  one  has  not  mastered  the deep  biophysical

interrelations between emotions and plasmatic activities, perceptions and the

functions  of  consciousness.  These  functional  interrelations  were  hitherto

completely hidden and unknown. We are only beginning to understand them;

the riddles are still numerous. Therefore, utter caution in forming an opinion

is essential. In the course of our development we face the danger of doing

away with basic problems of natural functioning by using terms loosely. One

can already hear people saying that orgone therapy is nothing but “work with

the hands on the muscles” or “letting the patient breathe”; or that man suffers

from “tensions.” The tendency of the average human animal to escape from

simple  though  basic  realities  by  verbalization  of  alive  functions  is

tremendous and among the most damaging attitudes in life. It is not a matter

of  “muscles”  or  of  “breathing”  or  “tension,”  but  it  is  a  matter  of

understanding how cosmic orgone energy came to form plasmatic moving

substance, and how cosmic orgonomic functions are present and active in the

human animal, in his emotions, in his thinking, in his irrationalism, in his

innermost  experience  of  himself.  Schizophrenic  dissociation  is only  one,

though a very characteristic, example of the interrelations between emotional

processes in living matter and the orgone energy field (or the ether) around it.

This is what matters, and not muscular tension. It seems to be in the nature of

things that the living just functions, and is satisfied with mere functioning;

reflecting about its own existence and ways and whys of being is an age-old

activity of the human animal; but whether it is just as much a necessity of life

as mere living seems very doubtful. In any case, the institution of statehood

has  reduced  all  human  interests  to  the  questions  of  mere  existence.  And

somehow the human animal accepts this viewpoint en masse and as a matter

of course.

  To  know  one’s  standpoint  of  judgment  is  essential  to  any  sound

conclusion.  What  I  am  trying  to  convey  here  is  the  great  depth  of  the

functions we encounter in the schizophrenic. I mean depth, not complication.The functions which appear in the schizophrenic, if only one learns to read

them  accurately,  are COSMIC  FUNCTIONS,  that  is,  functions  of  the  cosmic

orgone  energy  within  the  organism  in  undisguised  form.  Not  a  single

symptom in schizophrenia makes sense if one does not understand that the

sharp  borderlines  which  separate homo normalis  from  the  cosmic  orgone

ocean  have  broken  down  in  the  schizophrenic;  accordingly,  some  of  his

symptoms are due to the intellectual realization of this breakdown; others are

direct  manifestations  of  the  merger  between  organismic  and  cosmic

(atmospheric) orgone energy.

  I am referring here to functions which bind man and his cosmic origin

into one. In schizophrenia, as well as in true religion and in true art and

science, the awareness of these deep functions is great and overwhelming.

The schizophrenic is distinguished from the great artist, scientist, or founder

of religions in that his organism is not equipped or is too split up to accept

and to carry the experience of this identity of functions inside and outside the

organism. It happens that, after a period of great productivity, an artist or a

“knower”  breaks  down  psychotically.  It  was  too  much  to  carry; homo

normalis, who has lost his first sense, has made life too hard and unbearable

for such individuals. The final breakdown in such great men as van Gogh,

Gauguin, Nietzsche, Doeblin, Ibsen, and many others is the work of homo

normalis.  Mystical  deviations,  such  as  those  of  Swedenborg,  Lodge,

Eddington, Driesch, etc., are due to the lack of physical comprehension of

cosmic and organismic orgone energy functions. And this lack of knowledge

is again due to the mechanical armor of homo normalis. But to go back to our

patient.


Twentieth session


  A  new  problem  arose: what  exactly  is  the  bodily  mechanism  that

underlies the schizophrenic split between organ excitation and perception of

excitation?  The  events  pointed  sharply  to  the  peculiar  disturbance  ofrespiration: a severely restricted volume of respiration in connection with a

mechanically  soft  chest.  In  the  well-armored  neurotic,  the  chest  itself  is

usually  quite  rigid;  thus  no  strong  emotions  are  developed.  In  the

schizophrenic, on the other hand, the chest is soft, the emotions are fully

developed, but they are not fully perceived; most probably the inhibition of

the motion of the chest structure constituted the mechanism which split the

perception off from the excitation. This had to be corroborated clinically. The

further course of events confirmed this assumption.

  The immobility in her chest and throat was especially severe that day. No

air at all seemed to pass in or out through the larynx. At the same time, the

patient was softer in her chest and neck musculature than ever before. She

said: “I am very emotional today…” Any attempt to induce passage of air

through the throat met with no success. There was no trembling, only severe

aversion against respiration. There were no “forces” around that day.

  The patient asked me whether she could go to the bathroom. I began to

worry when she didn’t return. After quite some time the patient came back.

Her upper abdomen showed a cut in the skin about 10 cm. long across the

region of the solar plexus beneath the sternum. She said: “It is here where I

feel the strongest emotions…”

  I told her that such actions would not eliminate the pressure; she agreed.

To become excited and anxious about such actions would not help. It would

only induce the patient to do worse things. If one has good control over the

case, one will accept such actions as a special mode of self-expression. This

requires, of course, the absolute confidence of the patient in the physician and

vice versa, a confidence established firmly by working through the distrust

and by complete frankness.


Twenty-first session


  The  patient  came  to  this  session  in  good  humor  and,  to  my  great

astonishment, breathing fully. But she had added three cuts across the one ofthe  day  before.  She  explained:  “I  had  to  do  it  on  behalf  of  the  forces;

otherwise, they could have become worried because of the incompleteness of

the cut.… It has to be a cross.… I am afraid that they [the forces] will not

condone  the  interval  of  twenty-four  hours  between  the  first  cut  and  the

addition of the crosses.…”

  It was quite obvious that she had cut herself in an attempt to release bio-

energetically her terrific emotional tension in the diaphragmatic region. This

is called “crazy” in the schizophrenic. It is called “national custom of hara-

kiri”  when  a  Japanese  general  does  the  same  thing,  with  death  as  the

consequence. Basically, they are of the same nature; they have the function,

in the schizophrenic as well as in the general, of eliminating the unbearable

emotional tension in the upper abdomen.

  I had the impression that day that psychotic delusions were present but

that they were very weak. She told me that the “forces” had not been around

all  day.  She  had  felt  her  emotional  excitation  fully.  The  contact  between

excitation  and  perception  seemed  reestablished;  this  had  obviously  made

perception of the streamings as outer “forces” more difficult. She was still

afraid of the “forces”; she did not trust the situation as it were. The previous

request  on  the  part  of  the  “forces”  to  “sacrifice  herself”  could  now  be

understood as inner urges to release the terrific emotional strain by “opening

the tight bladder” with a knife. This only confirmed what orgone-biophysical

research had brought to light in other biopathies such as masochism: strong

emotions  correspond  to  an  expansion  of  the  plasma  system.  Under  the

condition of some constriction of organs, the feeling of “bursting” appears,

together with the inability to “let off steam.” In such situations self-injury,

suicide,  actual  smashing-up  of  the  body  structure  occur.  In  bio-energetic

terms, an unbearably tight bladder had been pricked open.

  The improvement did not last long. I may say that I had never before

experienced  the incapacity  for  full  healthy  functioning  in  a  biopathic

organism as clearly as in this case. The biopathic structure is used to thebiopathic  functioning;  it  is  incapable  of  “taking,”  or  managing,  strong

natural emotions fully and of directing them. It became clearer than ever

before that there are two sharply delineated groups of human animals: the

ones without and the ones with an armor. What appears easy and self-evident

to the unarmored individual is utterly incomprehensible and impossible to

manage  in  the  armored  individual,  and  vice  versa.  A  certain  way  of  life

requires a certain character structure; this is valid for both realms. Our patient

was unable to stand healthy functioning. We can understand better now how

useless, in the face of this inability to function healthily, the usual measures

of mental hygiene appear. To impose healthy conditions of living on armored

organisms  is  like  asking  a  lame  man  to  dance.  The  measures  of  rational

mental hygiene are all right; they require, however, thorough disarmoring of

the human animal on a mass scale and, first of all, prevention of biopathic

armoring  in  the  newborn  babies.  The  breadth  and  depth  of  this  task  is

obvious.


Twenty-second session


  Her reactions, especially her speech, were severely slowed down. Every

single word was repeated several times. She could not formulate words. Her

face  was  frozen;  she  could  not  move  her  facial  muscles;  she  knew  the

answers  to  my  questions  but  could  not  formulate  them;  she  was  slightly

confused; her skin was pale and spotty-white and bluish; she felt entirely

empty.

  She said slowly: “I could move if I made a very great effort.… Why is

every  effort  so  difficult?…  What  is  happening  to  me?  I  had  such  states

before, but I never felt them so clearly.”

  I told her that her full respiration the other day had made the appearance

of the “forces” impossible. She rose and wanted to leave, but fell back on the

couch.

  I moved her facial muscles, raised her eyelids, moved the skin of herforehead.  It  helped  a  little,  but  the  catatonic  attack  went  on.  She  had

apparently  reacted  to  the  strong  emotions  of  the  day  before  with  an

anorgonotic attack, with immobility; but her intelligence was clear; she knew

what was going on. In the end, she still felt “empty,” but less “faraway.” “If I

become healthy, and if I commit murder, I shall be convicted. Today the boys

were electrocuted.…” (Some execution had actually taken place that day.)

  Her cataleptic attack during the session was due to a breakthrough of a

certain deep blocking. The medical orgone therapist knows well that each

pathological layer has to appear from the depth. This does not interfere with

the life outside. She had worked well in the office that day and was orderly.

  She remained in the room after I had left. When I returned ten minutes

later, I found her coiled together, with her head between her pulled-up legs,

her hands at her knees. She could not move. “I prayed to God that you would

come in and free me from this position.… I suddenly could not move at all.

…”

  I helped her to get up, and she began slowly to move again. She said: “I

thought that the forces might have done that to me, but I don’t know.…”

Thereafter, her head began to tremble; after a while she recovered fully and

left, reassuring me that she felt better.


Twenty-third session


  The misconception prevails in certain circles that the essential thing in

orgone therapy is the establishment of orgastic potency and nothing but that.

It is true, of course, that this is and remains the main goal of our technique.

But the manner in which this goal is reached is decisive with regard to the

firmness and durability of the success. It is essentially the slow and thorough

overcoming  of  the  emotional  blocks  in  the  organism  and  of  the  anxieties

connected  with  each  single  block  which  secures  lasting  results.  Our

schizophrenic  patient  was  close  to  the  goal  of  therapy;  but  the  disease

mechanisms which were interpolated were the most essential obstacles to beovercome if the eventual success was to be lasting. It is easy in certain cases

to  achieve  release  of  pent-up  energy.  But  if  the  main  blocks  remain

unresolved, relapse with worse effects than those of the disease will result.

Therefore, we obey the rule of proceeding slowly and of carefully working

through  each  single  layer  of  blocking.  These  biophysical  blocks,  which

impede the free flow of bodily energy, constitute exactly the “disposition” to

various kinds of symptomatic diseases.

  I  knew  that  our  patient  carried  strong  inclinations  to  catatonic  stupor

within herself. These tendencies would have to develop fully; they would

have to come to the surface and would have to be overcome. The greatest

danger was still ahead of us. One must not brag about success too early.

  The  patient  had  suffered  a  slight  catatonic  attack  during  the  previous

session. She came back happy and looking very well: she told me that she

had had a very good time since the last session. She could move her facial

muscles,  but  was  unable  to  move  the  skin  of  her  forehead,  as  in

“astonishment” or “frowning.”

  She related quite spontaneously that she felt impelled to make a lot of

grimaces when she felt strongly emotional; but she was not able to make any

grimaces at all when she felt “estranged.” “I have learned hard not to show

any emotions in my face … I don’t like women who show emotions; I want

them to be like nice, slender statues.…”

  These few sentences, although spoken calmly, contained much emotional

dynamite. Her head and neck musculature was severely blocked and rigid.

Therefore, grimacing partially relieved her from the feeling of tension and

immobility. Strong depersonalization and splitting wiped out the ability to

grimace. We understand now why catatonics and advanced schizophrenics

grimace:  it  is  a  desperate  attempt  to  release  the  deadness  and  immobility

which overcome their organism in the state of stupor. They test themselves to

see whether they still feel anything at all.

  I did not understand immediately what the ideal “slender statues” meant. Iwas soon to learn about it the hard way.

  She  spoke  much  about  “dying”  that  day.  The  idea  of  “dying”  is  well

known to orgone therapists. It usually comes up when the patient is close to

orgastic release of bio-energy; it is connected with severe fear of letting go

fully. The anxiety will persist as long as the main blocks in the organism,

usually in the pelvis, are not dissolved. Her head was visibly disturbed in a

most severe manner. Therefore, I feared a premature breakthrough of total

body  convulsions.  The  outcome  would  inevitably  have  been  a  total

breakdown because of the remaining blocking in her forehead. “The emotions

are hurting me lately in my belly,” she said. “Here…” and she pointed to the

upper abdomen. “My left arm also lives and acts on its own.… I do not feel it

as my arm.…”

  Whenever  a  neurotic  or  psychotic  symptom  increases  in  strength,  it

indicates that the emotion contained in the local region has become urgent

and tends to break through. The detachment of her left arm could possibly be

the expression of strong impulses to touch her genitals. Her idea of “nice,

slender statues” could, in this connection, only mean being a “statue without

genitals,” something “god-like.”

  In order to prepare her for her genital breakthrough, I concentrated on her

immobilized forehead and eyes. I let her move the skin of her forehead, roll

her eyes in all directions, express anger and fear, curiosity and watchfulness.

THIS IS NOT MANIPULATION AND HAS NOTHING WHATSOEVER TO DO WITH ANY KIND

OF MANIPULATION. We do not “manipulate” mechanically; we induce emotions

in  the  patients by  letting  them  imitate  willfully  this  or  that  emotional

expression.

  She objected very strongly to showing the expression of anxiety in her

eyes. This objection is usually much more intense in schizophrenics than it is

in  neurotics.  The  reason,  based  on  several  cases  of  schizophrenia,  is  the

following: raising the eyelids, opening the eyelids wide and showing anxiety

releases a sensation of severe terror with the feeling of oncoming disaster.Sometimes panic sets in. Some such patients have the feeling that they are

dying, “going off,” and that they will be unable to “come back again.” It is

essential to be very careful at this point.

  I worked very cautiously on her expressions in the forehead, stopping her

whenever she showed too strong anxiety. After some time, she could move

her forehead more easily and she felt freer. Her self-perception of the total

organism was still severely disturbed; to let her total preorgastic contractions

break through would have been dangerous and inadvisable. She was sensitive

to touch, pressure, cold, and heat, but at times she did not feel the quivering.

After  the  therapeutic  session,  she  asked  many  intelligent  questions  about

herself, but her speech was considerably slowed down; she spoke as if against

some great counter-force.

  It was during the experiment with this schizophrenic that the following

idea came up for the first time: the organ sensation or “orgonotic sensation”

is a true SIXTH SENSE. Besides the abilities to see, hear, smell, taste, touch,

there existed unmistakably in healthy individuals a sense of organ functions,

an ORGONOTIC  SENSE,  as  it  were,  which  was  completely  lacking  or  was

disturbed in biopathies. The compulsion neurotic has lost this sixth sense

completely. The schizophrenic has displaced this sense and has transformed it

into certain patterns of his delusional system, such as “forces,” “the devil,”

“voices,” “electric currents,” “worms in the brain or in the intestines,” etc.

  Since the orgonotic sensations and organ perceptions seem to constitute a

great part of what is called the ego or the self, it appears clear now why a

splitting and dissociation of perception and speech usually go hand in hand

with the dissociation and displacement of these organ sensations.

  We  must  also  assume  that  the  severity  and  the  outcome  of  a  disease

depend  entirely  on  the  specific  organ  in  which  the  deadening,  i.e.,  the

extinction  of  the  organ  sensation,  took  place.  The  dissociation  of  an  arm

appears harmless if compared with the immobilization of eyes and forehead,

or even parts of the brain.  We would object less to the irresponsible brain operations and lobotomies

which  are  performed  to  kill  the  devil  in  the  organism  if  they  served  to

disclose the dynamic functions of the brain. Such questions as “Does the

brain move? Does it contract and expand when working, just as other organs

such as the heart, intestine, glands, etc., do?” are of the utmost importance for

medical  pathology  and  the  understanding  of  the  organismic  functions.  It

would be highly important to invent a device which would enable the brain

specialist to observe the brain in its natural state. Cutting out “windows” in

the skull to study the brain, as was done with apes and with some human

beings, won’t help. The living organ does not move when a severe operation

has been performed in its vicinity. This is shown by the edemas and similar

dysfunctions occurring after operations. All I want to say is this:

  There is good reason to believe that in the schizophrenic process parts of

the brain, most probably the base with its nerve roots, become immobilized;

just as in chronic constipation the intestines are immobilized, or in a tumor of

the  stomach  peristalsis  ceases  to  function.  This  would  appear  as  a  new,

hopeful and functional approach to the somatic disturbances in schizophrenia.

It would require abandonment of the mechanistic view of the brain function.

The brain would have to be regarded as an organ like others within the total

functioning  of  the  organism,  as  a  special “transmitter”  of  total  plasma

functions, and not as the source of motor impulses. For if the brain is the

source of impulses, then the next logical question is: who gives the orders to

the brain? It amounts to the assumption of an imp in the brain, if one says

that  the  motor  impulses originate  in  the  gray  substance.  There  are  many

species without any brain at all, who function fully as far as living functions,

including  judgment,  are  concerned;  and  we  know  from  experiment  that

brainless  dogs  continue  to  function,  even  if  severely  impaired  by  the

operation.

  To return to our patient: The situation at this point was characterized by

her closeness to total bodily convulsions and genital activity; but the block inher  forehead  and  eyes  constituted  a  major  obstacle  which  had  first  to  be

removed before she could be permitted to develop further on her way toward

natural genitality.


Twenty-fourth session


  The patient came beaming with joy. She had felt very happy and at ease.

Her eyes were clear and the look was alert. The color of her face was ruddy

and fresh. She had, for the first time in her life, passed through a menstrual

period  without  psychotic  reactions.  She  had  visited  many  friends,  among

them a girl in the mental institution. Her respiration was much improved,

though it was not completely without restriction.

  The next step was quite clear: I had to bring her back to where she had

been the previous day. She would have to “pump up” more emotion, to learn

to stand it without “going off,” and then to proceed further.

  In the course of deep respiration, a tremor appeared over her chin and in

the masseter muscles. She said: “When my emotions kick me on the one side,

and  society  on  the  other  side,  I  feel  like  getting  down,  hurting  myself,

becoming syphilitic or something like that…” Later on: “Emotions want to

break out here…” She pointed to her stomach and then down toward her

genital.… “Then I am able to commit anything…”

  One cannot expect to have these connections presented more clearly.


6. THE RATIONAL FUNCTION OF THE “DEVILISH EVIL”


  It is necessary to sum up again the basic functions which were found by

orgonomic research in the depth of man’s biophysical functioning, in order to

understand fully the meaning of character structure. In the light of orgone

biophysics,  this  “structure”  appears  as  the  sum  total  of  the  relationship

between the orgonotic energy system and the sensory-motor system which

has to perceive the plasmatic currents, to execute the energy discharges, and

to coordinate all energy functions into an orderly, total, unitary functionalsystem:  “orgonotic  system.”  In  the  schizophrenic  process,  the  system  of

perception is flooded by high-pitched biophysical sensations which are not

integrated into the total biosystem and lead a separate existence, as it were.

This  constitutes  the  “split  of  personality.”  The  biosystem  has  a  very  low

tolerance for sudden increases of the emotional, i.e., bio-energetic, level of

functioning.  Disorientation,  hallucinations,  speech  deterioration,  and

murderous impulses are likely to appear with a sudden increase in energy

level if the tolerance is low. This has nothing to do with “psychology.” The

“psychology” of the schizophrenic is a result and not a cause of the process.

When the perception is split off from the bio-energetic excitation, the bodily

sensations are experienced as “foreign,” as “evil,” “devilish” influences by

“supernatural powers” (“supernatural” in the sense of “beyond” one’s own

self).  In  this  harrowing  confusion,  the  biosystem  develops  destructive

impulses to protect itself against the devil. It is, in fact, the remainder of sane

personality which does the fighting against the devil.

  Let us follow further the events in the patient:

  The  patient  had  scarcely  uttered  the  words:  “Emotions  want  to  break

through here … [in the genital]…,” when she became pale and silent; she lay

there immobile, as if absent; she did not respond to questions. After a while

she said in a very timid manner: “I have just said the Lord’s prayer … The

emotions are gone.”

  She  left  the  session  calm  and  slightly  absent-minded.  The  next  day  I

received the following letter (Italics mine.—W.R.):


                                                                          March 18, 1942

    So it is all emotion—you did not know about the music that was playing Liszt’s Hungarian

  Rhapsody—or others—the notes go through me—not through you or anyone else—to tell me

  something—I don’t usually know what—tonight it was my bigness—you couldn’t understand

  that—nor could anyone else on earth.

    There  are  colors  and  darknesses  and  shadows  and  lights—it  was  raining  hard  tonight  I

  walked in puddles I was going to take my shoes off and walk by your house, the people stared in

  the train and on the street—I went in to eat on your main street and a woman was there after

  talking to the boy in the store about hospitals and Bellevue—they had worked there—they are  made to speak then to annoy me but they smiled not with me—at me—the people in the train

  were having a good time—and they wanted me out of the way—but I stayed anyway—

    I came home and found I had passed a city test I once took—so maybe I’ll be a typist for the

  city—that I would not be able to quit easily though—

    Just human and emotional?—You couldn’t know—You said I didn’t believe in my forces—

  but they believe in me—they send rain and tell me they know—I won’t see you for 2 days

  maybe I can forget you and your work—86000 Jews were killed—slaughtered by the Nazis in

  Russia  today—all  for  crucifixation  of  Christ—There  were  nails  through  his  hands  and  one

  through his feet—I wonder if he bled much Blessed Mother forgive me—Thine is the Kingdom

  the Power and the Glory forever and forever Amen

    You  crucifier  of  the  Blessed  Sacrament—You  should  pay  and  yours  after  you—I  am

  protected from mine enemies the rain marks them for having annoyed me—something will

  happen to you—Adler died when I told him he would—Katz of Psychiatric died also—You

  shall have many troubles—you may think they are the natural outgrowth of things but I will

  know better—

    You could have been so helpful but you went your own inimitable way—the epitome of

    knowledge—spheres that go round and round—Help when I needed it you would not give—I

  am protected and sheltered and if sometimes made to suffer it is for a definite reason—The Jew

in me must be made to suffer so that others can survive—

    On thee, Oh Lord, our faith rests—that takes thee to eternal life

      Command and I shall obey no ties can find me no powers save those can stay me from

  performing my predestined destiny—Please tell me oh Lord—

    If your interest has waned I am willing to stop—if your Ego keeps inflating I am also willing

to stop so I must take first aid to help the wounded humans survive—

    Mummies and madmen grow dark in the sun— (after thought)

                                                                            You, too—F.


  I suggest that we take these things very seriously. In such schizophrenic

experiences, the world which is called THE BEYOND in common mysticism and

in true religion manifests itself before our eyes. One must learn to read this

language. What is never admitted by homo normalis, what is lived out only

clandestinely or laughed at in a silly manner, are the severely distorted forces

of nature; exactly the same forces which imbue the great sages, philosophers,

musicians, geniuses of science, in the wide realm beyond the conceptions of

homo normalis and his everyday political clamor. I venture the statement that

in our mental institutions many potentially great artists, musicians, scientists,

and philosophers are rotting away their lives because homo normalis refusesto  look  beyond  the  iron  curtain  which  he  drew  in  front  of  his  real  life,

because he dare not look at living realities. These great souls, broken down

and  wrecked  as  “schizophrenics,” KNOW  and PERCEIVE  what  no homo

normalis dares to touch. Let us not be led astray by the distortions in this

knowledge.  Let  us  listen  to  what  these  gifted  and  clear-visioned  human

beings have to say. We can learn a great deal from them; we can learn to

become more modest, more serious, less gaudy and cocky, and we can start

realizing a few of the claims we make in an empty manner in our churches

and in our high academic institutions. I claim, after thirty years of thorough

study  of  schizophrenic  minds,  that  they  look  through  our  hypocrisy,  our

cruelty and stupidity, our fake culture, our evasiveness, and our fear of the

truth. They had the courage to approach what is commonly evaded, and they

were wrecked because they went through the inferno without any help on the

part of our neurotic parents, our conceited teachers, our cruel directors of

educational institutions, our ignorant physicians. They hoped to emerge from

the inferno into the clear, fresh air where only great minds dwell. That they

could not make it, that they got stuck in the realm of the “devil” is not their

fault; it is the fault of the abysmal ignorance and stupidity of our homines

normales.

  Our patient had experienced her emotional storm as great music. The

ignoramus will say “that’s crazy.” No, it is not crazy. A Beethoven goes

through  the  same  kind  of  emotional  storm  when  he  composes  a  great

symphony,  which  provides  a  huge  profit  for  some  utterly  amusical

businessman. It is obvious that a Beethoven has the structure to stand the

same  kind  of  great  emotional  storm  that  causes  the  breakdown  in  the

schizophrenic  structure.  It  is  equally  obvious  to  one  who  works  with

orgonomic functions that a Beethoven, in order to keep his inner world safe,

withdraws his bio-energy from his acoustic nerves, that he goes deaf in order

not to have to listen to the chattering of annoying “critics” and what not. The

schizophrenic differs from him in that he does not keep his genius intact anddoes not develop it as does a Beethoven. But he suffers from the misbehavior

and misdeeds of our Babbits no less than did Beethoven; and he withdraws

into his own inner world. His misfortune is that he has only partial contact

with this inner world, that he is not equipped to accept it fully and to carry it

further; hence the breakdown. My work with “wayward youth” in Germany

left no doubt that the best of the human crop go down to ruin not because of

their  “badness”  but  because  of  the  inferno  which homo  normalis  calls

“civilization” and “cultural adaptation.” We shall have more to say about this

realm of the devil. Homo normalis, who wants his psychiatrists and biologists

to  be  “aloof,”  “unemotional,”  “academic,”  “removed,”  so  that  he  can

continue  to  plant  the  emotional  plague  in  millions  of  newborn,  healthy

babies, undisturbed, hates the schizoid character for its closeness to a realm

of nature which is forever closed to himself.

  The  evening  of  the  same  day  the  emotional  storm  had  occurred,  our

patient became restless. She had seen her parole physician and had stood her

ground well. But inside her the storm continued. It was clear to me that,

should  she  ever  become  capable  of  coping  with  her  strong  and  rational

emotions,  she  would  be  saved.  If  not,  she  would  certainly  go  down  as  a

catatonic in the mental institution.


7. ANORGONOTIC REGIONS IN THE CATATONIC STATE


Twenty-fifth session


  The patient came back in a very bad state. She had fought “a desperate

battle against the ‘forces.’” Both her arms were bandaged with tape. A huge

cross, made of tape, was fixed to her stomach from the pit down to the genital

and across. She told me that the “forces” had requested an account of whether

she had betrayed them; they had asked whether she was ready to sacrifice

herself  fully,  to  yield  to  them  to  the  fullest  extent.  I  asked  her  what  she

meant: “It means that I have to cut a deep cross with a knife into my body…”She said that she did not want to do it, and she fought a hard battle against

doing it, but that she did not know how to escape from the request. She had

finally arrived at the conclusion that she could try to “cheat the forces”: if she

placed a bandage across her belly, the forces could be made to believe—”for

a short time only”—that she had fulfilled their request. She wanted me to

help her. Once, she said, she was close to using a razor to cut herself.

  Her speech was considerably slowed down, as if all impulses had been

extinguished.  She  was  slightly  dissociated;  she  showed  mannerisms  and

driveled. Her face was pale, the skin of her forehead was immobile, her eyes

were heavily veiled, the skin of her body was patchy. Something had to be

done immediately if commitment to the institution was to be avoided. She

was in a state similar to that of shock. I took her to the metal orgone room

and examined her with the fluorescent bulb. The background of this test is the

following: orgone-charged fluorescent bulbs luminate when they are slightly

rubbed on the skin. I wished to ascertain whether or not her state was due to

loss of surface charge. Her legs gave the normal effect of lumination. Her

hair reacted only weakly, and her forehead did not react at all. It was amazing

to me to hear her telling me beforehand which parts of her body would and

which would not give lumination. She predicted the disturbance on the basis

of the feeling of deadness or aliveness which she felt in a particular spot.

  I tried to charge her in the orgone accumulator. After about half an hour

of irradiation, she slowly began to recover. The lumination effect became

stronger where it had been weak before; she could move the skin of her

forehead;  the  patchiness  disappeared;  her  eyes  became  bright  again.  The

disturbance had been strongest in the region of the segment corresponding to

the base of her brain: eyes, eyelids, lower parts of the forehead, temples.

After about half an hour she felt “fuller in the head where it had been empty

before.” Her speech had also improved considerably.

  In the end she implored me not to abandon her in her fight against the

“forces” and to put her through safely. I told her that I could not promiseanything, but that I would do what I could to help her. She felt rather happy

again.

  I  had  gained  the  firm  conviction  during  this  treatment  that  the

immobilization  of  the  bio-energetic  functions  in  the  optical  segment,

including the brain, was the center of the acute catatonic attack. Several

other cases of latent and manifest schizophrenia with catatonic tendencies

corroborated this conviction. Further investigation of this dysfunction might

reveal that it is generally specific for the acute schizophrenic breakdown; it

may also restrict this mechanism to certain types of schizophrenia. Its main

characteristic is a standstill of the movements and, with them, of the bio-

energetic functioning of the brain, especially its frontal and basal parts.

  Orgonomy  has  termed  the  stoppage  of  bio-energetic  functioning

“anorgonia.”  This  symptomatology  was  first  discovered  in  the  cancerous

shrinking biopathy. But now I met it in a schizophrenic during a catatonic

attack. It was correct to assume that most of the symptoms of the catatonic

attack  were  due  to  a  more  or  less  complete  standstill  of  bio-energetic

functioning at the periphery of the organism. This standstill appeared to be

accompanied or even caused by a withdrawal of bio-energy to the core of the

biosystem. Immobility, flexibilitas cerea, perseveration, torpidity of speech

or  mutism  were,  accordingly,  to  be  regarded  as  direct  expressions  of  the

immobilization. On the other hand, such symptoms as automatic movements,

mannerisms, echolalia, and particularly the sudden breakthrough of severe

rage could be understood in terms of an attempt of the remainder of mobile

bio-energy  to  break  through  the  immobility  by  forceful  or  by  automatic

movements from the center outward. The relief which is usually experienced

by catatonics after an attack of rage, and the following improvement in the

disease picture, would corroborate our interpretation. The more complete the

armoring, the deeper toward the biological core it spreads, the greater must

the  rage  be  in  the  outbreak.  In  other  cases,  such  an  outbreak  would  be

impossible and deterioration with loss of weight and stoppage of biofunctionsone  by  one  would  result.  It  is  also  to  be  assumed  that  a  paranoid

schizophrenic picture changes more or less suddenly into a catatonic one, if

the biosystem has lost its capacity to endure strong biophysical outbursts of

energy. The complete final contraction of the biosystem in such cases would

be the reaction to the attempts at expansion by the remaining life impulses.

  It  should  be  especially  emphasized  that the  intolerance  of  healthy

expansion on the part of the sick organism constitutes the core of the disease.


8. THE FUNCTION OF SELF-DAMAGE IN SCHIZOPHRENIA


  We know from therapy of mental biopathies that suicide and self-injury

are brought about by unbearable bio-energetic stasis in the organism when

neither work nor destructive actions nor orgastic gratification are accessible

for discharge. The psychological “motives” of such actions are secondary and

incidental;  usually,  they  are  merely  rationalizations  of  the  action.  In  the

schizophrenic,  and  especially  in  the  catatonic  type,  self-injury  acquires  a

special function. This became clear when the attempts at self-damage in our

patient revealed their motivation.


Twenty-sixth session


  I took her to the orgone room and examined her skin surface again with a

                                    3
gas-filled, orgone-charged bulb. Then I asked her to show me the parts of her

skin where she felt dead, and to rub the bulb against these spots. To my great

amazement, she pointed to exactly the same spots where she had inflicted

cuts: at the joints of her hands, where she had once cut herself; at her palms,

at  the  saddle  of  her  nose;  at  the  temples;  and,  most  emphatically,  at  her

sternum, where she had several times cut crosses into the skin. These spots

did not give lumination of the orgone-charged bulb, in contradistinction to

other spots. They were felt as “dead” in her self-perception, and they were

uncharged, i.e., “dead,” objectively.

  This is a most important new piece of information on the biophysical statein  the  schizophrenic  psychosis.  In  our  patient,  the  idea  of  “sacrifice”  to

hostile  “forces”  was  obviously  built  upon  the  foundation  of  correct

perception  of  a  severe  bio-energetic  dysfunction  of  her  skin  surface.  She

behaved  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  many  schizophrenics  in  mental

institutions; they knead their skin, touch their forehead, rub their finger tips

against walls, try to move their eyelids, rock their limbs, etc., in a stereotyped

manner; some do that for years on end. These stereotypes and automatisms

have  not  been  understood  hitherto.  Now  it  appears  that  these  catatonic

activities  were  expressions  of  a  desperate  but  futile  attempt  to  regain  the

feeling in the parts of the body which went dead. I would like to emphasize

especially  the  catatonic  facial  grimaces.  Catatonics  usually  have  severely

stiffened, masklike faces. Grimacing seems, therefore, to be an attempt at

mobilization of the deadened facial musculature.

    Theoretically,  the  detachment  of  single  parts  of  the  body  or  of  whole

organ systems from the realm of self-perception would, according to these

biophysical findings, be direct results of a deficiency in orgone charge in the

respective  parts  or  organs.  The  compulsion-neurotic  biopath  only  feels  a

general  emptiness  and  deadness;  the  schizophrenic  biopath  perceives  the

dysfunction much more clearly and immediately. He can tell us exactly where

the dysfunction is located, if we pay close attention to what he is saying and

understand his language of emotional, i.e., bio-energetic, expression.

  We are justified in drawing the conclusion that the schizophrenic mind

describes objective processes. Normal, healthy functioning of the organism

expresses itself in and is governed by an even distribution of bio-energy in

the biosystem. I know well that we are moving along pathways which no one

has yet studied scientifically. It is not only new land but also no man’s land,

so to speak. The self-perception of well-being and happiness, of strength and

security, is due to the coordination into one whole of all the self-governing

partial  functions  of  the  various  organs  of  the  organism.  Accordingly,  the

feeling of dissociation, splitting, depersonalization, etc., in the schizophrenicbiosystem must be due to discoordination of the single organs and energy

field systems in the body. It is as if some of the organs—I suggest especially

the brain—lead separate existences, detached from the total organism; as if

there were no contact and no unity between the bio-energetic units called

“organs.” The mental and the emotional confusion and disorientation are the

direct result of a sane self-perception of this dissociation.

  Our patient reacted in an unequivocal manner: when the “veiling” of her

forehead set in, she felt that the convolutions of her brain were tangled up

“like entangled intestines.” Well, to me such a description appears full of

rational meaning. In spite of the routine objections of mechanistic neurology,

it  seems  improbable  that  the  brain  should  have  convolutions  like  the

intestines  and  that  at  the  same  time  it  should not move,  like  most  other

organs, when it performs its work of coordination and transmission of central

impulses. Is it not most reasonable to assume that the brain is built up of

intestine-like  convolutions  precisely  because it  moves  in  the  manner  of

peristalsis while functioning? Some healthy individuals who are used to hard

thinking relate that they feel great heat in their brain and in their foreheads

when they think with great effort; that they feel a “glow,” and that this glow

disappears  when  the  effort  is  over;  on  the  other  hand,  we  see  pale,

immobilized,  cold  foreheads  in  cases  of  mental  deficiency  and  pseudo-

debility. If some thought is given to the question, it seems self-evident that

the  brain  would  not  behave  differently  from  other  organs  during  strong

functioning.  Heat  production  is  a  well-known  indication  of  physiological

effort, in the muscles and in the emotional state of sexual excitement. Lack of

heat production is readily seen in cases with low bio-energy, as in cancer

biopathies,  anorgonotic  weaknesses,  anemia,  etc.  There  is,  therefore,  no

reason to assume that the brain tissue does not develop more energy and, with

it, more heat and motion during hard work.

  I know well enough that this assumption sounds peculiar and strange to

classical pathology, to which the brain is an immobile organ, in spite of theerroneous assumption that it is the brain with its thalamic and subthalamic

appendices which generates all impulses of life activity. I do not agree with

this theory. I believe that it is utterly wrong; that it is contradicted by obvious

facts of living functioning, such as the fact of brainless living beings and by

important aspects of natural philosophy in general. The visual proof of brain

motility is hard to adduce, as I said before. But there can no longer be any

reasonable doubt that it is the brain which is functionally (and not, to begin

with,  structurally)  disturbed  in  schizophrenia.  Mechanical  and  structural

changes appear later as results of the functional bio-energetic dysfunctions;

among them, stoppage of motion and discoordination of the bio-energetic

field action appear to be the most essential ones. We must admit atrophic

changes of disuse in the brain tissue just as we see them in muscular atrophy.

If it is true, as it seems to be, that the shape of the organs reflects the form of

motion of bio-energy, then the brain with its twisted and rich gyration is an

excellent example of the bio-energetic function of organic forms.

  The emotional and bio-energetic dissociation in the schizophrenic leads,

as we well know, sooner or later to a general decay of the organism with bad

body odor, loss of weight, severe disturbances of biochemical metabolism,

and sometimes also with true cancerous developments. The schizophrenic

shrinks biophysically, too, because of the loss of the capacity to take up bio-

energy and to maintain its normal level.

  To  return  again  to  our  patient,  who  yielded  so  much  insight  into  the

riddles  of  schizophrenia:  I  treated  her  for  several  weeks  with  the  orgone

accumulator. The orgone had a strongly positive effect on her; it caused, as it

does in other cases of organismic contraction, an expansion of the autonomic

nervous system. Her face reddened, her eyes became clear again, her speech

became faster and more coordinated, and she would even feel pleasure in the

orgone accumulator after fifteen to thirty minutes’ irradiation. This was a

great new hope for possible biophysical treatment of incipient schizophrenia.

  The  combination  of  physical  and  psychiatric  orgone  therapy  was  veryhelpful. Acute withdrawal of bio-energy could be dealt with by means of the

accumulator alone. Psychiatric orgone therapy helped to bring to the surface

schizophrenic mechanisms from greater depth.

  During the twenty-seventh session the patient was mostly good-humored,

the skin of her forehead was mobile, and her eyes were very alert and clear.

But her respiration was still restricted. It is possible to “pump to the surface,”

as it were, the remainder of pathological mechanisms. As long as it is still

possible to induce anxiety by means of respiration or certain typical attitudes

of  the  body,  the  biophysical  structure  has  not  really  been  cleaned  of  its

dysfunctions. When I “pumped up” her emotions, she lost her gaiety, the

“forces were near,” the forehead became pale and immobile: “Something is

interrupted between the skin of the forehead and the brain,” she said. This,

she  said,  was  always  the  case  when  the  “forces”  were  around;  it  usually

disappeared with them.

  During  the  following  period (twenty-eighth  through  thirty-second

sessions), the patient seemed very much improved. She said repeatedly: “I

don’t know whether I want to get well.…” Saying that, she meant that she did

not  know  “what  would  happen  to  her”  if  she  became  well.  On  several

occasions she kept imploring me: “Please, help me against the forces … they

are not around now, but I know they will come back … I am so afraid of

them … save me.…”

  It had become unequivocally clear by now that the “forces” were her

distorted perceptions of the plasmatic orgonotic streamings; that she loved

them  and  dreaded  them  at  the  same  time;  that  whenever  the  streamings

became strong, she would fall into a stupor-like state. The sensing of forces,

flight  into  psychotic  mechanisms,  and  immobility  of  the  optical  segment

formed a single functional unit.

  I could see that she fought against a mean, cruel expression in her eyes. I

encouraged her to let go and to force this expression out. She succeeded with

some effort, and immediately felt much better; but at the same time she alsoseemed to come very close to a catatonic state whenever she produced the

expression of strong hate in her eyes. Once she got up, went in a stuporous

manner to the closet, took the heater, and put it, switched on, before the door

of the closet; then she built a cross from hangers on the door. She “had to

soothe and appeal to the forces,” she said. She also told me a little later that

she “felt only parts of her brain”; other parts “were twisted,” and, “therefore,

she was confused.”

  I knew well that she would have to pass through a severe anxiety attack,

with possible complete relapse into catatonia, when the plasmatic streamings

broke through in full force. This seemed to depend entirely on whether or not

she would yield to full respiration. One could see each time that she flattened

her respiration when the “forces” became too strong.

  During the following four weeks (in spring) she improved very much. She

worked well in the office where she had taken a job; she was sociable and

gay; the attacks of withdrawal became rare and were not as strong as they

used to be. True, off and on she would return to her schizophrenic attitude

and  action.  For  example,  she  came  once  with  her  abdomen  wound  up  in

adhesive  tape  “in  order  to  keep  myself  together.…”  A  neurotic  biopathy

would  simply  have  expressed  fear  of  bursting;  our  patient  actually  took

measures  against  bursting  in  a  typically  psychotic  way.  But  we  both

understood  what  was  going  on,  why  she  did  such  things,  and  she  knew

perfectly well when she would stop doing them. I had taken great pains to tell

her everything about the danger ahead, and she had understood with truly

schizophrenic intelligence.

  She had also learned slowly to produce the expression of murderous hate

in her eyes, without becoming frightened by it. This gave her some feeling of

security against her fear of committing murder; she realized that one can

express murderous hatred fully, and that this did not mean that one actually

had to commit murder.

  I worked continuously and cautiously on the inhibition of respiration inher  throat,  with  some  success.  But  she  never  gave  in  fully  to emotional

respiration.  She  had  shifted  her  main  sensations  from  her  chest  to  her

abdomen; this was an indication of the shift in the perception of her orgonotic

streamings toward the region of the genitals.

  Once she tried in a playful manner to put a noose around her neck “in

order  to  see  whether  she  could  hang  herself.”  These  actions  still  had  the

timbre of danger about them; but it was greatly reduced by the playfulness

and the humor which went into them. I knew that she was not yet beyond the

possibility of actually committing suicide. Her parole physician noticed the

great change, and encouraged her therapeutic effort. This psychiatrist was

very helpful and kind.

  It  was  clear  that  bio-energy  and  the  sensations  accompanying  it  were

moving strongly toward the genital region. The preorgastic sensations were

near. Therefore, the still prevailing block in her throat constituted the main

therapeutic problem. I knew if this block should fail to budge in time, if the

genital excitation should break through in great force with the block in the

throat still present, then she would definitely become catatonic. It was a race

against time to remove the block in the throat before the full development of

genital excitation.

  One day she gave in fully to her respiration and she felt immediately the

identity of orgonotic streamings and the “forces.” She knew it instantly and

quite clearly, with no doubt left whatsoever. Her chest structure moved quite

automatically. She had strong sensations of streaming in her whole body,

with  the  exception  of  the  genital  region  proper  from  the  mons  pubis

downward. She asked: “Would it be possible to make the body whole without

touching  the  soul?”  This  was  a  most  peculiar  question.  Did  the  “soul”

represent the genital sensation or even the genital itself? Most probably it did.

We  would  expect  this  to  be  so  when  the  “forces”  represented  the  bodily

streamings;  when,  furthermore,  the  peak  of  bodily  streamings  was

experienced in the genital organs, as “nature has prescribed,” then it waslogical that also the “soul” was represented by the preorgastic sensations in

the genitals. They had been split off from perception for such a long time that

they could be perceived only as foreign forces and as the “soul,” the most

prominent part of self-perception. This was confirmed when she insisted that

she “did not want to have her soul cured.”

  The  patient  was  very  cooperative  for  weeks  on  end.  Each  time  when

natural respiration brought forth genital excitation she objected in a psychotic

manner and cramped the muscles of her thighs, the deep adductor muscles, in

a way familiar in all types of cases.


Thirty-third session


  The  genital  organs  are  biological  tools  of  energy  discharge  and  of

procreation  of  the  species.  The  latter  function  is  widely  known  and

acknowledged. Homo normalis, who is the heir of homo sapiens, who in turn

is  the  heir  of homo  divinus,  has,  on  the  other  hand,  condemned  the

biophysical  function  of  energy  discharge;  it  returned  as  the  devil  in  the

fantasy life of man. The biologically strong individual did not or could not

sacrifice his rational judgment to the demands of ecclesiastical thinking; the

great natural force came into conflict with the dependence of the individual

on  his  kin  and  his  society.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  genital  forces

continue to function, but they are split off from the rest of the organism as

“bad” or as “sin,” and return as the devil, as “forces from beyond” in the

realm of schizophrenia and mysticism in general.

  This fact became clear beyond any shadow of a doubt during the further

progress of our patient. Since Tausk in 1919, it has been known in psychiatry

that  the  genital  apparatus  constitutes  the  persecutor  in  the  schizophrenic

delusion.  But  it  was  not  known  that  this  had  a  much  deeper  biophysical

significance; that it was the strong sensation of living streaming in the body,

and  not  merely  the  genitals,  which  becomes  alien  and  unbearable  in  the

adolescent as well as in the psychotic. The genital organs are so predominantonly because their excitation induces the strongest sensations of aliveness.

  I told the patient that she had now the task of learning to feel her genital

region  just  as  clearly  as  she  felt  other  parts  of  her  body.  She  let  her

respiration  go  fully,  but  soon  became  confused  and  patchy  in  her  face

whenever she came close to streamings in her pelvis. I saw her cramping

severely in her thighs for the first time. The “forces” began to break through

to the area where they belonged: namely, into the genital region.

  She spoke in a secretive manner, fearfully and in a hushed voice; she said

that no one had understood her with regard to “these feelings.” She began to

describe extensively what she experienced when “it happened or began to

happen in that region.” The “forces” somehow make the things in the room

around her take on a “queer expression”; they become quite “peculiar.” Not

that they would change their shape; but they acquired an alive expression, the

meaning  of living beings.  “Something  strange  emerges  from  them”;  they

“seem to want to tell me important things, as if animated.” Then she became

confused and anxious.

  At first I could not understand why “things became alive around her”

when she herself was close to becoming genitally excited. Then it became

clear: In strong biosexual excitation, the orgone energy field of the organism

expands  considerably;  all  sensory  impressions  become  more  acute  and

sharp.  This  also  happened  to  her;  but  since  she  did  not  perceive  this

biological process as her own, since the excitation was split off from self-

perception, the ORGONE ENERGY FIELD AROUND HER, AS EXPERIENCED IN VERY

VIVID  SENSE  IMPRESSIONS,  APPEARED  AS  A  FOREIGN,  STRANGE  FORCE,  WHICH

ENLIVENED THE THINGS IN THE ROOM.

  Accordingly, the projected psychotic persecutory sensation appears as a

true perception of a real process: THE PSYCHOTIC PERCEIVES HIS OWN ORGONE

ENERGY FIELD OUTSIDE HIS ORGANISM. The contents of the sensation, such as

projected homosexual or destructive ideas, are secondary to the bio-energetic

perception of the orgone energy field.  Let us pause for a moment and consider how safe this assumption is, apart

from the clinical experience brought forth by our patient.

                                                                    4
  The orgone energy field meter, constructed in 1944, demonstrated the

existence of an orgone energy field beyond the skin surface of the organism.

  An orgone-charged electroscope reacts to the energy field of the moving

palm only, and not to dead wool.

  The oscillograph reacts when the electrode is attached to a wet towel and

when a living organism or organ such as the hand is touching the towel.

  Bions which are strongly charged with orgone kill bacteria and cancer

cells at a distance and attract other bodies. This capacity disappears when

death occurs.

  The existence of the “sixth sense,” the orgonotic perception beyond the

surface of the organism, can, therefore, not be doubted.

  I explained to the patient the function of the orgone energy field as seen

in bions, blood cells, and at the field meter. She understood it and paid me the

compliment that I was the first person she had known who could explain her

deep experiences to her in an understandable manner.

  I would like to mention here briefly two cases of paranoid reaction which

demonstrate  the  fact  that  persecutory  sensual  hallucination  in  certain

instances follows the perception of orgone energy outside the skin surface of

the organism.

  Several  years  ago  I  treated  a  woman  who  suffered  from  vaginal

anesthesia. She was married, but had never experienced any sensations in her

pelvis. After some time, the orgasm-reflex began to appear; soon it was far

enough  developed  to  reactivate  the  natural  physiological  functions  in  the

vaginal mucous membranes and the glands. She reported that her husband

seemed rather gratified by the development in their relationship. However, a

few days later she brought her husband to me in despair: he had developed

the  idea  that  I,  in  a  malicious  way,  was  influencing  him  with  electrical

currents  through  her  vagina.  It  was  immediately  evident  that  he  haddeveloped a paranoid persecution idea. He went into an institution with the

diagnosis paranoid schizophrenia.

  Why did the husband break down psychotically when his wife developed

strong vaginal streamings and excitation? We could not have answered this

question  before  the  organismic  orgone  energy  functions  were  discovered.

Now it seemed clear: his own energy system could stand the genital embrace

only  so  long  as  no  strong  sensations  occurred.  When  his  wife  began  to

recover,  her  organism  quite  obviously  had  induced  currents  and  strong

sensations in him. His organism reacted to this experience with a split in a

paranoid fashion. I had cured his wife; therefore, I had influenced him with

electricity  through  her  vagina.  He  showed  the  typical  schizophrenic  eye

symptoms.

  This  case  shows  that  actual  physiological  changes  take  place  in  the

organism of one mate when the genital functioning changes in the other mate.

This is true for dulling of sensations as well as for increased excitation. We

see it often happen in orgone therapy that a husband or a wife improves when

the bio-energetic situation changes for the better in the partner who is under

treatment.

  A man with clear-cut psychotic mechanisms used to react with severe

anxiety after turning his eyeballs upward. He felt as if he were being choked

to death. One day I let him turn his eyeballs upward again. This time the

reaction was particularly strong. In the course of the anxiety attack, he stared

into one corner of the room, ripped his eyelids wide open, began to scream,

and pointed in terror toward the corner. “Don’t you feel it,” he screamed,

“there, it’s right there, coming out of the wall, staring at me.” Then, with a

sudden jump, he leaped up and ran with terror into that corner from which he

felt the stare had come. I led him into this reaction several times. It subsided

gradually and finally disappeared altogether.

  In this case, too, a “projection” had occurred. Bio-energetically, however,

I had no reason to doubt that his orgone energy field had become excited faroutside of his body and that this had made possible the psychotic reaction. To

return to our patient: during the following few weeks she was happy, worked

well, and had no delusions; the “forces” seemed gone. But one day, when she

saw her parole physician again, she told him that she did not know whether to

continue the work with me; that she became confused and did not understand

the mechanisms which I explained to her.

  She had turned against me in a malicious manner. During her sessions

with me she behaved in a haughty, arrogant way, as if she despised me. The

treatment  made  her  incapable  of  living  in  the  real  world  of  real  human

beings; she was losing the “credo” of a “beyond” which seemed so much a

part of her. How would she be able to exist in this world if she were going to

become genital? She knew well, she said, that people are ill; but she did not

want to exchange her world for reality as it is.

  She refused my suggestion that she could develop the ability to live her

own life without having to escape into her schizophrenic world. To that she

answered that the world as it is does not permit human beings to live the

happiness of sexual union without imposing severe chains and pains. She,

therefore, preferred her world of delusions where she was her own master and

protected by the “forces.”

  Her judgment of the social situation, as far as the sex-economic way of

living was concerned, seemed quite rational. Not a single one of her critical

ideas  could  have  been  refuted  on  the  basis  of  human  welfare  or  social

security or moral integrity. For instance: during her puberty there had been

moments of great sanity and lucid judgment; she clearly longed for a boy to

embrace her and to love him; but then came the thought of where to love him,

and what to do with her relatives, who would have hindered and plagued her,

had they only guessed what she was doing; she was afraid of being sent to a

reform school; she had known that she would become a criminal if she were

caught and taken to an institution. She had not known at that time that she

would later spend many years in a mental institution. But her suffering fromher  frustrated,  bodily  excitations  had  become  so  strong  that  she  finally

welcomed the dullness of mental institutions.

  Should she have yielded to her sick mother, who nagged her all day long,

hated her father, spoke disparagingly about him, smeared his name wherever

and whenever she could, because he had withdrawn from her? Or how could

she have developed her great intelligence in some field of human endeavor

when  she  had  no  room  of  her  own,  when  her  mother  opened  all  letters

addressed to her? She had been squeezed between her overpowering bodily

craving  for  a  man  and  the  social  impossibility  in  her  life  situation  of

satisfying this desire. The period of this dilemma was short but agonizing.

Then, for the first time, things around her became alive and seemed to “tell

her things.” First she was curious; but when they grew stronger, she became

frightened and finally confused. Where did she end and where did the world

around her begin? She could tell less and less. Then murderous impulses

would  come  up  and  she  had  a  hard  time  refraining  from  hurting  people.

Therefore the walls of the institution appeared as a refuge from great strain

and persecution on the part of her own organism.

  During the following weeks she was clear and cooperative; she wished

that  I  “would  free  her  from  her  experience  of  animated  objects”  which

frightened her so much. She felt deadly afraid of the “other world.” I asked

her to describe this other world. She drew this diagram:







Room Mirror

l A = Real World

 

 
  The power of the “forces” manifested itself in their ability to open world

B for her when she felt anxious in world A. This “other world” was “quite

real,” although she knew perfectly well that it was not real.

  The patient began to perceive the deadness in her throat. She understood

for the first time in several months what I meant when I kept telling her thatshe held her respiration; that she should try to press her air out; that she

should let her chest “fall” or “go down.”

  She felt anxious when the chest moved downward with the air passing

through her glottis. When she felt a strong excitation in her lower abdomen,

she said: “I am afraid of something I do not feel, but I know it is there.…”

  The projection and mystification of the bodily streamings were the result

of lack of clear perception of an organ sensation which was nevertheless

perceived.

  It is very difficult to put such biophysical functions into proper words.

These functions are beyond the realm of words and ideas. It is very difficult

to formulate in words an experience in which a process in the organism is

perceived and yet is not perceived as one’s own. But there can be no doubt

whatsoever that this is exactly the key to understanding the schizophrenic

split  and  the  projection  of  bodily  sensations.  Her  sharp  intelligence

manifested  itself  again  when  she  spontaneously  formulated  the  difference

between  a  hysterical  and  a  schizophrenic  experience:  the  first,  she  said,

consists in an alienation of an organ from the total body experience; the latter

consists  in  an  alienation,  just  as  in  hysteria, plus  misinterpretation  and

mystification of the detached perception.

  This  description  is  in  agreement  with  the  most  skillful  biopsychiatric

comprehension  of  the  process.  It  fits  every  type  of  mystical  experience;

mysticism perceives a body-own process as alien and originating “beyond”

one’s person, or beyond one’s earth.

  The patient was in a constant disequilibrium between rational integration

of  her  feelings  and  schizophrenic  delusion.  I  had  expected  that  her

schizophrenic process would develop fully when her self-perception made

contact  with  her  bodily  excitation  in  full  force.  My  expectation  proved

correct.


Thirty-fourth session  The patient came with vivid schizophrenic delusions. Soon after the last

treatment, when she had made contact with her bodily streamings, a diarrhea

had set in. She had had “twisted intestines … and something had moved

downward toward her genitals.” She had vomited everything she had eaten;

she was bothered by severe flatulence. During the night, she had seen many

peculiar forms and figures in her room with rainbows around them. It was

obvious  that  the  orgone  energy  had  moved  rapidly  in  her  body  and  had

brought about the excitation of her intestines. It was further obvious that she

had misinterpreted most of her sensations. She complained: “I do not trust

you … you are at one with them [with the forces]; they use all possible means

to harm me … they poisoned the food so that I had to vomit … they made it

rain to annoy me … they never before mingled with everyday life … now

they do … that’s your fault.…”

  The  idea  of  being  poisoned  may  well  be  understood  as  a  result  of

excitations  which  are  bounced  back  at  the  upper  intestines  in  reversed

direction, i.e., in impulses to vomit. I persuaded her to yield more to the

“forces.” She succeeded in giving in more fully. When severe tremors in her

total body set in, she went off again. I brought her back by pinching her. But

her  eyes  remained  empty  and  “faraway.”  The  skin  of  her  forehead  was

immobile; she trembled with severe anxiety.

  This was in itself a great step forward. I had expected it. I had known that

all her schizophrenic symptoms would flare up once her organ sensations

developed and were perceived fully. But I did not know what the outcome

would be: complete catatonia or recovery? The risk had to be taken, since

catatonia would have been the only outcome without therapy anyhow. I also

knew that the danger of suicide was great. I assured myself of her confidence

and honesty. She confided that when her hands went completely dead for a

while the other day, she had had the impulse to cut them off. “… If only I

could trust you…” she said repeatedly. “… They have got hold of me now …

they do with me what they want … I cannot fight them any longer.…” Itstruck  me  that  she  had  refused  a  cigarette  I  had  offered  her  during  the

treatment. She was suspicious of being poisoned.


Thirty-fifth session


  The patient came in a state of complete vegetative shock. Her skin was

spotty from blue to red. She trembled and her eyes were severely veiled. She

could  hardly  speak.  At  first  she  seemed  willing  to  cooperate.  But  when

convulsions  occurred  in  her  face  and  shoulders  she  suddenly  jumped  up,

pulled a knife from behind her back, and went at me. I made it a habit to be

on the lookout for such things. I grabbed her hand, squeezed the knife out of

her fist, and told her sharply that she should lie down and not move. She

screamed: “I have to kill you … I have to … I must.…”

  For  more  than  two  decades  I  had  experienced  and  understood  the

murderous rage against me on the part of people who became frightened to

death by my scientific, factual description of the orgonotic streamings. I had

met  this  terror  in  presidential  candidates,  Communist  liberators,  fascist

mystics,  well-adjusted  psychoanalysts,  neurotic  court  psychiatrists,

neurosurgeons, directors of mental institutions, cancer pathologists without

hope, schizophrenics, politicians of all kinds, scheming wives of co-workers,

etc. So I knew what I was dealing with. She was blue with rage; she tried

again and again to jump upon me, to get at my throat, and to kick me.… She

did  it  openly  and  frankly,  while  the  biopathic  psychoanalyst  who  feels

threatened  by  my  teachings  goes  around  sneaking  and  gossiping,  telling

people that I was in a mental institution or that I seduced all my female

patients or that I have just been buried. I preferred the behavior of my patient

by far. After some time, she broke down in a quite unschizophrenic manner

and  cried  bitterly  like  a  child.  She  cried  for  a  long  time,  and  it  was

emotionally complete. At intervals, she became furious, cursed her mother,

her father, the world, the whole system of education and medicine, the state

hospital, and the physicians there. In the end she calmed down and explained:after the last treatment, spontaneous movements in her lower abdomen had

plagued her; she had felt them fully; her genital had “itched” severely for

the first time in her memory; she had tried to satisfy herself, but without

success.

  I had to take strong precautions against possible disaster. I knew that if

the therapy did not succeed in making the patient capable of tolerating and

integrating her bodily sensations, the worst could be expected to happen. I

notified  her  relatives  to  take  the  necessary  steps  to  commit  her  to  the

institution.  One  will  ask  again  why  I  took  the  great  risk,  why  I  did  not

commit her immediately. My answer is again: the scientific results of this

experiment  were  tremendous;  to  commit  the  patient  would  have  meant

stopping  the  flow  of  scientific  information;  it  would  also  have  meant

extinguishing any hope of her recovery. She was on the verge of recovery

and deserved a chance to reach it. The final outcome proved this attitude

correct. But at that time I did not know the final outcome.


Thirty-sixth session


  The patient came late; she had not wanted to come. “I do not like it [the

situation]…” she said. “I felt pleasure all over my body; my body is one now,

but I do not like it.…” She was almost completely relaxed; her respiration

functioned well. “I would like to go back to my old world.… I loved the

forces.… I am afraid I might want badly to sleep with a boy.…” (She had

never embraced a man.)

  She  showed  all  the  well-known  signs  of  severe  preorgastic pleasure

anxiety.  The  prospect  was:  she  would  either  become  frightened  to  a

sufficiently great extent to withdraw again fully and probably finally; or she

would break through to full health.


Thirty-seventh session


  She same in, complaining about the movements in her abdomen and inher genital region. She had no power over these movements. On the contrary,

the movements had great power over her body. Before, she could do nothing

to the “forces,” but she could, so she said, kill me because I had brought

about this situation of movements in her body. She could not live with these

movements. If I were dead, then the influence I was exerting upon her would

cease, and with it also the movements in her body.

  Let  us  pause  for  a  moment  again  to  think  over  this  situation:  the

therapeutic result was doubtful as far as restoration of complete sanity was

concerned.  As  a  clinical  confirmation  of  the  whole  theory  of  organismic

orgone biophysics, the situation was invaluable, rich in possibilities, with a

broad outlook on the whole realm of human character structure. To sum it up,

the following conclusions seemed safe:

  1. The murderous hate I and my co-workers had met in so many people,

laymen and professionals alike, was due to the provocation of spontaneous

movements  in  the  body,  in  bodies  which  had  never  experienced  such

autonomic movements, well-known to every healthy, unarmored individual.

  2.  These  movements,  if alienated  or excluded  from  the  realm  of  full

perception (= self-perception), constitute the experiences of every kind of

mysticism.  That  a  psychopath  like  Hitler  preferred  to  kill  in  spring  thus

becomes easily understandable.

  3.  The  influencing  “forces”  in  schizophrenia  are  identical  with  the

plasmatic movements in the organism.

  4. Many types of crime and murder are due to such sudden changes in the

structure of potential or actual murderers.

  5. Chronically armored human organisms tolerate only low levels of bio-

energy and the corresponding emotions. What constitutes high-pitched joie

de vivre in unarmored individuals, their buoyance, their aliveness, namely the

functioning of bio-energy on a high level with a strong energy metabolism, is

utterly unbearable to the armored individual. Sudden changes from a high to a

very low energy level constitute acute depression. On the other hand, suddenchanges  from  a  chronically  low  to  a  very  high  energy  level  constitute

dramatic and dangerous situations because of the inability to tolerate strong

sensations and emotions.

  It  is,  therefore,  to  be  expected  that  biopsychiatry  will  sooner  or  later

succeed in describing human structures and characteristic reactions in terms

of “bio-energetic  metabolism,”  “emotional  tolerance”  of  biophysical

excitation, and “capacity for energy discharge.”

  Such  an energetic  point  of  view  would  enable  us  to  handle,  finally,

“human nature,” not with complicated ideas and experiences, but with simple

energy functions, as we are handling the rest of nature.


Thirty-eighth session


  The patient felt fairly well, was coordinated, clear. She had tried to satisfy

herself;  she  had  felt  a  strong  throbbing  in  her  vagina.  However,  she  had

“detached” her right arm; she could not press the hand in handshaking. I

explained  to  her  that  some  deep  inhibition  manifested  itself  in  this

detachment of her right arm, that we had to get it out of the depth. “This

would be much too dangerous,” she said.

  We were dealing clearly with a very old and deep blocking of the motion

of physical self-gratification with the right hand.


Thirty-ninth session


  I knew that I had to put her through the genital emotions as quickly and as

safely as possible if a final breakdown was to be avoided. She was very

mobile and clear that day. When the respiration had “pumped up” enough

organismic  energy,  her pelvis  began  to  twitch  spontaneously.  Strong

streaming  sensations  set  in  and  she  refused  to  continue.  She  declared

suddenly that she was confused (she was not). At the next parole meeting she

would hide from the parole physician the fact that she felt much better in

order to keep the door open for return to the asylum. “If I let go further, itwill  take  my  brain  away.…”  She  meant  she  would  lose  consciousness:

ORGASM ANXIETY was coming to the foreground. At the end of the session, she

made the sign of the cross in the Catholic manner.

  At 11 p.m. that evening she called me on the phone to tell me that the

moon “had thrown shadows on the floor of her room,” and that that was the

“sign  to  her  from  them,”  but  she  had  been  unable  to  call  the  “forces.”  I

succeeded in quieting her down.


Fortieth session


  She was very unhappy. I knew that she had been very excited sexually the

night before, that she had not been able to obtain gratification, and that she

had reached a most crucial point in her life. She told me that she had tried

desperately to get the “forces” back, but that she had not succeeded in doing

so  “in  spite  of  the  contact  with  the  moon.”  She  was  convinced  that  the

“forces” refused her company because she was “Jewish.” Furthermore, she

said  that  she  did  not  want  to  lose  her  world;  she  could  not  live  in  “this

world.”

  It was clear what she meant by the word “Jewish.” It meant to be “sexual”

and  “swinish”  at  the  same  time.  The  ambiguity  of  these  emotional

experiences derived from the fact that she wanted to feel her bodily forces but

did not want to feel or be “swinish.” This was in complete agreement with the

clinical experience of orgone biophysics: the human animal longs for full

feeling and realization of his biosexual emotions; at the same time he rejects

them and hates them because of their perverse distortion. “God” represents

the former, and “devil” the latter; both are fused into one painful, confusing

entity. This becomes quite obvious in schizophrenics but is also present and

clearly expressed in homo normalis.

  Was her refusal of the world of homo normalis justified? Of course it

was. This world had ruined her natural biological structure (“God”) and had

implanted the “devil”; her mother had done this to her. The schizophrenicknows the ways of homo normalis and has full insight into their disastrous

results. Homo  normalis,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  Babbitt  who  does  not

understand the schizophrenic world of rational judgment, or, for that matter,

his own.

  It is a major objective of this case history to describe the psychotic crisis

in relation to the orgonotic streamings and emotions of the biosystem. It is of

the utmost importance to concentrate one’s attention on this single fact, and

not to be distracted by the maze of schizophrenic mechanisms and delusory

ideas. We must penetrate to the common denominator which characterizes

the schizophrenic breakdown, regardless of the contents of the delusions. The

center  of  the  schizophrenic  breakdown  is  determined  by  overwhelming

orgonotic plasma streamings which flood a biosystem incapable of coping

with the emotional storm.

    Psychiatry  has  understood  that  the  psychotic  system  is  an  attempt  at

reconstruction of the lost ego (= world). But it could not tell why this world

of the ego breaks down. The psychotic reconstruction is a result and not a

cause of the disease. This must be kept well in mind. Also, the “narcissistic

fixation in childhood” is not a cause of the breakdown but only one of the

conditions under which the breakdown occurs. The core of the problem is the

biophysical  split  between  excitation  and  perception  and  the  resulting

intolerance by the biosystem of strong emotions.


                        9. CRISIS AND RECOVERY


  The patient went through the following three distinct periods at the end

and after the treatment: (1) great well-being and sanity; (2) sudden catatonic

breakdown;  (3)  full  recovery,  with  freedom  from  psychosis  for  over  five

years after treatment.


1. The rapid approach to health


  The first period lasted about a month. In the beginning, she used to cryvery often “because the ‘forces’ do not want me any more; because I am

Jewish.…” With the bodily sensations and the return of their perception, the

“forces” were gone completely.

  Then she began to enjoy her newly acquired health. She used to call me

up saying that she did not need the treatment that day, that she felt fine and

happy, that she preferred to play tennis instead or to see a show. She worked

efficiently and happily at the office.

  During the treatment she breathed fully; she let her emotions develop

freely,  cried,  laughed,  talked  very  intelligently  and  without  a  trace  of

blocking or perseveration. But I did not trust the situation fully, because of

my experiences with reactions to severe orgasm anxiety. I knew she was not

safe until she had yielded to her biological role as a female animal in the

embrace with a man whom she could really love.

  The “forces were not around any more.” No trace of any schizophrenic

symptoms was to be seen on the surface. But there were many indications

that there were schizophrenic functions still at work in the depth, even though

without a high pitch of bio-energy.

  She hesitated to acknowledge the accomplishment of orgone therapy. We

know that patients who do not appreciate good results are somewhere and

somehow hostile, due to a remainder of anxiety.

  She  said  emphatically  that  she  thanked  only  the  great  Lord  for  her

recovery.  She  developed  the  idea  that  “health”  meant  continuous,

uninterrupted happiness, without any interference of sorrow and worries. She

did not accept my statement that health meant also the ability to stand the

impact of unpleasant situations and worries.

  She felt her genital region as belonging to her, and no longer as dead or

alien; but she claimed to have no desire for the sexual union. There was no

doubt whatsoever that she did not admit the problem of sexual union to full

scrutiny. She was evasive and glib about the subject of a serious love life.

  Then  slowly  the  suspicious  indications  of  oncoming  disaster  began  toincrease.

  She began to call me a “faker” and a “dangerous man” who provoked

“bad things” in people. She did “not want any orgastic potency,” she said,

although she had come to me explicitly because I had elaborated this concept

of emotional health.

  One day she came with a metal cross hanging from her neck; she had

bought it for ten cents “in order to appease the ‘forces.’” I warned her not to

be too optimistic but to expect more devilish things from the depth of her

emotions. She laughed at that and assured me that I was exaggerating.

  She showed signs of escape from further therapy. She wanted to come

only  for  another  few  sessions.  She  said  I  was  not  cultivated  enough,  not

subtle enough for her. She would go to the police to accuse me of “doing bad

things.”

  Then, one day, she did not want to cooperate at all, remained in her coat,

and left soon after. She phoned that same evening, excused herself for her

behavior,  and  told  me  that  she  still  needed  me  very  badly.  Then  events

rapidly turned for the worse.


2. Sudden catatonic breakdown


  The patient came to the next session in a very bad state of health. She had

had a “horrible night”; things and forms had become “alive” in the room; a

shadow had appeared on the wall and had stretched out an arm to take hold of

her. “I felt no anxiety, but it was a horrible experience,” she said.

  She  felt  a  little  better  when  bodily  currents  developed  and  when  she

permitted their perception.

  But  the  following  day  she  came  completely  confused,  with  severe

dissociation in speech and ideas. All things were “queer”; all actions were

terribly complicated; when something went wrong she thought that the forces

were  interfering  with  her  will.  Her  job  at  the  office  was  a  great  burden,

scarcely bearable. Her speech during the whole session was severely retardedand mostly unintelligible, but she tried very hard to make herself understood.

  She remained in the treatment room at 7:20 p.m. to dress. One of my

assistants found her at 8:50 p.m. in a cataleptic position; she could not move;

she had remained there in the same position for an hour and a half. Very

slowly and with great effort she told us that she had been unable to call for

help. Her organism had reacted with catatonic catalepsy, that is, with a total

block  of  motility,  to  the  strong  plasmatic  currents  which  threatened  to

overcome her.

  The following day the patient had recovered from her cataleptic attack,

but she had developed a delusion of grandeur instead. This new delusion

obviously  had  the  function  of  preventing  the  flow  of  bio-energy  in  her

organism and the perception of nature in herself.

  When during the treatment strong preorgastic sensations occurred, she

suddenly said: “I am too great and too good to be an animal.…” A few

minutes later: “… The ‘forces’ force me to cut deep into my left cheek. But I

shall master myself; I am stronger than they [the forces].…”

  To the expert in orgone-biophysical functioning, this reaction was clearly

the  expression  of  a  delusion  of  strength  due  to  the  new  and  gratifying

experience of biophysical, vagotonic expansion of her plasma system. Still

incapable, as she was, of accepting and enjoying the pleasure function fully,

she turned against it by means of her delusion: now she was even stronger

than the “forces,” i.e., still stronger than the animal in her. This was soon

confirmed in a very drastic manner. The following day I received this letter

from her:


                                                                                Thursday

    Added adjunct—the affective (should he effective) advocates of the lyceum in Rome. You

  do not see that by immortal power of Will to survive and achieve. “My mind” is in a state of

  confusion about the pieces fitting in and my good boss and job. You did not fit the pieces for me

  no one did or does and that’s why I go to psychiatrists to find out.—The water babies, the

  Goddess Diana, and the Dr. Doolittle stories when I was a kid. I am very very old from Buddha

  and Mohammed in caves and Isis on an alter of crucifixion I am always depressed by nature of

  myself. I must have a clear answer not by “changing my thoughts” as you said—that solves  nothing—but you are very very kind my thoughts are not thoughts but impregnated knowledge

  given into my head. Sentences written in books that know how and why I suffer written for my

  eyes alone without the author’s knowledge or will. Impregnated thoughts.

    But the bad panic is from the terrific confusion which hurts.

    Here’s another message to add to your collection. It may prove someday extremely valuable

  —I would not have to say “I told you so.”

    Do you know who I am? I told you I would tell you the complete picture—and the Greeks

  and Romans—ancient of course—fit right into the picture. I suppose you have heard of “Isis”—


                              I AM HER RESURRECTION

    And there are those who are opposed to Foreign Forces—there are probably five all told.—

  The  Lord  on  the  left,  the  others  are  more  or  less  somewhat  antagonistic—It  is  these  that

  sometimes bring fear because they are often against me and torture me cleverly. You see the

  complete reincarnation is not always present and when only part is there I am open to abuse

  from these other forces. I have no priestesses, etc. left—not in this world so I have to fight

  myself—and I am not always full of the complete super-power to do so easily—the Lord of

  course—is my ally. When I am complete as this evening in your home—there is Nothing I

  cannot do—should I so wish—coming home there was a policeman ordering someone to put the

  lights out in a store—for air-raid precaution—I was hoping he would say something to me or

  someone would—to order me to do something—Fools that people are they cannot appreciate the

  greatness of me—they do not see it—they only see something strange but they do not know the

  power.

    The question of suicide is difficult because of the question of status beyond—would I go

  back to my original birth or forward into the future queenliness—until the question is solved I

  can do nothing. Death is another force, he is quite a kind, serious figure—he came years ago—

  but not since. The One today was the same as last week but that is Evil, I think—You see I as

  Isis am not fully on the same standing as the Others—principally one reason because I am

  predestined to live here on earth and carry on that life—that problem I have never been told the

  answer to—what the main reason behind this being on earth is—

                                                                    That’s enough to write

                                                                                      F.

                                                                Names are so meaningless

                                                    Just family left-overs—not at all real—


  She had become the goddess Isis because of her strong bodily sensations;

the psychotic distortion of the feeling of strength and “mission” and contact

with the universe was clearly due to her inability to permit full perception of

the natural orgonotic strength and to enjoy it as a living organism, whole andsane.  Therefore,  my  statement  seems  justified  that  the  schizophrenic,  in

contradistinction to the neurotic, has the full power of his natural orgonotic

energy function; he differs from the healthy animal, including man, in that he

splits  off  perception  from  excitation  and  thus  transforms  his  feeling  of

strength  into  delusions  of  grandeur,  and  his  weak  perception  of  faraway

excitation into delusions of the “beyond” and persecution.

  These insights seem to be of first-rate importance for the understanding of

the whole realm of psychotic delusions; it does not matter whether the split is

brought about by high temperature, as in post-puerperal amentia, or by post-

syphilitic  structural  lesions  as  in  the  paralytic  delusion,  or  by  a  truly

schizophrenic split. The essence remains the same.

  Once  the  unitary  function  of  the  organism  is  split,  the  biophysical

processes in the organism will be perceived as a force alien to the ego, in the

form  of  hallucinations  or  delusions  of  various  kinds.  The  specific

mechanisms which distinguish a delusion in general paresis from a delusion

in puerperal fever or a delusion in dementia praecox are not important here.

What  is  important,  however,  is  the basic  dissociation  of  the  perceiving

apparatus from the biophysical system of excitation.

  Our patient described this pathological situation very clearly during lucid

moments in that period of her breakdown:

  “The world is very far away … and yet very close … it does not concern

me at all … and yet I feel everything around me in a painful way.… When an

airplane flies by, I have the clear feeling that the motor makes a louder noise

in order to annoy me.… The birds are singing louder in order to give me hell.

… That sounds silly, but I sincerely believe that they do it for that purpose.…

The human beings look at me and observe carefully everything I am doing.…

I  can  scarcely  stand  all  the  many  impressions.…  How  shall  I  be  able  to

perform my work? … I would like to go back to the hospital where I do not

have to do the work and be responsible.”

  Later on:  “Would you permit me to swallow this cross? It could help me to stand all

that better. When there is only one ‘force’ around me, I can stand it; but when

there are many of them around, then I cannot stand it; my ability to stand it is

not sufficient.”

  This is plain language, indeed. One has only to learn to listen to it to

understand  it,  instead  of  “shocking”  such  broken-down  people. Homo

normalis shuts himself up in his room behind drawn blinds when the bright

sunlight annoys him, when he cannot stand the impact of natural forces. The

old  gossiping  spinster  keeps  on  telling  bad  stories  about  loving  couples,

because her organism cannot stand the excitation which is brought about in

her by the functioning of love around her. The biopathic Führer kills millions

of people because he cannot stand any alive expression. The criminal kills the

one  who  provokes  in  him  the  feelings  of  humanity  and  goodness.  The

schizophrenic falls apart emotionally and biophysically.

  The patient fell into a stupor that same session, recovered, and was taken

home by one of her relatives.

  The following day at 1:30 p.m. she swallowed the cross she had carried

on her chest. She came to the session with great pain. She had at first only

taken the cross into her mouth. Then “it went down quite by itself.…” It had

hurt in the pharynx, but finally it had slipped through the esophagus. She had

intended “to please God” by this action, and to stop people from looking at

her. She had been frightened when she had swallowed the cross, but God had

smiled at her. She wanted to walk on a high mountain, to stretch her arms

toward heaven; then God would come close to her and would embrace her.

  Her intense desire for the genital embrace was thus disguised in the form

of the psychotic delusion of being embraced by God.

  I let her eat a good deal of bread immediately. She looked at the bread

and said: “Here there are eyes [the holes in the bread] looking at me.…”

  She was taken to a private physician who x-rayed her. The cross was in

her stomach. The physician knew of the orgone-therapeutic experiment andcooperated in order to help keep her out of the institution. But all efforts were

in vain. In my long career as a research physician, I have seen many a human

being rather die than admit the perception of his bio-energetic sensation of

streaming. I have witnessed people go to war rather than risk punishment for

telling the truth. Therefore, it did not surprise me to see this patient prefer to

go to the mental institution rather than admit full genital excitation in her

organism.

  The cross was later eliminated naturally. But the following day I received

this report from one of her relatives who was guarding her:


                                                                Report as of May 23, 1942

    I first became aware of some change in her behavior when she asked her mother to leave,

  and said that she would prepare something to eat. I later learned that she insisted that the mother

  leave the house. She did set things out to eat. When I looked up next, she was standing at the

  sink with a glass in her hand which she was hitting up against the side of the sink. It refused to

  break and then she tried to hit it with a small drain shovel to no avail. I thought she would hurt

  herself so I approached and offered to break the glass for her. She gave me the glass which I

  broke. She picked up the pieces and carefully put them in the pail.

    There was no further incident during the meal. She remained in the kitchen watching me; her

  eyes had a strange look. After the meal, I prepared a shower for myself. Then suddenly, while

  under the shower, I was very much surprised to see her appear in the bathroom with a large

  kitchen knife in her hands. She was completely nude. This is the first time I had ever seen her

  nude before me.

    I asked her what she wanted the knife for. She said that she used it to open the door, to lift

  the latch. Then she laid the knife down upon the washstand and looked at me. I pretended to go

  on washing but all the time I kept watching her. She just stood there saying nothing and looking

at me. I tried to make conversation with her but it was no good. All of a sudden, she jumped up

  on the rim of the bathtub in which I was, put her hands around my throat, and tried to push me

  under the water. My throat was soapy and her grip was insecure. I took hold of her wrists and

  forced her off the bathtub. I asked her why she did that. She said that she wanted to see me

  under the water. She stood looking at me for some time and then left.

    When I came out of the bathroom, she was in another room. The lights were out and she sat

in the gloom. I did not go into the room but I listened as intently as I could. After some time, I

  heard the sound of tearing. What it was that she was tearing I could not tell, and so after it

  continued for some time, I went to see what she was doing. She had completely torn the pages

  out of the book, The Function of the Orgasm, by Dr. Wilhelm Reich, and she was about to start

  on  another  copy  of  the  book,  when  I  took  it  from  her.  She  now  had  her  bathrobe  on  and

  continued to walk about in the dark.    When I noticed her again, she had climbed upon a dresser in the hall and stood there in a

  catatonic condition, a cigarette dangling from her hand. After about ten minutes, during which

  time she stood upon the dresser immobile, I called Dr. Reich to ask him what I should do. He

  suggested that I take her down and bring her over to the phone to talk to him. I took her by the

  hand and pulled her down. She sank into my arms rather easily. But when I started to carry her

  over to the phone, she began to kick and insisted that I let her down. I did. She put on her

  bathrobe and sat down to talk to Dr. Reich on the phone. I left her alone and went into another

  room.

    Dr. Reich had suggested to me that I give her two sleeping pills and put her to bed. But after

  talking on the phone, she was much better and said that she wanted to visit some married friends

of ours with whom she had an appointment. We both went to see them and spent the evening

  there. While she was not completely well, she was pretty clear. When we got home about 2 a.m.,

  she took two sleeping pills and went to bed.

    She slept all through Sunday and refused to get up either to eat or for any other reason. She

  finally got up on Monday morning, but she didn’t go to work that day.


  A few hours after I received this letter, the patient phoned me. She wanted

to “do something, but cannot tell me what.…” I knew the patient’s status well

enough to feel sure that she would not do anything cruel. I knew that deep-

seated  schizoid  mechanisms  had  broken  through  and  were  still  breaking

through; that she was acting out some of them, but also that her attachment to

the treatment and her confidence in me were strong enough to keep her from

dangerous  actions. The  element  of  mutual  trust  had  great  weight  in  our

relationship.  She  had  promised  me  that  she  would  go  to  the  hospital  if

necessary; I had to trust her promise if the cure was to be achieved. One

cannot bring a schizophrenic back to sanity if one does not support his sane

structure and rely on it. She knew that I trusted her, and this was the most

powerful guarantee against real danger. The further development as well as

the final outcome proved this attitude to be correct.

  In the afternoon of the same day her relative called up: she had undressed

completely, had climbed on a high chest of drawers, and remained there in

the position of a statue; she had told her relative that she was the goddess

Isis. She had also approached her brother in a sexual manner, after she had

tried to drown him in the bathtub.  One hour later her brother called up again: she was still standing there

immobile; she apparently could not move. I advised her relatives to keep a

cool  head;  I  told  them  that  she  was  going  through  a  certain  emotional

situation, that keeping her out of the hospital, if at all possible, was essential,

but that they should call the ambulance if they felt that the situation was

dangerous. They did not have to call the ambulance.

  I also told them to call me immediately at any time if there should be any

change  for  the  worse.  They  did  not  call  me  until  the  afternoon  of  the

following  day.  The  patient  had  gone  to  bed  the  previous  evening  greatly

exhausted. Now, at 4 p.m., she was still in bed and did not want to get up.

Her mother tried hard to pull her out of bed. I told them to let the patient

sleep; she was obviously exhausted and needed rest after the great strain she

had lived through.

  The patient slept through until the afternoon of the third day, and came to

see me at 6 p.m. She “had been at the hospital to write herself in again, but

the hospital was closed.” I told her that she should go back to the hospital if

she felt the need to do so. She said that she did not know whether she ought

to go back or not. She was afraid that she would deteriorate completely if she

went back. I had to agree that this danger was present and that it was great.

  It was perfectly clear in this session, after the great attack, that she was

both perfectly clear and very close to a complete catatonic breakdown at the

same time. I had never seen great clarity and sanity paired with a catatonic

status in such a manner before. Usually a state of clarity and sanity returns

after the patient breaks out of the catatonic stupor by way of violent rage.

Here no rage was visible, but clarity fought against immobilization. Which

function would win out in the end? I did not know; nobody could tell.

  Her  catatonic  immobilization  was  very  strong,  making  greater  the

contradiction in her strong urge to communicate with me, to talk to me, to tell

what was going on in her. She spoke very clearly but very slowly, each word

coming forth with great difficulty. Her facial expression was mask-like; shecould  not  move  her  facial  muscles;  but her  eyes  were  not  veiled; on the

contrary, they had the glow of great sanity and insight. Her speech, though

slow, was clear and orderly, logical and to the point.

  She told me in the course of about three hours that she “had fallen into

the other world completely” the other day. The “forces” had succeeded in

pulling her into this other world against her will. She had finally succeeded in

coming back into this  world.  But  she  still  felt  far,  far  away.  She  had  no

contact with things and people at all. Everything seemed removed as if into

the far distance. She felt completely indifferent to whether it was nine o’clock

in  the  morning  or  in  the  evening,  whether  the  people  around  her  were

laughing or crying, whether they liked her or not. She tried hard to come

close to people and experiences, but was unable to do so.

  She stared at a bright spot on the floor where light was reflected from the

window. She knew it was light, but at the same time it appeared strange to

her, “foreign” as it were, and as if it were “something alive.” It seemed clear

to me that she perceived impressions clearly, but that at the same time SHE

COULD NOT MAKE CONTACT WITH HER OWN PERCEPTIONS.

  The  difference  between  her  inner  situation  before  treatment  and  now

consisted in that previously the state of clarity had alternated with the state of

confusion; now she was confused but at the same time she knew perfectly well

what she was confused about. This was a great step forward toward health.

These insights into the process of the cure itself are immeasurably important.

They  not  only  tell  us  what  is  going  on  in  a  catatonic  stupor  but  reveal

important  functions  of  self-perception  and  of consciousness  itself.  Every

natural  scientist  knows  how  decisive  these  insights  are  for  a  future

comprehension of the greatest riddle of all natural science, the function of

self-perception. And during the whole experiment I felt and acted far more as

a natural scientist than as a psychiatrist. I would advise that only psychiatrists

equipped  with  great  psychiatric  skill and  thorough  knowledge  of  the

problems  of  the  mind  should  attempt  such  ventures  in  exploring  naturalfunctions.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  risky

research is indispensable if mastery of a vast realm of the emotional plague is

to be finally obtained by medicine.

  She remembered well that she had tried to drown her brother and to turn

on the gas. But she claimed that “it wanted to do it,” that she had tried to

resist “it”  but  did  not  succeed.  Therefore,  she  wanted  to  go  back  to  the

hospital. It was clear that, if she managed to keep her clarity, the psychotic

functions would cease. This required that she not hide behind the protective

walls of the hospital.

  Of the rest of the period of catatonia, she remembered only the day when

she had stood there as the goddess Isis; she could not remember the following

two days when she lay in bed, immobilized. She had been catatonic for two

days and was amnestic to it.

  I let her talk as much as she wanted. She described again and again the

alienation of the world in different words and pictures. In the end, I took her

into the orgone accumulator. Her reactions became faster after some twenty

minutes and she left in good condition. The first decisive victory over the

catatonic breakdown had been won.

  She came back the following day a bit slowed down again. Irradiation in

the orgone accumulator removed the plasmatic contraction promptly again.

This was very hopeful. It became clear that the orgone accumulator would

some  day  play  a  great  role  in  the  overcoming  of  catatonic  states  of

biophysical contraction of the organism.

  I must confess that I felt greatly astonished about the results obtained with

the orgone accumulator, although I was already then—some seven years ago

—well acquainted with its vagotonic effects. Nevertheless, the whole thing

appeared  amazing  and  incredible  even  to  me.  Therefore,  I  could  well

understand the reactions of distrust on the part of physicians who had never

worked with orgone energy.

  I  informed  her  brother  of  her  great  improvement,  but  warned  againagainst too great optimism. I also advised him to be ready at any time to

commit the patient to the institution. The patient agreed to all this.

  Then  the  following  morning  she  met  with  disaster.  The  whole

significance of the police mentality of mental institutions became apparent in

a grotesque manner. In spite of the information the officials had about the

experimental therapy and the good results obtained so far, and in spite of

their own approval of what was going on, they had the patient taken away the

following morning at 7:30 to Bellevue Hospital by two psychiatric nurses and

by force, without conferring with me or her relatives. The patient did not

resist.

  This  god-like  omnipotence  of  institutional  psychiatrists  is  the  greatest

obstacle to true efforts concerning rational mental hygiene. They could have

and  should  have  at  least  informed  the  relatives  and  me.  No.  They  felt

almighty after the worst was over, the patient having been handled skillfully

and painstakingly by an experienced biopsychiatrist, by the relatives, and by

the patient herself. The latter behaved, in view of the situation, admirably. I

sincerely hope that the mental-hygiene movement will one day be able to clip

the wings of the court and institutional psychiatrists, and will force them to

listen and to pay attention to new and hopeful medical efforts in cases where

they themselves betray nothing but utter ignorance. The whole effort of many

months was in danger of breaking down because of this action on the part of

officials. I did not succeed, then, in finding out how it had come about. There

can be no true mental hygiene as long as such things are permitted to happen.

  It is true, the patient had reacted in a dangerously psychotic manner on

several occasions. It is also true, and I knew it very well, that I had taken a

great risk. But we take risks every single day of our lives, if in nothing else

than in walking under roofs with loose bricks. Yet we do not jail the owner of

the house with loose bricks. We do not jail the parents who produce criminals

en masse. And we do not jail the judge who sentenced an innocent man to die

in the electric chair. Therefore, we cannot become excited at all over suchwell-controlled actions of a schizophrenic. Our patient was, on the whole, in

spite  of  everything,  much  less  dangerous  than  a  single  psychopathic

neurosurgeon  who  keeps  knowledge  out  of  his  mental  institution,  or  a

dictator who rules millions. Nobody asked that Hitler be jailed; yet they took

away this patient who struggled so bravely for health. It is obvious that there

is far more behind such institutional actions than mere safeguarding of the

public.

  Another fact is important here. We medical orgone therapists, who work

with  deep  human  emotions,  know  from  experience  that  even  the  most

adjusted neurotic will sound wild and insane during orgone therapy to the ear

of an uninformed neurologist. Were such a neurologist to listen to a single

therapeutic  session  of  orgone  therapy,  he  would  surely  run  to  the  district

attorney,  as  he  in  fact  once  did  in  New  Jersey.  When  deep  emotions,

especially hatred, break through the armor, a procedure which is absolutely

necessary  for  cure,  we  know  that  we  have  created  an artificial  situation

involving genuine emotional forces. We know the emotions are potentially

dangerous, but the process of breaking through was deliberate. Usually we

have  the  patient  well  in  hand,  and  we  have  prepared  the  emotional

breakthrough for days or weeks with the greatest care. The same applies to

cutting open an abdomen for an operation. Nobody will accuse the surgeon of

murder. And nobody objects to the cruel method of shock “therapy” or the

piercing of the thalamus with long needles or to the frantic brain operations

which kill patients.

  Since ignorance in emotional matters is widespread; since, furthermore,

every ignoramus thinks he is an “expert” because he has emotions himself

and can, therefore, judge biophysical or psychological processes, the situation

in biopsychiatry is different from that in surgery.

  I myself was not quite sure how much of the emotional situation in this

patient was due to therapeutic procedure and how much was due to a genuine

psychotic  breakdown.  The  jailers  were  far  removed  from  any  suchconsideration.  More  will  have  to  be  said  later  about  the  hatred  of homo

normalis for the schizophrenic. It took only a few days to convince me fully

that the patient had reacted psychotically in accordance with the therapeutic

situation, and not as a consequence of a psychotic breakdown. She had taken

the injustice in an admirable fashion. She wrote the following sane letter

from the hospital to her brother, a short time after the commitment:


                                                                            May 28, 1942

    Thanks a lot for writing so soon—I know the manner of my leaving and the unexpectedness

of it, must have been a great shock to you and Mom—I, myself, was shocked, so I can imagine

  how you people felt.—Anyway, the only thing I can say is that it was an unnecessary step for

  the hospital authorities to have taken—but since there was nothing I could do at the time to stop

  their taking me—I “took it” as nicely as possible.

    I am a little bothered about my job.—I am wondering if it would be possible for me to take

  up where I left off, if I leave here soon enough. I would hate the thought of losing the excellent

  reference that I know they would give me—unless they are angry because I left without giving

  them notice.

    If you get this letter in time to come out this Sunday, fine; if not, next week will do just as

  well. If possible, try and get Dr. Reich to come out with you—I’d like to see him.

    When you write again, send me E’s address—it is in my address book (which is on my table

in my room). Let me know if she got in touch with you and if she was angry about my not being

  able to go with her on the A.Y.N. trip this Saturday.

    Watch for the Red Cross first aid Certificate, I was expecting in the mail within a week or

so.

    Keep in touch with O. and M. and let me know as soon as she has her baby, and of course

  how she is feeling.

    Tell Mom to send out some anklets for me. Tell her, also, not to worry—I feel fine and am

  hoping that it will be very soon that I leave here.—

                                                                            Lots of love,

                                                                                      F.


  I found out later that her commitment was due to a misapprehension on

the part of the parole physician about her description of the “forces,” which

were  coming  through  in  orgone  therapy.  Her  letter  from  the  institution

sounded sane and perfectly rational. Her cure had developed far enough to

enable her to stand up against the impact of the cruel method of commitment.I received the following letter from the patient, which shows clearly that her

reactions were only the usual reactions during psychiatric orgone therapy:


                                                                            June 6, 1942

    I don’t know what to make of things all around—my being picked up and brought back here

to the Hospital was some shock—I might have thought a lot about going back—but never

  seriously expected them to go to the length of forcing me back—In my opinion—they have

  some nerve—I never did anything to give them a right to do that to me—and without warning,

  too—did my brother tell you?—I could have made a fuss and refused to go—but I knew they

  had straight jackets in the ambulance-bus with them and there were enough of them to drag me

  down by force—so I just gave in as graciously as I could—I fitted in here just as before—I work

  all around the place and help out—but I’ve felt “off” a couple of times—here at least it doesn’t

  make a damn bit of difference—but I would like to go on a “bat” and let loose—the only trouble

  with that is that it will land me in the violent ward and I will lose all the privileges I have gotten

  —for being good, so well-known, and such a good worker—I don’t know if it is worth it—we

  will see—

    Anyway, Christ, etc. are sort of still around—that is in an influence sort of way—to mix

  things up for me—but not enough to make any difference so far—I wonder if electric shock

  would do any good—Incidentally, how on earth could I call you if I was here Sunday—you

  don’t think they would let a patient make a phone call, do you—I can’t even write you this letter

  without the doctors, nurses, attendants reading it and censoring it and probably not sending it

  out—so my brother is sneaking it out for me—

    I think you all (doctors) stink! I don’t know who’s right and who’s wrong—or what’s the

  right way—or who’s who—Should I tell these doctors that I intend to see you when I get out? I

  don’t see any doctor here, anyway—only at the final staff meeting, when they decide whether to

  let you go home or not—

    What’s the matter—do you think you are too big to come out to see a patient? I asked my

  brother to ask you to come—but he said you couldn’t—so I guess that’s why—I don’t know

  who is on my side and who isn’t—

    There is the constant threat of transfer to back buildings which are awful—and the noise,

  stink, and awfullness of the place as a whole—

    Did you tell these doctors or the parole doctor about anything that happened when I was

  home?—Is that why I was brought back?—

    If I have you to blame—I’d hate you the rest of my life—


  Then the institution began to exert its typical influence:


                                                                                  Sunday

    I am writing this while waiting for my brother to come back. I don’t know anything about    anything—what’s more—it isn’t at all bad here—As a matter of fact—it’s swell—We have

  parties  every  night—Me  and  some  other  patients  who  are  privileged  like  me  and  some

  attendants——

    It is all done on the sly, of course—I can’t see any future life at all.

    We shall see—what is more—Christ and Death, etc. come around again—bothering me—

  I’m “sitting on a powder keg” because I’m very suspicious of this swell time I’m having here—I

  suspect that Christ, etc. are piling it all on so that there can be a Big eruption to smash it all up—

  just to annoy me—

    I’m somewhat in a fog during the day and evening—but not today—much—you know—

  dulled, etc. far away—

    I don’t even know about continuing with you after—I don’t know anything—

    It’s all fake

                                                                                Anyway—

                                                                                      F.


  I wrote a letter to the parole physician who had misunderstood her report

on her reactions in therapy. I asked him to give her a chance at recovery and

to transfer her to a private institution. The physician agreed to that, but the

deterioration  which  I  had  expected  began  to  make  rapid  progress.  I  shall

reproduce here the letters I received during that time. They give a rather clear

picture of what happened to her; in her fight for life and recovery the patient

showed great insight, expressed in a psychotic manner. If the reader takes

care to study her letters thoroughly, to separate the psychotic expression from

the  content  of  her  ideas,  he  will  have  to  agree  that  these  schizophrenics

deteriorate not because of too little but because of too much and too clear

contact  with  the  world  of  armored  man.  It  is  true  that  the  idea  of  Jesus

appears in a typically psychotic manner in her as it does in many psychoses.

But it is also true that Jesus was nailed to the cross by a pack of sick, cruel,

murderous homines normales.


                                                              Thursday, November 19, 1942

    It’s awful and I don’t know what to do. The other night I found out the why of the world and

  the war and almost everything. They were drinking gallons of blood in front of me. The devil is

  red because of that and he gets redder and redder and then the blood goes to the the sun and

  makes it on fire. Jesus was dripping blood on the cross by drops and this was being swallowed

  then he was seated on the side of the devil and drinking too—the table was round oblong of  flowing thick blood (no feet on it) Mother Mary was at the corner watching. She was white as a

  sheet—All her blood had been drained off and consumed. She saw her son drinking that and

  suffered. I did not want to see it or hear it or know the why of everything—that why but they

  force me to see and hear—Maybe because of Isis—whom they used all these thousands of years

in between I don’t know what to do.

                                                                                      F.

    The other night I found out the why of the world and the war and almost everything. They

  were drinking gallons of blood in front of me …


  This statement was perfectly true, in full accordance with reality. Hitler

and other militarists were shedding millions of gallons of blood. The hook-up

with the red of the sun is psychotic, of course, and yet we feel inclined to

think about this connection.

  I had no message from the patient for several months. Then, in February

1943, I received the following letter. It was clear that she was still fighting

bravely and that she tried hard to hold on to me:


                                                                            Feb. 14, 1943

    Things are screwy as hell—the world and all the people in it stink—Everybody is out to cut

  everybody else’s throat—with large, butcher knives—They kill 8 million—they were the Jews

  and they keep us in here alive—it makes no sense—nothing does—I’m not supposed to be

  eating and I eat so I’m paid back with intrigue and pettiness—All around me—just to trap me in

  the middle of it all—I have to be 115 lbs.—For a long time now and I get close to it and then eat

  tons and gain it all back—the 10 disciples are still waiting to be taken out of the catacombs and I

  can’t draw them out until I’m 115 lbs,—Now they are with the right hand side—The Lord and

  they help me on my promise to not eat but I do eat and, as I said before, get paid back plenty—

so much that I can’t always cope with it all. I don’t know anybody today only about generations

  ago—centuries ago— eons ago—ancient sage—

    Only work today is right and real—I love it—it never fails you—never—the work is a

  straight line—

    You told my brother you would write—please, please do—I don’t know anything and I’d

  like to hear about the straight corners from you—Thanks a lot—

                                                                                      F.


  Great insight into the realities of our society and our ways of life, though

expressed in a distorted manner, was characteristic of this letter, too, and is

the way many a schizophrenic looks through us.  The patient stayed in the mental institution another few months, more

than a year in all. Her brother kept me informed about her state of health. She

came out of the institution severely injured emotionally, but she had stood the

ground which she had gained during only three months of orgone therapy.

She seemed less psychotic now, but she had changed her character in the

direction of a compulsion neurosis. She was petty, mean, nasty toward her

relatives; in short, she had become a typical homo normalis. Her greatness

and the “spark” of genius were gone. The brother married a girl of another

faith.  Earlier,  she  would  not  have  cared  at  all.  She  would  have  taken  it

philosophically. Now she objected on petty religious grounds, exactly like

her mother, whom before she had fully seen through and whom she imitated

now. She did not work in the office any more as she had done during most

critical periods of her psychotic condition. She just went around dull and

without interest, clinging to her hated mother in the typical neurotic manner.

The  experience  of  her  violent  commitment  had  been  too  much  for  her.

Orgone therapy was not resumed until October 1944, a year after her release

from the institution.


3. Slow recovery


  Her biophysical status on October 4, 1944, was the following:

    Respiration  was  functioning  well,  air  was  passing  through  the  glottis,

only slightly restricted.

  Orgasm reflex was functioning easily and fully.

  Vaginal self-gratification with orgastic release was obtained at regular

intervals.

  Eyes were still slightly veiled but considerably improved.

  Total behavior was yielding and coordinated.

    “Forces” were “very weak” but “still around in the far distance.”

  A slight pressure in the depth between the eyes was felt occasionally.

  Skin of the face was ruddy.  In  the  course  of  a  few  exploratory  sessions,  shock-like  indications  of

catatonia  still  were  discernible,  but  on  the  whole  the  situation  seemed

satisfactory. I succeeded in releasing her crying fully. Thereupon, she asked

me to let her speak at length and about “something very important.” She had

found the origin of her idea that she was the goddess Isis.

  As a child, she remembered now, she had felt that she understood the

world so much better than others, especially the grownups. She had always

felt that the human beings around her were ill in a certain way which she

could not fully understand. The main thing in these experiences had been her

astonishment that she was capable of knowing so much more than the others.

Slowly,  she  had  developed  the  feeling  of  standing  apart  from  the  rest  of

human beings, and she began to believe that she had knowledge of thousands

of years. In order to explain to herself this extraordinary fact, she had to

assume  that  such  a  thing  was  only  possible  if  the  goddess  Isis  had  been

reborn in her body. In relation to the everyday course of petty events, this

idea appeared queer to her, and she had felt, therefore, still more apart. Then

she had begun to feel her body very strongly concentrated in her genitals.

This was contrary to everything in her environment. Slowly, she had learned

that the feeling in her body could be weakened or “removed” if she forced

herself to stiffen up. Then the excitations used to subside. She had felt these

excitations as overpowering and beyond her control. Later she had learned to

master them, but she still felt them around. The return of the overpowering

forces  was  usually  announced  by  a  strong  feeling  in  the  upper  abdomen.

Sometimes only this aura remained; at other times the forces had come back

in full force. Now she understood clearly that the overpowering forces of her

early childhood and the later “evil forces” from “beyond” were one and the

same thing.

  I had the impression that, in spite of this insight, a certain amount of

doubt was left in her mind about the true meaning of the “forces.”

  She continued to improve greatly. Her eyes became clearer, but off andon a pressure would return in her eyes. She explained eagerly: “But it [the

pressure] is behind the eyes, not in the eyes.…” I could only confirm this

statement.

  Four months later the patient was again overtaken by a catatonic attack,

but she overcame it. I suggested continuous daily irradiation of the region of

the sella turcica with orgone energy.

  I saw the patient again in January 1947. She read a great deal, had good

appetite.  She  had  had  intercourse  with  great  pleasure,  but  without  final

orgasm. In November of the same year she came again to ask my advice: the

orgastic release during intercourse was still not functioning properly. But she

worked well and felt well on the whole.

  I advised her not to see any physician any more, not even me, and to try

to forget the whole tragedy of her life. She begged for continuation of therapy

with me, but I felt that she should become entirely independent and advised

her to learn to stand on her own feet.

  On August 4, 1948, I received the following letter:


    I am writing to tell you how very much I was impressed by your book, Listen, Little Man! I

  cannot write I enjoyed the book since what you wrote about the “Little Man” is too sadly true,

  and I find myself fitting into those shoes.

    I want you to know that the antagonism and even hatred which I showed toward you and

  your work during therapy, stemmed from my knowledge (at times even conscious) that I was

  getting too close to the break-through of my body into feeling and perhaps love. This was

  something  I  could  not  permit—I  had  severely  controlled  my  body  all  my  life  and  even

  consciously damned it to extinction—treating my body as dirt, hating it and neglecting and

  torturing myself in punishment for early feelings and masturbation. This same hate I had for my

  body was hate which I projected on to you. Forgive me for this, Doctor, this hate has done a

  great  deal  of  damage  to  my  body  and  mind.  I  would  like  to  tell  you  that  in  spite  of  my

  “maliciousness and pettiness” your work with me did me tremendous good. I am aware of what

  harm I am doing to myself and others around me and why I am doing these things. Also, I find

  myself thinking and feeling that my body wants to be healthy and that my retreat into the “ivory

  tower” of mental illness only changed the color of the picture, but not the picture itself. I might

  make myself mentally ill to be something “special” to be certain that my body will keep far in

  the background, but I am gradually finding out that a healthy “active” body is more pleasure—

  physically and mentally.    So, I think you will see that I am getting there, however slowly, through your help. The

  process is slow since I still have a great number of tensions and sometimes blocks which I can’t

  seem to do anything about. Often my small courage fails and then the dark picture of hate,

  delusions, and suffering comes back but not permanently so, thanks for everything and I pray to

  God I have courage. F.


  At the end of 1948 I heard that she was in good condition—with the

exception of a letter I received from her telling me how “rotten” she was “in

her core” and how “unworthy to live in this beautiful world.” I told her to

stop worrying about it and to go on enjoying herself. She did not mention the

“forces” any more.

  A few weeks later she visited me. She seemed perfectly coordinated, her

eyes sparkled with intelligence and penetrating knowing. She worked well

and even studied a great deal. However, her genital love life was not in order.

She had no boy friend. She had met one whom she liked. One evening they

were together alone. She knew that it would happen that night, that he would

embrace her. She had brought some sleeping pills with her. She put some

sleeping pills into his wine glass, and he fell asleep. I advised her to remove

the last obstacle with the help of one of our psychiatric orgone therapists.

  Seven years have elapsed since the end of the therapeutic experiment; a

period of time long enough to make possible a sound judgment of the result

obtained,  but  not  long  enough  to  give  a  final  answer  as  to  whether  such

patients will stay sane.  This  will  depend  on  many  conditions  beyond  the

reach of individual orgone therapy. They are essentially of a social nature.

  It is mainly the question whether homo normalis will change his way of

living  and  thinking basically,  a  question  which  awaits  a  highly  uncertain

answer. The elucidation of the fact that the way of life of homo normalis

creates the schizophrenic breakdown in millions of healthy newborn infants

will, if seriously considered and executed practically, be a part of this all-

important answer. It is quite obvious that for some time already, and justly,

homo  normalis  has  come  under  sharp  scrutiny  as  to  the  soundness  and

rationality  of  his  ways  of  being.  We  can  learn  from  such  experiences  inindividual schizophrenics what homo normalis does to millions of newborn

children.  The  prevention  of  the  disease  “schizophrenia”  means  changing

radically  the  whole  system  of  education  of  small  children,  and  not  only

changing  the  schizophrenic.  The  latter  will  always  remain  an  individual

answer only, unless as a social endeavor.

  This  statement  does  not  mean  that  we  should  stop  studying  the

schizophrenic mind. It has much to tell us about human functioning, about

the  problems  of  perception  and  self-perception,  about  the  function  of

consciousness which is far less understood than the unconscious. It can tell us

much about how to help individual human beings who are in the beginning of

a  breakdown.  But  the  main  issue  in  this  as  in  all  other  similar  tasks  of

medicine and psychiatry will be the world of homo normalis, so long as he

cherishes age-old ideas and laws which do untold harm to the biological core

in every child of each new generation.

  In  this  process  of  mastering  the  emotional  plague,  we  shall  encounter

homo normalis at his worst; in the form of the righteous mystic and of the

mechanistic human animal who run away from themselves for exactly the

same reasons that forced our patient into the catatonic breakdown: the horror

of  the  plasmatic  currents  in  an  organism  which  has  become  incapable  of

coping with strong bio-energetic emotions and has lost the natural function of

self-regulation. All attacks upon our scientific work during the past twenty-

five  years  have  come  from  such  individuals  in  various  organizations  and

social bodies. Homo normalis  has  fought  orgone  biophysics  for  the  same

reason that made him burn witches by the thousands, that makes him “shock”

patients by the millions: the horror of the life forces in the human animal,

which he is unable to feel in himself. If we do not muster the courage to

maintain this insight, we shall fail as psychiatrists, physicians, and educators.

  For the first time in the history of medicine the emotional plague, which

is built and maintained on the fear of the organ sensations, has found its

medical opponent. This is our great obligation: TO ENABLE THE HUMAN ANIMALTO ACCEPT NATURE WITHIN HIMSELF, TO STOP RUNNING AWAY FROM IT, AND TO

ENJOY WHAT NOW HE DREADS SO MUCH.                                  CHAPTER XVI





                  THE EMOTIONAL PLAGUE




The term “emotional plague” is not a derogatory phrase. It does not connote

conscious malevolence, moral or biological degeneracy, immorality, etc. An

organism whose natural mobility has been continually thwarted from birth

develops artificial forms of movement. It limps or walks on crutches. In the

same way, a man goes through life on the crutches of the emotional plague

when the natural self-regulating life expressions are suppressed from birth.

The  person  afflicted  with  the  emotional  plague  limps  characterologically.

The  emotional  plague  is  a  chronic  biopathy  of  the  organism.  It  made  an

inroad into human society with the first mass suppression of genital sexuality;

it became an endemic disease which has been tormenting people the world

over  for  thousands  of  years.  There  are  no  grounds  for  assuming  that  the

emotional  plague  is  passed  on  from  mother  to  child  in  a  hereditary  way.

According to our knowledge, it is implanted in the child from the first days of

life. It is an endemic illness, like schizophrenia or cancer, with one notable

difference, i.e., it is essentially manifested in social life. Schizophrenia and

cancer are biopathies which we can look upon as the results of the ravages of

the emotional plague in social life. The effects of the emotional plague can be

seen in the human organism as well as in the life of society. Every so often,

the emotional plague develops into an epidemic just like any other contagious

disease, such as the bubonic plague or cholera. Epidemic outbreaks of the

emotional plague become manifest in widespread and violent breakthroughs

of sadism and criminality, on a small and large scale. One such epidemicoutbreak was the Catholic Inquisition of the Middle Ages; the international

fascism of the twentieth century is another.

  If we did not look upon the emotional plague as an illness in the strict

sense of the word, we would run the risk of mobilizing the police against it,

instead  of  medicine  and  education.  The  nature  of  the  emotional  plague

necessitates police force, and this is how it spreads. The emotional plague

does indeed represent a grave threat to life, but not one that will ever be

eliminated by police force.

  No one will take it as an insult if he is told that he is suffering from a

cardiac disease or that he is nervous. No one should take it as an insult if he is

told that he is suffering from an “acute attack of the emotional plague.” We

sometimes hear it said among orgonomists: “No sense wasting your time with

me today, I’m pesty.” In our circle, when someone is afflicted with a minor

case of the emotional plague, he deals with it by isolating himself and waiting

until the attack of irrationalism passes. In acute cases, where rational thinking

and friendly advice are of no avail, orgone therapy is used to remove the

infection.  It  can  be  seen  again  and  again  that  such  acute  attacks  of  the

emotional plague are always produced by a disturbance in the person’s love

life. They disappear upon the elimination of the disturbance. The acute attack

of the plague is such a familiar phenomenon to me and to my circle of co-

workers that we accept it as a matter of course and deal with it objectively. It

is extremely important for students of orgone therapy to learn to perceive

acute attacks of the plague in themselves before such attacks go too far, to

know how to keep such attacks from getting the best of them, to prevent them

from spreading into the social environment and causing damage there, and,

by means of intellectual detachment, to wait until they pass. In this way, we

succeed in keeping harmful effects in our cooperative work at a minimum.

Sometimes such an attack cannot be dealt with and the afflicted person causes

a certain amount of harm or even resigns. We take such misfortunes in the

same way one would take the acute physical ailment or demise of a belovedcolleague.

  The emotional plague is more closely related to character neurosis than to

organic heart disease, for example, but it can lead to cancer or heart disease in

the long run. Just like the character neurosis, it is sustained by secondary

drives. It differs from physical defects inasmuch as it is a function of the

character  and,  as  such,  is  strongly defended.  As  opposed  to  a  hysterical

attack, an attack of the emotional plague is not sensed as a symptom and as

ego-alien.  True  enough,  character-neurotic  behavior  is  usually  highly

rationalized, but this is true of the emotional plague reaction to a far greater

extent.  One  is  hardly  aware  of  it  at  all.  How  do  we  recognize  a  plague

reaction and how do we distinguish it from a rational reaction, the reader will

want to know. The answer is that we distinguish it in the same way that we

distinguish a rational reaction from the reaction of a neurotic character: as

soon as the roots or motives of the plague-afflicted reaction are touched, the

result is invariably anxiety or anger. Let us go into this in more detail.

  A man who is essentially free of the emotional plague and is orgastically

potent is not overcome by fear when a physician discusses the dynamics of

natural life processes. On the contrary, he develops a lively interest in such a

discussion. The man afflicted with the emotional plague will become restless

or  angry  when  the  mechanisms  of  the  emotional  plague  are  discussed.

Orgastic impotence does not always lead to the emotional plague, but every

person  afflicted  with  the  emotional  plague  is  either  lastingly  orgastically

impotent or becomes impotent shortly before the attack. This makes it easy to

distinguish the plague reaction from rational reactions.

  Furthermore,  a  natural  and  healthy  behavior  cannot  be  disturbed  or

eliminated  by  any  genuine  medical  treatment.  For  example,  there  is  no

rational means of “curing,” i.e., disturbing, a happy love relationship. But a

neurotic symptom can always be eliminated. A plague reaction is accessible

to and can be eliminated by the genuine character-analytic art of healing. This

is  how  we  recognize  it.  Thus,  avarice,  a  typical  character  trait  of  theemotional plague, can be cured, but pecuniary generosity cannot be cured.

Insidious cunning can be cured; characterological openness cannot be cured.

Clinically, the emotional plague reaction is comparable to impotence; it can

be eliminated, i.e., cured. Genital potency, on the other hand, is “incurable.”

  An essential and basic characteristic of the emotional plague reaction is

that action and the motive of the action never coincide. The real motive is

concealed and a sham motive is given as the reason for the action. In the

reaction of the natural and healthy individual, motive, action, and goal form

an organic unity. Nothing is concealed. This unity is immediately evident.

For example: the healthy individual has no other motive for his sexual acts

than his natural need for love, and no other goal than its gratification. The

ascetic, plague-ridden individual, on the other hand, uses ethical codes to

justify  his  sexual  debility.  This  justification  has  nothing  to  do  with  the

manner in which he lives, which is there before the justification. The healthy

person will not want to impose his way of life on anyone, but he will cure and

he will help others when he is asked and when he is capable. In no case will a

healthy individual legislate that everyone “has to be healthy.” First, such a

demand would be irrational, for a person cannot be ordered to be healthy.

Second, the healthy  individual has no urge to force his way of life upon

others, for the motives of conduct are related specifically to his own life and

not  to  anybody  else’s.  The  person  afflicted  with  the  emotional  plague  is

distinguished  from  the  healthy  individual  by  the  fact  that  he  makes his

demands of life not only on himself but, above all, on his environment. In

situations in which the healthy individual makes suggestions and helps, in

which he uses his experiences as an example to others, leaving it up to them

whether they want to follow, the person afflicted with the emotional plague

imposes his mode of life upon others by force. Individuals afflicted with the

emotional plague do not tolerate views which threaten their armor or unmask

their irrational motives. The healthy person is happy to be given an insight

into his motives. The plague-afflicted individual is seized by frenzy. Whenviews contrary to his own disrupt his life and work, the healthy individual

puts up a strong rational fight for the preservation of his way of life. The

plague-afflicted person fights against other modes of life even when they

don’t concern him in any way whatever. He is impelled to fight because he

senses the very existence of other ways of life as a provocation.

  The energy which sustains the emotional plague reaction always derives

from genital frustration, whether it is a matter of sadistic deeds of war or the

defamation of friends. Stasis of sexual energy is what the plague-afflicted

individual has in common with all other biopathies. I shall have a word to say

about the differences shortly. The basic biopathic nature of the emotional

plague is revealed in the fact that, like every other biopathy, it can be cured

by establishing the natural capacity for love.

    Susceptibility to the emotional plague is universal. There is no clear-cut

line of distinction between those afflicted with and those uncontaminated by

the  plague.  Just  as  every  man  somewhere  in  the  depths  is  susceptible  to

cancer, schizophrenia, or alcoholism, so even the healthiest and most life-

affirming among us is susceptible to irrational plague reactions.

  It is easier to distinguish the emotional plague from the structure of the

genital  character  than  to  distinguish  it  from  the  structure  of  the  neurotic

character.  While  the  emotional  plague  is  indeed  a  character  neurosis  or

character biopathy in the strict sense of the word, it is also more than that,

and this “more” distinguishes it from biopathies and character neuroses. We

can define the emotional plague as human behavior that, on the basis of a

biopathic character structure, operates in an organized or typical way in

interpersonal, i.e., social, relations and in social institutions. The emotional

plague  is  just  as  widespread  as  the  character  biopathy.  In  other  words,

wherever there are character biopathies, there is also at least the possibility of

a chronic effect or an acute epidemic outbreak of the emotional plague. Let us

briefly outline a few typical areas in which the emotional plague is either

chronically rampant or capable of breaking out in an acute way. We shall seeimmediately that it is precisely the most important spheres of life in which

the  emotional  plague  is  active:  mysticism  in  its  most  destructive  form;

passive and active thirst for authority; moralism; biopathies of the autonomic

nervous system; party politicking; familial plague, which I have designated as

“familitis”;  sadistic  methods  of  education;  masochistic  toleration  of  such

methods  or  criminal  rebellion  against  them;  gossip  and  defamation;

authoritarian bureaucracy; imperialistic war ideologies; everything that falls

under the American concept of “racket”; antisocial criminality; pornography;

profiteering; racial hatred.

  We see that the compass of the emotional plague coincides approximately

with the broad compass of social abuse, which has always been and still is

combatted by every social freedom movement. With some qualifications, it

can be said that the sphere of the emotional plague coincides with that of

“political reaction” and perhaps even with the principle of politics in general.

This would hold true, however, only if the basic principle of all politics,

namely thirst for power and special prerogatives, were carried over into those

spheres of life which we do not think of as political in the usual sense of the

word. For example, a mother who resorts to political methods to alienate her

child  from  her  husband  would  come  under  this  extended  concept  of  the

political emotional plague. The same would apply to an ambitious scientist

who  works  himself  up  to  a  higher  social  position  not  by  concrete

accomplishments but by intrigue.

  We  have  already  stated  that  biological sexual  stasis  is  the  common

biophysiological core of all forms of the emotional plague. On the basis of

our present experiences, we can say that a genital character is incapable of

using  the  methods  of  the  emotional  plague.  This  constitutes  a  great

disadvantage  in  a  society  ruled  to  such  a  large  extent  by  plague-ridden

institutions.  There  is  another  common  denominator  in  all  forms  of  the

emotional plague: the lack of the capacity for natural sexual gratification

leads  to  the  development  of  secondary  impulses,  particularly  sadisticimpulses. There is abundant clinical evidence in support of this statement.

Hence,  it  does  not  surprise  us  to  find  that  the  biopsychic  energy  which

sustains  the  emotional  plague  reactions  always  derives  from secondary

drives. In pronounced cases, specific human sadism is never missing.

  Thus, it is not surprising that truthfulness and straightforwardness, though

highly  extolled  modes  of  behavior,  are  rarely  encountered  in  human

intercourse; they are so rare, indeed, that most people are amazed when they

occasionally prevail. To judge from our “cultural” ideals, one would expect

truthfulness  and  straightforwardness  to  be  everyday,  self-understood

attitudes.  The  fact  that  they  are  not,  that  they  are  looked  upon  with

astonishment,  that  truthful  and  straightforward  men  and  women  are

considered freaks, a bit “touched in the head”, that, indeed, being truthful and

sincere often entails severe social dangers—all this cannot be explained on

the basis of the ruling cultural ideology. To arrive at an understanding of

these  contradictions,  we  must  turn  to  our  knowledge  of  the  organized

emotional plague. This knowledge alone is capable of providing an insight

into the reasons why objectivity and truthfulness, the driving forces of all

strivings for freedom, have been frustrated again and again over the centuries.

It cannot be assumed that any freedom movement will have any chance of

achieving its goals if it does not sharply and clearly confront the organized

emotional plague with truthfulness.

  The fact that the emotional plague was not previously recognized was its

surest protection. An exact investigation of its nature and its dynamics will

demolish this protection. The champions of the emotional plague will be right

in interpreting this declaration as a mortal threat to their existence. This will

be  clearly  brought  out  in  the  way  the  champions  and  perpetuators  of  the

emotional  plague  react  to  the  following  objective  representations.  On  the

basis of these reactions, we shall be able to and shall have to distinguish those

who want to help in the fight against the emotional plague from those who

want  to  preserve  its  institutions.  We  have  seen  again  and  again  that  theirrational nature of the emotional plague unwittingly reveals itself as soon as

one  attempts  to  go  to  the  root  of  it.  This  is  understandable  because  the

emotional plague can only react irrationally. It is doomed to extinction when

it is sharply and clearly opposed by rational thinking and the natural feeling

for life. It does not have to be attacked or fought directly. The plague will

automatically  and  inevitably  work  itself  into  a  rage  when  the  natural

functions  of  the  living  organism  are  objectively  and  truthfully  described.

There is nothing it hates more than this.


  DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE GENITAL CHARACTER,

THE NEUROTIC CHARACTER, AND EMOTIONAL PLAGUE

                                    REACTIONS


a) In thinking


  The  genital  character’s  thinking  orients  itself  on objective  facts  and

processes.  The  genital  character  distinguishes  the  essential  from  the  non-

essential or less essential; he attempts to think out and eliminate irrational

emotional disturbances; he is, in terms of his nature, functional, i.e., capable

of  adapting  himself; he  is  not  mechanistic  and  he  is  not  mystical.  His

judgments are the result of a thought process. Rational thinking is open to

objective  arguments,  for  it  has  difficulty  functioning  without objective

counterarguments.

  To  be  sure,  the neurotic  character  also  attempts  to  orient  himself  in

objective  facts  and  processes.  In  the  neurotic  character,  however,  rational

thinking is interfused with and affected by chronic sexual stasis, as a result of

which he also to some extent orients himself on the principle of the avoidance

of unpleasure. So the neurotic character will use various means of avoiding

processes and events which, if he examined them, would produce unpleasure

or would be at variance, for example, with a compulsive character’s system

of thinking; or he will probe these processes and events in such a way, i.e.,irrationally,  that  the  rational  goal  becomes  unattainable.  Let  us  cite  an

example.  Peace  and  freedom  are  universally  desired.  However,  since  the

average character structure is neurotic in its thinking, fear of freedom and

fear of responsibility  (pleasure  anxiety)  become  intertwined  with  ideas  of

peace and freedom, and these goals are therefore discussed in a formalistic

rather  than  objective  manner.  It  is  almost  as  if  the  simplest  and  most

immediate facts of life, i.e., those facts which obviously represent the natural

building material of peace and freedom, are intentionally avoided. Important

relations  and  connections  are  overlooked.  For  example,  it  is  certainly  no

secret that politics is ruinous and that humanity is sick in the psychiatric

sense of the word. Yet no one seems to see the connection between these

facts and the demand for a viable democratic order. Thus, two or three well-

known and generally valid facts exist side by side, without any connection.

Showing  how  these  facts  are  related  to  one  another  would  immediately

necessitate radical  changes  in  the  practical  affairs  of  everyday  life.

Ideologically,  the  neurotic  character  would  be  prepared  to affirm  these

changes. However, he fears their practical realization. His character armor

forbids a change in the life pattern that has become rigid. Thus, he will, for

example, agree with the critique of irrationalism in society and in science. In

a practical and objective way, however, he will refashion neither himself nor

his surroundings in keeping with this critique. He will not create a model

social center reflective of the ideology he affirms. It often happens, indeed,

that  the  same  individual  who  says  yes  when  it  is  a  question  of  ideology

becomes a vehement opponent in practice when someone else brings about

actual changes. At this point, the boundaries between the neurotic character

and the individual afflicted with the emotional plague become blurred.

  The individual afflicted with the emotional plague is not content to take a

passive attitude—he is distinguished from the neurotic character by a more or

less life-destructive social activity. His thinking is completely muddled by

irrational concepts and governed almost exclusively by irrational emotions.In the neurotic character, thinking and acting do not coincide. This is not true

of the plague-afflicted character. As in the genital character, his thinking is in

complete agreement with his actions, but there is a significant difference, i.e.,

his  conclusions  are  not  the  result  of  his  thinking.  They  are  always

predetermined by his emotional affliction. In the person afflicted with the

emotional plague, thinking does not, as in the rational individual, serve to

help him arrive at a correct conclusion; on the contrary, it serves to confirm

and  rationalize  a  predetermined  irrational  conclusion.  This  is  generally

known as “prejudice,” but one fails to see that this prejudice has detrimental

social effects on a large scale. It is universally disseminated and characterizes

just about everything that is called “tradition.” It is intolerant, i.e., it does not

countenance the rational thinking which could pull the ground out from under

it. Hence, plague-afflicted thinking is not accessible to arguments. It has its

own technique in its own sphere, its own “coherence,” so to speak, which

impresses  one  as  “logical.”  In  this  way,  it  creates  the  impression  of

rationality, without in reality being rational.

  For instance, a strict authoritarian educator will tell you that children are

difficult to teach and that is why his methods are necessary. In this narrow

framework, his conclusion seems to be correct. If a rational thinker comes

along  and  points  out  that  the  intractableness  of  children  which  the  strict

authoritarian cites to justify his methods is itself a social consequence of

precisely this irrational thinking in education, he will find himself face to face

with a mental block. Precisely at this point the irrational nature of plague-

afflicted thinking emerges.

  Let  us  give  another  example.  Moralistic  sexual  repression  produces

secondary  drives,  and  secondary  drives  make  moralistic  suppression

necessary. Any number of logical conclusions can be drawn on the basis of

this relation. But if the clear thinker points out that the secondary drives can

be  eliminated  by  making  possible  the natural  gratification  of  needs,  the

plague-afflicted individual, though his frame of reference has been shattered,will  react  not  with  insight  and  correction  but  with  irrational  arguments,

silence, or even hatred. In short, it is emotionally important for him that both

repression and secondary drives continue to exist. He is afraid of the natural

impulses. This fear operates as an irrational motive for his entire, in itself

logical, frame of reference and drives him to commit dangerous actions when

his social system is seriously threatened.


b) In acting


  In the genital character, motive, goal, and action are in harmony with one

another.  The  goals  and  motives  are  rational,  i.e., socially  oriented.  In

accordance with the natural character of his motives and goals, i.e., on the

basis of their primary biological foundation, the genital character strives for

an improvement in his own conditions of life and in the conditions of life of

others. This is what we call “social accomplishment.”

  In  the  neurotic  character,  the  capacity  for  action  is  always  limited,

because  the  motives  are  devoid  of  affect  or  are  contradictory.  Since  the

neurotic  character  has  usually  deeply  repressed  his  irrationality,  he  is

constantly  forced  to  keep  it  under  control.  And  this  very  repression

constitutes the limitation of his capacity for action. He is afraid to become

fully involved in any activity, for he is never sure whether sadistic or other

impulses might break through. He usually suffers because he is aware that he

is inhibiting his own life, but he is not envious of healthy people. He can be

characterized by the attitude: “I was unfortunate in life; our children should

have it better than I did.” This attitude makes him a sympathetic, though

sterile spectator of progress. He is not detrimental to progress.

  In the individual afflicted with the emotional plague, the motives of the

action are always counterfeit. The ostensible motive never tallies with the

real motive, whether the latter is conscious or unconscious. Nor does the

ostensible  goal  tally  with  the  real  goal.  In  German  fascism,  for  example,

“salvation and pacification of the German nation” was given as the goal,whereas the real goal—grounded in the character structure—was imperialistic

war,  the  subjugation  of  the  world,  and  nothing  but  that.  It  is  a  basic

characteristic of the plague-afflicted individual that he seriously and honestly

believes in the ostensible goal and motive. I should like to stress that the

character structure of a person afflicted with the emotional plague can be

comprehended only if it is taken seriously. The plague-afflicted person acts

under a structural compulsion. No matter how good his intentions may be, he

can act only in the manner of the plague. His action is in keeping with his

nature just as much as the need for love or truth is in keeping with the nature

of the genital character.

  But the plague-afflicted individual, protected by his subjective conviction,

does not suffer from insight into the harmfulness of his act. A father who, out

of  hatred  for  his  wife  (who,  let  us  say,  was  unfaithful  to  him),  demands

custody of their child is seriously convinced that he is acting “in the best

interest of the child.” But if the child suffers under the separation from the

mother or even begins to go to pieces, such a father will prove to be totally

impervious to any form of remedy. The plague-afflicted father will find all

kinds of superficial arguments in support of his conviction that he “means

well” by the child in keeping him away from his mother. It will be out of the

question to convince him that the real motive is sadistic punishment of the

mother.

  The person afflicted with the emotional plague, in contrast to the neurotic

character, always develops as a part of his structure an envy coupled with a

deadly  hatred  of  everything  healthy.  A  character-neurotic  spinster  lives  a

resigned life and does not interfere in the love life of young girls; a plague-

afflicted spinster, on the other hand, cannot endure the sexual happiness of

young girls. If such a spinster is a teacher, she will be sure to make the girls

entrusted to her care incapable of experiencing sexual happiness. This holds

true for every life situation. The character afflicted with the emotional plague

will  attempt,  under  all  circumstances  and  with  every  available  means,  tochange his environment so that his way of life and his way of seeing things

are not jeopardized. He senses everything that is at variance with his way of

life  as  a  provocation  and,  therefore,  persecutes  it  with  bitter  hatred.  The

ascetic is a good illustration. Under one guise or another, the ascetic’s basic

attitude is: “Why should others have it any better than I had it? Let them

suffer as I suffer.” In every case, this basic attitude is so well concealed in a

logical, well-thought-out ideology or theory of life that only someone having

wide practical experience and capable of incisive thinking can unmask it. It is

distressing but necessary to record here that, as recently as the beginning of

this century, the greater part of official European education was modeled

along these lines.


c) In sexuality


  The  sexuality  of  the  genital  character  is  essentially  determined  by  the

basic natural laws of biological energy. He is so constituted that he naturally

takes  pleasure  in  the  sexual  happiness  of  others.  In  the  same  way,  he  is

indifferent to perversions and has an aversion to pornography. The genital

character  is  easily  recognized  by  the  good  contact  he  has  with  healthy

children.  He  considers  it  quite  natural  that  children  and  adolescents  are

essentially sexually oriented. In the same way, he fulfills or at least strives to

fulfill  the  (often  socially  restricted)  demands  which  result  from  these

biological facts. This attitude exists spontaneously, whether a corresponding

knowledge has been acquired or not. In our society, these very mothers and

fathers, unless they happen to live in a milieu which supports their views, are

exposed to the serious danger of being looked upon and treated as criminals

by authoritarian institutions. They deserve the exact antithesis—the greatest

possible  social  protection.  They  constitute  centers  of  society  from  which

rationally acting educators and physicians will one day proceed. The basis of

their life and actions is the sexual happiness which they themselves have

experienced.  Parents,  for  example,  who  would  allow  their  children  toexperience sex in keeping with completely healthy, natural laws, would be in

danger of being accused of immorality (or “moral turpitude”) and of being

deprived of their children by any ascetic who happened to have power.

  The neurotic character lives a sexually resigned life or engages in secret

perverse activities. His orgastic impotence is accompanied by a yearning for

sexual happiness—he is indifferent to the sexual happiness of others. He is

more likely to be ruled by anxiety than by hate whenever he comes into

contact with the sexual problem. His armor relates solely to his own sexuality

and  not  to  the  sexuality  of  others.  His  orgastic  longing  is  very  often

incorporated into cultural or religious ideals, which are neither very useful

nor very detrimental to the welfare of the community. The neurotic character

is usually active in circles and groups which do not have any great social

influence. There can be no doubt about the cultural value of some of these

groups. But the neurotic character is not capable of making any significant

contribution to creating healthier structures on a mass scale, for the broad

masses are far more intimate with the question of natural sexuality than he is.

  This  basic  attitude  on  the  part  of  the  sexually  innocuous,  neurotic

character is capable, at any time and under corresponding external conditions,

of changing into a plague-ridden attitude. The process is usually as follows:

the secondary drives held in check by the cultural and religious ideals break

through. The sexuality of the character afflicted with the emotional plague is

usually  sadistic  and  pornographic.  It  is  characterized  by  the parallel

existence  of  sexual  lasciviousness  (owing  to  the  incapacity  to  achieve

gratification) and sadistic moralism. This dualism is a part of his structure;

the plague-afflicted individual could not change it even if he had insight and

knowledge. In  terms  of  his  structure,  he  cannot  be  anything  but

pornographically lascivious and sadistically moralistic at the same time.

  This is the core of the character structure of the plague-afflicted person.

This structure develops bitter hatred against every process which provokes its

own  orgastic  yearning  and,  hence,  orgasm  anxiety. The  demand  forasceticism is directed not only against oneself but, above all and in a sadistic

way,  against  the  natural  sexuality  of  others.  Persons  afflicted  with  the

emotional plague have a strong tendency to form social circles. These circles

become centers for the molding of public opinion. Their most outstanding

characteristic  is  their  strong  intolerance  in  questions  of  natural  sexuality.

They are widespread and well known. Under the banner of “culture” and

“morality,”  they  persecute  to  the  extreme  every  expression  of  natural

sexuality.  Over  the  years  they  have  developed  a special  technique  of

defamation. We shall speak of this later.

  Clinical investigations leave no room for doubt that sexual gossip and

defamation afford these emotionally plagued individuals a kind of perverse

sexual gratification; they can thus attain sexual pleasure without the natural

genital  function.  It  is  precisely  in  such  circles  that  we  often  find

homosexuality,  sexual  intercourse  with  animals,  and  other  forms  of

perversion.  These  Vehmic  courts  direct  their  sadistic  attacks  against  the

natural  sexuality  of  others, not  against  perverse  sexuality.  They  take  an

especially  sharp  stand  against  the natural  sexuality  of children  and

adolescents, whereas, strangely enough, they are purblind to every form of

perverse sexual activity. They have many human lives on their consciences.


d) In work


  The  genital  character  takes  an  active  interest  in  the  development  of  a

work process which is allowed to take its own course. His interest is focused

essentially on the process itself. The result of the work is achieved without

special  effort,  for  it  ensues  spontaneously  from  the  work  process. The

shaping of the product through the course of the work process is an essential

feature of the biological pleasure of work. This leads to a sharp criticism of

all methods of educating children through toys which spell out the child’s

activity. The predetermination of how the toy is to function and the rigid

prescription of how the toy is to be put together stifle the child’s imaginationand productivity. Compulsive moralism tolerates only mystical ecstasy; it has

no patience with genuine enthusiasm, and this is the reason why enthusiasm

with regard to work is always lacking. A child who has to put together a

preplanned  house  with preplanned  building  blocks  in  a preplanned  way

cannot apply his imagination and cannot develop any enthusiasm. We can

easily understand that this basic characteristic of authoritarian education is

part of the pleasure anxiety of adults. It has a stultifying effect upon the

child’s  pleasure  in  work. The  genital  character  influences  the  work

performance  of  others  by  setting  an  example  and  not  by  prescribing  the

product  and  the  method  of  work.  That  requires  the  ability  to  tolerate

vegetative streaming and to be able to let himself go.

  The  neurotic  character  is  more  or  less  restricted  in  his  work.  His

biological  energy  is  essentially  consumed  in  the  warding  off  of  perverse

fantasies. The neurotic disturbance of work can always be traced back to a

misuse  of  biological  energy.  For  the  very  same  reason,  the  work  of  the

neurotic character, no matter how rich in potential it may be, is perfunctory

and joyless. Since the neurotic character is incapable of genuine enthusiasm,

he will look upon the child’s capacity for enthusiasm as “unseemly” (if, for

instance,  he  happens  to  be  a  teacher).  In  a  compulsive  neurotic  way,

nonetheless, he insists on determining the work of others.

  The  individual  afflicted  with  the  emotional  plague hates  work,  for  he

senses  it  as  a  burden.  Hence,  he  runs  away  from  any  responsibility  and

especially from small jobs which require patience. He may dream of writing

an important book, of painting an outstanding work of art, of running a farm,

etc.; however, since he is incapable of work, he shuns the necessary step-by-

step, persistent organic development inherent in every work process. This

predisposes  him  to  becoming  an  ideologue,  mystic,  or  politician,  i.e.,  to

engage  in  activities  which  do  not  require  any  patience  and  organic

development. He is just as likely to become an idle vagrant as the dictator of

this or that sphere of life. He has created a picture of life made up of neuroticfantasies and, since he himself is incapable of doing things, he wants to force

others  to  work  toward  the  realization  of  this  sick  picture  of  life.  The

American’s  negative  concept  of  the  word  “boss”  is  a  product  of  such  a

constellation.  A  genital  character  who  is  in  control  of  a  collective  work

process will spontaneously lead the way by his good example: he will work

more  than  the  others.  On  the  other  hand,  the  character  afflicted  with  the

emotional plague will typically want to work less than the others. The smaller

his capacity for work and, consequently, the lower his self-esteem, the greater

is his insistence on being a labor leader.


                                        *   *   *


This comparison necessarily took the form of clear-cut distinctions. In reality,

every  genital  character  also  has  his  neurotic  inhibitions  and  his  plague

reactions.  By  the  same  token,  every  plague-afflicted  individual  bears  in

himself  the possibilities  of  the  genital  character.  Experiences  in  orgone

therapy leave no doubt that persons afflicted with the emotional plague, those

who come under the psychiatric concept of “moral insanity,” are not only

curable in principle but are capable of developing exceptional capacities for

work, sexuality, and intellectual activity. This again gives us the opportunity

to stress that the concept “emotional plague” does not imply a disparagement.

In the course of almost thirty years of biopsychiatric work, I have come to

realize that a predisposition to the emotional plague is indicative of very high

quantities of biological energy. Indeed, the high tension of the individual’s

biological energy makes him sick with the emotional plague if, because of a

rigid character and muscular armor, he cannot realize himself in a natural

way.  The  person  so  afflicted  is  a  product  of  authoritarian  compulsive

education.  Because  of  the  frustration  of  his  unrealized  talent,  he  wreaks

revenge on compulsive education far more successfully than the quiet and

resigned neurotic character. He differs from the genital character inasmuch as

his rebellion is not socially oriented and is therefore incapable of effectingany rational changes for the better. He differs from the neurotic character

inasmuch as he does not become resigned.

  The genital character controls his emotional plague reactions in two ways:

(1) Since the structure of his character is of an essentially rational nature, he

senses his own plague reaction as alien and senseless. (2) He is so immersed

in rational processes that he is immediately aware of the danger to his life

process  which  could  ensue  from  his  irrational  tendencies.  This  awareness

enables  him  to  keep  himself  in  control.  The  person  afflicted  with  the

emotional plague, on the other hand, derives so much secondary, sadistic

pleasure from his own behavior that he is inaccessible to any correction. The

acts of the healthy individual flow directly from the reservoir of biological

energy; the acts of the plague-afflicted individual stem from the same source,

but they have to break through the character and muscular armor each time

and in the process the best motives become antisocial and irrational actions.

In  its  passage  through  the  character  armor,  the  original  goal  of  the  act

changes its function: the impulse begins with a rational intention; the armor

thwarts a smooth and organic unfolding of the impulse; the plague-afflicted

character senses this obstruction as an intolerable inhibition; the impulse

must first break through the armor in order to become at all manifest; in this

process the original intention and the rational goal are lost. When finally

realized, the act contains little of the original rational intention; it is an exact

reflection of the destructiveness which had to be brought into play in the

process of breaking through the armor. The brutality of the plague-afflicted

individual is a result of the failure on the part of the original impulse to get

through  the  muscular  and  character  armor.  A  loosening  of  the  armor  is

impossible, for the plague-ridden act neither discharges energy orgastically

nor  produces  rational  self-confidence.  This  “failure”  enables  us  to

comprehend  some  of  the  contradictions  in  the  structure  of  the  individual

afflicted with the emotional plague. He has a strong desire for love; he finds a

woman whom he believes he can love; he proves himself incapable of theexperience. This drives him into a sadistic rage against himself or against the

desired woman, a rage which not infrequently ends in murder.

  Basically, therefore, the individual afflicted with the emotional plague is

characterized by the contradiction between an intense desire for life and the

inability (because of the armor) to achieve a corresponding fulfillment of life.

To  the  careful  observer,  Europe’s  political  irrationalism  was  clearly

characterized by this contradiction. With the logic of a compulsion, the best

intentions led to destructive ends.

  It is my opinion that the gangster type constitutes a simple demonstration

of the mechanism of the emotional plague, if the result of the gangster act is

taken into account along with the inhibition of the rational impulse which

turns it into a plague-ridden act.

  Now let us endeavor to examine these differentiations in simple examples

from everyday life.

  Let  us  take  as  our  first  example  the fight for the child which usually

occurs when parents sue for divorce. There are three possible reactions: the

rational, the inhibited reaction of the neurotic character, and the emotional

plague reaction.


a) Rational


  Father and mother fight for the healthy development of the child with

rational arguments and means. It is possible that they agree in principle—

then it is easy; but it is also possible that they will have very different ideas

about the matter. Nonetheless, in the interest of the child, they will shun

underhanded methods. They will speak openly with the child and allow him

to make his own decision. They will not allow themselves to be governed by

selfish  interests;  they  will,  instead,  be  guided  by  the  child’s  inclinations.

When  one  or  the  other  parent  is  an  alcoholic  or  is  mentally  ill,  this

information will be communicated to the child as a misfortune that has to be

borne bravely, taking the greatest possible care to spare his feelings. Themotive will always be to prevent the child from being damaged. The attitude

is dictated by the sacrifice of one’s personal interest.


b) Character-neurotic


  The  fight  for  the  child  is  inhibited  by  all  kinds  of  considerations,

essentially  fear  of  public  opinion.  Conformity  to  public  opinion  takes

precedence over the child’s best interest. In such things, character-neurotic

parents abide by the prevailing practice: the child remains with the mother

under all circumstances, or they submit the case to legal authorities. When

one of the parents is a drinker or is mentally ill, then the tendency exists to

sacrifice oneself, to conceal the fact, with the result that the child as well as

the other parent suffer and are endangered. Divorce is avoided. The motive of

their behavior is epitomized in the sentence, “We don’t want to make a stir.”

Their attitude is determined by resignation.


c) The individual afflicted with the emotional plague


  The welfare of the child is always a spurious and, as the results show,

unfulfilled motive. The real motive is to wreak revenge on the partner by

depriving him or her of the pleasure of the child. Hence, in the fight for the

child, one partner resorts to defamation of the other, whether he or she is

healthy or sick. The absence of any consideration for the child is brought out

by the fact that his love for the other parent is not taken into account. As a

means of alienating the child from one or the other parent, he is told that his

mother  or  his  father  is  an  alcoholic  or  is  mentally  ill,  a  statement  which

usually does not correspond to the facts of the case. The result is that the

child is the one who suffers most; the motive is revenge on the partner and

domination of the child. Genuine love for the child is not at issue.

  There are any number of variations on this example, but its basic features

are the same and they are of general social importance. In making decisions,

a rational jurisprudence would have to give priority to such differentiations. Itcan be assumed that there will be a significant increase in the number of

divorces; and it is my opinion that only a correctly trained psychiatrist and

educator is capable of measuring the extent of the damage caused solely by

emotional plague reactions in cases of divorce.

  Let us cite another example from the sphere of private life in which the

emotional plague rages far and wide: the infidelity of a love partner.


a) Rational


  In cases in which one of the partners in a love relationship wants to be or

is unfaithful, the healthy individual reacts principally in one of three ways:

factual separation from the partner; competition and the attempt to regain the

partner’s love; or toleration when the other relationship is not too serious and

is of a temporary nature. In such cases, the healthy person does not take flight

into neurosis, does not make any legal claims, and becomes angry only if the

affair is carried out indecently.


b) Character-neurotic


  The infidelity is either suffered masochistically or the armor shuts off its

cognizance.  There  is  acute  fear  of  separation.  Resignation,  flight  into  a

neurotic illness or alcoholism, and hysterical attacks are typical reactions.


c) Individual afflicted with the emotional plague


  As a rule, infidelity occurs not for reasons of love for another person but

because one has become weary of one’s partner. The injured party attempts to

hold the partner in the house, to wear him or her out with hysterical attacks,

dominate him or her with scenes of the lowest sort, or even have him or her

watched by a detective. Flight into alcoholism often occurs as a means of

facilitating  the  brutalizing  of  the  partner.  The  motive  is  not  love  for  the

partner but thirst for power and possessiveness.

  Reactions of emotional plague are quite prevalent in tragedies of jealousy.At the present time, there are neither medical nor social nor legal views and

measures which take this vast and desolate sphere of life into account.

  Now let us turn our attention to an especially striking and typical mode of

reaction of the emotional plague which we shall designate as “specific plague

reaction.”

  The specific plague reaction has a special preference for the use of sexual,

i.e., moralistic, defamation. It functions in a way similar to the projection

mechanism in delusions of persecution; i.e., a perverse impulse which has

broken through the armor is transferred to persons or objects in the outer

world. What in reality is an inner impulse is misinterpreted as an external

threat. The same applies to the sensations which originate in the orgonotic

plasma  currents.  The  healthy  individual  experiences  these  currents  as

something  joyful  and  pleasurable.  The  schizophrenic  on  the  other  hand,

because  of  the  contradictions  which  result  from  his  character  armor,

perceives these currents as the secret workings of an evil fiend intent upon

destroying  his  body  with  electrical  currents.  These  insane  projection

mechanisms are well known. However, psychiatry makes the error of limiting

such projection mechanisms to the mentally ill. It fails to see that precisely

the same mechanism is rampant in social life in the form of the specific

plague  reactions  of  ostensibly  normal  people.  This  is  our  next  topic  of

discussion.

  The  biopsychic  mechanism  is  the  following:  compulsive  moralism  in

upbringing and in life produces sexual lasciviousness, which has nothing to

do with the natural need for love, and constitutes a real secondary drive like,

for example, sadism or masochism. Since orgonotic aliveness in the natural

experience of pleasure has atrophied, lasciviousness and the thirst for sexual

gossip become unbridled secondary needs. Just as the mental patient projects

his  orgonotic  currents  and  his  perverse  impulses  onto  other  persons  and

experiences  them  as  a  threat  issuing  from  them,  the  plague-afflicted

individual  projects  his  own  lasciviousness  and  perversions  onto  otherpersons.  In  contrast  to  the  mental  patient,  he  does  not  masochistically

experience as a threat the impulses which he projects onto the other person;

rather, he makes use of gossip in a sadistic way as a defensive mechanism,

i.e., he imputes to others what he cannot take cognizance of in himself. This

applies to natural genitality as well as to the secondary perverse impulse. The

mode of life of the genitally healthy person painfully reminds him of his own

genital weakness and, as such, constitutes a threat to his neurotic balance.

Thus, in conformity with the principle, “What I can’t have, you can’t have,”

he is forced to cast a slur upon the natural genitality of others. Moreover,

since he is not capable of wholly concealing his own perverse lasciviousness

behind a façade of ethical moralism, he imputes it to the victim of his gossip.

In every case of this form of plague reaction, one comes to realize that the

healthy individual is reputed to have precisely those characteristics against

which the plague-ridden individual struggles in vain or indulges in with a bad

conscience.

  The mechanism of the specific plague reaction is easily carried over from

the sexual to the non-sexual sphere. It is characteristic that something one

does oneself, would like to do, or is on the verge of doing is attributed to

someone else. We shall use a few typical, everyday occurrences to illustrate

the specific plague reaction.

  There are young intellectuals who were once known as “cultural snobs”

among the serious intellectual circles of Europe. They are clever, but their

intelligence is devoted to a kind of sterile artistic activity. Their acquaintance

with the magnitude and seriousness of the problems probed by a Goethe or a

Nietzsche  is  less  than  superficial,  but  they  take  great  pleasure  in  quoting

classical literature. At the same time, they are full of cynicism. They regard

themselves as modern, liberal, free of any conventions. Incapable of serious

experience, they look upon sexual love as a kind of child’s play. They spend

their  summer  vacations  in  communes,  little  boys  and  little  girls  living

together. At nights, there are amusing diversions, i.e., the “child’s play.” Atthe breakfast table, the child’s play is joked about in a carefree and very

clever  manner.  Possibly,  the  “sinful  woman”  will  be  made  to  blush  by

ambiguous  allusions.  All  this  is  very  much  part  of  today’s  “liberal”  and

“unconventional” way of living. One is “jolly”; one is “hip.” One intimates

how often one has engaged in the “play” the night before; and one lets it be

known, everything described in the “choicest” figures of speech, that it was

“very nice,” that she was “delightful,” etc. The serious listener, who is all too

familiar  with  the  abysmal  sexual  misery  of  masses  of  people  and  the

destructiveness of sexual triviality, comes away wtih the impression that the

lasciviousness of these “bright” young men and women is the result of sexual

hunger  due  to  orgastic  impotence.  Such  cultivated  “Bohemians”  typically

look upon the serious efforts of sex-economy to fight the emotional plague in

masses  of  people  as  the  fabric  of  a  sick  mind.  But  then  these  young

“geniuses”  are  well  versed  in  the  art  of  “high  politics.”  Forever  prattling

about the cultural “values” that have to be upheld, they become furious as

soon as one begins to translate their talk into social action among masses of

people.

  One such Bohemian met a woman who wanted to come to me to study.

Naturally, the conversation turned to my work. He gave her fair warning,

saying that he would send neither his best friend nor his worst enemy to me,

for I was, so he said, the “owner of a public brothel, without license.” To

conceal the flagrant plague-ridden nature of this statement, he immediately

added that I was a very able clinician. This defamation, patterned along the

lines of the specific plague reaction, made the rounds. Notwithstanding, the

woman came to me to study sex-economic pedagogy and soon grasped what

we call the emotional plague.

  It  is  difficult  to  maintain  an  objective  and  correct  attitude  in  such

situations. One cannot give into the impulse, which arises spontaneously and

for which there is good reason, to give such a plague-ridden individual a

good thrashing so that he will not go around defaming people any more, forone wants to keep one’s hands clean. To ignore the incident in a noble way is

to do precisely what the plague-afflicted individual counts on so that he can

continue to perpetrate his social mischief with impunity. There remains the

possibility of a libel suit against him. However, this would be to fight the

emotional plague on its own level and not in a medical way. Thus, one allows

the matter to take its own course. In so doing, however, one runs the risk that

another  such  plague-afflicted  person,  perhaps  a  “scientific  historian,”  will

take up the matter and pass one on to posterity with the “objective historian’s

                                                1
authority” as the owner of a secret brothel.

  The  matter  is  important  because  the  emotional  plague  has  succeeded

again and again, by means of such rumors, in crushing honest and important

accomplishments.  The  fight  against  the  emotional  plague  is  socially

necessary,  for  it  causes  more  damage  in  this  world  than  “ten  thousands

canons.” Read, for example, Friedrich Lange’s account of the defamations to

which the pioneer natural scientist of the seventeenth century, de la Mettrie,

was subjected by the emotional plague. In his great work Histoire Naturelle

de  l’Ame,  de  la  Mettrie  clearly  grasped  the  essential  relations  between

perception and physiological stimuli and correctly divined and described the

connection between the body-soul problem and the biological sexual process.

This was too much for the Philistines, who far outnumber bold and honest

scientists; they circulated the rumor that de la Mettrie was able to arrive at

such views only because he was a “libertine.” And thus the rumor was passed

on to posterity that de la Mettrie died from a pastry which, in true voluptuary

fashion, he had consumed too voraciously.

  This of course is medical nonsense. More than that, it is a typical example

of  plague-afflicted  rumor-mongering  which,  when  seized  upon  by  human

organisms incapable of pleasure, becomes a specific plague reaction and is

passed on to posterity, defiling, without rhyme or reason, a decent name. We

readily recognize the catastrophic role played by such plague reactions in

social life.  I should like to cite another example in which the projection mechanism

of the emotional plague, in the form of defamation, is even more clearly

manifested. In Norway, I heard that a rumor was being circulated that I had

become schizophrenic and had spent some time in a mental institution. With

some effort we succeeded in tracing the source of the rumor. When I came to

the United States in 1939, I ascertained that this rumor was very widespread,

much more so than in Europe, where my work was better known. In America,

the source of the rumor was even more obscure than it had been in Europe,

but certain signs clearly indicated that it stemmed from the same European

      2
source.

  The situation was not devoid of humor Shortly after my expulsion from

the International Psychoanalytic Association, the person who had originally

started this rumor suffered a nervous breakdown and was forced to spend

several weeks in a mental institution. This fact was directly communicated to

me  by  a  university  professor  who  was  well  informed  on  the  situation.

Evidently, the nervous breakdown gave this slanderer a terrible fright. He

found  himself  at  that  time  in  a  difficult  situation:  on  the  one  hand,  he

recognized the correctness of my development; on the other, he could not

detach  himself  from  an  organization  that  was  sharply  opposed  to  that

development.  As  is  usual  in  such  cases,  he  took  advantage  of  the

circumstances to divert attention from himself and focus it on me when I was

in the center of a critical controversy. He thought that I was finished, and the

opportunity to give me another kick was too tempting. His reaction was a

specific plague-afflicted projection.

  I have never been mentally ill, nor have I ever been confined to a mental

institution. I have borne until the present day one of the heaviest burdens ever

imposed upon a man, without any disturbance to my capacity for work and

love.  To  become  mentally  ill  is  no  disgrace.  I,  like  every  self-respecting

psychiatrist, have deep sympathy for mental patients and often admiration for

their conflicts. As I have stressed elsewhere, a mental patient appears to mefar more serious, far closer to what is alive than a Philistine or a socially

dangerous individual afflicted with the emotional plague. This defamation

was intended to ruin me and my work and it did result in a number of serious

situations that were not easy to master. With some students, for example, I

had the additional difficulty of persuading them that I was not mentally ill. In

certain  phases  of  orgone  therapy,  a  specific  mechanism  of  the  emotional

plague inevitably appears. As soon as the patient or pupil comes into contact

with his plasmatic currents, severe orgasm anxiety appears. What happens is

that the orgone therapist is looked upon as either a “dirty” sexual pig or an

“insane” man. I want to emphasize that this reaction appears regularly. Most

of my students had indeed heard about the rumor. Some aspects of the theory

of sex-economy are so revolutionary that it is extremely easy to regard the

theory itself as insane. I must state that, as a result of this rumor, certain

complicated situations became mortally dangerous. There should be clear-cut

legal  possibilities  for  precluding  such  consequences  of  a  plague-afflicted

reaction. I have only my clinical experience to thank for my being able to

weather—in  addition  to  the  already  existing  difficulties  of  my  work—the

dangers which derived from the rumor about my mental illness.

  The affair was not without comic after-effects. When it was realized some

years  later  that  my  scientific  work  clearly  indicated  that  I  was  not

schizophrenic, a new rumor was circulated and again from the same source.

Now  it  was  said  that,  happily,  I  had  “recovered”  from  my  schizophrenic

illness.

  Specific plague reactions are encountered particularly in the sphere of

politics. Again and again during the last few years we have seen that, with

every  fresh  conquest,  dictatorial-imperialistic  governments  attribute  to  the

victim precisely the intention they themselves have carried out. For instance,

it was said that Poland had been secretly planning an attack on the German

empire, that this had to be anticipated, and therefore Germany was justified in

attacking Poland. The attack on the Soviet Union was “justified” in the sameway.

  Also  illustrative  of  this  specific  plague  reaction  are  the  now  famous

“Moscow trials” of Lenin’s early co-workers. At these trials, the charge of

high  treason  was  lodged  against  functionaries  hostile  to  the  Russian

Communist Party; the defendants were accused of having maintained direct

contact with the German fascists and, together with them, of having planned

the overthrow of the government. To those who knew the backgrounds of

those accused, it was clear that the charges against them had been trumped

up.  But  in  1936  no  one  could  explain  the  purpose  of  such  an  obviously

spurious accusation. The Russian government was strong enough to eliminate

any troublesome opposition with less transparent arguments. It wasn’t until

1939 that the mystery was cleared up, at least for those who were already

familar with the specific plague mechanism. In 1936 the accused were said to

have committed precisely that crime against the state which the government

itself  actually  did  commit  in  1939.  It  signed  a  pact  with  Hitler  that

precipitated  the  war  with  Poland  and  divided  Poland  with  the  German

fascists. Only then was it understood that, by defaming others, the state had

succeeded in clearing itself of the pact with Hitler, so well, indeed, that the

implications of its action remained unknown to the public. This case was yet

another confirmation of the fact that the public acts as if it had no memory.

Such political plague reactions in fact count on this very irrationality in mass

thinking. It makes no difference that this pact did not help, that eventually the

German dictatorship became engaged in a war with the Russian dictatorship.

Nor could the subsequent rationalization change the fact that a pact had been

signed.

  Let us cite another example from the sphere of the emotional plague.

Leon  Trotsky  had  to  defend  himself  against  the  accusation  that  he  was

involved in a plot against the life of his rival. This was incomprehensible, for

the murder of Stalin would have only damaged the Trotskyites. It became

comprehensible  when  Trotsky  was  murdered  in  1941.  (These  facts  havenothing to do with political points of view for or against the Trotskyites.)

  If we go back only a few decades in the history of politics, we find the

famous Dreyfus case. High-ranking military men of the French general staff

had  sold  plans  to  the  Germans;  to  cover  themselves,  they  accused  the

unsuspecting and respectable Captain Dreyfus of the very crime they were

guilty of. They succeeded in having their victim convicted, and he languished

in  jail  for  more  than  five  years  on  a  faraway  island.  Without  Zola’s

courageous intervention, this specific plague reaction would never have been

combatted. That Dreyfus was subsequently honored does not erase in any

way the atrocity committed against him. If policies of state were not ruled to

such a large extent by the laws of the emotional plague, it would be a self-

understood principle that such catastrophes should never happen in the first

place. However, since the emotional plague governs the molding of public

opinion, it always succeeds in passing off its atrocities as regrettable errors of

justice, only to be able to continue its mischief with impunity.

  In the case of a government figure, his personal character has enormous

importance for the social life as a whole. If, for instance, the girl friend of a

king is French, one can be assured that in a world war during this king’s

reign, his country will be on the side of France against the German “arch

enemy.” If that same king should forfeit his throne shortly before or at the

beginning  of  the  second  world  war,  and  if  his  successor  had  a  personal

relationship with a German woman, the same country would fight the war on

the side of its former arch enemy, Germany, against France, its former ally.

  Whoever takes pains to scrutinize the workings of the emotional plague in

the sphere of politics will become more and more immersed in a condition

akin  to  acute  confusion.  Is  it  possible,  one  will  ask  oneself,  that  the

clericalism of a political dictator or the love affair of a king can determine the

weal and woe of several generations? Does irrationalism in social life go that

deep? Is it really possible that millions of industrious adults are not aware of

this, indeed refuse to be aware of it?  These questions seem peculiar only because the effects of the emotional

plague  are  too  fantastic  to  be  perceived  as  something  tangible.  Human

intelligence evidently refuses to admit that such absurdity can predominate

on  such  a  massive  scale.  It  is  this  stupendous  illogicality  of  such  social

conditions that represents their strongest protection. We must realize just how

enormous the effects of the emotional plague are and understand that this

enormity makes them appear incredible. I firmly believe that not one social

evil of any magnitude can ever be eliminated so long as the public refuses to

recognize that this absurdity does exist and is so enormous that it is not seen.

Compared  with  the  enormity  of  social  irrationality,  which  is  constantly

nourished by the deeply rooted emotional plague, the basic social functions

of love,  work,  and knowledge,  which  govern  the  life  process,  appear

infinitesimal; indeed, they appear socially ridiculous. We can easily convince

ourselves of this.

  On  the  basis  of  long  and  extensive  medical  practice,  we  know  that,

unresolved  as  it  is,  the  problem  of  adolescent  sexuality  plays  an

incomparably greater part in the molding of our social and moral ideologies

than some tariff law or other. Let us imagine that a parliamentarian, who

happened to be a physician, approached his government and demanded the

opportunity to give a thorough presentation of the problem of puberty at a

parliamentary session and to have it debated as a tariff bill is debated. Let us

further  imagine  that  this  same  outstanding  person  resorted  to  a  filibuster

because  his  request  was  denied.  In  a  simple  way,  I  believe  this  example

shows the basic contradiction between everyday life and the administrative

form which rules it. If we consider the matter calmly and objectively, we

shall find that there is nothing very special about a legislative debate on the

problems of puberty. Everybody, every member of parliament included, has

gone  through  the  hell  of  the  adolescent  neurosis  brought  on  by  sexual

frustration.  No  other  conflict  compares  with  this  one  in  magnitude  and

importance. It is a problem of general social interest. A rational solution tothe difficulties of puberty would eliminate at one blow a multitude of social

evils, such as juvenile delinquency, public care of mental patients, the misery

of divorce, the misery of child rearing, etc.—thousands of formal bills on

budgets and tariff systems could never even approach the problem.

  So we regard the demand of our medically oriented parliamentarian as

unequivocally rational, progressive, and useful. At the same time, however,

we ourselves shy away from it. Something in us is opposed to the possibility

of a public, parliamentary debate on this topic. This “something” is precisely

the effect and intention of the social emotional plague, which is constantly

striving to preserve itself and its institutions. It has drawn a sharp distinction

between official and private life, and the latter has been denied access to the

public platform. Official life is asexual on the surface and pornographic or

perverse  beneath  the  surface.  If  this  dichotomy  did  not  exist,  official  life

would immediately coincide with private life and correctly mirror everyday

life  in  large  social  forms.  This  unification  of  everyday  living  and  social

institutions would be simple and uncomplicated. Then, however, that sector

in the social framework would automatically perish which not only does not

contribute to the preservation of social life but, rather, periodically brings it to

the brink of the abyss. We can place this sector under the heading of “high

politics.”

  The continuation of the gap between the real life of the community and its

official façade is one of the emotional plague’s bitterly defended intentions.

There is no other way to explain the fact that the emotional plague always

resorts to force of arms when an effort is made to touch upon this gap in an

objective  and  rational  way.  Representatives  of  high  politics,  whether

personally affected or not, always attempted to thwart the dissemination of

the sex-economic recognition of the relationship between man’s biological

organism and the state. In their mildest form, their attacks were somewhat as

follows: “These ‘sex philosophies’ are immoral abscesses on the social body

which break open from time to time. It is true that the human animal has asexuality, but this is only to be regretted. After all, sexuality is not everything

in life. There are other, far more important problems, i.e., economics and

politics. Sex-economy exaggerates. We would get along far better without it.”

  This  is  a  typical  argument,  some  variation  of  which  is  regularly

encountered in curing a person of a biopathy and even in training a student.

We are convinced that this argument springs from orgasm anxiety and that its

aim is to prevent a disturbance of the person’s resigned attitude. Faced with

the same argument at a public meeting on mental hygiene, one cannot disarm

the advocate of cultural and other “values” by pointing to his personal armor

and pleasure anxiety. A sex-economist who used such an approach would

have the meeting against him, for the opponent of sex-economy shares this

character trait and the irrational argument that springs from it with the others.

Many a physician and teacher has floundered here. There is an incontestable,

purely logical counter-argument which, on the basis of our experience, is

successful.

  We concur with the opponent: sexuality is not everything in life. We even

add that, in healthy people, sexuality is not a topic of conversation or the

center of their thinking. But how do we explain that sexuality, which is not

everything in life, actually assumes the most prominent place in man’s life

and thinking? This fact cannot be gainsaid. Let us cite another example to

illustrate this.

  The circulation of steam in the steampipes of a factory is an unquestioned

precondition of the factory’s operation. However, the workers in a factory

hardly  give  a  moment’s  thought  to  the  circulation  of  the  steam.  Their

attention is completely concentrated on their work. The energy engendered

by the steam is “not everything” in the factory. There are other important

interests,  e.g.,  the  manufacture  of  machines  and  similar  things.  Let  us

imagine that all of a sudden one or more steam valves became clogged. The

flow  of  energy  engendered  by  the  steam  would  cease  immediately.  The

pistons would stop; the wheels would no longer turn; work would be out ofthe  question.  All  the  workers  would  have  to  direct  their  attention  with

dispatch to the obstructed flow of steam in the pipes. All thinking would be

centered  on  one  question:  how  a  regulated  circulation  of  steam  could  be

reestablished in the quickest way. Let us further imagine that some workers

began to argue about this situation as follows: “This confounded theory of

heat exaggerates the role of steam. Sure, it’s true that steam is necessary, but

it’s far from being everything in this factory. Don’t you see that there are

other things to worry about? What about the economy?” In a breakdown like

the one described, these “brainstorms” would merely be laughed at, and one

would quickly attempt to eliminate the basic disturbance in the circulation of

the steam before turning one’s thoughts to “other things.” It would serve no

purpose  to  consider  the  interests  of  economy  when  the  steam  valves  are

clogged.

  This example illustrates the nature of the sexual problem in our society.

The  flow  of  biological  energy,  i.e.,  sexual  energy,  is  disturbed  in  most

people. The biosocial mechanism of society therefore functions poorly and

sometimes not at all, and we have irrational politics, irresponsibility on the

part  of  masses  of  people,  biopathies,  homicide—in  short,  the  emotional

plague. If all people fulfilled their natural sexual needs in a natural way, there

would be little talk of the sexual problem; there would be no sexual problem.

Then one would be justified in contending that there are “also other things.”

  Because sex-economy is interested in seeing these so-called other things

come into their own, it spends much time and effort trying to eliminate the

basic  problem.  The  fact  that  today  everything  revolves  around  sex  is  the

surest indication that there is a severe disturbance not only in the human

animal’s flow of sexual energy but, as a consequence of this disturbance, in

his  biosocial  functioning.  Sex-economy  is  striving  to  open  the  valves

blocking the flow of biological energy in the human animal so that other

important  things,  such  as  clear  thinking,  natural  decency,  and  pleasurable

work, can function and pornographic sexuality will no longer occupy all ofone’s thinking, as is the case today.

  This disturbance of the flow of energy has a profound effect on the basis

of biosocial functioning and thus governs both limited and higher functions

of the human animal. I believe that the fundamental biological character of

this disturbance has not been comprehended in its full scope and depth, even

by some orgonomists. Once again let us cite an example to illustrate this

depth and the relationship of orgonomy to other sciences.

  Let us compare the natural sciences, which disregard this basic biological

disturbance,  to  a  group  of  railroad  engineers.  Let  us  imagine  that  these

engineers  write  thousands  of  highly  technical  books  describing  the

construction of trains, their size and the material of the doors and windows,

the seats and sleeping accommodations, the specific chemical composition of

the iron and wood, the strength of the brakes, the speeds at which these trains

are to travel and the time schedules, the stations, every detail of every single

track. In every book, however, these engineers regularly omit one detail—

they make no mention of the dynamics of steam. The natural sciences are not

familiar with the study of life processes from a functional point of view; they

are therefore comparable to these engineers. The orgonomist cannot perform

his work unless he has fully realized that he is the engineer of the living

apparatus. It is not our fault that, as engineers of the living apparatus, we are

first and foremost concerned with biosexual energy. We have not the slightest

reason to feel demeaned because of this. Quite the contrary: we have every

reason to be proud of our difficult task.

  One will ask in amazement how it was possible to have so completely

overlooked a disease that has so ravaged mankind for such a long time. He

who  has  gone  to  the  very  core  of  the  emotional  plague  knows  that

concealment is part of its nature. It owes its success to the impossibility of

getting  at  it,  seeing  through  it,  comprehending  it—all  part  of  its  intent.  I

stressed earlier that the disease was too obvious to attract attention. (Hitler:

“The  bigger  the  lie,  the  more  readily  it  is  believed.”)  Before  characteranalysis, there was no scientific method for the discovering and unmasking of

the  emotional  plague.  Politics  and  the  expression  of  political  opinion

appeared  to  have  a  special  kind  of  reason;  one  was  miles  away  from  an

intuition of the irrational character of the political plague. And the emotional

plague itself was in control of the most important social institutions and was,

therefore, in a position to prevent the recognition of its nature.

  We have to deal with the emotional plague every time we cure biopathies

and every time we have to restructure a teacher or physician. So, even in the

fulfillment  of  this  training  program,  the  emotional  plague  obstructs  our

efforts in the form of resistance reactions on the part of the character. This is

how we learn to know it clinically, and upon these experiences we base our

contention that it has left no human being unscathed.

  We  also  learn  about  its  nature  through  the  typical  reactions  to  the

scientific discoveries of orgonomy. Even if those afflicted with the emotional

plague are not directly affected by the results of our scientific work; even if

they are far removed from or unfamiliar with the subject; they have somehow

divined and feel threatened by the unmasking of the emotional plague as it

takes place in the quiet offices of character analysts and orgone therapists. In

spite  of  the  fact  that  they  were  not  directly  affected,  they  reacted  with

defamation and the specific plague reaction long before a single orgonomist

had  any  idea  that  he  was  on  the  verge  of  engaging  in  the  most  difficult

struggle that physicians and educators had ever undertaken. We shall go into

this matter in detail when we discuss the training of physicians and educators.

Here  it  is  merely  important  to  give  a  very  thorough  description  of  the

emotional plague’s general characteristics, so that everyone will be capable

of recognizing them in himself and in others.

  The emotional plague has known how to anticipate possible disclosures

by  well-concealed  and  rationalized  actions.  It  acted  like  a  nobly  dressed

murderer  whose  mask  has  been  torn  off.  The  emotional  plague  was

successful for more than a decade; it had almost succeeded in securing itsexistence for centuries to come. It would have indeed triumphed had it not

become  so  destructively  and  blatantly  manifest  as  dictatorships  and  mass

infection.  It  stirred  up  a  war  of  unimaginable  dimensions  and  added  to

chronic,  everyday  murder.  It  endeavored  to  conceal  itself  behind  high-

sounding “political ideals” and “new orders,” behind “ancient empires” and

“racial claims.” For years it was given credence by a psychiatrically sick

world. But its acts of betrayal were too blatant. It insulted the natural feelings

for  life  of  all  men  and  women,  leaving  no  family  and  no  profession

untouched. The phenomena which character analysts and orgone therapists

had learned to study and to fight so well over a long period of time in the

stillness of their offices suddenly became one with the phenomena of the

world  catastrophe.  Both  on  a  small  and  on  a  large  scale,  the  basic

characteristics were the same. Thus, the emotional plague itself came to the

aid of natural science, and the work of a few psychiatrists and educators. The

world began to ask about its nature and to demand an answer. This answer

shall  be  given  according  to  our  best  knowledge  and  conscience.  Every

conscientious person will discover the emotional plague in himself and, in

this way, better comprehend what plunges the world into tragedy again and

again. The “new order” always begins in one’s own house.

  The unmasking of these hidden activities and mechanisms of a decadent

life has two goals: first, the fulfillment of an obligation to society. If, in the

case of a fire, the water supply fails and someone knows the source of the

failure,  it  is  his  duty  to  name  it.  Second,  the  future  of  sex-economy  and

orgone biophysics has to be protected from the emotional plague. In Austria

in 1930; in Germany in 1932 and 1933; in Denmark in 1933; in Lucerne in

1934; in Denmark and Sweden in 1934 and 1935; and in Norway in 1937 and

1938, my honest work on the human structure was subjected to attacks. In

retrospect, I am almost inclined to feel grateful for these unjustified attacks,

for they did away with my good-natured guilelessness and opened my eyes to

a  generally  dangerous,  though  pathological,  system  of  defamation  andpersecution. When a thief goes too far and throws caution to the wind, he

runs a greater risk of being caught and rendered harmless. Until about ten

years ago, those who were afflicted with and spread the emotional plague felt

secure. They were too sure of their victory. For many years, indeed, victory

did  appear  to  be  on  their  side.  Great  perseverance,  deep  involvement  in

experimental and natural scientific work, and an independence from public

opinion—an  independence  for  which  one  can  only  be  grateful—rendered

their victory impossible. The emotional plague never lets up or rests until it

has  invalidated  great  deeds,  until  it  has  poisoned  the  fruits  of  human

diligence, research, and the attainment of truth. I do not think that it has

succeeded  this  time  or  that  it  will  succeed.  It  is  the  first  time  that  the

emotional  plague  is  confronted  not  only  by  honest  attitudes  but  by  the

necessary knowledge of life processes, which always make up in clarity what

they lack in strength. The strength and consistent application of orgonomic

natural science enabled me to recover from the heavy and dangerous blows I

received from the emotional plague. If that was possible, it seems to me that

the most difficult part has been accomplished.

  As far as I and my work are concerned, I should like to state one simple

fact for the reader’s consideration. Neurotic psychoanalysts declared that I

was mentally ill; fascist communists denounced me as a Trotskyite; sexually

frivolous people accused me of being the unlicensed owner of a brothel; the

Gestapo persecuted me on the grounds that I was a Bolshevik (the FBI did

the same on the grounds that I was a German spy); domineering mothers

wanted to pass me on to posterity as a seducer of children; charlatans in the

field of psychiatry called me a charlatan; would-be saviors of mankind called

me a new Jesus or Lenin. However flattering or unflattering these diverse

appellations may have been, this much should be clear: it is not likely that I,

being  but one  person,  could  have  been  brothel  owner,  spy,  Trotskyite,

schizophrenic, and savior all at the same time. Each of these activities would

have taken up a whole life. But I cannot have been all these things for thesimple reason that my interests and efforts lie elsewhere, namely in work on

the  irrational  human  structure  and  in  the  extremely  demanding  work  of

comprehending the recently discovered cosmic life energy; they lie, in short,

in  the  field  of  sex-economy  and  orgone  biophysics.  Perhaps  this  logical

consideration will help to remove a misunderstanding about me.

  Those who have read and really understood the works of great women

and  men  know  the  sphere  we  characterize  as  emotional  plague.

Unfortunately, these  great  accomplishments  have  remained  without  any

essential social effect. They were neither organized nor made the basis of

life-affirming  institutions.  If  that  had  happened,  it  would  be  difficult  to

believe that the emotional plague could have reached the extent it did in the

catastrophes of 1934–45. True, monuments have been erected in honor of the

great masters of literature, but all too often, we see that the emotional plague

knows how to build huge museums in which these great accomplishments

can be locked up and made innocuous through false admiration. Any one of

these accomplishments would have been enough to build a rational world if it

had been taken seriously as a practical possibility. I am not the first person to

make an effort to grasp and fight the emotional plague. I merely believe that I

am  the  first natural  scientist  who,  by  the  discovery  of  the  orgone,  has

provided a solid foundation on the basis of which the emotional plague can

be understood and vanquished.

  Today,  five,  eight,  ten,  fourteen  years  after  various  unexpected  and

incomprehensible catastrophes, this is my standpoint: just as a bacteriologist

devotes  all  his  efforts  and  energies  to  the  total  elimination  of  infectious

diseases, the medical orgonomist devotes all his efforts and energies to the

unmasking and combatting of the emotional plague as a rampant disease of

the people of the world. The world will gradually get accustomed to this new

form of medical activity. One will learn to comprehend the emotional plague

in oneself and in others and to go to scientific centers and not to the police,

the district attorney, or the party leader. There are police, district attorneys,and even saviors who are interested in mastering the emotional plague in

themselves and in others. For the police and the district attorney have to deal

with  biopathic  criminality,  and  the  human  savior  is  concerned  with  the

helplessness and mass biopathies of man. We want from now on to draw a

sharp  distinction  between  those  who  run  to  the  police  or  use  political

persecution to settle a controversy and those who use scientific reasoning.

Thus  we  will  be  in  a  position  to  distinguish  who  is  afflicted  with  the

emotional plague and who is not. At this point I should like to stress that we

do not enter into discussions of politics and police. On the other hand, we

welcome every form of scientific discussion; indeed, we wait for it.

  I believe that the time has come when helplessness toward the emotional

plague  is  beginning  to  disappear.  Until  now,  one  sensed  its  attacks  as

something comparable to a tree crashing to the ground or a stone falling from

the roof. Such things simply happened, and one was either lucky and got out

alive or one was unlucky and was struck down dead. From this point on, we

know that the tree does not tumble by accident and the stone does not fall of

its  own  volition  from  the  roof.  We  know  now  in  both  cases  that  well-

concealed, mentally disturbed human animals cause the tree to topple and the

stone to roll off the roof. Once this much has been grasped, the rest follows of

itself.

  Hence, when some physician or another files suit against an orgonomist

because of some “illegal activity”; when a politician accuses an orgonomist

of “tax fraud,” “child seduction,” “espionage,” or “Trotskyite opposition”;

when  we  hear  rumors  that  some  orgonomist  or  another  is  mentally  ill,

seduces his patients, operates an illegal brothel, etc., then we know that we

are  dealing  with  police  or  political  tactics  and  not  with  scientific

argumentation.  The  training  requirements  of  the  Orgone  Institute  and  the

demands  of  everyday  work  are  a  public  guarantee  that we  are  doing  our

utmost to combat the basic characteristics of the emotional plague.

  We do not conceal, nor have we ever concealed, that we cannot believe inthe  fulfillment  of  human  existence  as  long  as  biology,  psychiatry,  and

educational  science  have  not  come  to  grips  with  the  universal  emotional

plague, and fought it as ruthlessly as one fights plague-ridden rats. Nor do we

conceal the fact that extensive, careful, and painstaking clinical investigations

have led us to this conclusion: it is solely the reestablishment of the natural

love-life  of  children,  adolescents,  and  adults  which  can  rid  the  world  of

character neuroses and, with the character neuroses, the emotional plague in

its various forms.                                    NOTES






Preface to the First Edition

1. Footnote, 1945: today we would say “functional” conception.

2. Cf. Der Einbruch der Sexualmoral, now published in English as The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-

Morality. Ed.

3. The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality, and “Dialektischer Materialismus und Psychoanalyse,”

published in Unter dem Banner des Marxismus, 1929.


II. The Economic Viewpoint in the Theory of Analytic Therapy

1. Cf. Development of Psychoanalysis.

2. Cf. Reich: “Über Genitalität” and “Die therapeutische Bedeutung der Genitallibido,” Internationalen

Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, Vol. X (1924) and XI (1925).

3. In the meantime, we have discovered possibilities of considerably improving even such cases.

4.  Cf.  Reich:  “Die  Rolle  der  Genitalität  in  der  Neurosentherapie,” Zeitschrift  für  Aerztliche

Psychotherapie, Vol. I (1925).


III. On the Technique of Interpretation and of Resistance Analysis

1. First presented in the Seminar for Psychoanalytic Therapy, Vienna, June 1926, published in the

Internationalen Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, 1927–28.

2.  Footnote,  1945:  This  technical  problem  of  psychoanalysis  has  been  completely  solved  in  the

meantime.  In  orgone  therapy,  the  pathogenic  remembrances  emerge spontaneously  and effortlessly

when the somatic emotions break through the muscular armor.

3. Footnote, 1945: Compulsive talking is a form of resistance offered by many patients. To begin with,

this compulsion is a purely biological manifestation of a contraction of the deep musculature of the

neck and throat. Speaking without any regard to content is a necessity, e.g., “the chatterbox.” In orgone

therapy,  we  enjoin  such  patients  to  be silent,  and  eventually  the  anxiety  which  nourishes  this

compulsive symptom comes to the surface. The curing of a compulsion to speak is brought about by the

loosening of the muscular armor of the throat.


IV. On the Technique of Character Analysis1. First presented at the Tenth International Psychoanalytic Congress, Innsbruck, September 1927.

2. Footnote, 1945: The form of expression is far more important than the ideational content. Today we

use only the form of expression to arrive at the decisively important experiences of childhood. It is the

form of expression and not the ideational content that leads us to the biological reactions which lie at

the basis of the psychic manifestations.

3. In light of this clinical experience, the element of form has been incorporated into the sphere of

psychoanalysis, which, until now, has focused predominantly on content.

4. Footnote, 1945: While this explanation is psychologically correct, it is not the whole story. We

understand now that such complaints are the direct expression of vegetative, i.e., muscular, armor. The

patient complains of an affect-paralysis because his plasmatic currents and sensations are blocked. In

short, this defect is essentially of a purely biophysical nature. In orgone therapy, the motility block is

loosened by means of biophysical methods and not by means of psychological methods.

5. Since then, I am in the habit of urging the patient to give me a description of my person. This always

proves to be a fruitful measure for the removal of blocked transference situations.

6. Let the following case serve as an example of how decisive it is to take into consideration or neglect

a patient’s mode of behavior. A compulsive character who had twelve years of analysis behind him

without any commensurate improvement and was well informed on his infantile motivations, e.g., on

the central father-conflict, spoke in a strange monotone in the analysis, in a somewhat singsong cadence

and kept wringing his hands. I asked whether this behavior had ever been analyzed. It had not. At first,

I had no insight into the case. One day it struck me that he spoke as if he were praying. I informed him

of my observation, whereupon he told me that as a child he had been forced by his father to attend

prayer meetings, which he had done very reluctantly. He had prayed, but under protest. In the same

way he had recited to the analyst for twelve years, “Fine, I’ll do as you say, but under protest.” The

uncovering of this apparently insignificant detail in his behavior threw open the analysis and led to the

most deeply buried affects.

7. In view of the total picture at this point, perhaps some psychologists will understand why we analysts

cannot acknowledge the inferiority complex as an absolute agent: because the real problem and the real

work begin precisely at that point at which it ceases for Alfred Adler.

8. Cf. my discussion of the symbolism of the orgasm in The Function of the Orgasm.


V. Indications and Dangers of Character Analysis

1.  Footnote,  1945:  The  reader  will  understand  that  I  had  to  be  cautious  in  the  beginning  of  my

character-analytic research, i.e., some nineteen years ago. My warning that only experienced analysts

should make use of the character-analytic method was objected to even at that time on the grounds that,

if it was superior to symptom analysis, even beginners should learn to practice it. Today there is no

longer any need for such caution. We now have a vast fund of character-analytic experience at our

disposal. Hence, the technique can be taught and even recommended to beginners of symptom analysis.

The restrictions on its use which are suggested in the following text are no longer necessary. It is not

only that character analysis may be used—it must be used in every case of psychoneurosis if one wants

to destroy the character-neurotic reaction basis. A much more difficult question is whether characteranalysis can be carried out without orgone therapy.


VI. On the Handling of the Transference

1. Footnote, 1945: In terms of orgone biophysics, the goal of orgone therapy is the dissolving of the

armorings in such a manner that all biological reflexes and movements finally become united in the

total orgasm reflex and lead to sensations of orgonotic current in the genital. This makes possible the

establishment of orgastic potency.

2. It seems very likely to me that the objections which were raised during my discussion of the negative

transference were prompted by the fact that, usually, the patient’s narcissistic protective mechanism is

not gone into very deeply, thus precluding a violent hate transference.

3. The widely discussed problem of the “will to recovery” is not as complicated as it appears. Every

patient has preserved a sufficient amount of elementary urges toward the love and enjoyment of life.

These urges, even if they are completely buried, offer us the most essential help in our efforts.

4. Cf. Reich: Geschlechtsreife, Enthaltsamkeit, Ehemoral, Münster Verlag, 1930; Der sexuelle Kampf

der Jugend, Verlag für Sexualpolitik, 1931.


VII. The Characterological Resolution of the Infantile Sexual Conflict

1. First presented at the Congress of the German Psychoanalytic Society in Dresden, September 28,

1930.

2. Freud: “Charakter und Analerotik,” Ges. Schr., Bd. V.

3. Jones: “Über analerotische Charakterzüge,” Internationalen Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, V (1919).

4.  Abraham: Psychoanalytische  Studien  zur  Charakterbildung,  Internationaler  Psychoanalytischer

Verlag, 1924.

5. Footnote, 1945: In the language of orgone biophysics: the continual frustration of primary natural

needs leads to chronic contraction of the biosystem (muscular armor, sympatheticotonia, etc.). The

conflict  between  inhibited  primary  drives  and  the  armor  gives  rise  to  secondary,  antisocial  drives

(sadism,  etc.);  in  the  process  of  breaking  through  the  armor,  primary  biological  impulses  are

transformed into destructive sadistic impulses.

6. Cf. Reich: Der triebhafte Charakter, Internationaler Psychoanalytischer Verlag, 1925.


VIII. The Genital Character and the Neurotic Character

1. At this point it is necessary to make a fundamental distinction between our concepts and those of

Alfred Adler concerning character and “security.”

a) Adler began to move away from psychoanalysis and the libido theory with the thesis that what is

important is not the analysis of the libido but the analysis of the nervous character. His postulating

libido  and  character  as  opposites  and  completely  excluding  the  former  from  consideration  are  in

complete contradiction to the theory of psychoanalysis. While we do take the same problem as our

point of departure, namely the purposeful mode of operation of what one calls the “total personality and

character,” we nonetheless make use of a fundamentally different theory and method. In asking whatprompts the psychic organism to form a character, we conceive of the character as a causative entity

and arrive only secondarily at a purpose which we deduce from the cause (cause: unpleasure; purpose:

defense against unpleasure). Adler, in dealing with the same problem, uses a finalistic point of view.

b) We endeavor to explain character formation in terms of libido economy and arrive, therefore, at

completely different results from Adler, who chooses the principle of the “will to power” as an absolute

explanation, thus overlooking the dependency of the “will to power,” which is only a partial narcissistic

striving, upon the vicissitudes of narcissism as a whole and of the object libido.

c) Adler’s formulations on the mode of action of the inferiority complex and its compensations are

correct. This has never been denied. But here, too, the connection is missing to the libido processes

which lie deeper, especially the phallic libido. It is precisely in our libido-theoretical dissolution of the

inferiority  complex  itself  and  its  ramifications  in  the  ego  that  we  part  company  with  Adler.  Our

problem begins precisely where Adler leaves off.

2. Cf. Karl Abraham: Psychoanalytische Studien zur Charakterbildung (Int. PsA Bibl., No. XXVI,

1925), especially Chapter III: “Zur Charakterbildung auf der ‘genitalen’ Entwicklungsstufe.”

3. Footnote, 1945: The regulation of sexual energy is dependent upon orgastic potency, i.e., upon the

ability of the organism to allow a free flowing of the clonic convulsions of the orgasm reflex. The

armored organism is incapable of orgastic convulsion; the biological excitation is inhibited by spasms

in various places of the organism.

4. For further information on the dependency of sadism on libido stasis, see Chapter VII of my book

Die Funktion des Orgasmus, 1927. Cf. also The Function of the Orgasm, 1942, 1948.

5. “People say, to be sure, that the struggle against such a powerful instinct, and the strengthening of all

the ethical and aesthetic forces which are necessary for this struggle, ‘steel’ the character; and this is

true for a few specially favorably organized natures. It must also be admitted that the differentiation of

individual character, which is so marked in our day, has only become possible with the existence of

sexual restriction. But in the vast majority of cases the struggle against sexuality eats up the energy

available in a character and this at the very time when a young man is in need of all his forces in order

to win his share and place in society. The relationship between the amount of sublimation possible and

the amount of sexual activity necessary naturally varies very much from person to person and even

from one calling to another. An abstinent artist is hardly conceivable; but an abstinent young savant is

certainly no rarity. The latter can, by his self-restraint, liberate forces for his studies; while the former

probably finds his artistic achievements powerfully stimulated by his sexual experience. In general I

have not gained the impression that sexual abstinence brings about energetic and self-reliant men of

action or original thinkers or bold emancipators and reformers. Far more often it goes to produce well-

behaved weaklings who later become lost in the great mass of people that tend to follow, unwillingly,

the  leads  given  by  strong  individuals.”  Freud: “Civilized”  Sexual  Morality  and  Modern  Nervous

Illness, (1908). The English translation is quoted from The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund

Freud, Vol. IX.


IX. Childhood Phobia and Character Formation

1. See also my investigations of defective identifications in Der triebhafte Charakter, InternationalerPsychoanalytischer Verlag, 1925.

2. Götz von Berlichingen, a drama by Goethe about the peasant wars in Germany circa 1500. Götz, a

knight, is remembered for his statement: “You can kiss my ass.”—Ed.

3. Cf. Chapter VIII, “The Genital Character and the Neurotic Character.”


X. Some Circumscribed Character Forms

1. The latency period, as we learn from the sexual development of children of primitive peoples, is not

a biological but a sociological phenomenon, created by sexual suppression.

2. Cf. Fenichel’s excellent presentation in “Über organlibinöse Begleiterscheinungen der Triebabwehr”

Internationalen Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, 1928.

3. Cf. Böhm’s and Sadger’s investigations of active homosexuality.


XI. The Masochistic Character

1. Cf. Reich: The Discovery of the Orgone, Vol. I, The Function of the Orgasm, Chapter VII.

2.  A  thorough,  critical  summary  of  the  analytic  results  can  be  found  in  Fenichel: Perversionen,

Psychosen, Charakterstorungen, Internationaler Psychoanalytischer Verlag, 1931, p. 37ff.

3. Freud: “Triebe und Triebschicksale,” Ges. Schr. Bd. V, p 453

4. Reich: “Über die Quellen der neurotischen Angst,” Internationalen Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, XI

(1926), p. 427.

5. “… the designation masochism comprises all passive attitudes to the sexual life and to the sexual

object; in its most extreme form the gratification is connected with suffering of physical or mental pain

at the hands of the sexual object … It may even be doubted whether it ever is primary and whether it

does not more often originate through transformation from sadism.” Freud: “Three Contributions to the

Theory of Sex,” The Basic Writings of Sigmund Freud. New York, 1938. Translated by A. A. Brill.

 

“In the case of the pair of opposites sadism-masochism, the process may be represented as follows:

(a) Sadism consists in the exercise of violence or power upon some other person as object.

(b) This object is given up and replaced by the subject’s self. With the turning round upon the self,

the change from an active to a passive instinctual aim is also effected.

(c)  An  extraneous  person  is  once  more  sought  as  object;  this  person,  in  consequence  of  the

obliteration which has taken place in the instinctual aim, has to take over the role of the subject.

Case (c) is what is commonly termed masochism. Here, too, satisfaction follows along the path of the

original sadism, the passive ego placing itself back in phantasy in its first role, which has in fact been

taken over by the extraneous subject. Whether there is, besides this, a more direct masochism, not

derived from sadism in the manner I have described, seems not to be met with. “Instincts and their

Vicissitudes,” The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. XVI, 1914–16. Translated

from the German by James Strachey.

 

“To begin with, there seems to be a confirmation of the view that masochism is not the manifestationof  a  primary  instinct,  but  originates  from  sadism,  which  has  been  turned  round  upon  the  self  …

Instincts with a passive aim must be taken for granted … But passivity is not the whole of masochism.

The characteristic of unpleasure belongs to it as well—a bewildering accompaniment to the satisfaction

of an instinct.” “A Child Is Being Beaten,” Vol. XVII, 1917–19.

6. “If one is prepared to overlook a little inexactitude, it may be said that the death instinct which is

operative in the organism—primal sadism—is identical with masochism.” Freud, in his article, “Das

ökonomische Problem des Masochismus” (“The Economic Problem of Masochism”).

7. Freud: Jenseits des Lustprinzips, Ges. Schr., Bd. VI.

8. “Todestrieb und Angst,” Internationalen Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, XVII (1931).

9. Cf. Reich: The Function of the Orgasm, Chapter IV.

10. “The suffering itself is what matters.”

“The satisfaction of this unconscious sense of guilt is perhaps the most powerful bastion in the subject’s

(usually composite) gain from illness—in the sum of forces which struggle against his recovery and

refuse to surrender his state of illness. The suffering entailed by neuroses is precisely the factor that

makes them valuable to the masochistic trend.” Freud: “Das ökonomische Problem des Masochismus.”

11. The theory of the death instinct dominates psychoanalytic literature at the present time. Freud

himself in a conversation a few years ago described the theory of the death instinct as a hypothesis

existing outside clinical experience. In Beyond the Pleasure Principle, we read at the end: “… be

prepared to leave a path which one has followed for a while, when it doesn’t appear to be leading to

anything good.” However, the hypothesis became a clinical “theory”; it was not only not given up—it

led to nothing good. Some analysts even contend that they have direct evidence of the death instinct.

12. “The core of the entire psychology of the neurosis is contained in the sentence that guilt can be

atoned  through  punishment,  through  suffering.”  Alexander:  “Neurose  und  Gesamtpersönlichkeit,”

Internationalen Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, XII (1926), p. 342.

“The  neurosis,  which  is  essentially  based  on  a  conflict  between  instinctual  demand  and  need  for

punishment…” (Reik)

13. This concept found its strongest advocates in the English group of the International Psychoanalytic

Society.

14. The Fateful question for the human species seems to me to be whether and to what extent their

cultural development will succeed in mastering the disturbance of their communal life by the human

instinct of aggression and self-destruction.” Civilization and Its Discontents, English translation quoted

from The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. XXI.

15. Freud: Formulierungen über die zwei Prinzipien des psychischen Geschehens, Ges. Schr., Bd. V.

16. Reich: “Zur Trieb-Energetik,” Zeitschrift für Sexualwissenschaft, X (1923).

17. Reich: “Strafbedürfnis und neurotischer Prozess, Kritische Bemerkungen zu neueren Auffassungen

des Neurosenproblems,” Internationalen Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, XIII (1927).

18. Freud: “A Child Is Being Beaten.”

19.  This  phenomenon  was  stressed  by  Freud  in  his  article:  “Das  ökonomische  Problem  des

Masochismus”  (Ges.  Schr.,  Bd.  V.  p.  378).  However,  its  clinical  investigation  leads  not  to  the

hypothesis of primary masochism but to its refutation.

20. Footnote, 1945: The orgone energy that was dicovered in 1939 provides the explanation for thisphenomenon: the alleviation of the child’s anxiety by bodily contact with the mother is explained,

orgone-biophysically, by the orgonotic expansion of the child’s biosystem which reaches out for the

mother. There is a contact between the orgone fields of the two organisms.

21.  With  respect  to  the  relation  between  masochism  and  exhibitionism,  see  the  case  described  by

Fenichel in Perversionen, Psychosen, Charakterstörungen, p.39.

22. Cf. the chapter on “Defective Identifications” in my book Der triebhafte Charakter, Internationaler

Psychoanalytischer Verlag, 1925.

23. The neurosis is brought on by the conflict between an ego which strives for pleasure and an outer

world which frustrates these ego-strivings; it is sustained by the conflict between the ego and the

superego. The superego retains its power on the basis of the repeated experience that sexual pleasure is

something punishable. To the early effect of childhood suppression is added the decisive suppressive

atmosphere of society.

24. Stasis-neurotic.

25. Cf. Freud: Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, Ges. Schr., Bd. V, p. 78f.


XII. Some Observations on the Basic Conflict Between Need and Outer

World

1. Footnote, 1948: The discovery of the organismic orgone energy will force a reevaluation of our

concepts of the “instincts.” They are concrete PHYSICAL ENERGY functions.

2. Hemmung, Symptom und Angst, Ges. Schr., Bd. XI.

3. To avoid any misunderstanding, it is necessary to make it quite clear that I am not postulating an

absolute antithesis between a finished need apparatus and the outer world. The need apparatus itself has

a long history behind it. Phylogenetically, it too must have resulted from similar functional processes.

This will be a tremendous problem for the theory of evolution as soon as it is ready to give up the

mechanistic point of view in favor of the functional point of view.

4. According to Weber, sensations of Unlust go with a centripetal flow of blood, while sensations of

pleasure go with a centrifugal flow of blood. See also Kraus and Zondek: Syzygiologie: Allgemeine und

spezielle Pathologic der Person, Thieme, 1926.

5.  One  can,  if  one  wants,  perceive  a  destructive  impulse  even  in  the  processes  pertaining  to  the

gratification of hunger, in the destruction and assimilation of foodstuff. Thus viewed, the destructive

instinct would be a primary biological tendency. However, one must not fail to take into account the

difference  between  destruction  for  the  sake  of  annihilation  and  destruction  for  the  purpose  of  the

gratification of hunger. Only the former can be regarded as a primary instinctual drive, whereas the

latter merely represents a device. In the former, destruction is subjectively desired; in the latter, it is

merely objectively given. The motive of the action is hunger, not destruction. But in each case the

destruction is at first directed toward an object outside of the person.

6. In spite of the fact that this antithetical pair lies close to the surface of the personality structure,

Adler’s entire individual psychology has never gone beyond it.XIII. Psychic Contact and Vegetative Current

1. Cf. The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1971.

2. It is the social, i.e., political, practice resulting from the knowledge that sexual repression is of social

origin. The view expounded at the 13th Psychoanalytic Congress by Bernfeld that adolescent sexual

intercourse can be traced back to poor educational conditions merely confirms the adolescent’s neurotic

guilt feelings. It will, to be sure, also please all priests and champions of the “objective spirit.” Apart

from this, however, it will merely veil the problem of adolescence, instead of solving it, and it will he

inimical to every positive sex-economic help to adolescents. For all that, the problem of adolescent

development definitely belongs in the framework of the relations between vegetative excitation and

psychic  behavior,  no  matter  how  conscientiously  the  truth  is  hushed  up  and  the  fact  ignored  by

“objective science” that the adolescent development of our youth is chiefly determined by the social

frustration of their sexual life. That is to say, whether the vegetatively produced sexual energy is

regulated in a healthy or in a neurotic way depends primarily upon how the society has equipped the

youth structurally and materially.

3. Cf. my work “Zur Triebenergetik,” Zeitschrift für Sexualwissenschaft, 1923.

4. See also my description of the relationships between psychoneurosis and actual neurosis in Die

Function des Orgasmus (1927). Also, The Function of the Orgasm, 1942, 1948.

5. This principle was misconstrued by my critics, among them Nunberg, to mean that, for me, character

and defense were identical; that, therefore, I unjustifiably limited the concept of the character. If this

were so, I would immediately have to correct it. But I am of the opinion that I formulated my views

quite  unequivocally  when  I  stated  that  the  most  important  and  most  conspicuous  character  trait

becomes, in analysis, the most crucial resistance for the purpose of defense, just as it developed for this

purpose  in  childhood.  The  fact  that,  over  and  above  this,  it  has  different,  chiefly  sex-economic

functions, that it serves to maintain the relationship to the outer world and to preserve the psychic

equilibrium, is thoroughly described and elaborated in Part I of the present volume. Hence, it seems to

me that this criticism is not objectively motivated.

6. Footnote, 1945: This formulation was one-sided and therefore incorrect. The investigation of the

armoring of the ego was only the first necessary step. After we had succeeded in mastering the armor,

both in theory and in practice, the vast realm of biological energy was opened with the discovery of the

orgone in the organism and in the cosmos. What the psychoanalytic theory calls the “id” is, in reality,

the physical orgone function within the biosystem. In a metaphysical way, the term “id” implies that

there is “something” in the biosystem whose functions are determined beyond the individual. This

something called “id” is a physical reality, i.e., it is cosmic orgone energy. The living “orgonotic

system,” the “bioapparatus,” merely represents a particular embodiment of concentrated orgone energy.

A psychoanalyst recently wrote a review in which he described the “orgone” as being “identical” with

the Freudian “id.” This is as correct as saying that Aristotle’s and Driesch’s “entelechy” is identical

with the “orgone.” While it is true that the concepts “id,” “entelechy,” “élan vital,” and “orgone”

describe  the same thing,  this  is  an  oversimplification  of  their  relatedness. “Orgone”  is  a  visible,

measurable, and applicable energy of a cosmic nature. “Id,” “entelechy,” and “élan vital,” on the other

hand, are merely expressions of human intuitions of the existence of such an energy. Are Maxwell’s“electromagnetic  waves”  the  same  as  Hertz’s  “electromagnetic  waves”?  Yes,  certainly.  But  with

Hertz’s  waves  it  is  possible  to  transmit  messages  across  the  ocean,  which  is  not  possible  with

Maxwell’s waves.

Such “correct” analogies without mention of the practical differences have the function of verbally

camouflaging great advances in the field of natural science. They are as unscientific as the sociologist

who described the orgone as one of my “hypotheses.” Blood cannot be revitalized and cancer tumors

cannot be destroyed with “hypotheses,” the “id,” “entelechy,” etc. With orgone energy, this is clearly

possible.

The coming to grips with the problems of psychology in the following text is correct and important

within the framework of depth psychology. Orgone biophysics transcends this framework. With the

knowledge  of  the  orgone  functions  of  the  organism,  problems  of  depth  psychology  diminish  in

importance. The solution to the problems of psychology lies outside the sphere of psychology. For

instance, a simple block of orgonotic pulsation in the throat makes the most complicated mechanism of

oral sadism understandable in a simple way. But we cannot go into this at this point. In retrospect, it is

interesting to realize how hard the serious psychoanalyst has had to struggle with biophysical problems,

without really being able to get at their core. In depth psychology, the analyst operates with drives, but

he is rather like the man who wants to drink water from a glass which he sees reflected in a mirror.

7. Footnote, 1945: “Biopsychic apparatus,” “human orgonotic system.”

8. Footnote, 1945: In 1933 I did not know that, in these spontaneous movements of the patient, I was

dealing with segments of the orgasm reflex. I did not understand the biophysical function of these

movements, but only their “psychic meaning.” Today most analysts are still in this position.

9. “Probleme der Technik,” Internationalen Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, IV (1934).

10.  Footnote,  1945:  The  clinical  manifestation  of  “contactlessness”  later  became  the  leading

perspective  from  which  we  carried  out  the  search  for  orgone  biophysical  disturbances.  In

contactlessness,  we  are  dealing  with  a  motility  block  of  the  body  orgone  (anorgonia).  In  penis

anesthesia, the skin is not orgonotically charged; the orgone energy field is markedly contracted; the

penis is sensitive to touch but not to pleasure. Since only a change of the energy level is capable of

creating pleasure, it is clear that it is a block in the plasmatic current which causes contactlessness. In

1942 we succeeded in proving the physical existence of the orgone energy field through the lumination

of  a  filament.  Cf.  also  “The  Bio-electric  Function  of  Pleasure  and  Anxiety,” The Function of the

Orgasm.

11. Footnote, 1945: This assumption was confirmed three years later: the bioelectric experiments with

stimuli of pleasure and anxiety showed that the intensity of the sensation was functionally identical with

the quantity of the bio-energetic excitation.

12. To give a more concrete example, I might cite the fusion of two gametes. One can only surmise the

deep relation with the orgastic sensations of melting.

13.  Footnote,  1945:  The  decisive  importance  of  the  sex-economic  comprehension  of  the  ideas  of

“bursting,” “dying,” “melting,” etc., was not really revealed until 1936–40, when, on the basis of this

hypothesis, the bions and the physical energy in the atmosphere were actually discovered. We know

today that the neurotic fear of bursting is the expression of the inhibited orgonotic expansion of the

biosystem.14. The theory of evolution will have to decide whether the biological armoring of the turtle, for

example, is developed in the same way.

15. Cf. “The Genital Character and the Neurotic Character,” in Part II of the present volume.

16. From the point of view of sex-economy, it is not so important that biopsychic energy is bound;

what is important is the form in which this binding takes place, whether or not it limits the availability

of the energy. It cannot be the goal of mental hygiene to obstruct the character’s ability to develop

armor; its goal is merely to guarantee free motility and the greatest possible disposal of vegetative

energy, i.e., to guarantee the flexibility of the armor. This task cannot be reconciled with existing

educational and moralistic institutions.

17. Cf. Reich: “Der Urgegensatz des vegetativen Lebens,” Zeitschrift für Politische Psychologie und

Sexualökonomie, 1934.

18. These observations are not strictly true. But it would be premature at this point to make binding

statements about the relation of the “psychic” to the vegetative and of consciousness to both.


XIV. The Expressive Language of the Living

1. Purely physiological orgone therapy by means of orgone accumulators is discussed in The Discovery

of the Orgone, Vol. II: The Cancer Biopathy.

2. Cf. Reich: The Discovery of the Orgone, Vol. I.


XV. The Schizophrenic Split

1. Conceived, 1940–48. Written in English by the author, August-September 1948.

2. This assumption gained some support through the examinations of schizophrenics by Dr. Elsworth

Baker at the Marlboro State Hospital in New Jersey.

3. Cf. my article, “Orgonotic Pulsation,” on “lumination,” 1944.

4. Cf. The Discovery of the Orgone, Vol. II, 1948.


XVI. The Emotional Plague

1. I should like to point out that, to me, a woman of easy virtue having a decent character is socially and

humanly preferable to such a plague-afflicted person. Women of easy virtue have no pretenses; social

conditions,  material  necessity,  and  the  prevailing  social  chaos  lead  them  into  a  profession  which

requires them to gratify the sexual needs of sailors and soldiers, i.e., men who risk their lives. Countless

princes and priests have had to visit houses of prostitution to satisfy their needs or to escape their

misery. This is neither reproach nor praise but merely an establishment of fact.

2. Footnote, 1945: One of our prominent physicians returned from Oslo to the U.S.A. in 1939. He spent

a few days in Zürich, where he told a former psychiatric colleague that he had been working with me.

Much surprised, he said: “But So-and-So said Reich had become schizophrenic.” “So-and-So” was the

person in question. Soon after his return to the States, he learned from an acquaintance that his analyst

had told him the same thing: “So-and-So [again the same person] told me Reich was schizophrenic.”

This rumor-monger died a few years later from heart failure. I had known for a long time that hesuffered from impotence.                                    INDEX






The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the

pages in your eBook. Please use the search function on your eReading device

to search for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that appear in the

print index are listed below.


Abraham, Karl

Abstinence, rule of

Actual anxiety; see also stasis anxiety

Actual neurosis

Adler, Alfred

Adolescent sexuality

Alcoholics, alcoholism

Alexander, Franz

“Algolagnia”

Ambivalence

Anal character

Analytic passivity

Anemia

Anorgonia, anorgonotic

Anxiety

Arc de cercle

Aristotle

Armoring, of the ego; and pleasure-unpleasure; as replacement of a phobia; external form of; in the

hysterical character; of the masochistic character; peripheral; in the schizophrenic; prevention of; and

rage; see also character armor and muscular armor

Armor segments; ocular; oral; neck; chest; diaphragmatic; abdominal; pelvic


Baker, Elsworth

Beethoven, Ludwig vanBenedek, Therese

Bernfeld, Siegfried

Bio-energy, biological energy, discovery in the atmosphere; full release of; in biopathies; in

schizophrenia; in catatonic attack; in healthy functioning; in armored organisms; in predisposition to

the emotional plague; in the sexual problem

Bions

Biopathy, definition of; schizophrenic; lack of orgonotic sense in; emotional plague as

Boehm, Felix

Bornstein, Berta

Brill, A. A.


Cancer, cancer biopathy, carcinominous shrinking biopathy

Catatonic catalepsy

Catatonic stupor

Cathartic therapy

Catholic Inquisition

Character; formation and economic function of; of the ego; relationship to repression; economic

principles of; development of the

Character armor; loosening of; and infantile anxiety; and sadistic and narcissistic energies; formation

of; sex-economic function of; in hysterical character; structure of; in character-analytic practice;

clinical study of; and muscular rigidity; and muscular armor; clarification of; see also muscular armor

Character attitude

Character reaction formations

Character resistance

Character structure

Compulsive character, compulsion neurotic, sadism in; conversion symptoms of; and affect-block;

facial expression and gait of; study of; and genital frustration; and love; and passive beating fantasy;

and the love impulse; and reaction to danger; change of function in instinctual demands in; and

contactlessness; sadistic attitude of woman; and an orgonotic sense; characteristics of

Compulsive talking

Condemnation of the instincts

Contactlessness

Counter-cathexes

Counter-transference


Daydreaming

Death instinct, and “The Masochistic Character”; and eros; and structure forming processes; and the

psychic conflict; and masochism; as consequence of narcissistic flight; and melancholia; and Freud’s

original formula; refutation of; and inhibition of sexual strivings; and negative therapeutic reaction; and

the ego defense; and sexuality; formulations on

De la MettrieDeutsch, Helene

Doeblin

Dreyfus

Driesche


Eddington

Ego instincts

Ego, structure of

Ehrenberg

Emotional block

Emotional plague, emotional plague reaction; specific plague reaction

Eros

Erythrophobia

Evolution, theory of

Exhibitionism


Federn, Paul

Fellacio

Fenichel, Otto

Ferenczi, Sandor; his active technique of interference

Fixation in early childhood

Free association

Free floating anxiety

Freud, Sigmund, his principles; and direct interpretation; on the disappearance of symptoms; on

remembering; and resistances; on the transference neurosis; on anxiety; theory of resistance formation;

on acting out; on the transference; on the role of the analyst; on character traits; on the Oedipus

complex; and autoplastic and alloplastic adaptation; on repression; on sublimation; and “The

Masochistic Character”; on masochism and sadism; theory of actual anxiety; theory of instincts; theory

of the death instinct; on the disorganization of speech

Functionalism


Galileo

Gauguin, Paul

Genital character

Glover

Goethe

“Gotz von Berlichingen”


Haarmann

HartmannHebephrenic process

Heredity

Hertz

Hitler

Homosexuality

Hysterical character, hysteric, hysteria, armoring in; in a woman; neurotic reaction basis of; study of; in

external appearance; and love; and danger; change of function in instinctual demands; determination of

physical disturbances in; difference from schizophrenic experience


Ibsen, Henrik

Id, structure of

Impulsive character neuroses

Impulsive personality, character

Inferiority complex, feelings

Instinct-inhibited character

Instincts, theory of


Jesus Christ

Jones, Ernest


Kaiser, Hellmuth

Krafft-Ebing

Kraus, Siegfried

Kretschmer, Arthur

Kürten


Lamarck

Landauer, Karl

Landru

Lange, Friedrich

Latency period

Lenin

Libido economy

Libido theory

Life energy; see also orgone energy, bio-energy

Lodge


Malinowski, Bronislaw

Manic

Marriage, institution ofMasochism

Masochistic character, masochists

Masturbation

Maxwell

Medical orgone therapy; see also orgone therapy

Melancholia, melancholic

Moral insanity

Muscular armor; see also character armor

Mussolini


Napoleon

Negative therapeutic reaction

Neurotic anxiety

Neurotic character

Neurotic, definition of

Neurotic mountain climbers

Neurotic reaction basis

Nietzsche

Nirvana principle

Nunberg, Hermann


Oedipus complex, stage

Ophuijsen, J. H. W. van

Orgasm anxiety

Orgasm function

Orgasm reflex

Orgasm, theory of

Orgastic impotence

Orgastic potency

Orgone accumulator

Orgone biophysics, publications in; as bio-energetic study of the emotions; and character-analytic

contentions; transition to; goal of orgone therapy in terms of; and frustration of primary needs; and

depth psychology; therapeutic task in terms of; and man’s emotional functions; and character structure;

clinical confirmation of; clinical experience of; and homo normalis; and the emotional plague; and

Reich’s interests

Orgone energy, and emotions; and “psychic energy”; discovery of; and bodily contact; and the

instincts; and therapy; in Van Gogh’s paintings; in the schizophrenic; in bions; irradiation with; and the

emotional plague

Orgone energy field;

Orgone therapy, procedure in; and vegetotherapy; and pathogenic remembrances; and compulsive

talking; and the motility block; and character analysis; the goal of; the concept of; purely physiological;and segmental armor; and hate attitudes; and talking; misconceptions of; and schizophrenic

mechanisms; patients’ hostility to; and patients; and the emotional plague; see also medical orgone

therapy

Orgonomy

Orgonotic lumination


Passive-feminine character

Patriarchal family

Penis anesthesia

Penis envy

Phallic-narcissistic character

Phallic sadism

Phobia

Phobic diffusion

Pleasure anxiety

Pleasure principle, pleasure—unpleasure principle

Primary drives

Prophylaxis of neuroses

Pseudologia

Psychic contactless


Rado, Sandor

Rank, Otto

Raynaud’s disease

Reaction basis of the character; in masochism

Reaction formation

Reality principle

Regression

Reik, Theodor

Repetition compulsion

Resistances; latent


Sachs, Hanns

Sadger

Sadism, sadistic impulses, in compulsive character;

Schilder, Paul

Schizoid depersonalization

Schizophrenia, schizophrenic, schizophrenic split, case history; rumor about Reich and

Secondary drives; see also sadism and masochism

Secondary narcissismSex-economic regulation of energy

Sex-economy, sexual economy, its infancy; and Freud; and society; and the hysterical character; and

masochism; chronic disturbance of; and the orgasm; and therapy; and substitute contact; ideas of

regulated and unregulated; and the nerves; and biopsychic energyy; regarding anxiety and pleasure; and

cultivated “Bohemians”; revolutionary aspects of; arguments against; and the basic problem; and the

emotional plague; and Reich’s interests

Sex-politics

Shyness

Stalin

Stasis anxiety; see also actual anxiety

Stekel, Wilhelm

Sublimation; according to Freud;

Substitute contact

Suicidal inclinations

Superego, structure of

Swedenborg

Symptom formations


Tausk, Victor

Transference; negative


Van Gogh, Vincent

Vascular hypertension

Vegetotherapy

Vienna Psychoanalytic Society

Vienna seminar on technique


Weber

Weissman

“Will to recovery”


Zola, Emile

Zondek                                  BY WILHELM REICH


                                  Beyond Psychology


            The Bioelectrical Investigation of Sexuality and Anxiety


                                The Bion Experiments


                                The Cancer Biopathy


                                  Character Analysis


                                Children of the Future


                            Early Writings, Volume One


                Ether, God and Devil / Cosmic Superimposition


                            The Function of the Orgasm


                                        Genitality


                    The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality


                                  Listen, Little Man!


                        The Mass Psychology of Fascism


                                The Murder of Christ


                                  Passion of Youth


                                  People in Trouble


                                Reich Speaks of Freud


                                  Selected Writings


                                The Sexual RevolutionFarrar, Straus and Giroux

18 West 18th Street, New York 10011

This translation copyright © 1945, 1949, 1972 by Mary Boyd

Higgins as Trustee of the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund

All rights reserved

Parts One and Two were originally published in German as Charakteranalyse, copyright © 1933,

renewed © 1961 by Mary Boyd

Higgins as Trustee of the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund

Published in 1972 by Farrar, Straus and Giroux

This Farrar, Straus and Giroux paperback edition, 1990

Library of Congress catalog card number: 70-163663

Paperback ISBN-13: 978-0-374-50980-4

Paperback ISBN-10: 0-374-50980-8

www.fsgbooks.com

eISBN 9781466846876

First eBook edition: May 2013