REICH SPEAKS
OF FREUD

WILHELM REICH DISCUSSES
HIS WORK AND HIS RELATIONSHIP
WITH SIGMUND FREUD

EDITED BY
MARY HIGGINS AND
CHESTER M. RAPHAEL, M.D.

WITH TRANSLATIONS FROM
THE GERMAN BY
THERESE POL

P
t><f>£

 
REICH SPEAKS
OF FREUD

WILHELM REICH DISCUSSES
HIS WORK AND HIS RELATIONSHIP
WITH SIGMUND FREUD

EDITED BY
MARY HIGGINS AND
CHESTER M. RAPHAEL, M.D.

WITH TRANSLATIONS FROM
THE GERMAN BY
THERESE POL

il
 


The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your personal

use  only.  You  may  not  make  this  e-book  publicly  available  in  any  way.

Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy of this

e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify

the publisher at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.                                  Contents






                                      Title Page

                                  Copyright Notice

                                        Epigraph

                                    Editors’ preface

                                  Introductory note



                              Part 1: The Interview

                                1. October 18, 1952

                                2. October 19, 1952

                          3. October 19, 1952 (continued)

                                        Postscript



                        Part 2: Documentary Supplement

                                    Explanatory note

                                  1. Correspondence

                    2. Emotional plague: The psychoanalysts

                                  3. Miscellaneous

              The significance of style in psychoanalytic writing

            Supplementation of Freud’s theory of the anxiety neurosis

                                The “death instinct”

                                      Lay analysis                              Expulsion from the IPA

                          On Freud’s eightieth birthday

        Sex-economy and vegetotherapy in relation to psychoanalysis

                            Basic tenets on Red Fascism

                                Truth versus Modju

                                Freud, Reich, Kinsey

                                      Conclusion



                                      Photographs

                                          Notes

                                          Index

                                      Copyright 


  “I left behind me an age which had finally got hold of a little corner of the Freudian thought
    system, but had completely thrown overboard Freud’s courage to stand alone, his adherence
    to some basic truth, his penetrating sense of what is right regardless—in other words, the
        complete abandonment of basic research of human emotions to petty little nuisance
    considerations such as career, easy money, easy recognition by institutions which owed their
      very existence to the evasion of the very facts of life they pretended, falsely, to disclose.”

                                    WILHELM REICH, 1954                EDITORS’ PREFACE






The  Wilhelm  Reich  interview,  conducted  by  Kurt  R.  Eissler,  M.D.,

representing  the  Sigmund  Freud  Archives,  took  place  at  Orgonon  in

Rangeley, Maine, on October 18 and 19, 1952. Reich had intended to publish

it, but the decision of the editors to do so was more than mere compliance. In

our opinion it is an unusually candid document and its publication supplies a

long-waited clarification of the relationship between Freud and Reich.

  While Reich in many of his writings did refer to this relationship and to

the  conflict  that  developed  later,  the  directness  and  informality  of  the

interview technique has made it possible to elicit the information in a manner

that is both simple and concise, and it should have the advantage of placing

the reader in a favorable position to determine for himself what was at issue.

Those  who  are  unacquainted  with  the  history  of  this  relationship—and,

regrettably, most are—have been bombarded with so much slanderous fiction

that clarification is urgently needed. It is hoped this interview will fulfill that

need.

  In  view  of  recent  strenuous  efforts  to  eliminate  the  libido  theory,  the

publication  of  this  interview  is  unexpectedly  timely.  For  Reich  remained

steadfast in viewing libido as the core of Freudian theory. His pertinacity,

supported by ample clinical evidence of the existence of a sexual energy,

eventually led him, unlike Freud, to the laboratory and to the discovery of

“libido” in vitro. In so doing, he inherited the criticism and stigmatization

that Freud had previously endured. And more! For with his discovery of a

tangible,  physical  energy,  Reich  could  not  provide  the  same  sort  ofappeasement  that  the  world  demanded  and  received  from  Freud.  Freud

capitulated  (sublimation,  death-instinct,  and  cultural  theories),  and  gained

fame; Reich died in prison.

  The fact that Freud did not offer any scientific proof for the libido theory,

even though he predicted it would be forthcoming, and the attenuation that

resulted from his later speculations, left his disciples with little to sustain

them. As a result, they have gradually abdicated, despite some idolatrical lip

service in their theoretical discussions—“a formal obeisance to the past”—

and they have offered little, if any, opposition to the concerted effort now

being directed against the energy theory, the most viable aspect of Freudian

psychoanalysis.

  The  untenability  of  their  position  might  have  been  alleviated  by  an

objective evaluation of Reich’s discovery of the Life Energy. It would have

furnished them with concrete evidence of a vital force, functioning within the

organism, acted upon and influenced by the numerous inner and outer stimuli

which are so often improperly invested with primary importance. Instead,

they have chosen to remain silent, indifferent, incredulous or contemptuous

and,  as  a  result,  have  been  unable  to  forestall  the  promulgation  of

psychologies which have extirpated the “soul” from the living. They have

made “cultural adaptation” their goal, without stopping to consider that our

culture, which is so stubbornly defended, derives from the biopsychic rigidity

of the human organism and the authoritarianism it fosters.

    According to the adaptationalists, who appear to be most determined to

eliminate libido, it is not necessary “to posit an energy whose existence can

never [italics, ed.] be demonstrated for behavior which is meaningful only in

                                                                                          1
terms  of  motivation,  psychological  mechanism  and  ultimate  action.”

“Libido,” they say, “adds nothing to our knowledge and hence should be

            2
discarded.” They use such empty phraseology as “motivating impulse” and

“act  of  behavior”  to  describe  the  living  process,  and  they  consider  this

entirely sufficient for their purposes. To them, and to the Freudians, who nowappear  to  be  in  agreement,  libido  is  nothing  more  than  a  “metaphor,”

“tautological”  and  merely  a  “prop  for  the  imagination.”  “Block  That

          3
Metaphor” has become the rallying cry of those who labor so assiduously to

relegate libido to such an ignominious status.

  These critics of Freudian theory have also sought to capitalize on Freud’s

error in minimizing the role of society in relation to human behavior. They

emphasize “sociology” and conveniently deemphasize “sexuality.” Ironically,

although Reich’s emphasis on the magnitude of the influence of society upon

the  individual  caused  his  break  with  Freud  and  his  expulsion  from  the

International  Psychoanalytic  Association,  he  saw  no  justification  for

discarding Freud’s libido and remained the only one prepared to defend it.

  Although  he  was  never  politically  oriented,  Reich  was  once  violently

condemned  and,  at  times,  even  today,  continues  to  be  slandered  as  a

communist because he attached so much importance to the impact of society

and  saw  in  Marxist  doctrine  some  basis  for  hope  in  bringing  about  an

improvement in the human condition. However, practical communism, as it

developed in the Soviet Union, because a monster he termed “red fascism”;

and this fact, in addition to his own experiences as a physician among the

masses,  convinced  him  that  human  structure,  molded  by  authoritarian

institutions, is protoplasmically unable to change.

  In another ironic twist, the psychologists of the communist countries, who

had  previously  held  Freudian  theory  in  utter  disdain,  now  see,  in  the

elimination of libido, a basis for compatibility with psychoanalysis through

kinship  with  our  latter-day  adaptationalists.  Thus  a  Czechoslovakian

psychiatrist cheerfully asserts, “If it is true that Freudian statements about

instincts and instinctual energy are not essential to Freud’s work and can be

separated  from  his  empirically  based  generalizations,  I  do  not  see  any

                                                        4
compelling reasons for Marxists to reject Freud.”

  Reich never failed to appreciate and express his indebtedness to Freud. In

retrospect,  he  viewed  their  conflict  as  a  link  in  the  chain  of  scientificdevelopment and, therefore, desirable and even necessary. Throughout this

interview, Reich strives to show how essential Freud’s formulations were for

the clarification he himself sought in clinical matters. For example, Freud’s

formulation of the negative therapeutic reaction enabled Reich to focus on the

problem and to arrive at a biological explanation which is fully in accord with

clinical facts, instead of at the futile death-instinct hypothesis, which Freud

himself acknowledged was only a speculation.

  Reich’s disappointment in Freud, for which there was much justification,

never led to “hatred or rejection.” Instead, he came to have “a better and

higher estimation of Freud’s achievement than in those days when I was his

worshipful  disciple.”  Even  Adler,  Jung  and  Rank  are  not  denied  Reich’s

indebtedness  for  the  inadvertent  assistance  their  theoretical  positions

provided in his pursuit of a natural scientific basis for the libido theory. (See

Reich’s letter to Ferenczi)

  Freud, on the other hand, with his authority, tended to foster a static,

finalistic  condition  for  psychoanalysis.  Anyone  who  opposed  him  was

considered heretical and no longer part of psychoanalysis. This encapsulation

of Freudian theory, and the desire to make it socially acceptable, has tended

to deprive it of its historical importance as a foundation for the growth and

development  which  should  have  been  expected  of  psychoanalysis  as  a

science.

  It is now evident that the failure of the psychoanalysts to grasp and utilize

the libido theory in a practical way, and the fear it aroused in a rigid social

order, has led to its scuttling. Freud’s later speculations were designed to

reassure a world unprepared to accept any responsibility for its implications.

The  personal  insufficiencies  of  his  followers  and  the  authority  of  Freud

himself, who was unwilling or unable to draw the ultimate conclusions from

his early remarkable intuition, created a barrier against any further progress

toward an effective therapy and, more important, toward a mass prophylaxis

of the neuroses.  Freud’s  own  defection  in  assuming  a  biological  foundation  for  our

authoritarian culture, thereby limiting the usefulness of his theory, and the

lack  of  practical  success  in  the  use  of  psychoanalysis  as  a  therapeutic

instrument  have  simplified  the  task  for  those  who  now  seek  to  eliminate

Freud’s influence completely. Reich, alone, did not yield. He is, therefore,

persona non grata—to  the  biopsychologists  because  he  gave  emphasis  to

sociology; to the sociopsychologists because he emphasized biology.

  Speculating and opinionating about the issues of life do not ordinarily

constitute a threat to the established order. Consequently, such intellectual

pastimes are usually treated with toleration or indifference. Subjecting these

issues to scientific scrutiny, however, almost invariably arouses suspicion and

distrust,  and  ridicule  is  not  an  infrequent  accompaniment.  Then,  with  the

disclosure  of  a  vital  truth,  all  the  forces  of  suppression  are  mobilized  to

conceal or destroy it. The discovery of the Life Energy encountered these

forces in all their virulence. Every step of the process, from its beginning in

the orgasm theory to its culmination in the discovery of a ubiquitous energy,

met harassment and slander. These familiar instruments of suppression were

finally elaborated into wanton book-burning and incarceration, terminating in

the death of Reich in a federal prison.

  But, as with the discovery of any fundamental truth, the demonstrable fact

of the existence of a universal force cannot be shunted aside or suppressed

indefinitely. There is certainly no complacency on the part of those hostile

forces  seeking  so  desperately  to  suppress  the  discovery.  Harassment  and

calumny continue unabated ten years after Reich’s death. Nevertheless, his

discovery must eventually evoke a demand for a rational appraisal. It will not

lend  itself  indefinitely  to  the  idle  exercise  of  incompetent  or  frivolous

interpretation.  Nor  will  slander  much  longer  serve  to  undermine  serious

consideration of the significance of the discovery. It will not be confirmed or

rejected on the basis of the biased opinions of psychoanalysts who can claim

authority  only  in  matters  pertaining  to  the  psyche,  nor  in  the  legalisticmaneuverings of chemical-oriented food and drug agencies. The validity of

the discovery will be established on the basis of the natural scientific study of

such  seemingly  unrelated  phenomena  as  biogenesis,  the  cancer  disease,

gravitational attraction, the development of hurricanes and the formation of

deserts in the light of the existence of a universal energy.

  The relationship of Reich to Freud and psychoanalysis was the vital first

step which led to the discovery of the cosmic orgone energy. To capture the

historical significance of this relationship is the purpose of this volume.


                                        *   *   *


The  interview  was  originally  recorded  on  magnetic  tape  and  transcribed

shortly thereafter. For the purpose of publication, it was deemed necessary at

times to relieve the German style of sentence structure and to delete some

redundancies  and  repetitions.  The  editors  are  responsible  for  such  minor

changes and are confident that, in making them, no interference with meaning

has  resulted.  We  have  also  provided  the  footnotes  and  appended  a

supplement consisting of correspondence with Freud and others, as well as

miscellaneous documents pertinent to the material of the interview.


                                        *   *   *


Unfortunately, the expectation that permission to publish Freud’s letters to

Reich would be granted was shortlived. Ernst Freud, managing director of the

Sigmund  Freud  Copyrights,  Ltd.,  initially  expressed  interest  only  in  the

payment  of  a  royalty,  but  negotiations  were  abruptly  terminated  and

permission refused on the advice of unnamed psychoanalysts. The editors had

anticipated the possibility of such a response, but the publisher’s previous

experience with the Freud estate had been positive and there was always the

hope that the truth would not be tampered with, nor history denied. Although

orgonomy had its historical origin in psychoanalysis, it no longer bears any

factual relationship to it. Nevertheless, the irrational, unrelenting hostility ofthe psychoanalysts continues to impede every effort to achieve a scientific

evaluation of Reich’s work.

  Wherever there is a specific reference to the Freud correspondence in the

text, we have undertaken to paraphrase briefly the contents of the letters.

Others have been deleted.


                                                                            MARY HIGGINS

                                                              CHESTER M. RAPHAEL, M.D.

                                                                        New York, 1967            INTRODUCTORY NOTE






Biographies are usually written long after the issues involved have become

meaningless,  when  nobody  can  do  anything  about  them,  when  they  have

become  historical,  i.e.,  ossified.  Biographies  of  important  men  should  be

written  when  everybody  responsible  for  good  or  bad  is  still  alive  and

responsive.  Why  should  we  be  so  full  of  regard  for  privacy  in  important

matters when our newspapers drown us in small scandals every day?

  The developments in science and education within the next one hundred

years will be decisive in establishing whether this interview will have any

meaning whatsoever, or whether the evasion of the issues of babyhood and

motherhood will continue to mess up more centuries of human destiny. It is

of crucial importance, therefore, that the major, factual parts of the Wilhelm

                                                  1
Reich interview on Freud be published now.


                                                                  Wilhelm Reich, 1954                                        PART 1







                    THE INTERVIEW                        1) OCTOBER 18, 1952




  DR. EISSLER

Dr. Reich, the question I want to ask you is a very simple one. It is a very

comprehensive  question,  but  it  is  a  simple  one.  I  would  like  to  know

everything you know about Freud, everything you observed and everything

you thought. Even if it is not based on a correct observation, the mere fact

that you thought it about Freud would be so important for us to know.


  DR. REICH

Well, that is quite a big order. I know a lot about Freud. I would like to start

with a basic theoretical difference in the approach of psychoanalysis and my

work, not to propagate my work, but to explain how I saw Freud.

    Psychoanalysis, as you well know, works with words and unconscious

ideas. These are its tools. According to Freud, as I understood him, as he

published  it,  the  unconscious  can  only  be  brought  out  as  far  back  as  the

Wortvorstellungen [verbal ideas] when the “word images” were formed. In

other words, psychoanalysis cannot penetrate beneath or beyond the second

or third year of life. Psychoanalysis is bound down by its method. It has to

stick to that method which is the handling of associations and word images.

                            1
Now,  character  analysis  developed  the  reading  of  emotional  expression.

Whereas  Freud  opened  up  the  world  of  the  unconscious  mind,  thoughts,

desires, and so on, I succeeded in reading emotional expressions. Until then,

                                                                                        2
we couldn’t “read the mind.” We could only connect verbal associations. Is

what I’m saying perfectly clear?


  DR. EISSLERSure.


  DR. REICH

  When it becomes possible through character analysis to read emotional

expressions, the patient does not have to talk. If we know the patient well

enough, we know what’s going on without words being spoken. You tell me

what you are by way of your expression. Freud told me what he was through

his facial expression. Would you look at this picture of Freud. Please go there

                3
and look at it. I don’t know whether you will see what’s in that picture. I

didn’t see it when I received it from him in 1925. Can you see what’s in that

picture?


  DR. EISSLER

Well, a little bit.


  DR. REICH

It’s a very sad expression, true despair. I began to see the despair in Freud’s

                                                            4
face some time around 1940. Although he was dead, he had a great influence

upon the direction of my further search in the realm of human emotions.

What was his despair about? Now, if I am right, if I read the emotional

expression correctly, the problem is why he was in such despair. And why

didn’t I see it before, in 1925 or 1930?

  When I met Freud in 1919, he was a very alive person. I described him a

                                                                5
bit in the first volume of The Discovery of the Orgone. He was alive. He was

outgoing. He was hopeful. He was full of zest and zeal. Then, around 1924,

something happened. I don’t know whether you know that he withdrew from

all meetings and congresses in 1924. And he developed his cancer of the jaw

at that time. Are you following me?


  DR. EISSLER

Sure, yes, yes.  DR. REICH

Now, cancer, in my research—you know that I worked on it—is a disease

following emotional resignation—a bio-energetic shrinking, a giving up of

    6
hope.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes?


  DR. REICH

Now that hooks on to Freud: Why did he develop cancer just at that time?

Freud began to resign. (If you don’t follow, if anything is unclear, please just

ask me. Interrupt me and ask freely.) I didn’t see it then, and, peculiarly

enough, the conflict between us also began about that time.

  Now, I want you to believe that it is not my intention to accuse anybody. I

no longer have any interest whatsoever in the psychoanalytic movement. I’ve

been completely on my own since about 1930. Some of the people who were

involved  at  that  time  are  now  dead.  Some  are  still  alive.  Some  of  their

misdeeds still go on, are still active in one form or another. I want to add that

whatever  happened  between  the  International  Psychoanalytic  Association

(IPA) and myself, I ascribed, at first, to this person or that person, to the

psychoanalytic association, to a betrayal of Freud and psychoanalysis, etc.

And all that turned out to be wrong. Do you know what happened at that

time?


  DR. EISSLER

Only the gross—


  DR. REICH

I shall tell you the details. What happened at that time not only happened in

the IPA from 1926 to 1934. It has happened all through the ages. It happened

in the Christian Church fifteen hundred years ago. It happened in every homeon this planet. Now that sounds peculiar, doesn’t it? What happened? Do you

know the term “pestilent character”?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

That means, briefly, the following: There is a peaceful community—whether

it be of psychoanalysts or sociologists, or just a community of people like this

                    7
town of Rangeley. There are two or three people who are sick, emotionally

                                          8
sick, and they begin to stir up trouble. You still follow me?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Now, these people are very small and insignificant, historically. But, at that

time, they weren’t insignificant to me or to other psychoanalysts. At that

time, they were important because the fight against the development from

understanding  human  nature  on  the  basis  of  words  or  associations  or

unconscious  ideas  to  understanding  human  nature  on  the  basis  of  bio-

energetic  expression,  movement,  motion,  emotion—in  essence,  the

development  from  symptom  analysis  to  character  analysis  and  to  orgone

therapy—was  fought,  not  by  argument,  not  by  counterevidence,  but  by

slander. By slander, I say!

  There was one man, and I have to point him out. He’s dead now. He shot

                                9
himself. That’s Paul Federn. There is evidence that in 1924 this man began

to “dig” at Freud about me. I didn’t know it then. Freud didn’t know it. It

                          10
became clear later on. He was jealous of my success. And the result was

that mess in Lucerne. I don’t know what has been deposited in the Freud

Archives about me—what slander or defamation. But I know it’s around. I                                                      11
know who was involved in it. Jones was in it. I know that. And it is evident

                                            12
from the letters which I wrote to Freud and Freud wrote to me. I don’t know

if you went through them. Did you read them?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Then  you  saw  it  was  a  great  worry.  In  one  letter,  Freud  expressed  his

assurance that no matter what people said about me, he would protect me. I

                                                                  13
don’t know if you remember. That was about 1928 or so.

  Now, this whole horrible thing burst out at the Lucerne Congress. Do you

want to hear about that?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

That I seduced all my patients. I was a psychopath. I was this. I was that.

Then, finally, I had gone schizophrenic. That went on for years. You know

that?


  DR. EISSLER

No, I did not know that.


  DR. REICH

You don’t know that rumor of schizophrenia? Oh, yes. That was spread by

          1415
Fenichel. Oh, yes. Now, today, nobody believes it. It was quite a thing,

quite a thing. I doubt that you never heard that I’m paranoiac, schizophrenic.


  DR. EISSLERNo, I didn’t.


  DR. REICH

Sure?


  DR. EISSLER

Sure, I didn’t.


  DR. REICH

                                    16
You want to see the documents? Shall I give them to you?


  DR. EISSLER

Well, I mean, if you would—


  DR. REICH

All right, yes! Now listen! I can explain how they came to invent such a

rumor, or to set such a rumor into motion about me. In 1929—I think it was

then—I  began  to  work  in  character  analysis  with  physiological  emotions,

with physiological feelings in the patients. You are acquainted with character

analysis?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

                                                                                        17
You are. You know what I call preorgastic streamings? Orgonotic current?


  DR. EISSLER

I know a little about that.


  DR. REICH

You know something about it? Otherwise, there’s no use.  DR. EISSLER

Well,  I  know  your  literature  pretty  well  up  to  the  time  you  left  the

psychoanalytic movement.


  DR. REICH

It was already in by then. You didn’t read the third edition of Character

Analysis?


  DR. EISSLER

                            18
No, not the third edition.


  DR. REICH

Well,  in  schizophrenics,  the  bio-energetic  emotions  or  excitations  break

through  into  consciousness.  In  the  so-called  normal  human  beings,  these

excitations are more or less shut off. This is particularly the case in the affect-

blocked  compulsion  neurotic.  In  investigating  the  difference  between  the

typical neurotic and the schizophrenic, I learned that the neurotic recognizes

the excitations which may break through spontaneously, or in the course of

treatment, as biological, as arising from within. The schizophrenic fails to

recognize these primary, biophysical sensations and plasmatic streamings as

an inner process and, thus, comes to misinterpret and distort them. That is, he

believes the excitations—the sensations, the crawlings, the stirrings in him—

are due to outside influences, for example, to persecutors trying to electrocute

him. He does perceive his bio-energetic emotion, but he misinterprets it. This

explanation of the schizophrenic process was viewed as distorted and even

delusional by psychoanalysts such as Jones, Federn, Fenichel. And out of

such things grew the slander of calling me a paranoid schizophrenic. I want

you to read that third edition. You have it?


  DR. EISSLER

That was not published in 1930.  DR. REICH

No, no, that was published in 1948.


  DR. EISSLER

But that played already a role?


  DR. REICH

Oh,  yes,  1934.  Now,  how  far  do  you  want  to  go  into  the  secrets  of

psychoanalysis? Do you want it all?


  DR. EISSLER

Sure, I mean—


  DR. REICH

You think there should be no limitations?


  DR. EISSLER

No limitations.


  DR. REICH

I think the same thing.


  DR. EISSLER

I think it may be better understandable if you start with 1919 when you met

Freud.


  DR. REICH

Now, wait a minute. It goes from 1919 right up to 1950. It’s all one piece.


  DR. EISSLER

But you should start with 1919.  DR. REICH

Yes. I start with his despair.


  DR. EISSLER

But that was 1940.


  DR. REICH

I became aware of his despair in 1940, but the picture was given to me in

1925.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes,  but  we  are  in  1919,  and  that  period  from  1919  to  1925  is  quite

important.


  DR. REICH

Exactly. That’s why I come back now. I jumped forward to tell you about

that schizophrenic rumor and the rumors about my seducing patients—the

defamation, sexual defamation, and so on. Now, I have to go back to where

Freud was in despair.

  At  that  time,  about  1925,  the  psychoanalysts  in  the  technical  seminar

didn’t like my work on genitality, on orgastic potency, on the actual stasis

neurosis which underlies the whole dynamic structure of the energy source of

              1920
the neurosis. And their dislike showed itself in many ways. It would be

petty  to  go  into  it  here  and  to  try  to  describe  these  petty  ways,  petty

annoyances, and so on, but I have to say the following: The psychoanalysts

didn’t  like  it,  and  they  still  don’t  like  it.  They  don’t  mention  it.  It  is

mentioned nowhere. Genitality, to this day, is not handled as a basic problem

of adolescence, as a basic problem of the first puberty. To my knowledge,

                        21
nobody dares touch it. You’ll have to agree with me on that. Nobody dared

to  touch  it  then,  either.  I  touched  it  fully.  I  went  into  it  critically,  as  I

                                                  22
described it in my Funktion des Orgasmus. Do you know that book?  DR. EISSLER

Yes, sure.


  DR. REICH

At first, I didn’t understand why that animosity arose. I was regarded very

highly from 1920 up to about 1925 or 1926. And then I felt that animosity. I

had  touched  on  something  painful—genitality.  They  didn’t  like  it.  They

                              23
didn’t want it. Hitschmann was the only one who said, “You hit the nail on

the head.” (He was the director of the Psychoanalytic Polyclinic. We built it

up together.) It is very unpleasant to bring this forth, but I must. It has to do

with my plight, and it has to do with Freud’s despair.

  Basically,  Freud  discovered  the  principle  of  energy  functioning  of  the

psychic  apparatus. The  energy-functioning  principle.  This  was  what

distinguished him from all other psychologists. Not so much the discovery of

the unconscious. The unconscious, the theory of the unconscious, was, to my

mind, a consequence of a principle he introduced into psychology. That was

                                                                                          24
the principle, the natural scientific principle, of energy—the “libido theory.”

                                                      25
You know that today very little is left of it. I consider my bio-energetic

work with the emotions to be a direct continuation of that energy principle in

psychology. By the way, you should read that third edition.


  DR. EISSLER

I will do it.


  DR. REICH

Now, if an organism is to work with libido functions, with the genitality of

children or adolescents, I do not believe he can do so unless he is functioning

                                                  26
well himself. Do I make myself quite clear?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.  DR. REICH

If you feel that I am not quite clear, please interrupt me and tell me because I

feel it’s a very grave obligation to have that stated clearly.

  Freud introduced the energy principle into psychology, and, in doing so,

he broke the barrier which separated the science of that day from that of

today.  I  don’t  know  why  I  hesitate,  but  I  hesitate  to  say  this: Most

psychoanalysts were genitally disturbed, and that is why they hated it. That’s

it. I assure you that I don’t say that in order to do damage to anybody.


  DR. EISSLER

You think that extends to Freud, too?


  DR. REICH

No, I don’t. That’s the point. When I met Freud, I saw that he was a very

                                                                                    27
alive, strong-willed person. He couldn’t possibly have been disturbed. But

here comes the first tragedy in connection with his despair. His despair was a

double one. To my mind, as I felt it then, and as I later began to read it in his

face,  it  was  this:  First,  when  he  discovered  infantile  sexuality,  he  was

furiously attacked, in a horrible way, by Modju. Do you know who Modju is?


  DR. EISSLER

                                      28
I met him in one of the bulletins.


  DR. REICH

You  did?  Then  you  knew  that  “Modju”  is  a  synonym  for  the  emotional

plague or pestilent character who uses underhanded slander and defamation

in his fight against life and truth. That name “Modju” will stick to him for the

rest of this century and far beyond. Modju is a scoundrel and—


  DR. EISSLER

From where did you derive the name?  DR. REICH

Pardon?


  DR. EISSLER

From where did you get the name?


  DR. REICH

It was derived from Mocenigo, a nincompoop, a nobody, who delivered a

very great scientist, in the sixteenth century, to the Inquisition. That scientist

was Giordano Bruno. He was imprisoned for eight years and then burned at

the stake. This Mocenigo was a nobody who knew nothing, learned nothing,

couldn’t  learn  anything.  He  wanted  to  get  a  good  memory  function  from

Bruno, who had a marvelous memory. But he couldn’t do it. Bruno couldn’t

give it to him. So what did he do? He went out and killed Bruno. You see?

                                                                          29
That’s MO-cenigo.  And DJU  is  Djugashvili.  That’s  Stalin.  So  I  put  it

together to make “Modju.” And that is going to stick. They will never get rid

of  it.  Never!  That  has  to  do  with  our  present  plight  in  sociology,  you

            30
understand.

  Now, to get back to Freud’s despair. As I said, there was this first despair

after he discovered infantile sexuality. He was moving quite logically in the

direction of the genitality problem, where I found myself so much later, about

fifteen years later. But he couldn’t get at it. He tried to get at it in the Three

Contributions. But there, already, something came in which was no good.

That was that genitality was “in the service of procreation.” That’s in the

                        31
Three Contributions. It’s not true, you see. He knew it somewhere. In our

discussions, it was quite clear that he was hampered by the world, which did

not want him to get at the genitality of infants and children and adolescents

because that would turn the whole world upside down. Yes, Freud knew that.

                                                                            32
But  he  couldn’t  get  at  it  socially.  The  sublimation  theory,  which  he

                                                                                      33
developed as an absolute, was a consequence of that. It was an evasion. He

had to. He was tragically caught. You know with whom? With the manystudents, many pupils, many followers. And what did they do? They took

what he had and got the money out of it. I’m sorry to have to state that. I

stated it publicly before. They hampered Freud. He was hampered so that he

couldn’t develop further. And from there, he went right into the death-instinct

      34
theory. I don’t know if you want to go into such detail.


  DR. EISSLER

Sure.


  DR. REICH

You want it?


  DR. EISSLER

I think so.


  DR. REICH

Okay. Freud and I never spoke to each other about personal things. But he

was very unhappily married. You know that?


  DR. EISSLER

No, I didn’t.


  DR. REICH

You didn’t know that? I don’t think his life was happy. He lived a very calm,

quiet,  decent  family  life,  but  there  is  little  doubt  that  he  was  very  much

dissatisfied genitally. Both his resignation and his cancer were evidence of

that.  Freud  had  to  give  up,  as  a  person.  He  had  to  give  up  his  personal

pleasures,  his  personal  delights,  in  his  middle  years.  Before  that,  I  don’t

know.  While  he  had  great  understanding  for  what  youth  is  and  for  what

                                              35
people lived, he, himself, had to give up. Now, if my theory is correct, if my

view of cancer is correct, you just give up, you resign—and, then, you shrink.                                                                    36
It is quite understandable why he developed his epulis. He smoked very

                    37
much, very much. I always had the feeling he smoked—not nervousness,

not nervousness—but because he wanted to say something which never came

over his lips. Do you get the point?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

As if he had “to bite something down.” Now, I don’t know whether you are

on my line. Bite—a biting-down impulse, swallow something down, never to

          38
express it. He was always very polite, “bitingly” polite, sometimes. Do you

know what I mean?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

“Bitingly.” Somehow coldly, but not cruelly. And it was here he developed

that cancer. If you bite with a muscle for years and years, the tissue begins to

deteriorate,  and  then  cancer  develops.  Now,  that  cannot  be  found  in

psychoanalytic theory. That comes right out of my work, out of orgonomy.

  Freud was unhappy in two ways. First, he was caught with his pupils and

his association. He couldn’t move any more. And, second, he was caught

personally. He couldn’t show himself anywhere. He sat at home. He had two

                                  39
friends, I think. One was Rie, and there were perhaps two others. One died

                            40
later. They played tarok, didn’t they? Once a week—on Saturday evenings.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes, tarok.  DR. REICH

He was alone and lonesome. Only later, about 1926, Anna Freud began to

come into his life, into his work, as a co-worker. He stood it better then. But

                                                                                41
he really withdrew in 1924. The last time I saw him at a Congress was in

Berlin, 1922.

  Now, I would like to preclude the possibility that you may think I’m

telling all this about the students because I had that trouble with them, or

because I’m jealous. I’m not. It has nothing to do with it. I have my own life.

I don’t care a thing about it. What is important, however, is what they did—

what analysts like Adler, Stekel and Jung did. They took his theory, broke off

                                                                                          42
the most important thing, pulled it out, threw it away and went after fame.

That’s what they did, really. And it was always the sexuality that they threw

  43
out. In the discussions I had with him, I can assure you that Freud never

gave up the sexual theory, the libido theory. Never! And all the later attacks

—by the sociologists, for instance, who say “no” to libido—are nonsense!

It’s not an either libido or society. The libido is the energy which is molded

by society. There’s no contradiction there. I am always astonished when I

listen to such things, or read them. It’s either libido or sociology. Why, that’s

perfect  nonsense!  No  serious  psychoanalyst  ever  believed  that,  or  ever

preached that, or taught that. The child brings with it a certain amount of

energy. The world gets hold of it and molds it. So you have sociology and

                                    44
biology, both, in one organism. Now, to my mind, the whole sociological

school in psychoanalysis which abolished the libido theory, the sexual theory,

and says “not sexuality, but society” is plain evasion, a plain fear of getting in

touch  with  the  worst  mess  in  which  humanity  finds  itself,  man’s  sexual

neurosis. That’s clear, isn’t it?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH                                                                        45
You took part in my work in the Vienna movement in 1928. So you know

what I tried to do then. Oh, I could talk until next week about that time, but I

must make it short. I want to try to extract the conflict in which Freud found

himself.

  Freud started out as a young, healthy, alive individual. He had courage

and went ahead. And, then, he fell prey to the usual way of having a school,

of  having  admirers,  students,  pupils  in  an  association.  And  he  was  badly

licked. He already knew quite clearly in 1925 or 1926 that he was licked.


  DR. EISSLER

He told you?


  DR. REICH

In so many words, yes. Yes! I came to him very often in despair. “Where are

we going? Everybody gives up the libido theory.” Let me tell you, I’m going

through the same thing now with my own doctors. So I know it very well.

Nobody wants to touch the subject, which is, and always has been, taboo in

society. Not impotence. I don’t speak about impotence or frigidity. No. What

I mean is the emotional, the primary emotional experience of the merger of

two organisms. Do you get me, now?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

It’s  not  just  to  fuck,  you  understand,  not  the  embrace  in  itself,  not  the

intercourse. It is the real emotional experience of the loss of your ego, of your

whole spiritual self. Now, Freud understood that. And I asked him many

times, “Where are we going? This libido theory is dying.” (The death-instinct

theory came up about 1924 or 1925). And he said many times, “Don’t worry.

Just go on. Do your clinical work. Don’t worry.” He was right! Today, thesedeath-instinct things are dead; they are finished. You don’t hear of them any

more. But I believe Freud definitely knew that he was betrayed in his sexual

theory. The libido theory was betrayed, was gone. It is quite evident there is

                                                                  46
no libido theory today in the psychoanalytic movement. Do you agree with

me? Would you agree on that? You don’t have to commit yourself.


  DR. EISSLER

I wouldn’t go quite that far.


  DR. REICH

Yes, but you would say that it is—


  DR. EISSLER

One hears less and less of it.


  DR. REICH

Less and less—that’s right. Yes, that’s right. I’m glad that you give me as

much as that. Yes. One hears less and less. It’s more and more sociology.

This would not be bad, you understand, if it were not a run-away.

  Now, how, in heaven’s name, are psychiatrists who are influenced to such

a great extent by psychoanalytic thinking—how, in heaven’s name, I ask, are

they  ever  to  correct  the  psychic  economy  in  children,  in  newborns,  in

adolescents if they leave that [libido] out? I don’t think it will stay that way,

because I’m still around. You know that? I am quite a bit around. So that is

the struggle. You understand, now, that I wasn’t just interested in Freud when

I  offered  my  assistance  to  the  Freud  Archives.  It  was  not  interest  in  the

psychoanalytic movement either. I have no interest whatsoever in it. It was

not interest in psychoanalytic theory. It was interest in only one thing: How

the public institutions will behave in the face of my development of the libido

theory;  i.e.,  how  they  will  behave  in  the  face  of  the  biosexual  energy

development  of  infants,  mothers,  pregnant  mothers,  children  in  the  firstpuberty and second puberty. I may be wrong. I may be completely cockeyed.

I don’t think I am. But I assure you that there is no solution to this world’s

problems  unless  this  point  is  cleared  up  sociologically,  politically,

economically,  psychologically,  structurally,  characterologically,  in  every

single respect. I don’t believe that there will be any solution of any social

problem  as  long  as  children  and  adolescents  grow  up  with  a  stasis  of

biological energy—haywire, irrational, with neurotic symptoms, and so on,

and so on. That is why I offered my help. Do you understand? Is it quite clear

why I’m interested? I have a great interest in getting this point of view into

the psychoanalytic movement, in opposition to such schools as the English

school, which denies all these things, sees nothing of it, and still thrives on a

culture which just falls apart, or is in the process of falling apart, right now,

under the very feet of those who proclaim it.

  Now,  to  continue  with  the  basic  problem  of  Freud,  Freud  as  a  trail

breaker:  I  said  before  that  he  succeeded  very  well  in  penetrating  to  the

borderline where language develops, about the beginning of the third year.

And, then, he got stuck. Character analysis continued from there. Then, I

                                                            47
went on to the bodily expression, which is wordless. I went even further and

reached  the  stage  where  the  newborn  infant  is  formed  in  the  womb.

Psychoanalysis  knows  nothing  about  this.  It  can’t  know.  That’s  not  a

reproach. I don’t mean to say that psychoanalysis is bad or insufficient. I say

it’s  a  psychology.  And  psychology  has  to  stick  to  psychology,  to

                                    48
psychological work and ideas. My work continues into the bio-energetic

emotional expression. Now, why do I bring this up? I bring it up for a simple

reason: If Freud had not existed and done his work, it would not have been

possible to penetrate beyond the word language, beyond the unconscious into

the bio-energetic expression, into the bio-energetic form of expression of the

organism.  Then,  we  wouldn’t  have  learned  the  following,  which  no

psychoanalyst knows today. You remember the role the so-called “negative

therapeutic  reaction”  played  in  psychoanalysis.  The  more  you  knew,  theworse you got. And nobody understood it. Nobody! I began to understand it a

few years ago. I would like to try to condense it into a few words.

  When  a  child  is  born,  it  comes  out  of  a  warm  uterus,  37  degrees

centigrade, into about 18 or 20 degrees centigrade. That’s bad enough. The

shock of birth … bad enough. But it could survive that if the following didn’t

happen.  As  it  comes  out,  it  is  picked  up  by  the  legs  and  slapped  on  the

buttocks. The first greeting is a slap. The next greeting: Take it away from the

mother. Right? Take it away from the mother. I want you to listen here. It

will sound incredible in a hundred years. Take it away from the mother. The

mother must not touch or see the baby. The baby has no body contact after

having had nine months of body contact at a very high temperature—what we

call the “orgonotic body energy contact,” the field action between them, the

                        49
warmth and the heat. Then, the Jews introduced something about six or

seven thousand years ago. And that is circumcision. I don’t know why they

introduced it. It’s still a riddle. Take that poor penis. Take a knife—right?

And start cutting. And everybody says, “It doesn’t hurt.” Everybody says,

“No, it doesn’t hurt.” Get it? That’s an excuse, of course, a subterfuge. They

say  that  the  sheaths  of  the  nerve  are  not  yet  developed.  Therefore,  the

sensation in the nerves is not yet developed. Therefore, the child doesn’t feel

a thing. Now, that’s murder! Circumcision is one of the worst treatments of

children. And what happens to them? You just look at them. They can’t talk

to you. They just cry. What they do is shrink. They contract, get away into

the inside, away from that ugly world. I express it very crudely, but you

                                      50
understand what I mean, Doctor. Now, that’s the greeting: Taking it away

from the mother. Mother mustn’t see it. Twenty-four or forty-eight hours, eat

nothing. Right? Penis cut. And then comes the worst: This poor child, poor

infant, tries always to stretch out and to find some warmth, something to hold

on to. It goes to the mother, puts its lips to the mother’s nipple. And what

happens? The nipple is cold, or doesn’t erect, or the milk doesn’t come, or the

milk is bad. And that is quite general. That is not one case in a thousand. Thatis general. That’s average. So what does that infant do? How does it respond

to that? How does it have to respond to that bio-energetically? It can’t come

to you and tell you, “Oh, listen, I’m suffering so much, so much.” It just

cries. And, finally, it gives up. It gives up and says, “No!” It doesn’t say “no”

in  words,  you  understand,  but  that  is  the  emotional  situation.  And  we

orgonomists know it. We get it out of our patients. We get it out of their

emotional structure, out of their behavior, not out of their words. Words can’t

express it. Here, in the very beginning, the spite develops. Here, the “no”

develops, the big “NO” of humanity. And then you ask why the world is in a

mess.

  Now, may I hook on to the situation as it exists in the world today. How

is it understandable that a single Hitler or a single Djugashvili can control

eight hundred million people? How is it possible? That was the question I

introduced  into  sociology  in  1927.  And  I  discussed  the  whole  thing  with

Freud. How is it possible? Nobody asks that question. You don’t hear about

it. How  is  it  possible  that  eight  hundred  million  grown-up,  hardworking,

decent people can be subjugated by a single Modju? The answer is this—and

it’s quite sure and safe, and in a hundred years people will know it, I hope—

because infants  are  ruined  in  their  emotional  wanting,  in  their  natural,

emotional life expression right before their birth and after their birth. They

are ruined before their birth by cold, by what we call “anorgonotic,” i.e.,

biologically dead, contracted uteri. We have established this in many case

histories. Psychoanalysts don’t want to know anything about it. They don’t

                                                51
listen. The world already listens, however. Can you follow me?


  DR. EISSLER

Sure. Yes.


  DR. REICH

That means: The biological system of the human race has been ruined for

ages. It has been ruined for thousands of years in Asia—in China, in Japan.The hardened structures in India and Arabia. The helplessness of millions.

                                    52
That is why the Moscow Modju has such success in Asia. It is also true, of

course, in Europe and in America. Everywhere. That means: You break the

will of the infant, of the child. Not when it is in the oedipus phase. That’s a

consequence. That’s later. No, before it’s born and soon after, in the first two

weeks of life. And, then, the child withdraws. It resigns with a big “NO.” It

doesn’t say, “No.” It doesn’t scream, “No.” But there is an expression of

“No.” It’s a giving up. You can see it in the hospitals. There’s no doubt about

it. The damage is being done right there, in the very beginning—right before

and after birth. There is the disposition for all the rest of it. The NO, the

spiting, the not wanting, the having no opinion, not being able to develop

anything. People are dull. They are dull, dead, uninterested. And, then, they

develop their pseudo-contacts, fake pleasures, fake intelligence, superficial

things, the wars, and so on. That goes very far. I don’t want to go into any

more, here. But was I clear now, quite clear?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Now, that is quite crucial, quite crucial. Unless medicine, education, social

hygiene succeed in establishing such a bio-energetic functioning in the mass

of the population that the uteri will not be contracted, that the embryos will

grow in well-functioning bodies, that the nipples will not be contracted, and

the  breasts  of  the  mothers  will  be  bio-energetically  and  sexually  alive,

nothing will change. As long as children will be harmed and hurt with all

kinds  of  ugly  things—with  chemicals  by  the  chemistry  Modju,  with

injections of all kinds of things, and with the knife right after birth—nothing

will change. I have had much medical experience in that. I have pulled many

a child out of that mire. As long as that is going on, nothing will happen in

the  right  direction.  Nothing!  No  constitution,  no  parliament,  nothing  willhelp. Nothing, I say. Nothing will change for the better. You can’t impose

freedom on the ruined bio-energetic systems of children. Is this thing clear

now? Is this whole thing clear—the impact of the world, as it is, on the

infant,  yet  unborn  and  newly  born?  This  is  the  utmost  outpost  in

biopsychiatry today, the last thing that has been reached. I don’t think you

can go further in psychiatry than to the period where the infant is in the

womb and, then, leaves the womb. Now this has been the major conquest in

psychiatry  between  about  1942  and  1950.  It  was  achieved  in  psychiatric

orgonomy.  However,  if  Freud  hadn’t  existed,  if  he  hadn’t  found  the

unconscious, the theory of the instincts, the pregenital development of the

child, I couldn’t have gone on into the bio-energetic realm, to these things

which I have just brought up.


  DR. EISSLER

Now, how far were you at the time when this break occurred between you

and Freud? How much of these thoughts did you tell him?


  DR. REICH

We often spoke about the possibilities of penetrating beyond the association

technique.

  Then there was the problem of mental hygiene. I want you to understand

that, at that time, there was no preventive mental hygiene of the neuroses.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

                                                                                      53
Before 1927, there was nothing of it in our present-day sense—nothing. So

we  had  to  grope  our  way.  And  when,  in  1927,  I  established  the  mental

hygiene movement in Austria, I had many meetings with Freud. He was very

enthusiastic. And I would like to say that what you know today as psycho-sociology grew out of those discussions.

  One  day,  Freud  said  (I  remember  that  quite  distinctly—it  was  in

                                                          54
connection with the sexual legislation in Russia): “Möglich, dass das Licht

vom Osten kommt”—Maybe the light will come from the East. But he was

doubtful. I was doubtful, too. I never believed that the communists really

were on the right track. But you had to work with them because they had the

                  55
desolate  people.  And  you  had  to  bring  psychological  thinking  into

sociology. Freud was very much in favor of the new legislation in Russia,

although he was a bit hesitant about the easing of divorce and its effect on the

family. It was quite clear to me that he was bound down here. He wanted to

get out of his own marriage. But he couldn’t. He was bound down—bound

down by his position, by his Judaism, and by many other things. Once, in a

discussion concerning the family problem, he said, “Sie stechen hier in ein

              56
Wespennest.”

  Freud was a peculiar mixture of a very progressive free thinker and a

gentleman professor of 1860. Yet, in spite of his conservatism, he was so

open-minded and so outgoing. I don’t think that he, himself, betrayed his

cause,  but  he  let  himself  be  caught.  He  let  himself  be  caught  by  many

students who wanted all kinds of things from him and gave him admiration in

                                                                                        57
return. I have a manuscript ready for publication, The Murder of Christ. I

have to talk about it. Would you remind me later about Moses and Christ?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

It  is  quite  clear  that  people  seduce  you  if  you  are  a  leader,  if  you  have

something to give. They seduce you by admiration so that you will give them

as much as possible, and they can then thrive on you. Freud didn’t know

    5859
that. He tended to identify with the leader. But there is no doubt that he

should have stayed alone, completely alone. I know what I’m talking about.I’ve had quite a few experiences myself with this seductive admiration. I

have had to destroy one organization after another in order to remain free.

You get my point? Any questions now?


  DR. EISSLER

Do you think there was a difficulty in his bearing aloneness?


  DR. REICH

He  could  not  bear  it.  That’s  right.  That’s  a  good  question,  a  very  good

question, Dr. Eissler. It is terrifically painful to be alone and alive at the same

time. That’s hell. I go through it myself. Do you know why I have removed

myself, why I sit here, alone? I have to save my clean thoughts. I have to

maintain a cleanliness, a purity. Freud didn’t succeed in that, and you can see

it in his face. That was not quite clear in 1925. I didn’t understand it, then.

But later, I too began to experience the emotional plague and to see what it

does to man’s leaders. Now, that’s very crucial, not only to the understanding

of Freud, but to the understanding of the human race and what it does, how it

operates with its leaders, how it creates the dictator. Do you know my book,

                      60
Listen, Little Man!?


  DR. EISSLER

No.


  DR. REICH

Well, all right. I shall give you one, then. Yes, the leader is seduced by the

followers. They admire him and sit around him, and they look into his eyes,

and his ego swells. Freud was very much alone. He was alone for fifteen

years. Then the first students came, and he drank it up. He was very much

afraid  of  being  lonely.  He  was  lonesome,  anyhow.  He  had  no  social

                                                                                          61
intercourse  with  his  students,  with  the  exception,  I  think,  of  Ferenczi.

          62
Abraham? No, I don’t think even Abraham. With Ferenczi, it was bad, later,                                        63
too. You know there was a conflict.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. But, now, what was the situation in 1919?


  DR. REICH

In 1919, it was a very peculiar situation. In 1919, there was a very small

circle. There were only about eight men. At the Psychiatric Clinic, they were

laughed at. In the medical school, they were laughed at. Freud was laughed

at.


  DR. EISSLER

You had your M.D. at that time?


  DR. REICH

In 1922.


  DR. EISSLER

How did you happen to meet Freud? Why did you go to Freud?


  DR. REICH

Why I went to Freud? Because I read his things and I saw what he did. So I

went to him.


  DR. EISSLER

There was an immediate contact?


  DR. REICH

There was an immediate contact. Oh, yes! You see me now. I am quite alive,

am I not? I am sparkling, yes? He had the same quality. He had an aliveness

which  the  usual  human  being  didn’t  have,  you  know.  His  hands,  their

movements were very graceful. His eyes were good. He looked straight atyou. He didn’t have any pose. On the other hand, Federn was a prophet, with

a beard. Somebody else—Eidelberg, for instance, sat there as a “thinker.” But

Freud was just a simple animal. Would you accept that? Just a simple animal.

That was Freud. And then he broke.


  DR. EISSLER

But, now, in 1919, you made an appointment. You went up to his apartment?


  DR. REICH

I just wrote him. Yes. Go ahead, ask.


  DR. EISSLER

And what happened? What did you tell him? Do you remember?


  DR. REICH

I just told him that we are medical students, that we find that there is no

curriculum of sexology in the medical school whatsoever, that my colleagues

and I want to correct such a situation. We wanted his help, and he was very

ready to give it. He knelt down before his bookshelf and brought out “Trieb-

                                          64
Schicksale” and “Das Unbewusste,” and all those things. And he talked a

long time about it and was very much alive. He was very interested. He said,

“Finally. It’s time.” He said it’s very important to have a seminar.


  DR. EISSLER

Do you remember some literal statements of his at this first meeting?


  DR. REICH

He said what I told you: “It’s very important. It’s crucial to have it. Yes, you

are right. It’s a neglected subject.”


  DR. EISSLERAnd, then, you started this seminar?


  DR. REICH

No, we already had the seminar. The seminar started in January 1919.


  DR. EISSLER

That was within the psychoanalytic society?


  DR. REICH

                                                                                      65
No, no! It had nothing to do with it. That was at the University of Vienna.


  DR. EISSLER

And, then, what were your later contacts with analysis? How did you get

that?


  DR. REICH

                            66
Well, I began to analyze. I had my first analytic patient when I was in my

third  semester,  March  1919,  I  think.  I  described  it  in  my  book  on The

                                                                                        67
Discovery of the Orgone, in the first volume, The Function of the Orgasm.


  DR. EISSLER

And when did you see Freud again?


  DR. REICH

Oh,  I  went  to  see  him  every  once  in  a  while—not  regularly,  but  when  I

needed something. I still have the cards he gave to patients he referred to me.

For example, he would write, “Impotence, three months.” Can you imagine

trying to accomplish this in three months, or even in six months?

  [Change of tape. Dialogue lost.]

  I would like to go back to a point which I have here in my notes—Freud’s

disappointment in me. Now, if there is a disappointment, there must havebeen  an  expectation,  right?  When  I  first  met  Freud,  there  was  immediate

contact—immediate  contact  of  two  organisms,  an  aliveness,  interest,  and

going to the point. I had the same experience with Einstein when I met him in

    68
1940.  There  are  certain  people  who  click,  just  click  in  their  emotional

contact. You know Character Analysis well enough to know what I’m talking

about. I knew that Freud liked me. I felt it. I could see it. He had contact with

me. I could talk to him straight. He understood what I meant in an immediate

way. Furthermore, I was a young psychiatrist, very promising in the clinic

and  at  the  Psychiatric  Hospital  Clinic.  And  there  was  a  great  difference

between my way of expression, as you feel it right now, and that of the rest of

the psychoanalysts in Vienna. It was so very dull there. About eight or ten

people would sit around, and it was awfully dull—if you know what I mean?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

It was plain dull. Everybody had an opinion about this or that, and maybe that

is that, and somebody said this, and somebody else said that. I acted like a

shark in a pond of carps. When I came in, everything somehow began to stir,

and  that  was  very  good.  People  liked  it.  For  instance,  the  idea  for  the

technical seminar came from me. I discussed it with Freud, and he liked it

very much. And why did he like it? There was no theory of technique at that

                69
time. Nothing. Just associations. Sit there. Associate. Nothing happened,

nothing. And this “nothing happens” was exactly the problem. How can we

make a patient react? How can we make him reveal himself? It took some

eight years before it was solved, although I must say it is still not completely

solved. And Freud liked that alive way. It brought life into a dead body. He

                                                                      70
liked my work in the technical seminar. I think Anna Freud knows that very

well. She often said it, and she could confirm it. I was a good psychiatrist. I

                                      71
was known as a good clinician. I think I was the only one in that groupwhose background was in biology, natural science, and natural philosophy. I

don’t know whether there was—no, there was nobody else. I don’t think

        72
Nunberg or Hitschmann or Federn, or anybody else had that background.

That could be felt in discussions. Again, I don’t know whether I make myself

clear in a simple way, but when scientists speak together, they understand

each other. There’s a certain way of expressing things—in contradistinction

to physicians.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

That was a distinction I felt keenly. Nobody really mentioned it, but it was

there. I know it was there.

  I feel rather embarrassed speaking in this way. I know I sound as though I

want to make myself better than anybody else. I really don’t. I only refer to

Freud’s  great  hopes  and  expectations  in  order  to  explain  his  great

disappointment later. He once said to Annie Angel, a friend of Anna Freud’s,

that  I  was  the  “best  head  in  the  Association.”  The  best  head,  “der  beste

Kopf.” He often expressed the hope that I would continue clinical work, just

clinical work. I was a clinician. We agreed that speculations had no meaning.

It was easy to put up a theory about a case. I, however, appealed to facts, to

the development of the case. And that’s what Freud loved. So he had great

hopes.

  Then I brought in the idea of the technical seminar. It was the first of its

kind in the history of psychoanalysis. Hitschmann conducted it first. Then,

Nunberg took over, and I followed in 1924. It was really the birthplace of the

psychoanalytic  technique  as  it  is  practiced  today.  So  Freud  saw

developments, clinical developments. He saw theoretical developments, too.

And it was a very great thing to him that life came into that dead body.

  Then it happened. I encountered two things in the technical seminar: Onthe  one  hand,  the  clinical  situation—the  stasis  neurosis,  the  infants,  the

misery  of  people.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  reluctance  of  the

psychoanalysts to go into it—a reluctance that persists to this day. They are

still reluctant to go into the problem of stasis neurosis. You get me?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Now  that  drove  me  away  from  the  psychoanalytic  association—not  from

psychoanalysis, but from the association, from my colleagues. It drove me

into the world outside, into sociology. From now onward, the great question

was: “Where does that misery come from?” And, here, the trouble began.

While  Freud  developed  his  death-instinct  theory  which  said  “the  misery

comes from inside,” I went out, out where the people were. From 1927 until

about September 1930, I worked outside and did all that sociological work at

the  roots  of  society.  Here,  Freud’s  disappointment  comes  in.  I  went  into

sociology, which, at that time, was mixed or identical with politics. It was

one thing. And, here, there was another man, another genius, Marx. I began

to be interested in Marx and Engels in 1927. I had to, of course. They were

very great men and they all were right. I learned some good, true sociology,

there.

  Freud was enthusiastic at first—up to about 1928. I remember I visited

him on the Semmering, and we had discussions about the mental-hygiene

movement. But, then, as it grew, the political side of it, the sociological, took

over more and more. And Freud disliked that. Also, Paul Federn had been

digging at Freud about me and, about 1929, he succeeded in destroying the

splendid relationship between Freud and me with some slander. I don’t know

what kind of slander. I don’t know what went on, but there is no doubt that it

was Federn who kept digging at Freud about me. He dug and dug and dug—

probably  as  far  back  as  1923.  And,  then,  when  the  sociological  workdeveloped  outside,  Freud  began  to  yield. I  had  drawn  the  social

consequences of the libido theory. To Freud’s mind, this was the worst thing I

  73
did.

  Now,  what  are  these  social  consequences?  What  are  the  social

consequences  of  the  libido  theory?  You  have  it  in  all  my  publications.  I

would like to summarize it in a few words: If you have a stream, a natural

stream, you must let it stream. If you dam it up somewhere, it goes over the

banks.  That’s  all.  Now,  when  the  natural  streaming  of  the  bio-energy  is

dammed  up,  it  also  spills  over,  resulting  in  irrationality,  perversions,

neuroses, and so on. What do you have to do to correct this? You must get

the  stream  back  into  its  normal  bed  and  let  it  flow  naturally  again.  That

requires a lot of change in education, in infant upbringing, in family life.

These  are  the  social  consequences.  And,  somehow,  here,  Freud  couldn’t

follow  me.  It  was  not  the  character-analytic  technique,  it  was  the  sexual

          74
revolution that bothered him. Any questions?


  DR. EISSLER

What were his objections?


  DR. REICH

There were no objections. “Kultur,” that’s all. I want to have it quite clear

                                        75
that Das Unbehagen in der Kultur was written specifically in response to

one of my lectures in Freud’s home. I was the one who was “unbehaglich in

der Kultur.”


  DR. EISSLER

There was a discussion? Did Freud discuss that paper? Which paper was the

one—


  DR. REICH

                                                                          76
Yes. My paper was that on “The Prophylaxis of the Neuroses.”  DR. EISSLER

Yes. And what did Freud say?


  DR. REICH

                                                    77
Freud’s remark was, “Die Kultur geht vor.” I say he was irrational. I am

sorry. He was irrational. I said to him, “If your own theory says that the

stasis, the libido stasis or energy stasis, is at the core of the neurosis, of the

neurotic process, and if the orgastic potency, which you don’t deny (he never

denied that), is a key to overcome that stasis, or, at least, to deal with it, then

my theory of the prevention of the neuroses is correct. It’s your own theory. I

just draw the consequences of it.” But he didn’t want it. Here, he was the old

gentleman, bound down by his family, bound down by his pupils, who were

partially neurotic and partially bound down by their families. Hitschmann

                                                78
was one of the few who really understood. The enemies were Nun-berg and,

especially, Federn. Helene Deutsch was very sympathetic, but noncommittal.

                                                                                    79
Who else? Horney understood, but she dropped the sexual angle. Rado was

                                                                                  80
far off. Alexander was always far off. Yes, Alexander was an enemy. Anna

Freud understood. She was always very interested and friendly, but she was

also noncommittal.

  So, because Freud’s expectations had been so great, his disappointment

was equally great. He felt that here was a clinician, a psychiatrist, a man

trained in natural science, eager, gifted, who could carry on. And then he

goes off into Marxism, Communism, and so on.

  Now, I can assure you I made many mistakes at that time. For instance, it

was a mistake to believe that if you tell the people about a neurosis and if you

tell them about happiness, they will be able to understand and to change. I

knew the people were sick, but I wanted freedom for them. But the capacity

for freedom, the structural, the characterological capacity, was, somehow, not

quite  present.  Just  here,  on  this  fact  of  structural  incapacity,  Freud’s

objections to my work were correct. I have to admit that. But he didn’t know

why he was correct. Do you get my point?  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Is that clear?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

I  assure  you,  if  I  hadn’t  gone  through  those  mistakes,  through  those

experiences with the people, the way they accepted all that I said—if you

were in those meetings, you remember how that—


  DR. EISSLER

Sure.


  DR. REICH

—went high, high, high. Thousands of people in Berlin listened to all that.

Well, if I hadn’t gone through those mistakes, I wouldn’t have arrived where

I am now, at such a mature point. I don’t want to go into that here, but I want

you to understand there is no use in individual therapy. No use! Oh, yes,

good use to make money and to help here and there. But from the standpoint

of the social problem, the mental-hygiene problem, it’s no use. Therefore, I

                                                            81
gave it up. There is no use in anything but infants. You have to go back to

the unspoiled protoplasm. Is that clear?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICHAny questions?


  DR. EISSLER

Now, what was Freud’s view of politics? Do you remember?


  DR. REICH

Yes! Yes! Oh, yes! Freud wanted nothing of politics. I wanted nothing of

politics, either. But I was trapped in one thing which I only clarified much

later. That was the confusion that existed because no distinction was made

between the words “sociological” and “political.” They were not separated.

Do you get my point?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Today,  I’m  fighting  the  political  scoundrel  wherever  I  can,  but  I  do

sociology. That’s quite a different thing from politics. On the other hand,

Modju picks up sociology and makes a business out of it. This happens with

everything. Something serious, good, productive develops, and, then, Modju

                                                                  82
picks it up and makes a mess out of it. You get the point?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

That’s what I mean, today, when I speak of the “emotional plague.” And my

knowledge of all this came out of these experiences. You understand?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. Did Freud see the difference between politics and sociology?  DR. REICH

No, no! Nobody knew it then. We had to learn about it through our mistakes.

Thus,  for  instance,  we  had  to  find  out  what  those  politicians,  those

                          83
communist red fascists, were doing in Berlin in 1931–1932. As long as I

brought  ten  thousand,  twenty  thousand,  forty  thousand  youths  into  their

organization  on  the  basis  of  the  sexual  question  and  the  mental-hygiene

question,  they  said,  “Reich  is  marvelous.”  The  moment  it  came  to  doing

something practical, they became enemies. Now, that is crucial. As long as I

brought  them  people,  I  was  “wonderful.”  The  moment  they  had  to  do

                                                                            84
something practical for people, they became hateful. You get me?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

The scoundrels! They don’t know what to do or how to go about things. And

that is why they are politicians. I think they have no worse enemy, today,

than me, and they know it. Therefore, they behave the way they do.


  DR. EISSLER

What did you suggest?


  DR. REICH

It was quite clear. You have to establish youth centers. You have to train

                                                                85
many  physicians.  You  have  to  teach  sex  economy.  You  have  to  bring

human psychology into your politics. You have to do more. You have to

revamp  your  whole  way  of  thinking,  so  that  you  don’t  think  from  the

standpoint of the state and the culture and this or that, but from the standpoint

of what people need, what they suffer from. Then, you arrange your social

                                                            86
institutions accordingly. Not the other way around. Now, that is foreign to

the  mind  of  a  Marxist  politician  today.  They  only  think  in  terms  of“productive forces.” They think in terms of the state. I think in terms of

human  beings  and  what  they  need.  If  I  had  anything  to  say  politically,

everything which exists would be arranged in accordance with what the child

needs, the infant needs, the adolescent needs, you need, I need, everybody

      87
needs. Now, here, sociology becomes separated from politics for the first

time.

  So  I  moved  out  of  psychoanalysis.  No,  not  quite.  I  was  still  in

psychoanalysis, but I moved into sociology, into the field of human mass

action. Then, Freud was disappointed.


  DR. EISSLER

He warned you not to do it?


  DR. REICH

                                                        88
No, he didn’t. It was Modju Federn who did it. I don’t know what he told

Freud about me. I only know that at the Lucerne Congress he and Jones did

all  kinds  of  things.  They  told  people  that  I  was  psychopathic,  that  I  was

sleeping with many women, and so on. Do you understand?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. When did you see Freud personally the last time?


  DR. REICH

The last time I saw him was in September 1930, before I went to Berlin. I

visited him in Grundlsee and had a very sharp discussion with him. He was

very sharp, and I was very sharp, too.


  DR. EISSLER

That was in 1930?


  DR. REICH1930. September. I had just published the first part of The Sexual Revolution

                                                                        89
under the title “Geschlechtsreife, Enthaltsamkeit, Ehemoral.”


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. And what was the sharp discussion about?


  DR. REICH

It was about the following: I said that you have to distinguish the natural

family, which is based on love, from the compulsory family. I said you have

to do all kinds of things to prevent neurosis. And he replied, “Ihr standpunkt

                                                                        90
hat nichts mit dem mittleren Weg der Psychoanalyse zu tun.”


  DR. EISSLER

Mittleren Weg?


  DR. REICH

Ja, “mit dem mittel”—My German is a little gone now. “Mit dem mittelweg

der Psychoanalyse.” Those were his words. So I said, “Tut mir leid. Das ist

was ich glaube. Das ist was meine Uberzeugung ist. Wenn Sie die Neurosen

                                                                                91
verhüten  wollen—Wenn  Sie  das  Elend  wegbringen  wollen.…”  Darauf

antwortete er … Ich habe nicht die Worte. I don’t have quite the words, but I

remember that he said, “It is not our purpose, or the purpose of our existence,

to save the world.” And you will be astounded when I tell you that I have

                                                                            92
now reached the same point. I am just where Freud was in 1930.


  DR. EISSLER

That’s interesting.


  DR. REICH

You get it? But I have reached that point after having gone through twenty

years  of  agony,  through  the  bad  ‘experience  that  I  now  recognize  as  theemotional plague. Do you understand? Freud threw it away before he had

experienced it. I am throwing it away after having had the experience.


  DR. EISSLER

But perhaps you remember more about that last discussion. You say it was

heated.


  DR. REICH

It was very heated. Yes!


  DR. EISSLER

You got angry with him?


  DR. REICH

No, I didn’t get angry. He was angry. Perhaps I was angry, too, but I was

very calm. We knew we had to part. We were dealing with something crucial

on which our opinions diverged. My opinion was that the family had to be

revamped. What’s going on in America now was my view in 1930. Do you

know that?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

You know that. Well, it is the result of my digging and publishing for more

than twenty years. For instance, the marriage situation as I have it in The

                                            93
Sexual Revolution is accepted today. But at that time it was unheard of.

Freud  rejected  it  completely.  He  was  very  angry.  And,  here,  was  his

disappointment. Instead of developing into one of his best supporters, one of

his best students, one who would carry his theory forward, here I was, going

“off the beam.” Right? But I didn’t. I didn’t “go off the beam.”  DR. EISSLER

Yes.  Do  you  remember  what  Freud  thought,  how  this  thing  will  go  on

practically with society, with the family life?


  DR. REICH

Freud was not interested in how society would go on. He was not interested

in it. He only had a hope. He had the hope that Eros would make—“wird eine

                                                        94
Anstrengung  machen  in  das  Unbehagen.”  But, practically,  “Eros-

Anstrengung” means whether the womb of the mother is alive or whether it’s

dried  out,  whether  or  not  the  mother  experiences  sexual  orgasm  during

embrace, and whether an old, old, overaged Judaism cuts the penis right after

birth. Furthermore, whether the nipple of the mother is orgonotically charged,

i.e., whether the bio-energy is functioning in that nipple, so that when the

child  reaches  out  with  its  oral  desire,  it  hooks  onto  something  which  is

satisfactory and not a shock. You get me?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

These are very practical things. For example, it is important whether or not

the mother is satisfied in her embrace with the husband because that reflects

on  the  child,  you  see.  So  these  are  all  very  practical  questions,  and  they

cannot just be done away with by saying that “Eros wird eine Anstrengung

machen.” Is that clear?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Now, my work since then was devoted exactly to that. I wanted to understandwhat  erects  the  nipple, what  stretches  out.  That’s  where  I  discovered  the

orgone energy, the bio-energy, the life energy.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. But here, I mean in that last interview, you had a discussion with Freud

on concrete measures, what the family should look like—


  DR. REICH

No, not in that discussion. In that discussion, there was a break. No, not quite

yet. The break came three or four years later. The discussion about the family

was in 1929, in December, I think, in the meeting with Freud where I brought

up the “Prophylaxis der Neurosen.”


  DR. EISSLER

… That discussion in 1929, that was quite peaceful. There was no—


  DR. REICH

No, it wasn’t peaceful any more. No.


  DR. EISSLER

There was already conflict?


  DR. REICH

No, but they didn’t like it. Freud knew, of course, I was right somewhere.


  DR. EISSLER

I mean, there was a private discussion between you and Freud?


  DR. REICH

No, that was at a meeting. There were about seven or eight psychoanalysts

who  met  at  Freud’s  home,  and  I  was  one  of  them.  There  was,  I  think,

Hitschmann and Federn, Jekels—I don’t know whether Jekels was there.  DR. EISSLER

Probably.


  DR. REICH

                                                    95
Yes. I, Nunberg, Deutsch. Maybe Hartmann was there. I don’t know. Some

were guests. They took turns—some coming one time, some at another. I was

among  the  steady  ones.  So  there  I  brought  forth  “Die  Prophylaxis  der

Neurosen.” (If you read my Function, you will have more of the details.) And

there it was already heated. There was a very calm, cold atmosphere, but I

insisted:  First, you  must  shift  from  therapy  to  prophylaxis—prevention.

Second, you must concern yourself with the family, which is the origin of the

oedipus conflict, and so on. It was cold. They were revolting. Freud was very

hard with me, but it was a good hardness. I didn’t dislike it.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. But what did he say?


  DR. REICH

At that meeting he maintained that it is not the task of psychoanalysis to save

the world. He was right.


  DR. EISSLER

He thought the world cannot be saved, therefore—


  DR. REICH

Freud was resigned. I tell you he had a cancer in his mouth. He was resigned.

He couldn’t think differently any more. Besides, he was older. The age itself

wouldn’t have done it, you understand. It was a characterological resignation,

as I described it before.  DR. EISSLER

But he did not think that if there were means of reorganizing the family that it

should not be done?


  DR. REICH

I don’t know. I can’t tell. But my impression was that, here, the Freud of the

Victorian  era  contradicted  the  Freud  who  had  discovered  infantile

          96
sexuality. Here, perhaps, he was bound down personally. And he had had

enough. He had had enough struggle. And he was right again. If I had known

in  1930  what  was  awaiting  me—slander  and  defamation  from  the

psychoanalysts,  that  Lucerne  scandal,  and  all  the  things  that  went  on  in

                                                                                      97
Norway  from  1937  to  1939,  and,  then,  here  in  the  United  States—I

wouldn’t have done it. Do you understand?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

I wouldn’t have started it. Is that clear? You see, the question is: Will our

children, in a hundred years, when they are five or six years old, be able to

live their natural lives as nature or God ordains it? Or will they sublimate

according to Anna Freud? Is that clear now?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

That’s the problem. If I can help it, the first will be the case. I hope so.

Sublimated work or good cultural achievement is possible only after the basic

                    98
needs are satisfied. I already taught that in 1927.  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

That’s all published. I don’t have to repeat it here. What’s important here is

more  the  personal  element  in  it,  i.e.,  Freud’s  inhibition  due  to  his  own

                                              99
personal structure, his own resignation. his being bound up with a family he

                                                              100
most probably didn’t like. Puner has it in her book. I don’t know whether

you know the book. Then, there was his organization and the enemies. They

only waited to say that he was immoral. That’s what they said about me,

    101
later. Is that clear? Well, that’s about it. Any questions, Doctor? Go ahead.


  DR. EISSLER

Do  you  know  anything  about  his  opinions  regarding  those  pupils  you

mentioned? Or didn’t he talk about it at all?


  DR. REICH

He  talked  about  it.  Yes.  Not  too  much.  Well,  all  right,  let’s  deposit  it.

Hitschmann  once  told  me  that  Freud  couldn’t  stand  Federn’s  eyes.  He

referred  to  them  once  as  “patricidal  eyes.”  And  that  was  quite  true.

Wonderful! Federn really had murderous eyes. Yes!


  DR. EISSLER

That’s the only remark you know about?


  DR. REICH

Oh, there are very many others. Yes, it has to come out. Freud knew, of

course, of the sexual disturbances. We never really spoke about it, but it was

quite obvious that he knew. He despised them very much. He despised his

pupils. He referred to them once in the early years as—what was it? Vermin,

or what? Yes, he suffered very much from this. He was very biting. He talkedironically. I remember once he got Nunberg going. Freud said, “Now, what

you did now is, again, the same thing. You take a bone, like a dog, and you

crawl in the corner. You chew the bone and you think the bone is the world.”

                                        102
Yes, he was very sharp and biting. He was never ironic toward me, but he

was very mad at me.

  I wonder how much time we have to work things out. Would you have

had enough, now?


  DR. EISSLER

No, I would like to go on.


  DR. REICH

What?


  DR. EISSLER

I mean, it’s your fault that you are speaking in such a fascinating way that I

don’t notice the time, really.


  DR. REICH

All right. Now, I could go on and on because it is endless. That’s what Freud

means to me. Freud is like Columbus who landed on a shore and opened up a

continent. You understand?

  Now,  Freud  had  a  severe  conflict  with  Judaism.  Here,  he  was  bound

down, too. On the one hand, out of protest against the persecution he had

suffered, he maintained very bravely and very courageously that he was a

Jew. But he wasn’t. Freud was not Jewish. Do you know what I mean, now?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICHTo me, as a characterologist, a Jew is somebody who behaves in a Jewish

way, either nationally or religiously, who is bound up with his customs, who

speaks the Jewish language, who lives in it, thrives in it, and so on. Now that

is quite crucial. In our character analysis, this plays an important role. For

instance, was Roosevelt a “Hollander”? No, he was an American. Right? So

Freud was really German. His style, his thinking, his interests, everything

was German. And, here, he was torn apart. On the one hand, he was a Zionist.

On the other hand, he was a German. He liked Goethe, Faust. His language

was German. His style was the wounded German style of Thomas Mann—

the rounded, harmonic, but very complicated expression, in contradistinction

to the English, which is straight and simple. That became more and more

                                                                    103
apparent in Freud as the years went by and his fame grew. And, then, there

                                                                                      104
was his interest in Moses, who, to Freud’s mind, wasn’t a Jew either. Is

that clear?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

To me, that meant that Freud didn’t really want to be a Jew. But he couldn’t

cut loose.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

                                                                            105
And when the Nazis began to persecute, he suffered very much. I think he

died because of that. It was not just the cancer. He was done.


  DR. EISSLER

Did it [Freud’s Judaism] lead to a limitation in thinking?  DR. REICH

No, it led to a sharp contradiction in him. He suffered, just plain suffered

from it. He didn’t want to be a Jew. Never. He wasn’t Jewish. I never felt he

was  Jewish.  Neither  did  I  feel  Anna  Freud  as  Jewish.  They  had  nothing

Jewish  in  them,  either  characterologically,  religiously,  or  nationally.  That

doesn’t mean I’m anti-Semitic.


  DR. EISSLER

No, I understand.


  DR. REICH

You understand? Now, many Jews have suffered from that. In “Moses,” it’s

clearly  expressed.  Freud  was  the  Moses  who  never  reached  the  promised

land. His unconscious was only an idea. It’s not real. It was never real. You

know where it becomes real?


  DR. EISSLER

No.


  DR. REICH

In the twitchings which we get out of the organism in our work. Do you

know anything about it? You don’t? The unconscious comes out in orgone

                                          106
therapy in actions of the protoplasm. He didn’t reach that. I think he was a

very eager physician. He wanted to cure people, but it didn’t work. It just

            107
didn’t work. So you see, there were many reasons for Freud’s resignation.


  DR. EISSLER

You remember some actual statements he made about Jews, Judaism, his

relationship to it?


  DR. REICHNo, I never heard a direct remark, but he used to quote Jewish jokes. He had

much contempt in him for people. He made these jokes, but he was not anti-

Semitic. Surely not. Much of his Judaism was protest, not genuine. I may be

wrong in all this, you understand, but I just give you my impressions. His

German  was  perfect.  His  thinking  was  German.  It  was  not  Jewish,  even

              108
thought Janet had proclaimed that psychoanalysis was a Jewish science.

  Now, while Freud was caught in Judaism, I was free of it. I’m much more

in sympathy with the Christian world of thought and the Catholic realm. Not

that I condone it, or that I believe in it. I don’t believe in these things. But I

understand them well. The Christians have the deepest point of view, the

cosmic one. The American Jew has it, too, but not the European. I don’t

know whether we should go into that. But I am very much interested in the

history of Christianity. Do you know what Christ knew? He knew about the

Life Energy. I don’t know if you get me now. In a simple way, he knew about

the fields and the grass and growth and babies. That’s what he knew. Freud

didn’t. Freud was anti-emotional, very anti-emotional. Freud was for intellect

only, you understand. I myself am quite intellectual. But intellect without an

                                                        109
emotional basis can’t quite fully live or work. Now, I know why he was

against the emotions. He opposed them because he rejected the secondary

emotions, the perverted emotions. And the normal emotions, the natural ones,

                                                                  110
the deep ones—nobody knew anything about them, then.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. Now in one of your letters you said that you saw Freud at the window

like a caged animal.


  DR. REICH

That was that September, when we parted.


  DR. EISSLER

In Berchtesgarden?  DR. REICH

No,  no,  in  Grundlsee.  Oh,  that  was  very  tragic,  very  tragic.  We  had  a

discussion. I suggested that to be quite sure that I was right [about the social

problem] and that there was not an irrational element in my thinking, I would

try to consult with some prominent colleague in Berlin. He told me that since

I was the founder of the modern technique in psychoanalysis I would meet

with great difficulties. It would be difficult to find somebody to treat me. But

he said it would be possible to discuss it on a colleagual basis. I told him,

“All right, I shall try.” And he suggested either Rado or Bernfeld. I said, “I

shall see, yes.” I saw Rado several times. Nothing came of that. Rado was

very jealous, awfully jealous.

  But to return to our last meeting. We talked for about an hour, maybe an

hour and a half, and I left. I knew it was the last time I would see him.

Somehow, I knew that I wouldn’t see him again. I walked down. And as I

left, I looked up at his window, and I saw him walk up, down, up, down, fast,

up-down, up-down, in that room. I don’t know exactly why this impression

remained so vivid to me, but I had the impression “caged animal.” And that’s

what he was. Every man of his greatness, of his vivacity, of his spirit, who

knew what he wanted and landed where he did would behave like that, like a

caged animal. I have a very good feeling for movement and for expressions,

and  that  was  my  impression—caged  animal.  I  don’t  know  how  many

psychoanalysts were aware of that. I don’t think very many. I don’t know.


  DR. EISSLER

Before, you mentioned Freud’s meanness. That I think would be important.


  DR. REICH

Meanness? Did I say that word? Did I use that word?


  DR. EISSLER

I thought you did.  DR. REICH

Not meanness. Irony, a biting irony. He—how shall I formulate that? I think

the following happened: You see, every pioneer has to have friends and co-

workers to carry his work. Now, what usually happens is that they are not

around, or if they are around, they take advantage of the pioneer. That’s a

very dreadful truth, but it is truth. He waits and waits and waits for somebody

to come around, to help, to do things and to go along with him. But they are

just  dead.  You  see, the  pioneer  somehow  jumps  out  of  the  present-day

biological structure of humanity. You know that? He jumps out of it because

of his aliveness. But humanity sits, sits, just plain sits.

  Oh, yes, I remember a very nice thing. It was at the Congress in Berlin,

1922. I was still very young then. I had only analyzed for about two or three

years. There were about one hundred and fifty people there. And Freud and I

and a few others were standing together. Freud moved his hand over that

crowd and said, “Sehen Sie diese Menge hier?—See that crowd? How many

do you think can analyze, can really analyze?” He raised five fingers. That

showed he knew. Not that they are bad men or bad physicians, but the real

understanding, the real contact, the “feel” as I call it, was missing. Yes, Freud

was very much alone. He couldn’t associate with any of his students. Why?

Because every single one would go at him and hook onto him. He was a

daddy.  He  was  the  father.  He  had  to  give  everything.  He  had  to  love

            111
everybody. The Berliners, for instance, were very proud that they were not

Viennese. You know why? Because they didn’t have that infantile attitude

toward Freud. But they had it toward Abraham.

  Now, about Freud’s contempt. I don’t think he liked people. Do you know

what I mean?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICHI don’t think he liked people. I may be wrong. I don’t think so. Oh, of course

he liked a few people. I know he liked me, and he liked some others. For

example, he liked his daughter very much, and I know he liked Bernfeld for a

while.  He  also  liked  Abraham  very  much,  but  not  very  personally.  He

                                                    112
respected him. I know that he liked Ferenczi.


  DR. EISSLER

He spoke with you about Ferenczi?


  DR. REICH

Oh, we didn’t speak as you and I are doing now, sitting here. If I had some

problem, I went up, and we talked, half an hour or an hour.


  DR. EISSLER

Do you remember what specific problem which you probably—


  DR. REICH

                                                            113
Oh,  yes,  neurasthenia.  The  neurasthenia  problem.  Now,  you  know  that

Freud began as a somaticist, as a man who worked with the body. Then he

discovered the unconscious. So he switched over into psychology. But he

never forgot that he was a somaticist. The greatest thing that ever happened

in psychiatry was the discovery that the core of the neurosis was somatic, i.e.,

the stasis, the libido stasis was somatic. I once treated a waiter. I did this and

                                                                                      114
did that, and finally, I had to give up. I described it in The Function. I

worked an hour every day for over two years. It didn’t work. Didn’t work.

Nothing happened, even though I went through to the urszene, to the primal

scene. He had no erections, couldn’t have erections. Well, such things drove

me to Freud. His basic attitude about our technique was that we shouldn’t be

too ambitious in trying to cure. But I always had the feeling that he was very,

very  disappointed  in  the  curative  faculties  of  psychoanalysis.  He  had

                                                            115
expected very much, and it didn’t quite work out. When I first began toanalyze, treatment was to last three months, or, at the most, six months. Then

it became longer and longer and longer. Then he left therapy altogether. He

no  longer  wanted  to  improve  humanity.  He  was  disappointed,  clearly

disappointed. And he was right. Nothing can be done. Nothing can be done.

But, to my mind, he gave up before he started. You know what I mean?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

He gave up before he started. I came to the same conclusion, but only after

much experience and failure. Nothing can be done with grown-ups. I say this

as  a  person  who  is  rather  experienced  in  psychiatry  and  human  biology.

Nothing can be done. Once a tree has grown crooked, you can’t straighten it

out. And here, just in the light of this, his rejection of the prophylaxis of the

neuroses was so startling to me. If some factor makes the tree grow crooked,

why don’t you see how to prevent that from happening? That’s quite simple.

But, no, he didn’t want it. Here, I lose him, as if in a fog. I think it had to do

with his cancer. I can’t help feeling that. He did not like people. He couldn’t

have any social intercourse with his students. He was cut off from social life

outside. He had been very alive, and he must have suffered tremendously.

Being alive, quite alive, and having to sit alone, as he sat there, is bad, very

bad.


  DR. EISSLER

Do you remember what he told you in discussing that waiter whom you had

analyzed for two years? I’m sure it’s important.


  DR. REICH

                                                          116
He encouraged, “Gehen Sie nur vor. Deuten Sie.” He was really against the

passive technique, but as for really concrete proposals, I’m sorry to say hedidn’t offer much, not much. He couldn’t concretely say, “Do that and that.”

There was, as yet, no theory of psychoanalytic technique.


  DR. EISSLER

Your seminar was famous for that very point, that you worked out concretely

          117
the theory.


  DR. REICH

That’s right. And, here, at this point, the theory of the therapy of the neuroses

came in. Until then, nobody knew why he did what he did. Freud didn’t

know, either. He would say, “Be patient. Analyze. Understanding is more

important than doing.” Neither he, nor I, nor anybody else, at that time, knew

that there is that No in the human being, that basic No, the “I won’t.” It is

underneath the “negative therapeutic reaction.” The protoplasm is just plain

stuck. It cannot function properly. That is clear, now, biologically and in a

practical way. That’s Freud again, you see, because without his formulation

of the negative therapeutic reaction and the interest that it evoked, no one

could have penetrated to the answer we have today. The answer is simply that

the  biological  plasma  function  of  the  human  race  has  been  spoiled  for

millennia.


  DR. EISSLER

Did  you  discuss  that  particular  subject  with  him—I  mean  the  negative

therapeutic reaction?


  DR. REICH

Yes!  Yes!  Yes!  I  told  him  that  I  don’t  believe  in  the  unconscious  guilt

                                    118
feeling. If the “Strafbeduerfnis” simply means a guilty feeling, it’s all right.

In other words, if your destructiveness is just inhibited and you turn it against

yourself and eat yourself up inside, then I agree with you fully. But to believe

in a primary masochism, in a wish to punish yourself, in a desire to die—no!no! Freud told me explicitly, “Gehen Sie ruhig weiter mit Ihrer klinischen

Arbeit. Was ich da vorgebracht habe, ist nur eine Hypothese. Sie kann stehen

oder  fallen.  Sie  ist  nicht  grundsatzlich  wesentlich  fur  das  Gebaude  der

                  119
Psychoanalyse.” These were approximately his words. “Gehen Sie ruhig

weiter  mit  Ihrer  klinischen  Arbeit.  Es  war  nichts  mehr  als  ein  Spiel  mit

            120
Gedanken.” Only a hypothesis! Yet, out of that grew the horrible misuse of

          121
Thanatos. I succeeded in destroying that. You know that I did?


  DR. EISSLER

    122
Yes.


  DR. REICH

That is dead. I think that his wish to die was somehow his own. He was sick.

He was miserable. He was alone.


  DR. EISSLER

In what way did that cancer make itself noticeable?


  DR. REICH

He couldn’t speak. You see, he had been a marvelous speaker. His words

flew  clearly,  simply,  logically.  I  remember  that  Berlin  Congress.  He  was

                                                            123
beautiful. He spoke about “Das Ich und Das Es.” He spoke very clearly.

And then it hit him right there in the speech organ. He had to resign. This

man had wanted to talk, to go out, to speak, to move. Look at his mouth, the

configuration of his mouth. He wanted to go out, to do.


  DR. EISSLER

You were present when he read “Ich und Es”?


  DR. REICH

Yes, yes.  DR. EISSLER

Was there a discussion?


  DR. REICH

No, there was no discussion. It was very beautiful, awfully beautiful. That

was the last time he spoke at a Congress. He meant something very important

there, something very deep, very deep. The Ego is just as unconscious as the

Id. Prächtig! Wunderbar! It takes a genius to think that way. But he never

thought that the libido theory would be replaced, kicked out, with all those

              124
ego instincts. Frankly, I don’t understand why Karen Homey, Alexander,

and the others did that. I don’t understand. It’s incredible, incredible. The

libido phenomena are so obvious. Just look at any case.

  By  the  way,  I  have  to  mention  here  that  Homey  took  over  my  bio-

energetic theory. When Freud’s dualism didn’t work, I proceeded toward the

physiological and biological realm, and then toward the plasma motions. If I

want something, I stretch out. Yes? If I am afraid, I pull in. And if I want to

hit, I go out with a fury. So you have: I go out in love. I withdraw in anxiety.

Or withdrawal is anxiety. That’s simple. It’s the plasma motion which does it.

When I came to the United States, I visited Horney. She asked me about my

work and I told her. Three or four years later, a book by her appeared. I don’t

know which it was—“Personality,” or one of them. But it said she had a new

theory: People are moving toward people, away from people, and against

people. Toward people, away from people, against people. Do you get the

point?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

But without sex, without libido, without any bio-energy, without anything.

                                                125
She did a good job in taking many things.  But to come back to Freud. He was very beautiful at that Congress, as he

always was when he spoke. Then it hit him just here, in the mouth. And that

is where my interest in cancer began. I began cancer studies in 1926 or 1927.                        2) OCTOBER 19, 1952




  DR. EISSLER

Dr. Reich, I would like to ask about the mental-hygiene movement in which

you played such a great role. I think even you originated it.


  DR. REICH

No, I didn’t originate the idea of the mental-hygiene movement or the fact of

mental-hygiene  movements.  The  only  thing  I  really  brought  into

consideration was the problem of prevention of the neuroses en masse. There

was  a  mental-hygiene  movement  long  before,  but  the  recognition  of  the

neuroses as a social problem, mass neuroses, that’s what I brought into the

mental-hygiene movement. Does that answer the question?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. Now, what did you do practically about it? How far did you go?


  DR. REICH

Before I did anything, I wanted to be sure that Freud was in basic agreement

with me. Before incorporating the neuroses as a mass problem into mental

hygiene,  you  first  have  to  agree  on  one  point,  that  there  exists  a  mass

neurosis, that such a thing exists at all. You see, in the psychoanalysis of the

early twenties, the neurosis or the neurotic symptom was considered to be

something sick in an otherwise healthy organism. That was the idea, then. It

was  my  character  analysis  which  introduced  the  basic  concept  that  the

                    1
character structure is ill, sick, while the neurosis, the neurotic symptom is

                                                                          2
only  an  outgrowth  of  a  general  characterological  condition.  Now,  if  thecharacter neurosis is the basis of the symptom, then how widespread is it? I

had  made  statistics  in  the  Psychoanalytic  Polyclinic,  in  free-thinker

movements and in various associations. They revealed that about 90 percent

of all women and about 70 to 80 percent of all men were just plain sick. That

made me realize that there was a mass neurosis. I went to Freud. He had

already said that all humanity was his patient. Here, quite concretely, was the

evidence. Ninety percent of all women (today, I would say even more) are

characterologically  and  neurotically  sick  and  not  functioning  according  to

natural  law.  Now,  if  you  exist  within  this  realm  of  character-neurotic

            3
functioning, then you may say it is not neurotic. You may say it is “our way

of life.” The question is, “Is it ‘our way of life,’ or could it be different?”

That was the point.

  Now, I didn’t devote myself to the mental-hygiene movement just to cure

a few people or to improve their health. I started it after the fifteenth of July,

    4
1927,  when  a  hundred  people  were  killed  and  about  a  thousand  were

wounded in the street. I don’t know whether you remember that?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

That gave me the jolt. Freud was on the Semmering, near Vienna, at the time,

and I have a letter from him in which he asks if the world will still stand after

  5
that. Shortly thereafter, I went to him and I told him I wanted to start work

on a social basis. I wanted to get away from the clinics, from individual

treatment, and get onto the social scene. Freud was very much for it. He saw

the whole social thing. It is complete nonsense when, today, the Washington

                                      6
and Homey schools of psychiatry say Freud refused to consider sociology.

He never did. There is no trace of such a thing. I want to make that very clear.

He  knew  exactly  how  things  were  in  the  world.  But  before  he  could  go

outside,  he  first  had  to  know  what  was  inside.  He  was  very  happy  thatsomebody who knew the inside so well went out and tried to do something

about it. That was what I brought into the psychoanalytic movement at that

    7
time.

  The first step was to establish an organization outside the psychoanalytic

association.  The  Sozialistische  Gesellschaft  fuer  Sexualberatung  und

                  8
Sexualforschung was formed. I had about eight physicians and two lawyers.

Among  them  were  the  Viennese  psychoanalysts  Annie  Angel,  Edmund

        9
Bergler, Annie Reich. I think Sterba was also in it. In Berlin, there were

Edith Jacobson, Misch, Fenichel, and many others. I spent a lot of money,

thousands  of  shillings  out  of  my  own  pocket,  to  get  it  through.  I  first

published a notice in the Social Democratic paper, Arbeiter Zeitung. Then we

had our first meeting, at which I spoke on neurosis as a social problem (Was

                                              10
it  that?  Or  was  it  on  sexual  stauung?) You  see,  you  couldn’t  get  at  the

mental-hygiene  problem  with  ideas  such  as  the  oedipus  complex.  You

couldn’t get at it. It didn’t make sense. What made sense was the frustration,

the genital frustration of the population. Adolescents get frustrated. There is

misery in marriage. Why is it so? How does it work? What can we do about

it? And, here, you hit upon the social problem—the institution of marriage,

laws, Catholic dogma, birth control, and all kinds of social stuff. Here we see

sociology out in the open.

  I  discussed  details  with  Freud  and  he  was  enthusiastic.  He  said,  “Go

ahead, just go ahead.” Once a month we had a public meeting where some

subject  was  dealt  with,  such  as  education  of  children  or  the  problem  of

masturbation  or  adolescence  or  marriage  or  this  or  that.  Then  the  people

asked questions. That was quite tremendous. I still thrive on that experience.

Here,  the  people  came  out  completely.  What  I  had  to  do,  then,  is  very

important now. What I had to do was to break through the barrier which

separates the public from its own private life. You understand? Nobody talks

about it. Nobody touches it. No one. No one. The first thing to do was to

break through that. I told them, “I shall ask you direct questions, and I shallplace  before  you  direct  issues.”  No  circumlocution.  And  that  worked

marvelously. I shall never forget the warm, flushed faces, the glowing eyes,

the tension, the contact. There’s no doubt about it, Dr. Eissler, this issue will

win  out  everywhere.  It  will  kill  any  dictator.  There’s  no  doubt  about  the

social force in it. It is the force of the future. It is the sexual revolution. What

is in the way, today, is not the people, and not so much knowledge or lack of

knowledge.  It  is  Modju,  the  single  individual,  the  neurotic,  the  pestilent

character who digs here and digs there and tries to keep me from my job by

                                                                                11
keeping me busy and tying me up in legal affairs and other things. I hope

you get my point.

    Originally, I made one mistake, one great mistake. I set it up as a political

movement.  Political  movements  were  initiated  because  of  hunger  and

economic needs. So I created a movement concerned with sexual needs. You

see? To begin with, it was wrong to create a movement on political grounds. I

know that today, but I didn’t know it then. I felt that enthusiasm, that first

tremendous response. That kept me going for six years. When I went up to

Berlin, I lectured in mass meetings nearly—I don’t know—four or five times

a  week.  I  had  meetings  with  two  and  three  thousand  people.  There  were

meetings where Catholic priests had to answer questions on mental-hygiene

problems, and so on. It was quite big. There was no organized movement in

Vienna,  but  in  Berlin  there  were  about  fifty  thousand  people  in  my

organization in the first year. Any questions, please? I could go on and on,

now.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. But—


  DR. REICH

Yes, go ahead. Hook on to what I said.


  DR. EISSLERYou touched it now, but I think there is more to say: How far you actually

came to putting those plans into reality.


  DR. REICH

Oh, I came very far. I came too far. I don’t know whether you get me. I went

too far. I would have done better if I had restricted the movement for the first

ten years to the spreading of clinics. I had six clinics in Vienna where people

came and received advice once or twice a week. I had one, Annie Reich had

one, Annie Angel had one, Bergler had one, and so on. To provide medical

and educational help was its purpose. But I went too fast. I unintentionally

aroused the animosity of the political parties. They felt the power of it, and

they became afraid or jealous. Their meetings were dull. They spoke about

this and that, law and such things. People weren’t interested. When they came

to our meetings they had the whole personal, emotional life right in the open.

That created too much competition. It happened too quickly, too quickly. The

force of it was tremendous, especially in Berlin. So, to answer your question

about how far I went, I went too far.

  Here, I would like to sound a warning for every future mental-hygiene

movement: Never do it the political way! People will get very enthusiastic

about it. They will glow. They will burn for you. But their structures won’t

follow. The character structure can’t follow. Then you are in trouble. That’s

the  danger,  and  that’s  the  special  problem  of  mental-hygiene.  I’m  fully

occupied with it, now, in an effort to solve it. This discrepancy between what

a human being wants, what he dreams of, what he intellectually understands

as true and good and what he actually can do, i.e., what his structure, the

character structure, really permits him to do, is quite a problem in mental

                                                                                        12
hygiene. It is also the gap where religion comes in with the idea of paradise.

  So to answer your question, I went too far. It burned too much. It brought

up too much enthusiasm right from the beginning. It didn’t develop slowly

enough. That’s what killed it. And then I made enemies. Freud? I don’t know.

I don’t think Freud was ever against it. But the psychoanalysts, socialists,communists, Nazis, yes, and the liberals—everybody was against it. All the

politicians were against it. The problem is so tough, so complicated. But I did

learn one thing: Never do it politically. Never do it politically. Do it factually.

Establish clinics, help adolescents to establish their love lives, change the

laws which are in the way. The enthusiasm which is aroused politically does

not carry you very far. It carries you far, but like a flare. Any questions? Go

ahead.


  DR. EISSLER

Do you remember, did Freud make any statements to you regarding his own

political beliefs, where he stood politically?


  DR. REICH

Politically?  He  always  said,  “I’m  a  scientist.  I  have  nothing  to  do  with

politics.” And since politics was hooked up with sociology, I said, “That’s an

impossible  standpoint.”  You  can’t  be  apolitical  in  a  situation  such  as  the

world was in. You know, the depression years. But he was right as far as

politics went because politics is irrational. He was wrong as far as social

science went. But it was not his fault because no distinction was made. We

had  to  learn  it  the  hard  way.  We  had  to  distinguish  the  social  from  the

political. He had no—yes, he had a political standpoint. It was Jewish. We

spoke about it yesterday.


  DR. EISSLER

But was he a Social Democrat?


  DR. REICH

I don’t think so.


  DR. EISSLER

No?  DR. REICH

They made him a burger of Vienna, not an ehrenbürger—they were very

                                                                          13
careful  not  to  give  too  much.  It  was  through  Friedjung.  You  know

Friedjung?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. How was Friedjung? Did he participate in your work?


  DR. REICH

Oh, yes. Friedjung cooperated with me. He gave lectures in my organization.

He was a very good friend. He spoke about children. He was a good daddy

and uncle. He was nice. He liked me. I liked him. Frischauf was there, too. I

don’t  know  whether  you  know  anything  about  her.  She  was  a  very  kind

woman. She was awfully nice in her mental attitude. Do you know where

they are?


  DR. EISSLER

I think he was killed by the Nazis. I’m not sure.


  DR. REICH

We had a Dr. Fassler who was a communist. He was killed, too. I don’t know

what happened to Marie Frischauf. If you hear about her, will you let me

know?


  DR. EISSLER

Sure, I will.


  DR. REICH

Dr. Fliegl was in the movement, too. Oh, there were many. But I was careful

to build up a factual, medical, educational background for the whole thing in

order to be fully prepared for whatever problems might come along. Do youknow what a political peddler does instead? He uses such terms as “sexual

freedom,” “sexual happiness for youth” as political slogans. For example, the

anarchists in England, the communists in Greece do it in a political way.

They promise happiness, politically. Now, that’s a crime. Is that clear?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

It’s a crime. They promise happiness without really establishing the mental-

hygiene requirements for it. I never did that. I never went that way. Any

questions? Go ahead.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. Did you have discussions with Freud about medicine, medical schools,

and their relationship to psychoanalysis?


  DR. REICH

Before I go on to that, I would like to hook on to something else I said

yesterday.  Freud  went  along  with  me  in  principle.  But  when  it  came  to

concrete things, such as attacking the present, compulsive family attitude, the

family organization, he turned against it and he turned against me. That’s

very important. That’s where the whole conflict started. That was what was

involved  at  that  meeting  in  1929  at  which  I  spoke  of  the  prevention  of

neuroses and out of which grew his “Unbehagen in der Kultur.” Mind you, he

was not opposed to the basic idea. Of course, he agreed in principle to the

importance of sexual health. But he did not want what sexual health entailed,

the attack on certain institutions which opposed it. Is that clearly worked out

now?


  DR. EISSLERYes.  What  did  Freud  think  of  medicine,  medical  schools,  and  their

relationship to psychoanalysis?


  DR. REICH

                                                                                    14
Very, very little. Very, very little. He didn’t like medical men at all. He

                                                                                      15
thought they were quacks. That’s what they are. All that brain surgery, all

that stuff, the chemistry racket business—no good. That’s medicine of the

past. There’s no doubt that Freud was one of the fathers of the quite new

medicine—psychosomatic  medicine,  functional  medicine.  We  are  the

pioneers in that direction. As for the old medicine, he knew what it was. He

was a physician, but he was not a member of any A.M.A., you understand.

Do you know the difference? He was a very good physician, but he was not

enthusiastic about the methods of medicine or the chauvinism of any medical

association, especially as it has developed here in the U.S.A. But I want you

to understand that it has to be that way with the A.M.A.’s. There’s so much

cheating in the field of medicine, especially in the United States, cheating,

cheats,  just  quacks,  that  I  understand  why  they  become  chauvinistic  and

bureaucratic. That’s only a remark about the logic in the irrational. No, he

didn’t  think  very  highly  of  official  medicine.  However,  he  defended  the

quack in psychiatry. He made grave mistakes there. I think it was a very great

mistake in his fight against the chauvinism in medicine when he protected

Reik.  Theodor  Reik  was  in  trouble  once  in  Vienna.  He  was  attacked  by

someone for practicing medicine. Freud supported him. And from that, “lay

                                                                                        16
analysis” developed. Freud gave very strong support to the lay analyst. I

don’t know how you feel about it, but I tell you quite frankly I think Freud

made  a  very  grave  mistake.  The  admission  of  lay  analysts  into  natural

scientific psychoanalysis was a very great mistake. Here, again, I refer to the

natural  scientific  angle  in  psychoanalysis  as  opposed  to  the  mere

psychological angle. The psychological angle doesn’t carry you anywhere.

You have to be rooted in natural scientific thinking, in physical medicine, and

so on. You have all these lay analysts in the United States and, in my opinion,they  do  very  much  damage,  very  great  damage.  And  it  was  Freud  who

                                                                17
opened the way to that. That’s what I can’t help feeling.


  DR. EISSLER

Did  you  also  discuss  with  Freud  those  movements  which  came  out  of

                                  18
analysis, like Adler and Jung?


  DR. REICH

Oh, yes. Oh, yes. There was never disagreement on such things. It was quite

                    19
clear where Adler was wrong. He got stuck in a very superficial layer with

the power thing and he didn’t think further. It was an evasion of the libido

theory. That was quite clear. Freud was very clear about these things. He had

an awfully clear mind. He knew. He had his logic in his hands. He knew he

was  a  bit  wrong  with  Adler,  too.  I  have  a  letter  to  Ferenczi  where  I

                                                              20
complained that Freud wronged Adler at one spot. You see, Adler really

went into the ego, psychology, but he did it the wrong way. That didn’t mean

that he was basically wrong. Freud attacked him from the standpoint of the

libido theory. He rebuffed him and didn’t want anything of the ego theory.

Then, Freud himself went into it, undermining the libido theory. Still, such

conflicts are bound to happen in a scientific movement. But Adler was a run-

away.


  DR. EISSLER

          21
And Jung?


  DR. REICH

Jung? No, I don’t remember any special discussions about that conflict. Oh,

yes! Oh, yes! There was one thing, and Freud was wrong there, too. Jung

meant something very important. You know what he meant? He really meant

                                  22
the  energy  in  the  universe,  a  universal  libido.  Freud  said  it  was  not

          2324
scientific.  You  couldn’t  measure  it  on  a  Geiger  counter  as  I  can.Furthermore, it was mystically conceived. So Freud was correct in rejecting it

                                                                                  25
in that form. He also didn’t like the anti-Semitism which came into it?

  Oh, yes. Now I remember where Jung came into debates. I tended, then,

toward  a  unification  of  the  instinct  theory.  That  means  that  all  the  many

instincts we have—oral, anal, and so on—would have some common root,

whereas, in Freud, they stand out as single pillars. I was already on the way

to that unification of the partial instincts in a common biological principle.

But I had to guard against Jung because he had mystified the whole thing.

Freud held on to his dualism. He said there must be two separate, opposing

forces. Two forces. That was in connection with a discussion of the death

instinct. When I asked him whether masochism was primary or secondary,

whether  it  is  a  turned-back  sadism  or  aggression  or  a  disturbance  of

aggression outward, or whether it’s a primary death instinct thing, Freud,

peculiarly, maintained both. He said that, clinically, masochism is secondary,

but, in the basic theoretical sense, there must be a death instinct. And wrong

as Freud was with the death instinct, wrong as he was, he was right even

there. What he felt with the death instinct, what he tried to catch there, what

he felt in the human being was a certain dying quality. We call it DOR today

                    26
in a physical sense. There is a deadly orgone energy. It is in the atmosphere.

You can demonstrate it on devices such as the Geiger counter. It’s a swampy

quality. You know what swamps are? Stagnant, deadly water which doesn’t

flow, doesn’t metabolize. Cancer, too, is due to a stagnation. Cancer is due to

a stagnation of the flow of the life energy in the organism. So Freud was

trying to grasp that quality. I know, today, that he sensed something in the

                                          27
human organism which was deadly. But he thought in terms of instinct. So

he hit upon the term “death instinct.” That was wrong. “Death” was right.

“Instinct” was wrong. Because it’s not something the organism wants. It’s

something that happens to the organism. Therefore, it is not an “instinct.”

Freud was very deep in that. He had a nose for such things Tremendous!

Tremendous! Tremendous! He was theoretically very good. You must grantmistakes to a man who has to handle such a vast realm as the unconscious.

Everybody makes mistakes.


  DR. EISSLER

                                                            28
Did he say, did he tell you something about Stekel?


  DR. REICH

I don’t know whether we ever talked about Stekel. One thing is clear: I know

that he didn’t like it if we, as students, associated with people whom he had

                                                            29
discarded. Yes. He thought Stekel was a charlatan. I think he was unjust to

Stekel. Stekel did things. He slept with patients and such things. Freud didn’t

like that. I think that was his reason. I’m not too sure. Stekel was superficial,

very superficial. He was too quick. He tried to get at the answers too quickly.

He had answers to all things, right away.


  DR. EISSLER

            30
And Rank?


  DR. REICH

He liked Rank very much.


  DR. EISSLER

There was no disagreement yet, at that time?


  DR. REICH

No, not at that early time. It began about 1923 or 1924. I remember that

Freud was very decent in this conflict with Rank, but Rank was very wrong.

Again, Rank hit upon something very true. Rank said something very real,

without knowing it. It is what we operate with today in our children’s clinic.

It is the tight uterus, the contracted, spastic uterus which chokes the child.

The oxygen is lacking. The CO is excessive. Then, coming out of such a
                                      2spastic uterus is really a trauma. The birth process takes twenty to forty hours

in primaparae as against one to five hours in relaxed organisms. So Rank was

in the right direction, too. But what did he do? Just as so many others did, just

as Adler did with the will to power. They based everything on it. They made

a secondary or tertiary process the sole, responsible factor. And Rank did the

            31
same thing. That is no good. It is not good science to take a secondary

principle and attach primary importance to it.

  Freud,  on  the  other  hand,  was  mainly  a  dialectician,  a  functionally

thinking human being. He always wanted two forces to counteract each other.

What he did not do, and I don’t know why, was to see that these two opposite

forces were actually one in the depth because everything opposed in nature is

ultimately a unit. Yes, a unit. Do I make myself clear? Of course they split

up. Did you see our sign on the observatory? It’s over the door. Look at it

                                                            32
when you walk out. Are you familiar with the sign? Out of a unitary force a

splitting, an antithesis develops. That is my way of thinking about natural

scientific things. Now, Freud had these rigid ideas about instincts. He was a

bit  rigid  there.  But  he  was  always  separating  his  speculations  from  his

theories. That was why he always said, “Gehen Sie nur ruhig weiter Ihren

Weg. Machen Sie Ihre Klinik. Es spielt keine Rolle, primarer Masochismus

                  33
oder Todestrieb.” It did later. You know what the psychoanalysts did with

                            34
so many different things. Here, I am a bit emotional because I had such a

hard time combating this with my character analysis. Any questions?


  DR. EISSLER

If I may switch to an entirely different topic—


  DR. REICH

Yes, go ahead.


  DR. EISSLER

What about discussions regarding religion and church, and so on? Do youremember that that played quite a role?


  DR. REICH

I don’t remember ever having discussed problems of religion and church. I

encountered enough of it outside, of course. I may have discussed it with

Freud. I don’t know. Perhaps it appeared in a different form. Freud was an

intellectual individual. He believed in the overpowering role of the mind, i.e.,

of  the  intellect  as  against  emotions.  You  know  his  basic  attitude  toward

emotions. Not that emotions are bad, but you have to get them out of the way.

You have to control everything. Your intellect and mind must be master of

the emotions. But that attitude came into conflict with the direction which the

work in genitality took, where the emotions are involved, the “streaming,”

the feeling in the body. Freud rejected the existence of so-called “ozeanische

          35
Gefühle.” He didn’t believe in such a thing. I never quite understood why. It

is so obvious that the “ozeanische Gefühle,” the feeling of unity between you

and Spring and God, or what people call God, and Nature is a very basic

element in all religion, in all religious feeling to the extent that it is not sick

and distorted. Freud rejected that. And I regret to say, I had the feeling that in

the process of subduing his own aliveness, his own biological aliveness, he

had to restrict himself, to sublimate, to live in a way he didn’t like, and to

resign. I had the feeling that he, somehow, couldn’t accept the concept which

is behind all good religion. Do you get my point? All good religion. I am

referring to the biological activity in your organism which is a part of the

universe. He rejected it. And I know he didn’t like it. He didn’t like it. Now,

my work developed in just that direction. In the schizophrenic, for example,

the  streaming  they  feel,  the  emotions  they  feel,  that’s  all  very  real.  And,

somehow, Freud couldn’t follow that. His work became intellectualized. And,

to my mind, that was a part of the bad development that took place. He was

caught in words. He was caught in words.


  DR. EISSLERDr. Reich, you wanted to make a statement about Federn. Do you remember?

A document regarding Federn?


  DR. REICH

Oh, I shall write one out about Federn. There’s something I have to say. I

don’t want to say it here. I shall write it out and send you the document. I

would like to have it deposited. It has something to do with me privately,

something very private about myself. I may deposit it in a sealed envelope. It

must be on record. So in case something turns up, this envelope may be

opened. Do you understand?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Should  some  defamation  or  slander  come  up  any  time,  then  this  would

answer it.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes, certainly.


  DR. REICH

Did the “ozeanische Gefühle” problem settle the religious question?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

It did in a broad sense. Freud was an agnostic. He was a Freidenker. But that

doesn’t solve the problem of religion or of religious feeling in people. Don’t

you think we should conclude shortly?  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Do you have any other questions?


  DR. EISSLER

You  perhaps  remember  still  some  personal  anecdotes  or  personal

experiences?


  DR. REICH

You mean about Freud?


  DR. EISSLER

Little things, yes, habits he had—


  DR. REICH

Well, I never paid too much attention to these things. I know that he didn’t

like  it  when  Rie’s  daughter  cut  her  hair  short.  She  came  home  with  a

Bubikopf. He disliked it intensely. That’s gossip. Shall we go into that?


  DR. EISSLER

I think gossip—for the historian, gossip is extremely important.


  DR. REICH

Do I have to take part in that? Well, there was a question whether Anna

Freud had a love life. That was a very much discussed thing. Many analysts

in Vienna thought she lived in abstinence. And it was regretted. I, personally,

felt somehow that it wasn’t good for the development of the education of

children. Problems of genitality arise in education and if one of its leaders

lives that way it is important. This is what everybody felt. I know nothingabout her. I wouldn’t like to utter any opinions about it. Is that clear enough?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Other anecdotes? I don’t know. Once, as a young physician, he came home

drunk at night, or something of that kind, was brought home drunk. Such

things— But he did not discuss that. Oh, yes. He used to analyze his children.

If the child had wet himself, he would ask, “Why did you do it?”

  He was not sarcastic, but he used a biting wit to whip people. Snap! He

was very sharp. He never did it with me. Never! With me, he was oh, mad,

                                      36
mad,  later—in  the  late  thirties.  —Oh,  Silberer.  You  know  that  Silberer

committed suicide?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

                                37
After meeting Freud. Tausk, I think, went this way, too. Freud liked Helene

Deutsch very much.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes?


  DR. REICH

                                                                  38
He liked pretty women. For instance, Princess Bonaparte was quite pretty at

that time, and Deutsch was a very pretty woman. Want more of such gossip?


  DR. EISSLER

Sure.  DR. REICH

You know who knew the gossip. Psychoanalytic “Tratsch” was a foible with

Fenichel. He wrote letters around about what everybody did to everybody

else. Do you know that?


  DR. EISSLER

I didn’t know that.


  DR. REICH

He did. Oh, yes! You would like to have them?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Then you can read about all kinds of things psychoanalysts did. I wouldn’t

like to go into it. I didn’t like it. Later, I became a victim of that gossip. I

have them in a heap. That was long ago, eighteen years ago.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes, that, I think, may be an important historical document in a hundred

years.


  DR. REICH

You would like this? Tell me, how far do you go when you mean Freud,

when you say Freud, Sigmund Freud Archives? How far do you go?


  DR. EISSLER

Well, it’s difficult to say. It originally meant Freud, and just Freud, but I

don’t think that you can really make sharp distinctions.


  DR. REICHYes, that’s right. There’s no limitation because he influenced so much. But,

to me, it’s quite a dead period—this whole thing. It is meaningful from a

point  of  view  of  my  own  use,  of  my  early  development,  my  emotional

connection with Freud. I liked him very much. He liked me very much. It was

important. But it is only a memory now. The psychoanalysts still think I’m a

psychoanalyst. No! No! Am I looked upon as a psychoanalyst?


  DR. EISSLER

It’s  difficult  to  say.  I  mean,  your  historical  role  certainly  was  that  of  an

analyst.


  DR. REICH

Oh, yes. But I have had nothing to do with it for twenty years. I wouldn’t like

to be called a psychoanalyst. Not because I despise the psychoanalyst. No.

                                                                          39
It’s a very great thing. But because I have nothing to do with it.

  Are you satisfied with the interview?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes. I am certainly very grateful.


  DR. REICH

I hope it will—


  DR. EISSLER

And I could imagine that when you read the transcript that many more things

may come to your mind.


  DR. REICH

Yes, that’s possible. I am very careful in historical matters, with good reason.

I think it will take hundreds of years before the theory of the unconscious and

the theory of bio-energy will be really lived by alive people. And to protectthat process, you have to guard against slander. Slander will go on for a long

time—the slander of love, the slander of genitality, the slander of life, the

hate of life—for a long time. To protect against that is part of the job. It is

beyond  psychoanalysis.  It  has  nothing  to  do  with  psychoanalysis.  It  is

outside.                        3) OCTOBER 19, 1952


                                    (continued)



  DR. REICH

Now, you asked me to tell you about the private affairs of the psychoanalysts.

Not because we are interested in private affairs as such—we are, of course, as

physicians, as scientists—but because they had, as I said, some influence on

the  development  of  psychoanalysis.  It  is  a  very  tough  chapter,  a  very

                                                    1
unpleasant one, but I think it is necessary. I hope to do it with the least

possible harm.

  I may introduce it with the following words: You see, the great man, the

pioneer, the one who invented something, or did something, is in the public

spotlight.  Everybody  looks  at  him;  everybody  criticizes  him;  everybody

wants to know how many women he had; whether he was divorced or not

divorced; how many times he was divorced, and so on and so on. But those

who ask these questions and those who assume the right to delve into the

private lives of the pioneer, mostly to do damage, are themselves hidden in

the bushes. I have a very typical picture of that. The pioneer is like a deer in

the open meadow, and all of his critics and all of his enemies are all around

him in the bushes. They can shoot from ambush and he can’t do a thing about

it. Now, Freud was a pioneer, and you know how people wanted to know

about him. He ran away from that. I told you that yesterday. He stayed at

home. He didn’t see people. He was careful about his private life. He went

into the sublimation theory.

  Now, I myself began to be a pioneer, about 1923, when I discovered the

genitality problem in neurosis. And the enemies—they were not enemies yet,

but they sensed danger. As I told you yesterday, most of the psychoanalystshad  been  patients,  sexually  disturbed  themselves,  and  that  had  a  great

influence. But it wouldn’t have developed as it did if I hadn’t tackled the

problem of genitality in the neuroses. So the spotlight was turned on to me

very early. I remember, in this connection, a remark by Reik, Theodor Reik,

when  I  gave  my  first  lecture  on  “die  Rolle  der  Gentalität  in  der

                      2
Neurosenetiologie.”  All  of  the  Viennese  psychoanalysts  sat  there  and

listened. They were very attentive. Then, for the first time, the emotional

atmosphere around me cooled. Reik said that it was a perfect presentation,

but “I wouldn’t like to have written that book.” That was his remark. I think

that characterizes the whole situation.

  About 1926, when I published the work on the genitality in children, the

first puberty, rumors came to my ears that I cohabited with my patients. I

didn’t.  It  was  Federn  who  slandered.  That  went  on  and  on  and  on,

underhandedly. I would hear something here, something there.

  To further illustrate the situation as it developed around 1932—I was in

trouble with my wife, my first wife. You know that?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

She was sick. I just had to leave her. And I, in contradistinction to Freud, did

not give up my private life. I lived my love life. I was not afraid of public

opinion. When the relationship with my first wife did not work out, I took

another woman. Today, such things are readily acknowledged, aren’t they?

But  in  those  “cultured”  Viennese  circles  it  was  something  very  peculiar.

Now, I was in the open. Everybody knew about it. I was not promiscuous, or

in any way amoral or immoral. But I never permitted my organism to grow

stale or to become dirty. That goes very deep, you understand. You know

what happens when somebody lives too long in abstinence. He gets dirty,

dirty-minded, pornographic, neurotic, and so on. I never permitted that tohappen to me. One only shrinks if one lives against nature. One shrinks, gets

sick, ill, in one way or another. I never permitted that to happen. My life was

an open secret, or, I should say, quite in the open. On the other hand, the

private  lives  of  the  analysts  were  very  much  hidden.  However,  through

analysis, and so on, we knew what was going on. As a psychoanalyst, you are

aware of the fact that the one who leads a frustrated life, or a pathological

life, is envious of the one who doesn’t, the one who leads a clear and straight

life. I never made any bones about it. I didn’t talk about it. I didn’t carry it

ahead of me. But I didn’t hide it. I didn’t have anything to hide. When I was

through with my first wife, I had a second one. I wasn’t married to her, not

legally married to her, but she was my wife. That was Elsa Lindenberg. So

you see, while I was in the open with my genital relationships to women, they

were hidden. I don’t think it is right that I should divulge names, but I can

assure you that many things went on in a clandestine manner and, sometimes,

in a dirty manner. Without mentioning names, I shall mention facts which

resulted from the genital frustration of some psychoanalysts. Do you follow

me clearly?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

There were instances where psychoanalysts, under the pretext of a genital

examination, of a medical examination, put their fingers into the vaginas of

their patients. It was quite frequent. I knew that. You see, it happened once or

twice that I fell in love with a patient. Then I was frank about it. I stopped the

treatment and I let the thing cool off. Then we decided either yes or no to go

to bed. Is that clear?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.  DR. REICH

I was quite straight about it. Some psychoanalysts didn’t do that. They would

be  hypocrites  about  it.  They  would  pretend  there  was  nothing  there  and

would masturbate the patient during the sessions.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Now,  that  not  only  created  very  bad  situations,  but  it  also  created  a  bad

conscience or an envy toward me who was different in these matters. It is

quite clear that the man who discovered the genitality function in neurosis

and elaborated the orgastic potency question could not himself live in a sick

way.  A  sick  organism  could  not  have  found  the  way  to  these  problems,

anyway. So there was envy there. There was envy on the part of the restricted

one toward the one who didn’t permit himself to be restricted.

  One way the world usually attempts to kill the pioneer is to segregate

him, to put him away into loneliness, into lonesomeness, so he can’t live a

normal life. That is one way of breaking him. It happened to Nietzsche, for

example. Now, I never permitted anyone to do that to me. They tried many

    3
times. What did I do? I dissolved the organizations that tried to do that. Do

you follow my point?


  DR. EISSLER

No—the last one I don’t.


  DR. REICH

You don’t. Well, for example, it happened recently in New York. There was

a group of two dozen or so physicians who began to admire me and to have

this mystical attitude toward me. They sat around me. They made that bust of

  4
me and carried it up and down the steps in my house and made a holy smokeout of me. That began to disturb my life, my vitality. I had to separate myself.

I  didn’t  want  it.  It  is  much  more  important  that  I  stay  alive  and  do  my

experiments and my science than it is to have a few followers. This is only to

show you the way I was. I was that way all the while, all through. But the

others were different. I don’t say they are dirty, but they are hypocrites, just

plain hypocrites. For instance, I was reproached because I married a former

                                5
patient of mine, Annie Pink. It turned out very badly. Rado married a patient,

Emmy. Others married patients. There was nothing wrong with that. What

was wrong, however, was the hypocrisy which was in many treatments—

directly there—on the spot. And that created a bad conscience. And a bad

conscience  creates,  as  you  well  know,  malignant  behavior. You  make

somebody else bad in order to free yourself from responsibility. We call that

the Emotional Plague. In brief, I am aware of the fact that Jones and Federn

tried to present me to Freud as an immoral individual. I am quite sure about

Federn, not so sure about Jones.

  There is something wrong when most psychiatrists and analysts regard

normal, natural genitality as psychopathic, or when they confuse a healthy

genital character with a schizophrenic simply because both are quite different

from the average, armored, neurotic human being. I don’t want to go into that

now.  It  is  too  complicated.  I  only  want  to  say  that  the  analysts  used

underhanded means to turn Freud against me—Freud, who was on best terms

with me, who expected very much from me. I am sure that documents will

turn up to that effect. If I am wrong, then I am sorry. Then I misjudged the

whole  situation,  you  understand.  I  don’t  think  I  am  wrong.  If  it  is  not

contained in documents, then it was expressed in mere hearsay and gossip.

This was not a special case of hate, or infamy, or destructiveness toward me.

It is a general thing that goes on everywhere. But the psychoanalysts are no

different from anyone else. They are not exempt from it. I mention it to give

you  an  example  of the  sexual  situation  among  psychoanalysts  which,  of

course, was decisive with regard to their obscuring the sexual etiology of theneurosis. Do I make myself clear?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

If  the  analysts  were  disturbed  to  such  an  extent,  then  the  main

accomplishment of Freud, namely, the discovery of the sexual etiology of the

neurosis,  couldn’t  survive.  I  assure  you  that  it  is  the  same  with  the

orgonomists  today  with  the  genitality  theory.  They  don’t  touch  it.  These

armored character structures cannot handle natural genitality. It may take

another fifty years or so to get it across.

  Let me give you another example. My second wife, Elsa Lindenberg, was

very beautiful. That is her picture over there. I came to the Lucerne Congress

with her in 1934. It is quite amusing to think back on that today. But to give

you a picture of the attitude of some analysts at that time: They lived in

hotels, sat around in smoky lobbies, and so on. I didn’t. I lived with my wife

in a tent at the Lucerne Lake. I had a dagger, you know, as you have when

camping. Today, nobody would find anything peculiar in it. Fifteen years

later,  a  rumor  went  around  in  New  York  to  the  effect  that  I  had  gone

completely crazy at Lucerne and had put up a tent in the lobby of the hotel

and that I went around with a dagger. You never knew who started it, but that

rumor went around and came back to me. It was true that I lived in a tent, but

not in the lobby. And it was true I had a dagger, but not at the convention.

You  know  how  that  is  “verdictet”  [condensed].  When  my  wife  appeared

there, many analysts just streamed at her, as males do, trying to get to her.

Only sex-hungry, starved individuals do that. Is that clear?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.  DR. REICH

Only  starved,  genitally  starved  individuals  do  such  things.  A  genital

character, a normal, healthy individual doesn’t do that. It doesn’t occur to

him to do such things, to run after a woman in such a manner. They didn’t

know that she was my wife, but when they found out, they retreated. To get

to the essence of the whole thing, it is impossible for a human organism, such

as that of an analyst, to work continuously over the years with the human

structure, with the instincts, the perverted instincts and the healthy instincts,

to take all that, to have to accept it, to have it poured onto him, and to stand

it,  unless  he  himself  is  completely  clean,  lucid,  and  orgastically  satisfied,

unless he himself lives in a good way. Now, that was not the case with the

majority  of  psychoanalysts.  And  that  is  crucial.  Here  is  the  structure,  the

character structure, that had its hand in destroying the basic Freudian theory,

the sexual etiology of the neurosis. That was the basic thing it did. They got

away  from  natural  genitality.  And  why  did  they  get  away  from  it?  They

couldn’t stand it. Their structures couldn’t stand it. I don’t think they avoided

it in a moral way. In some cases, they did so in a pornographic way; in others,

in a defensive, compulsion neurotic way; in still others, by just not having

contact with it, just not handling it. I had many cases from psychoanalysts,

and it is true that they don’t handle the genital problem of a patient. That is

quite generally true. I knew it as early as 1926, 1927. I spoke to Freud about

it. But, at that time, I didn’t know the extent of the hatred against the normal,

against the natural. So you follow me?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

The hatred against the natural, the sick against the healthy, is the major realm

of my psychiatric endeavor today. I call the problem the Emotional Plague,

and I see it in a biological way. But, at that time, I didn’t know all of that. Itonly  became  clear  much  later.  Still,  I  was  always  astonished: “Why,  in

heaven’s name, do you persecute the normal, the natural?” I remember that

discussions on this subject were rather frequent. And Freud had nothing to

say. He didn’t understand it, either. I, somehow, had the feeling that he didn’t

want to touch it. He didn’t want to touch it. I don’t know whether you want to

go into that. It is a very important point. That was not Freud’s personal thing

—not that he was a coward, not that he was sick himself. I don’t think so. I

think he was quite a lively structure. It has to do with something much bigger

than that. I don’t know whether you want to go into it.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Sure? It goes very deep. I don’t know whether you are acquainted with the

orgonomic picture of the structure of the human character—the “core,” the

“middle layer,” and the “periphery.” It gives one a very practical tool with

which to work with patients. It is a bio-energetic tool. You can’t get at the

human  character  by  psychoanalytic  means.  You  have  to  reach  it  with

character analysis or orgone therapy. Human beings live emotionally on the

surface, with their surface appearance. Correct? In order to get to the core

where the natural, the normal, the healthy is, you have to get through that

middle layer. And in that middle layer there is terror. There is severe terror.

Not only that, there is murder there. All that Freud tried to subsume under the

death instinct is in that middle layer. He thought it was biological. It wasn’t.

It is an artifact of culture. It is a structural malignancy of the human animal.

Therefore, before you can get through to what Freud called Eros or what I

call orgonotic streaming or plasmatic excitation (the basic plasma action of

the bio-energetic system), you have to go through hell. Just through hell! This

is true for the physician as well as the patient. In this hell, there is confusion,

schizophrenic breakdown, melancholic depression. They are all there. I havethis in Character Analysis. I don’t have to repeat it. But why bring the Life

Force in here? There is only one reason: To show you why nobody wanted to

touch it or to get at the biological core where I was working at that time.

Before you can reach that core, you must encounter hate, terror, murder. All

these  wars,  all  the  chaos  now—do  you  know  what  that  is  to  my  mind?

Humanity is trying to get at its core, at its living, healthy core. But before it

can be reached, humanity has to pass through this phase of murder, killing

and destruction. What Freud called the destructive instinct is in the middle

layer. A bull is mad and destructive when it is frustrated. Humanity is that

way, too. That means that before you can get to the real thing—to love, to

life,  to  rationality—you  must  pass  through  hell.  This  has  very  grave

implications for social development. I don’t want to go into it now, but I

wanted to explain why the psychoanalysts refused, unconsciously, to touch

what I was working with. If I had fully known its consequences, I would have

run  myself.  I  don’t  want  to  make  myself  better  than  the  others,  you

understand. At that time, I would have run. I couldn’t run today. The bridges

are burned behind me. Looking back, I understand it. It is very dangerous.

You see, the armor, as thick as it is and as bad as it is, is a protective device,

and  it  is  good  for  the  individual  under  present  social  and  psychological

circumstances to have it. He couldn’t live otherwise. That is what I try to

teach my doctors today. I tell them I am glad they don’t succeed in breaking

down that armor because people, who have grown up with such structures,

are used to living with them. If you take that away, they break down. They

can’t, they just can’t live any longer. They can’t function, you see. It will take

a long time—maybe decades, maybe centuries, I don’t know—until we have

new generations whose structures will be different. But there is no doubt, if

you would break down all of the armoring in the world today, there would be

chaos. Perfect chaos! Murder everywhere! There is a rational element here.

And the reason why I was in trouble with the analysts was that there was not

only the structural but also this rational element. So I knew where the dangerswere. But the analysts refused to even look at it. Do you get me now? They

refused  to  even  look  at  it.  Their  structures  did  not  permit  them  to  really

understand the rational. It was their frustrated structures that blocked access

to the whole problem. They could not reach it because of their hatred of the

natural. To this day, genitality doesn’t exist in psychoanalysis. You know

that. I will tell you more. It doesn’t exist anywhere, not even in my own

organization. You just can’t tackle it. Now, that was the background of the

situation, the real background. But I didn’t know it then. Nobody knew it. It

only came out later. I lived what I would call a determinedly healthy, genital,

love  life.  I  didn’t  permit  anyone  to  frustrate  my  emotional  health.  The

analysts didn’t grasp that. Is that clear? I wasn’t promiscuous. I did not do

immoral things. In general, it was always clean and clear. I always had my

woman.  They  didn’t.  They  lived  in  marriages  they  hated.  I  broke  up  my

marriage when it threatened to destroy my work. When I couldn’t stand it any

more,  I  left.  And  that  seemed  impossible  to  them.  Now,  that  is  the

background of the defamation. Does that cover it now? Do you have any

questions?


  DR. EISSLER

I understand that you don’t want to go into details.


  DR. REICH

Oh yes, I want to go into details, but only into pertinent details.


  DR. EISSLER

You mentioned yesterday about Jones. I thought that that had a direct effect

on—


  DR. REICH

Oh yes, of course. He was a very frustrated Englishman, you see. And he

hated the way I lived. So, to judge from the events at Lucerne, he most likelydug against me to Freud. He thought I was psychopathic. The analysts don’t

distinguish the sick and the healthy. So, to them, I was psychopathic.


  DR. EISSLER

And Rado—what was Rado’s part?


  DR. REICH

Oh, that—I am not sure about depositing that, but I will tell you the story. It

was this: Emmy, his wife, and I had very strong genital contact with each

other. Never anything like full embrace happened between us, but we danced

a lot together and we had very strong contact. And Rado was jealous.


  DR. EISSLER

And then he started an intrigue against you?


  DR. REICH

Yes. He was the one who started that rumor in 1934. He began the rumor that

I was schizophrenic. He was the one. And Fenichel picked it up. The rumor

was that I was in a mental institution. I wasn’t. I never was, never have been.

Fenichel was the one who broke down emotionally. It was Fenichel who was

in  an  institution  for  three  weeks  after  a  breakdown.  He  broke  down  in

connection  with  my  separation  from  the  IPA.  I  never  mentioned  him  by

name,  but  I  related  that  whole  story  in Character  Analysis,  in  the  third

      6
edition. I never reacted to that publicly because I knew I was strong enough

to survive. So, to begin with, it was Rado because of Emmy. Fenichel and

others picked it up easily, as usually happens. I had quite a time to get rid of

that.  The  rumor  preceded  me  by  a  year  in  the  United  States.  Everybody

thought I was psychotic. That was my punishment for the discovery of the

orgasm function.

  As I mentioned before, the analysts don’t touch it.

  This “don’t touch it” showed up quite clearly in the handling of the FreudArchives. I don’t know whether you know that. Freud was put away. Nobody

wants to deal with Freudian problems, you understand. “Put them away for a

hundred years. Let two or three later generations decide about it. We don’t

want anything of it.” You won’t agree with me. There is, however, no doubt

about  it.  When  your  secretary  went  down  to  the  Library  of  Congress  to

confirm  receipt  of  my  documents,  the  answer  I  received  back  was  the

assurance that my correspondence with Freud or about Freud is put away for

a hundred years. But I am not interested in that. I never intended to put away

my  correspondence  for  a  hundred  years.  On  the  contrary,  I  am  going  to

                                  7
publish it during my lifetime. There is nothing to hide. Are you going to tell

                  8
them what I say?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Everyone wants to try to put Freud and the whole subject away. They don’t

want to touch it really, fully. They don’t want to handle it. They want nothing

    9
of it. That’s a basic human characteristic that acts everywhere in psychiatry.

The puberty problem, the adolescent problem—nobody touches it. You see

the  connection?  Freud  himself  put  away  a  lot  of  his  own  true  being  and

discoveries. The pressure of the emotional plague is too great and dangerous

to carry.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

I have that point off my chest now.

  When I worked in the socialist and the communist groups in Vienna from

                                                                  10
1927 to 1930, the analysts said that I was a communist. It was a handy toolfor  my  enemies,  you  know.  I  wasn’t  a  communist.  I  wasn’t  a  Marxist.  I

understood Marx, but I saw that Marxism, as I proved in my writings, was

insufficient to handle the problems. But the analysts were already afraid of

the “social consequences.” If I had known where it would lead, I would have

been afraid, too. But I didn’t, you see. I was determined to go right after the

problem. There was the marriage situation. Infantile genitality. The puberty,

the adolescent situation. These are the crucial points of mental hygiene. I am

still at it. But, this time, on a much deeper level, much deeper. I don’t work

on the psychological level anymore. It is biology, today.

  Now, about the communists: I was never a communist in the usual sense.

I was never a political communist. I would like to have that fully on record.

                                                                                      11
Never.  Oh,  yes,  I  worked  in  the  organization.  I  worked  with  them.  I

believed that capitalism was bad, but I don’t believe, today, that the misery

stems from capitalism. The misery is older than capitalism. I tried hard to get

psychology,  especially  psychoanalytic  psychology,  into  sociology.  And  I

succeeded. I don’t say that I did it all, of course. Bernfeld began it about

1925, but he dropped it. I continued in 1927. In Austria, I worked with the

                                                    12
communists, but I was in the Arbeiter Hilfe. In Germany, I belonged to the

                                          13
socialist physicians under Simmel. I worked with the communist faction

                                                                14
because of the new laws in Russia—the sexual laws. Freud was all for it.

Today, everybody is for it except the Russians, who dropped it long ago.

Somehow, the world has split up. You see, there was this tendency in the late

                                                                                          15
twenties to unite psychology and Marxism, or psychoanalysis and Marxism.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

But it fell apart. Russia degenerated. Communistic Marxism degenerated into

Stalinism  and  imperialism.  Freud  is  in  the  United  States—I  mean,

psychology and all that. Is that clear?  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

Now, they are opposed to each other, i.e., the economistic view and the study

of human structure, human biology. That is how I see it. These were the

subjects  of  the  discussions  with  Freud.  We  agreed  that  the  economic

approach alone cannot solve the issue. It is very important, of course, that the

people  do  not  go  hungry,  that  they  have  their  food,  that  they  have  their

shelters, that they have security. But that doesn’t solve the problem of human

structure or character formation. What you have to do is to first have your

secure economic base and then go ahead and change human structure. Here,

we were in complete agreement. And Freud was awfully enthusiastic about it.

To  him,  it  appeared  as  something  very  important.  But  then  Federn  came

along. He was a Modju. Federn was a psychoanalytic Modju. He was very

unhappy in his marriage, but he was a very, very good husband. He stuck to

her  and  so  on.  And  he  was  a  “culturist.”  He  used  to  read  Goethe  to  his

patients.


  DR. EISSLER

His wife had an influence on him?


  DR. REICH

I don’t know. I always had a feeling that he was a very alive human being,

too.  It  was  always  the  same  story.  The  man  was  alive,  the  woman  was

somehow  out.  The  men  gave  into  them,  and  they  were  then  jealous  or

inimical to those who didn’t give in.

  When did you enter the psychoanalytic movement?


  DR. EISSLER

Well, I went to psychoanalytic lectures from 1931 on.  DR. REICH

Are you a member of the psychoanalytic society now?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

In New York?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

May I ask you a question? Did you discuss this interview with anyone of the

Board of Directors of the Psychoanalytic?


  DR. EISSLER

What do you mean—discuss?


  DR. REICH

Discuss what we should talk about?


  DR. EISSLER

One or two, I think, know that I planned to interview you.


  DR. REICH

Who?


  DR. EISSLER

I think I told Hartmann and Kronold.


  DR. REICHYou know Kronold was my student.


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

He is quite decent, but they all left me. They all abandoned me.


  DR. EISSLER

But they say you are a very good analyst.


  DR. REICH

Yes. Other psychoanalysts don’t know about this interview? They don’t ask?

But they know that I cooperate with you?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes, sure. But their interest is really a peripheral one.


  DR. REICH

Is that so?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

You know what I mentioned yesterday about that original damage done to the

human,  to  infants.  That’s  what  it  is—this  lack  of  interest. Nobody  is

interested.  They  can’t  be  interested.  The  protoplasm  doesn’t  sparkle  any

more. Oh, we encounter that everywhere. We have it right in our own midst.

It is everywhere, everywhere. Were there any objections to my depositing the

documents?  DR. EISSLER

Oh, no.


  DR. REICH

There are a few severe enemies in the psychoanalytic association. Nunberg is

            16
very severe. There are very many friends there, too, but they don’t touch it.

You know what I mean. They don’t touch it.

  Tell me, are people aware that wherever organizational development of

Freud’s science ran one way, its scientific development went another way?


  DR. EISSLER

No, I don’t think that people are aware of that.


  DR. REICH

Aren’t  they?  Aren’t  they?  You  see—I  don’t  know  whether  you  are  quite

aware of what I mean. Do you know who has kept the libido theory alive and

working today? And who developed it? I regard myself as the only one who

did it. Nobody else. Is that clear? I want this quite clearly on record. I claim

                                  17
that. I am not a psychoanalyst. I am not interested in psychoanalysis. I have

no animosity against it. I have no grudge against it—not at all. It is all cold

and dead. But one thing is clear, and that I think we should work out here. It

was  also  a  point  of  frequent  discussion  with  Freud.  I  refer  here  to  the

relationship of the quantitative to the qualitative. To him, it was one of his

greatest discoveries that an idea is not active on its own, but because it has a

certain energy cathexis, i.e., it has a certain amount of energy attached to it.

In this, he had brought the quantitative and the qualitative together. He did

the same thing when he claimed that the neurosis had a somatic nucleus. But

the quantitative, the energy angle, was only a concept. It was not reality.

Now,  whereas  the  psychoanalytic  organization  developed  the  qualitative

angle, i.e., the ideas, their interconnection, and so on, I picked up the energy

angle. I had to hold on to the libido theory, you understand, not only becauseit was true, but because I needed it. I needed it as a tool. It led into the

physiological  realm.  That  means  that  what  Freud  called  libido  was  not  a

          18
chemical, but a movement of the protoplasm. Can you follow me?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

If an amoeba wants to go out toward something, it stretches out. Right? If it is

afraid, what does it do? It withdraws. It goes into itself. Right? Now, that was

the libido theory as I developed it as a real, physiological function. And out

                                                        19
of this came the discovery of the orgone energy.

  Now,  I  have  to  say  a  few  words  here:  I  don’t  think  there  are  many

analysts  who  appreciate  Freud’s  great  achievement,  the  discovery  of  a

psychic energy. I don’t think there are many who know what that means. I

said yesterday why they don’t. Very few have natural scientific training or

the  capacity  to  think  in  a  natural  scientific  way.  I  don’t  mean  just

psychological thinking. It is much more. Freud was a natural scientist in that

sense. He thought in terms of quantity, energy, libido cathexis to ideas. That

is where the psychoanalytic organization fell completely short, completely

short. And that is where I hooked on. That is what I owe to Freud in the

                                  20
discovery of the Life Energy. What Freud called libido inside the organism

                                                                                    21
is a reality outside the organism as well. You can see it on the devices. That

                                  22
blue outside is orgone energy. It is a reality. It was discovered on the basis

of Freud’s original libido, on the basis of the principle of energy. In my

discussions  with  Freud,  the  problem  of  the  content  and  the  cathexis,  the

relationship of the idea and the quantity of energy attached to it were crucial

points. The sexual angle was important because the genital excitation is the

best  example  of  that  energy.  When  the  penis  erects,  something  physical

happens. So I did not keep at the libido theory because I am an especial

adherent of sex in the usual sense of the word, but because it was a naturalscientific principle of energy quantity and objective functioning. I don’t even

feel myself to be a student of Freud any more. I have had nothing to do with

him for a long time. I would even have much reason to be very angry at him.

He didn’t behave very well in 1933 and 1934 when I was in trouble, in great

trouble.  While  I  defended  his  work,  he  didn’t  want  to  support  me.  He

        23
refused. But that has no bearing, whatsoever, on the factual, scientific angle

of the whole thing. It is the quantitative factor, the energy principle that I owe

to Freud, and it is that principle that separates me from the psychoanalysts.

Psychoanalysis  is  a  psychology  of  ideas, while orgonomy  is  a  science  of

physical  energy—physical  energy  inside  the  organism  and  outside  the

organism. Do I formulate it so that even one who is not in it can understand

what it is all about?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

The libido which Freud talked about hypothetically and which he suggested

might be chemical in nature is a concrete energy, something very concrete

and physical. It is in the air and can be concentrated in an orgone energy

              2425
accumulator. I shall give you a pamphlet on it. You have heard about it?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

So it is not psychoanalysis. It has nothing to do with psychoanalysis. But the

psychoanalytic  libido  theory,  the  psychic  energy  theory,  was  a  certain

                                                  26
decisive step in the discovery which I made.

  Now, I would like to be sure that I do not give the impression that I try to

depreciate or to debunk the psychoanalysts. I don’t. As I told you, I am not atall  interested  in  psychoanalysis.  What  I  am  interested  in  is  how  the  Life

Energy, which is in you and outside of you, works in you and through you

upon  the  world.  For  instance,  how  does  it  work  through  you  as  a

psychoanalyst upon your patient? What automatically works in you is what I

call  bio-energy.  It  is  concrete.  Libido,  however,  was  only  a  term  for  a

concept. Life Energy is something you can hear in the laboratory. You can

hear it click on instruments. That is the significance of the transition from the

libido theory to the concrete physical energy. What I am interested in is how

this energy, which is outside in nature and is inside you and works through

you, influences your patient. If, as a psychoanalyst, that energy in you is

thwarted,  frustrated  genitally,  then  your  whole  thinking  system  will  be

different from the person in whom it is not thwarted. The way you look at the

world and the way you see it will be different. Here, we are speaking again of

the “genital character” and the “neurotic character.” In the genital character,

this energy, this objective, cosmic energy works freely. It flows freely. It is in

contact. In a neurotic character, it is thwarted and blocked. Now, whether

the psychoanalyst is, or to what extent he is, a neurotic character determines

how he looks upon my work. It will determine whether he slanders me or not,

whether  he  thinks  I  am  a  psychopath,  or  whether  he  thinks  I  am  a  very

normal and gay individual, or an individual who is outgoing and natural, and

so on. You understand my point? I am not interested in these disturbances of

the psychoanalysts for themselves, or because they did this or that to me. I

am only interested in what manner they are thwarted and frustrated because

the distortion of the life force in the psychoanalysts was responsible for the

degeneration of Freud’s work. Is that clearly formulated now?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

That is what I am interested in. The same distortion of the life force has takenplace in all movements—in the Christian movement, the Marxist movement,

in  any  movement,  you  understand.  However,  what  is  significant  in

psychoanalysis  is  that  Freud  was  the  first  to  touch  upon  the  life  energy

hypothetically. He was the first to touch upon it, although only as a concept.

Before him it was only surmised. It was only an idea, like the entelechy. But

Freud, with his penetrating statement of a psychic energy principle, touched

upon the life energy in the organism as an actual concept. Now, that is where

I come in. Is that clear? From there, it developed right into the cosmic energy,

measurable  on  the  Geiger  counter,  visible  in  the  blue  of  the  atmosphere.

That’s  why  it  is  important  whether  a  psychoanalyst  smears  my  name  or

whether he knows what I am doing. If he smears my name, he is just sick.

There is thwarted life energy in him. He tries to do to my work what he did to

Freud’s work by destroying the libido theory. Are the psychoanalysts aware

that the libido theory is dead in their organization? [See Editors’ Preface.]


  DR. EISSLER

No, I don’t think so. Most of them I think would not admit that.


  DR. REICH

They would not admit that?


  DR. EISSLER

I don’t think so.


  DR. REICH

There is no doubt about that. Think of an article like Sterba’s on my work in

which he leaves out the crucial orgasm question entirely. Oh, yes, I know

they talk of anal and oral and so on. That is not the point, you understand.

The point is the grasping of what the libido theory meant. With the libido

theory,  psychology  hooked  onto  natural  science  for  the  first  time  in  the

history of science. I don’t know whether or not you are really grasping it.  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

You do. You understand that, until Freud, psychology was something beyond

natural science. It still is for many, for most. And what I am telling you now

is quite crucial. For the first time in the history of the human race, the mind

was hooked up, at least theoretically, with nature at large. Do I make myself

clear now?


  DR. EISSLER

Yes.


  DR. REICH

                                              27
That is where I come in. I made it real through the discovery of the orgone

energy. And that is why I say the libido theory is dead. Nothing happened to

it. Nobody did anything with it. Talking about oral and anal things does not

mean  libido  theory.  To  Freud,  libido  theory  was,  as  you  can  see  from

“Beyond the Pleasure Principle” and such papers, something very basic and

very deep. And, here, a part of his tragedy sets in. Here, also, was his interest

in my work. He knew that I was scientifically minded, i.e., basically oriented

toward fundamental natural processes. The genital functioning in a person is

an expression of his life energy. If that is disturbed, as is the case in the

average psychoanalyst, he doesn’t function, and he can’t think in the bio-

energetic way. He can’t think in that direction. And he hates. Now, that is the

background for the hate, for the slander that came my way.


  DR. EISSLER

Do you think that Freud abandoned the libido theory?


  DR. REICHNo. Never! Never! Only he couldn’t find his way further. He was stuck. I

believe the way was my way, the way I went so successfully. I had to go

through character analysis, the emotions, the pleasure anxieties, the opposite

directions of flow of bio-energy in the organism, from there to the plasmatic

movement—yes, to the amoeba—and, then, into the orgone energy outside.

Libido as a physical cosmic reality—that is my work. Freud provided the

concept. This is where he came in. This, to my mind, was his greatest deed.

He was a very great man, a very great man.                          POSTSCRIPT






  This letter from the Archives of the Orgone Institute was written after

  the completion of the interview. It was addressed to Dr. Eissler, but

  not sent.


Dear Dr. Eissler:

  The delivery of this interview has been delayed because I wished to finish

reading the first volume of the Sigmund Freud biography by Ernest Jones.

This reading has shown me that the following additions should be filed with

the Archives:

    (1) In the interview, I had characterized Sigmund Freud as an animal in a cage, the cage

  being only his environment and his pupils. The Jones biography reveals the fact that it was, in

  addition, Sigmund Freud himself who held on to his own imprisonment by Jewish customs and

  beliefs which, in the intellectual sphere, he loathed.

    (2) In the interview, I had offered the opinion that Sigmund Freud was a genitally healthy

  man. The biography reveals what I had not known, that he suffered, under familial and religious

  pressures, from severe sexual stasis during the nearly five years of his frustrating betrothal to a

  girl  who,  quite  obviously,  was  deeply  spellbound  by  a  neurotic  mother.  This  might  seem

  unimportant had it not forced Sigmund Freud to hamper all further developments concerning

  genitality. Freud seemed to have been stuck in his own need to “sublimate” which he, then,

  made valid for all by translating it into a wrong psychological theory. Contemporaries of his

  such as Strindberg, Ibsen, Nietzsche, who had no fear, were far ahead of Freud in these matters.

    (3) Sigmund Freud’s personal background also explains why he behaved the way he did in

  the reception of my orgasm theory. It explains, also, why he was so inimical to America where

  the sexual revolution was born from the genital frustrations and realizations of the early pioneers

  who liked female companionship. Freud could not possibly accept such realizations without

  changing his whole being.

    (4) I also did not know that Sigmund Freud had been on the way to the discovery of the bio-
                                                                        1
  energy in clinical activity (see Jones’ account of the “Project Manuscript”) which he later  rejected.  Freud  had  missed  the  discovery  of  the  physical  life  energy  as  he  had  missed

  completing his cocaine studies. All this, because of the severe inhibition imposed by a Jewish

  family and a Jewish bride upon his very alive and emotionally longing bio-system. This tragic

  aspect of Sigmund Freud’s background is clearly manifested in and explains what I had, to

  begin  with,  emphasized  as  the  great  despair  in  his  facial  expression.  His  psychological

  discoveries,  great  and  crucial  as  they  were,  thus  demonstrates  a run-away  from  the  full

  realization of those aspects of his discovery which I had, for a decade, pursued in the name of

  Freud,  but,  later,  had  to  shoulder  myself  when  he  refused  to  acknowledge  their  simple
                                            2
  consequences as explained in my orgasm theory.

                                                                      WILHELM REICH, M. D.

                                                                                  Orgonon

                                                                          Rangeley, Maine                                        PART 2







DOCUMENTARY SUPPLEMENT              EXPLANATORY NOTE






Although, during the early 1930’s, Reich still believed in the basic scientific

nature of Marxism, he had recognized “the tremendous gap between sex-

economic sociology and vulgar economism.” As early as 1932, his writings

were being banned by socialist and communist organizations, and he was

even threatened with execution if Marxism should gain power in Germany.

He was expelled from communist organizations because he had introduced

sexology into sociology and pointed out its implications for human structure.

Between 1934 and 1937, all of his writings were banned in the U.S.S.R.

  The  Marxist  terminology  which  appears  in  this  correspondence  was

deleted from the later editions of his early works. As to his relationship to

Marxist organizations, Reich, later, had this to say: “I do not regret my many

years’ work as a physician in Marxist organizations. I owe my sociological

knowledge  not  to  books,  but  primarily  to  the  practical  experience  of  the

struggles on the part of the masses for a decent, free existence. The best sex-

economic insights, in fact, were gained as a result of the errors in thinking on

the part of the masses, the errors which brought them the fascist pestilence.

To me as a physician, the working individual, with his everyday concerns,

was accessible in a way he never is to a party politician. The party politician

saw  only  the  ‘worker’s  class’  which  he  was  going  to  ‘fill  with  class

consciousness.’ I saw the living being, man, as he was living under social

conditions of the worst kind, conditions which he had created himself, which,

characterologically anchored, he carried within him and from which he tried

in vain to free himself. The chasm between economistic and biosociologicalconceptions  became  unbridgeable.  The  theory  of  the  ‘class  individual’

became  replaced  by  the  knowledge  of  the  irrational  nature  of  the  society

formed by the animal, man.

  “…  Dialectic  materialism  as  outlined  by  Engels  in  his Anti-Dühring

developed  into biophysical  functionalism.  This  development  was  made

possible by the discovery of the biological energy, the orgone (1936–1939).

Sociology and psychology were put on a solid biological foundation. Such a

development  cannot  remain  without  influence  on  thought.  As  thinking

develops, old concepts change and new concepts take the place of obsolete

ones.  The  Marxist  ‘consciousness’  was  replaced  by ‘dynamic  structure,’

‘needs’  by  ‘orgonotic  instinctual  processes,’  ‘tradition’  by  ‘biological  and

characterological rigidity,’ etc.

  “…  Does  that  mean  that  the  economic  theory  of  Marxism  is

fundamentally wrong? I should like to clarify this question by an illustration.

Is  the  microscope  of  Pasteur’s  time,  or  Leonardo  da  Vinci’s  water  pump

‘wrong’?  Marxism  is  a  scientific  economic  theory  which  stems  from  the

social conditions of the early 19th century. However, the social process did

not stand still, but developed into the fundamentally different process of the

20th  century.  In  this new-social  process,  it  is  true,  we  find  all  the  basic

elements of the 19th century, just as in the modern microscope we find the

basic structure of that of Pasteur, and in the modern plumbing system the

basic principle of Leonardo’s pump. But one, like the other, would be of no

use to us today. They have been surpassed by fundamentally new processes

and  functions  which  correspond  to  fundamentally  new  concepts  and

techniques. The Marxist parties in Europe failed and declined because they

tried  to  comprehend  fascism  of  the  20th  century,  a  fundamentally  new

phenomenon, with concepts belonging to the 19th century. They declined as

social  organizations  because  they  failed  to  keep  alive  the  developmental

                                                    1
possibilities inherent in any scientific theory.”                                                                  1
                    1) CORRESPONDENCE




 

                2
  (Reich to Adler)

                                                                  Vienna, March 10, 1920

  SEMINAR FOR SEXOLOGY

  My dear Doctor:

    Your  lecture  on  the  “Foundations  of  Individual  Psychology”  at  the  Society  for  Social

  Medicine prompts me to write you on a subject which has long been on my mind and which has

  provoked lively discussions in our seminar.

    In full appreciation of and admiration for your doctrines of ego psychology—or rather, just

  because of this—I could not dismiss certain rising doubts, not about their validity but about their

  comprehensive applicability, especially to the field of neuroses and perversions. So if I take the

  above-mentioned lecture as a vehicle for discussion, it is done because the case histories you

  presented from your practice lend themselves to illustrations of my argument.

    I will not touch on everything but will confine myself to those points which seem to me in

  greatest need of clarification. If I did not state these objections at the end of your lecture (motion

for discussion submitted by colleague Hartmann), it was, among other things, because I know

  from experience that such discussions, especially when only a brief fifteen minutes is allotted to

  them, are usually unproductive.

    1. I am completely mystified as to what motivated you, in a lecture plumbing the depths of

  individual psychology and touching on the problems of almost every aspect of our emotional

  life, to neglect the sexual phenomenon to the point of not even mentioning it, even though, in

  my opinion, the latter exerts at least as much influence over our emotional life as those elements

  which (in the adult) rightly play an important role (will to power, instinct of self-preservation).

Or am I to understand that the final case you mentioned—the girl who did not want to get

  married (I shall revert to this below)—contains the germ of an explanation, namely, that even

  sexuality is subject to the “will to power”? I shall further on elucidate the nature of the doubts—

  more than that, the reasoned objections—which make this explanation unacceptable to me.—

    2. I visualize the extent of the importance which you attribute to the will to power and its

  final directional goal for the emotional life of the individual and his position in the community; I

  acknowledge the struggle between it and the community of feelings innate to all of us, as it takes

  place in the adult at the height of his individual development; but I definitely feel that your  exposition  about  the first  beginnings,  the  most primitive  germinations  contains  certain

  ambiguities. I feel that the analysis of the emotional stirrings attending this will to power, their

  synthesis  into  a  virtually  tangible  form  of  the  mechanism  of  the  will—striving,  surpassing

  others,  extolling  one’s  own  personality  (ambition)—is  completely  successful.  But  your

  explanation of its autogenesis starts at a stage which surely cannot be the point of origin. For if

  this  will  to  power  originated  from  the  desire  to  become  like  the  father  (reinforced  by  the

  [inferiority] feeling that this cannot be done), the explanation would suffice if we did not have to

  ask ourselves: in what respect does the four-year-old boy want to become like his father? If he

  feels the stirrings of inferiority, this must have a cause—and what is it? However, our curiosity

  will  scarcely  be  satisfied  by  this  answer:  the  youngster  wants  to  become  an  engineer  or  a

  shoemaker like his father; he wants to build equally fine houses, etc., and since he cannot do

  this, his inferiority feelings awaken, and along with them the will to surpass his father. We can

  even occasionally observe that little boys show preference for games imitating the occupations

of adults, the closest model being the father. But we will have to say that this is not always the

  case, and if it does happen, it is frequently an imitation, free of envy, whose strongest motives

  must be sought in entirely different areas. We should even admit that nothing could be more

  alien to the child than the reality, burdened with worries and sorrow, which in the long run

  cannot be concealed from him, particularly if he is intelligent; that he will select from this

  reality only that which gives him the most pleasure—that is, only the marvelous freedom, the

    come-and-go-as-you-please, above all the freedom from the paternal whip that keeps coercing

  him back into the narrow circle he tries to break by every available means. And, here, alone, we

  would  find  the  relation  you  have  emphasized:  cause—effect,  pressure  by  the  father  (by  all

    education)—inferiority feeling (and the will to surpass the father, i.e., to overcome him, to be

  free of him).

    But when we pursue our investigations, we soon come upon the inexorable truth that the

  final meaning of our sexual life is invariably the ultimate and highest pleasure, and that in

  children we find pleasure-directed actions which in adults are known as perversions; that, for

  example,  we  cannot  describe  the  child’s  unquestionably  pleasurable  voyeurism  and

  exhibitionism as anything but sexual (we have no reasonable grounds for not doing so); that,

  furthermore, since the child subscribes to the pleasure principle, it frequently takes great efforts

to bring him back to the reality function inhibiting his need for pleasure, but that the sexual

  instincts belong to the former and the ego instincts to the latter principle; and that in the final

  analysis and primarily (I am not claiming, exclusively) the inferiority feeling has its origin in

  the sexual (pleasure) intimidation by the father, which is needed for the gradual integration of

  the child into cultural community life. —Now if one infantile root of the will to power might be

  found in the inferiority feeling caused by sexual intimidation—(to avoid any misunderstandings

  ab ovo, let me emphasize that I would never think of shifting this source of the will to power to

  the adult personality)—then I would like to mention another which was omitted in your lecture:

  sadism. I would like to point to the enormously conspicuous circumstance that persons with a

  particularly highly developed will to power also show a distinctly sadistic character trait. Sadism

is an indispensable tool of the will to power: in striving for his stated goal, the individual is not  merely content with overtaking and surpassing his fellow beings, but he also endeavors to push

  them back and inflict harm; he is like a runner who will trip up his rivals to secure his own

  victory. But that sadism has a sexual origin can scarcely be refuted in the face of sadistic

  perversion. Here I would like to remark that one of the most important mechanisms in the

  individual’s development seems to me that process in which certain sexual impulses—mostly

  those which in their extreme forms constitute the momentum movens for the corresponding

  perversions—are  shifted  from  the  sexual  constitution  into  the  ego  constitution  (Freud:

  sublimation), where they find their gratification in forms which do justice to the ego without

  clashing with the demands of culture. Time and again we simultaneously find splinter products

of these sublimated drives in the sexual constitution as, for example, in the sadistic trait of the

  male’s  sexual  wooing.  The  impulse  to  usurp  (?)  with  its  more  physical  potentiality  for

  gratification; its psychic correlate, the drive for knowledge (it is an established fact that the

  child’s curiosity is primarily directed toward the mysterious, which is largely the sexual), major

  facets of the voyeuristic impulse, among others, gradually, with advancing development, are put

  into the service of the ego, and just here lie most of the guarantees against psychic illness in the

  individual.

    If I finally add that, in my opinion, the “inferiority feeling” appears to be identical with the

  concept of the “castration complex” of Freud’s school, only modified in that it is shifted to the

  ego constitution; if I further find that your explanation for case II (young man, second-eldest

  son, God-fearing, etc.) completely coincides with the psychoanalytic view on the regression of

  compulsion neurotics into the (anal-) sadistic phase, I am doing it in order to ask you to uncover

  any possible error in this view; the same goes for my perhaps erroneous assumption that you

  have  isolated  the one  aspect  of  infantile  development,  namely,  sexual  intimidation  (see

  castration complex), and have elaborated it far beyond general doctrines, assigning it in later life

as “inferiority feeling” to the ego constitution as the foundation stone of ego psychology.—

    Hence my questions might be summarized as follows:

    a)  What  is  your  opinion  on  tracing  the  inferiority  feeling  back  to earlier  stages  of

  development?

    b) Is the inferiority feeling the expanded form of the castration complex, taken from the

  sexual constitution?

    c) Is there any connection at all?

    d) If not, then what is the first cause which generates the inferiority feeling?

    3. Case III: young girl, beauty; wants to get married but rejects all suitors.

    You explained that the girl did not want to get married because she refused to be oppressed

  and neglected like her mother had been. However, aside from a circumstance to be mentioned

  below, this contradicts the experience that can be observed hourly and daily: to wit, that the

  married state is the ideal for almost every woman unless she just has a masculine disposition;

  that every girl’s most ardent wish is to have a husband; that, in contradistinction to your view,

  the passive and subordinate are inherent in the nature of the female; that the inferiority feeling of

  the average woman—and she alone can be considered in this context—is rooted in the chains

  imposed on her in sexualibus by basic cultural morality. But it is far more logical to interpret the  traditional complaint of girls during puberty and later, “I’d give anything to be a boy!”, to mean:

    “Then I would have all the (sexual) freedom I want!”, rather than: “Then I could do great

  things!” —For the road to social achievement is wide open to modern girls and women, and still

  the wish to be a man persists; quite apart from the fact that the average middle-class girl wants

  anything but a profession, while the proletarian girl has to work anyway, and would still rather

be a man. Here the question arises as to why the absolutely and relatively greater inferiority

  feeling of the female sex does not produce, by way of overcompensation, a will to power far

  stronger than the man’s.… In explaining this case, you mentioned the father’s extraordinary

  love for his young daughter and later, it seemed to me, you did not refer to this very important

  circumstance again. Is it not likely, then, that the girl returned her father’s love, could not

  emancipate herself from him and rejected all suitors, regardless of her wish to get married,

  which even seems to have tormented her?

    Had she always articulated the conscious wish to be married? And how am I to interpret

  your explanation that she did not want to get married? The foundation for this diagnosis is

  lacking.

    You stated yourself that the patient suffered from sexual conflicts, but you continued to

  attribute the cause of her illness to the will to power. The only possible conclusion: sexuality is

  subordinated to the will to power; but sexuality is demonstrably subordinated to the sexual drive

  which strives solely for pleasure, and nothing else, and not for power.

    4. There is no question that a person who has set himself too high a goal owing to his

    overdeveloped will to power (case I), can be cured if he can be made to exchange it (which

  seldom works) for a deeper, more accessible goal (final cure). But cannot such an individual

  also be cured if the causes of his ambition which are rooted in earliest childhood are disclosed to

  him (causal cure)?

    I could add a few more comments, but this is probably more than enough and the other

  matters are of secondary importance.

                                                                  Very respectfully yours,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH,

                                                                      Student of Medicine

                                                                        IX Berggasse 7/16


 

                  3
  (Reich to Ferenczi)

                                                                Vienna, 11th February 1925

  My dear Doctor:

    Please accept my sincere apologies for taking up your valuable time with this letter, but the

  matter seems important enough to be submitted to you since you were a party to the conflict

  with Adler.
                      4
    With the Professor’s consent, I am currently working on a book on psychoanalytic therapy  and technique. It was originally intended for the Springer Verlag, but from the way it is shaping

  up it would be more suitable for a more restricted analytic circle. Now in casting the chapter on

  abbreviated methods (“active technique,” etc.) I read your paper “Elaboration of the Active

  Technique” and found the following passages which I had previously overlooked: “Adler said

  that  we  should  not  concern  ourselves  with  analyzing  the  libido  but  the  ‘nervous  character’

  instead.  My  current  propositions  show  certain  analogies  with  these  modifications,  but  the

  differences are many and conspicuous.” And further: “The character investigations are never in

  the foreground of our technique, neither do they play the same decisive role as they do with

  Adler, but they are applied only if certain abnormal traits of a psychotic coloration interfere with
                                  5
  the normal progress of the analysis.” Now I have made a special study of the psychoanalysis of

  the character, particularly in conjunction with “The Ego and the Id,” and have summarized the
                                                                                6
  partial results in a brief paper on the impulsive character which is soon to be published. But the

  principal  conclusion  of  this  research,  stimulated  by  “The  Ego  and  the  Id”  concerning  the

  character and its analysis, seems to me the, by now, generally accepted opinion that we are

  progressing  from  symptom  analysis  to  a  therapy  that  investigates  the  characterological

  foundations of the symptom neurosis; and that true and lasting cures can be achieved only if we

  succeed in modifying the neurotic character, which is the substructure of its symptomatology.

(In the ego: overcoming ambivalence and narcissism; in the sexual sphere: building up the

  “erotic  reality  sense,”  the  unambivalent,  heterosexual  genital  libido.)  The  difficulty  lies  in

  circumscribing  those  analytic  situations  which  do  not  belong  to  symptom  but  to  character

  analysis. We are, however, getting closer to Adler’s viewpoint, even if our character analysis

  differs substantially from his. It is only fair to admit this. This concession to Adler is sufficiently

  neutralized  if  we  spell  out  the  difference: not  libido but  character  analysis (Adler)  versus

  character analysis through analyzing the libido (Freud).—
                                                                          7
      Another difficulty is found in the addendum (1923) to the complete edition, Vol. VIII, p.

  257 (Psychoanalysis of a phobia of a five-year-old boy). We read in the body of the text: “I

  cannot make up my mind whether to presuppose a separate aggressive instinct side by side with

  and equal to the sexual and the self-preservation instinct we know.” And now the addendum:

  “The  book  was  written  at  a  time  when  Adler  apparently  was  still  rooted  in  the  soil  of

  psychoanalysis … Since then I, too, have been led to determine an aggressive instinct which is

  not identical with Adler’s. I prefer to call it ‘destructive’ or death instinct…” Since “The Ego

  and the Id,” we can no longer doubt that sadism—the aggressive, destructive death instinct—

  stands as the equal of Eros, and we are learning to assess its importance, which differs from

  Adler’s  in  being  less  one-sided,  and  yet  somehow  resembling  it.  I  must  confess  that  the

  contradiction between text and addendum irritated me all the more as I felt that the Professor did

  not unequivocally resolve it; for what Adler at the time understood to be an aggressive instinct is

  the same that Freud calls destructive instinct. Freud’s concept means just that and even more,

  namely,  the  biological  basis  (death  instinct)  of  psychic  aggression.  If  the  tendency  toward

  independent systems had not interfered, Adler’s theory would have led directly to today’s results

  without underestimating the libido. Adler’s priority with respect to the core of his doctrine—and  only  the  core—should  be  acknowledged,  though  always  with  a  detailed  exposition  of  the

  differences. I think that such a stand would be the best defense against the Adlerian “aggressive

  drive against psychoanalysis.”

    Or am I wrong? Is our destructive instinct really so radically different from Adler’s? For

  years  I  have  thoroughly  studied  Adler  and  the  superficiality  of  his  doctrine  amid  long

  discussions. But now I cannot dismiss the impression that the Adler of today, at least in some

  respects, is the victim of an injustice committed earlier. He had made an important discovery,

  but, like Rank, inflated its importance and …


 

                8
  (Reich to Federn)

                                                                Vienna, February 12, 1926

  My dear Doctor:

    I  believe  my  attitude  in  the  outpatient  clinic  affair  has  shown  that  I  do  not  allow  my

  judgment of certain incidents to be obscured by petty personal feelings and that I know how to

  subordinate  such  matters  to  the  more  important  interests  of  the  Association  and  of  the

  psychoanalytic movement. I must explicitly emphasize this with regard to what follows below. I

  felt—at first intuitively and later upon mature consideration—that the elimination of one of the

  two  secretariat  positions  from  the  executive  committee  was  a  boycott  of  my  person  and  a

  completely undeserved wrong. Here are the basic facts:

    You will no doubt remember, my dear Doctor, that you personally advised me as early as the

  fall  of  1923,  when  the  executive  committee  met  for  reelection  (Dr.  Rank  was  then  acting

  chairman), that my election was being considered for the office of second secretary but did not

  materialize because one of the two secretaries was supposed to be a lay analyst (Dr. Bernfeld).

As far as I know, you did not find a vestige of frustrated ambition on my part. I accepted the

  arguments.

    On  the  occasion  of  the  last  election  of  secretaries,  after  you  became  acting  chairman

  following Rank’s resignation from the executive committee, you told me that I would have

  become  secretary,  along  with  Nunberg,  if  it  had  not  been  necessary  to  iron  out  certain

  differences with Jokl and to appoint him for political reasons. Nunberg was elected because he

  had seniority. (May I be permitted to remind you in this connection that I have seniority over

  Jokl.) I accepted these political arguments, too, even if I did not approve their specific political

  nature, and I, the “aggressive, paranoid and ambitious” type, forgot the whole affair without

  being in the least upset about it. It was only after the most recent decisions of the executive

  committee that both incidents assumed significance in my mind. Now the position of secretary

  was simply liquidated with the explanation that Bernfeld was the only one being considered ad

  personam. And what about the post of second secretary before Bernfeld’s elecion?

    Please believe me when I say that I thought of my automatic advancement to Bernfeld’s

  position (as secretary or librarian) for the first time when you spoke of the new election in the

  board meeting.    I had a twofold interest in being on the executive committee. The first was motivated by the

  understandable desire to see and listen to the Professor more frequently. Infantile, perhaps, but

  neither ambitious nor criminal. The second was purely factual: I feel that for several years I

  have presented important suggestions which actually should have originated with a member of

  the executive committee since they concerned organizational questions such as establishing,

  conducting  and  developing  the  technical  seminar  (the  chairmanship  of  which  I  have  never

  claimed); differentiating between two kinds of members, systematizing the clinic services and

  the employment of physicians. (My admission as acting chairman to the executive committee of

  the clinic—an admission I did not claim but which was promised to me—suffered the same fate,

for even flimsier reasons, as did my admission to the executive committee of the Association.

  Without bemoaning the former, I performed my duties in the outpatient clinic to the best of my

  ability and judgment, giving no cause for complaint, in spite of constant vexations.) Without my

  energetic  efforts  against  the  decision  of  the  Association,  the  important  question  of  the

  psychoanalytic specialist might not have been tackled for many years. My organizational work

in  the  Association,  combined  with  my  scientific  activity,  gave  me  the  feeling  of justified

  expectation. To my mind, the fact that this expectation was not fulfilled is significant in one

  respect only (although, judging by past experiences, I must assume that the motives of basest

  ambition will be imputed to me): What does this boycott mean? I am unable to determine who

  started it. I only see a collective action of the executive committee. In the interest of my position

in the Association it is my duty—for the present, to you alone—to list the reasons which I

  suspect are at the basis of this action.

    My activity—which, like all positive things, also has its negative aspects—has earned me

  the reputation of being aggressive. I share this fate with Tausk. I had to admit that for a while,

  stung by an irrelevant scientific opposition and by the general conditions in the Association, I

  did not exercise sufficient restraint, a fact which I regretted very, very much, and, on realizing it,

I changed my conduct immediately. However, I may safely say that, no matter in what defensive

  position I found myself, I never insulted a colleague or otherwise hurt his feelings. Should this

  nevertheless have happened, I am ready to make any amends that are asked for. I never intended

  any personal offense but always objectively said what I was convinced I was justified in saying

  —without false consideration, however, for age or position of the criticized party. I have always

  welcomed objective criticism. On the other hand, I have had to put up with many things that

  would have prompted any one among you to insist on an arbitration procedure, and yet I did not

  react personally (coram publico  or  in  private)  or  aggressively.  That  my  objective  criticism

  became stricter still is something I cannot be blamed for. May I recall the personal insults of Dr.

  Hitschmann, Drs. Nunberg and Hoffer; also, the irrelevant personal criticism of my lectures by

  Dr. Reik (“The paper is good, but I would not like to have written it”). I will not even mention

  all the needling—so intangible, without being the less hurtful—that I cannot itemize without

  making a fool of myself.

    Also, please do not ask me for details about colleagues (there is only one among them who is

  younger than I am) who are apparently well-intentioned toward me. Unless it can be proved that

I made gross or numerous serious errors which would explain the attitude of many members  and, by extension, the attitude of the executive committee, then only one explanation suggests

  itself:  our  Association  is  suffering  from  intramural  envy.  A  paralyzing  skepticism  prevails;

  almost no one takes an active interest in the outpatient clinic, and anyone who wants to bring

  clarity to the controversial question of analytic therapy and refuses to become stifled in his

  interest in psychoanalysis as a science and movement is looked upon with a jaundiced eye.

    A conversation with Professor Freud about analytic therapy convinced me that an infinite

  number of opinions, circulated as belonging to the Professor (e.g., on passivity), are either

  falsely attributed to him or, if he voiced them at all, have been misunderstood. Whence stems

  this shyness to discuss our therapy which is so dangerous for psychoanalysis as well as for the

  individual analysts? The idiotic rationalization is: the Professor does not think much of therapy.

  And yet, it is nothing but one’s own inner insecurity and lack of sincerity which take cover

  behind Freud. I am not an optimist, as people keep telling me over and over. I am merely

  seeking the truth about our achievements, and for this purpose, confident of analytic honesty, I

  created  the  technical  seminar.  I  have  worked  for  many  years  to  obtain  insight  into  the

  circumstances of successful and unsucessful analyses. I interpret it as a symptom, and blame

  everyone who takes this personally, for letting me be the only one in the seminar, in courses and

in publications who has reported on failures and tried to clarify these in common discussion.

  Most of the Viennese analysts report either on the theory of the case alone or on successful

  cases only.

    So  this  is  the  crime  that  makes  me  unpopular:  I  criticized  the  ostrich  attitude  as  being

  unanalytic; I publicly maintained that an analyst is duty-bound to discharge a patient when he

  has lost the thread of the analysis and is unable to find it again; he must deal with the therapeutic

  theory of each case and he must study the criteria for prognosis.

    I have repeatedly asked for cooperation, and have met either with blind criticism or scorn for

  my efforts.

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 

                9
  (Reich to Freud)

                                                                                Vienna I

                                                                            Neutorgasse 8

                                                                            April 18, 1928

  My dear Professor:

    I am writing you, in your capacity as chairman of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Association, to

  complain about Dr. Paul Federn, acting chairman of the meetings.

    In yesterday’s meeting I lectured on “A Problem of Psychoanalytic Technique,” reporting on

  the technique of dealing with narcissistic defense. Last summer, I was criticized for giving my

  technical lectures at the Seminar and not at the Association. In yesterday’s lecture, I wished to

  present  to  the  Association  one  of  the  problems  which  has  been  discussed  for  years  at  the  Seminar, in order to elucidate the differences of opinion prevailing in the Seminar. To my

  greatest astonishment, Dr. Federn declared that what I had presented was so commonplace that

it did not belong in the Association. This may be true or not; but I must protest against Dr.

  Federn’s hateful, high-handed tone, and against the fact that he paralyzed the discussion by

  proposing  that  the  points  of  contention  should  not  be  debated,  which,  in  view  of  the

  Association’s general apathy for debate, was quite enough. This unprofessional attitude of a

  chairman cannot, and must not, be tolerated.

    It is not only my own feeling but the conviction of almost all analysts, particularly the

  younger ones, that Dr. Federn inhibits all constructive work by his inconsistency, his inability to

  conduct  a  discussion,  and  especially  by  his  embarrassing  manner  of  belittling  everything  a

  younger analyst may say; he is not only hampering the development of the Vienna Association

  but, worse, contributing to its deterioration. Dr. Sterba and Dr. Bibring, who, at my suggestion,

  were to present to the Association surveys on technique and therapy developed at the Seminar,

  have  refused  to  do  so  because  they  do  not  want  to  expose  themselves  to  Dr.  Federn’s

  supercilious  condescension.  If  Dr.  Federn  complained  last  year  that  the  Seminar  draws  off

  lectures  from  the  Association,  then  he  should  not  now  brush  aside  everything  the  younger

  analysts have to say; even if their knowledge is rather basic, they still struggle to acquire it on

  their own because it is generally held that Dr. Federn’s technical course was inadequate and did

  not offer what he calls “commonplace.” The younger analysts dare not complain because they

  fear  for  their  future.  Conditions  in  the  Association  are  utterly  depressing.  In  view  of  my

  allegiance to the Association, my interest in the development of analysis which, in spite of the

  persistently hostile attitude of the public at large, is becoming socially acceptable, and because

of the internal state of affairs, I am forced to bring this matter out into the open. I feel that, in

  this instance, personal considerations would only harm the work. Given these circumstances,

  active colleagues within the Association are bound to lose all pleasure in the scientific work.

                                                                          Devotedly yours,

                                                                        (signed) DR. REICH


 


To the

  Publishers and Editors of the

  International Journal for Psychoanalysis

  Vienna
                                                                                      10
                                                                                  (n.d.)

    As publisher of the I.Z.f.Ps., Professor Freud has found it necessary to add the following
          11
  comment to my paper, “The Masochistic Character”:

    “Special circumstances have caused the publisher to direct the reader’s attention to a point

  that is usually taken for granted. Within the framework of psychoanalysis this journal gives

  every author who submits a paper for publication full freedom of opinion, and in turn does not  assume any responsibility for these opinions. In the case of Dr. Reich, however, the reader

  should be informed that the author is a member of the Bolshevist party. Now it is known that

  Bolshevism  sets  similar  limits  to  scientific  research  as  does  a  church  organization.  Party
                                                                                    12
  obedience demands that everything contradicting the premises of its own dogma be rejected. It

is up to the reader of this article to clear the author of such suspicions; the publisher would have

  made the same comment if he had been presented with a work of a member of the S.J. [Jesuits]”

    The covering letter to the publisher emphasized that the paper could not appear if I did not
                              13
  consent to the above comment. In principle, I would like to state the following in reference to

  this measure taken by Professor Freud:

    1) My criticism of the doctrine of the death instinct and repetition compulsion has nothing

  whatever to do with the Communist Party. Until January 4 of this year, the Party leadership was

  unaware that I was critical of the recent theoretical structures in psychoanalysis. At my specific

  request, they informed me that they assumed no responsibility for my scientific struggle within

  the Association, and that such polemics would be entirely at my own risk.

    2) This refutes the publisher’s assertion that “Bolshevism sets similar limits to the freedom

of  scientific  research  as  does  a  church  organization.”  The  untenability  of  this  assertion,

  unsupported by any factual knowledge, becomes unequivocally clear from the following: When

I  moved  to  Berlin,  I  was  asked  by  the  directors  of  the  Marxist  Workers’  School  of  the

  Communist Party of Germany to give courses on psychoanalysis and Marxism. Up to now I

  have been able to do this without restrictions. The Central Committee of the Youth Association

of Germany asked me to write a booklet, and accepted the manuscript, whose medical section

  was based on analytic investigation and experience. In the proletarian organizations and student

  groups I repeatedly discussed the still highly controversial question of the relationship between

  psychoanalysis and Marxism. The official training course of the Party for lecturers on sexual

  orientation and politics is based on the analytic libido theory. So much for the dictatorship

  limiting the freedom of research.

    At the same time I was requested by Dr. Eitingon not to bring up any sociological subjects in

  the Association. My transfer to the Berlin local group was arranged by secret ballot, with two

  negative votes. So much for the liberal freedom of research.

    3) I reject the accusation that I am under any political coercion in my scientific work. The

  paper  “The  Masochistic  Character”  is  basically  an  analytic  critique  which  is  not  one  step

  removed  from  analytic  empiricism.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  things  that  the  direction  of  my

  psychoanalytic research, which is consistent with the basic elements of analytic doctrine and

  carries them further, should have political consequences, and the recently developed instinctual

  theories are intended to avoid these consequences. For the record let me note that I criticized the

  doctrine of the death instinct at a time when I knew nothing about Marxism except that it existed

  (see discussion with Alexander, written down in 1926). It was not Marxism that caused me to

  criticize the empirically unproven hypotheses leading to horrendous conclusions (death instinct

  and repetition compulsion), but it was analytic empiricism that brought me to Marxism. After

  all,  aside  from  individual  psychological  motives,  the  question  why  psychoanalysis  deviated  from its initial clear biological path could essentially be explained in sociological terms alone.

    4) The proof that the controversy about the death instinct is waged by my opponents—

  perhaps subconsciously—on a philosophical-political level is found in the fact that neither the

  work of Kolnai nor that of Pfister, Laforque or Daly has ever appeared with a comment by the

  publishers or editors; yet my own paper reflected an empirical-analytic approach, while the

  others presented philosophical hypotheses of a transparently bourgeois-reactionary kind. In spite

of  this,  I  do  not  deny  that  today,  influenced  by  my  Marxist  philosophy,  I  am  trying  to

  comprehend psychoanalysis in the context of the total sociological picture.

    5) In the past years, Professor Freud has never expressed an opinion on the accuracy or

  inaccuracy of my analytic theories. Neither has he explained just why he feels that my criticism

of the doctrine of the death instinct is factually wrong.

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Reich to Max Eitingon)

                                                                  Berlin, October 14, 1932

To the Executive Committee of the

  German Psychoanalytic Association

  Attn: Dr. Eitingon

  Berlin

  My dear Doctor:

    In our conversation of October 6th, you asked me not to admit any candidates in the first

  training stages to the unofficial technical seminar I am conducting, and to limit attendance to

  those analysts who at least are guests of the Association. You justified this demand by stating

  that I differ with Prof. Freud on the death instinct theory, which, judging by the latest decisions,

  has  become  an  integral  part  of  psychoanalytic  theory.  You  left  it  to  me  to  find  a  way  of

  excluding such candidates and non-guests of the Association. I have not been able to follow

  through with your request. Since you officially opposed my election for membership to the

  educational  committee  at  the  business  meeting,  basing  your  stand  on  my  deviations  from

  Freudian  theory,  I  would  ask  you  to  bring  your  official  influence  to  bear  in  barring  such

  candidates and analysts. I can do nothing in the matter because I do not share your views but

  continue to maintain that I am the exponent of the true and consistent therapeutic technique and

  theory  which  is  in  complete  agreement  with  clinical  analytic  work,  and  I  certainly  do  not

  advocate any deviations that are more dangerous than those that can be discerned in any other

  analyst.

                                                                    Very sincerely yours,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


   (Reich to publishers of I.P.A.)

                                                                      Dr. Wilhelm Reich

                                                                      temporarily, Vienna I

                                                                          Barawitzkagasse 6

                                                                  Vienna, March 17, 1933

To the

  Editorial Management and Advisory Board of the

  International Psychoanalytic Publishers

  Vienna I


 


    Yesterday Dr. Freud, the editorial director, advised me that, following a decision of the

  advisory board and the publishers, the contract for my book “Character Analysis,” scheduled for

  early publication, has been cancelled. The decision was based on current political conditions

  which make it seem inappropriate to publicize my already compromised name officially. I am

  disregarding my rights as a registered and active member of the IPV; I can even appreciate the

  precautionary measures of the board and the publishers, although, as a working scholar, I cannot

  approve of them. Beyond this, however, I feel obligated, in the name of the psychoanalytic

  movement, or at least a part of it, to call attention to the illusions apparently harbored by the

  editors and the publishers.

    1.  For  a  long  time,  political  reaction  has  identified  psychoanalysis  with

  Kulturbolschewismus,  and  rightly  so.  The  discoveries  of  psychoanalysis  are  diametrically

  opposed  to  the  nationalistic  ideology  and  threaten  its  existence.  It  makes  absolutely  no

  difference whether the representatives of psychoanalysis resort to one precautionary measure or

  another,  whether  they  withdraw  from  scientific  work,  or  whether  they  adapt  it  to  present

  conditions.  The  sociological  and  cultural-political  character  of  psychoanalysis  cannot  be

  eliminated from this world by any measure whatsoever. The nature of its discoveries (infantile

  sexuality,  sexual  repression,  sexuality  and  religion)  makes  it  the  arch-enemy  of  political

  reaction. One may hide behind such illusory beliefs as a “nonpolitical” science: this will only

  harm scientific research, but will never prevent the ruling powers from sensing the dangers

  where indeed they are, and fighting them accordingly. (For example, the burning of Freud’s

  books.)

    2.  Since  psychoanalysis,  in  the  unanimous  opinion  of  its  exponents,  has  a  cultural  and

  political significance beyond its medical goals and will play a decisive role in the forthcoming

  struggle for a new social order, but will certainly not side with political reaction, any attempt at

  adapting or camouflaging the movement’s essential meaning is a senseless self-sacrifice. All the

  more  so  as  a  substantial  group  of  analysts  is  determined  to  continue  the  cultural-political

  struggle. The existence of this group, regardless of its position inside or outside the IPV, is

  politically compromising even if its principal spokesmen should be physically destroyed. I see

  no possibility for the leaders of the IPV to disavow this group since it is rooted completely, andin  contradistinction  to  other  groups,  in  the  soil  of  psychoanalytic  discoveries  with  all  their

  implications.

    3. No matter how difficult and complicated the relationship between psychoanalysis and the

  revolutionary workers’ movement; no matter how uncertain the final outcome of the conflict

  between psychoanalysis and Marxism—no one can shake the objective truth that analytic theory

is revolutionary and therefore committed to the workers’ movement, independently of individual

  member  attitudes.  Therefore,  I  feel  that  today’s  most  important  task  is  not  to  secure  the

  existence of the analysts at any price, but the continued development of psychoanalysis itself.

  This first of all calls for discarding any illusions and for realizing that the so-called treasures of

  culture have only one administrator: the working class and its allied intelligentsia which is now

  paying a heavy price in blood in the German Reich. Hitler’s rule does not spell the end of the

  historical process. If ever the historical raison d’être of psychoanalysis and its sociological

  function was needed, the current phase of historical development must prove it.

                                                                        Very truly yours,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Reich to Anna Freud)

                                                                            April 11, 1933

  My dear Miss Freud:

    Yesterday I wrote you an official letter requesting the executive committee of the IPV to

  take a stand on my move to Copenhagen as a training and control analyst. Now you may be

  surprised to receive a personal letter on the same subject. But since the personal intrigues of

  some colleagues have gone beyond certain limits and impede any objective settlement of the

  matter, I am taking the liberty of turning to you, particularly as I do not know at this moment

  how to counter these machinations.

    When they learned that I was going to Copenhagen, two Danish students wanted to study

  with me. They discussed this with several Viennese analysts. One of these analysts discouraged

  them because a training course with me allegedly would not be recognized. This man knew

  more than I did. Another promised the bewildered Danes to consult local training analysysts,

  and came back with the information that a training analysis with me was not advisable because

  the Danes were Marxists, and since I, too, was a Marxist, “the danger of identification” would

be “too great.” This came as quite a surprise to me, for up to now it seemed virtually taken for

  granted that theologians were sent to Pfister, moral philosophers to Mueller-Braunschweig, and
                                                                      14
  reconstructed socialists to Bernfeld. Only in my case this Gleichschaltung, to use the latest

  [Nazi] term, does not seem to apply. I am powerless against such methods, which I hesitate to

  describe more succinctly; neither do I fear them. So far I have always tried to ignore them,

  preferring to get to work and settling any pending conflicts in a reasonable spirit through official

  channels. Since I do not want to resort to the same methods at any price nor provoke a scandal, I  must have an even greater concern for the official stand of the IPV, so that everyone, including

  my “sympathizers,” will know what is what. In your capacity as secretary of the IPV, you are

  qualified,  as  well  as  undoubtedly  interested,  in  clarifying  matters,  if  only  because  this

  scandalous situation cannot be kept secret for long. While I can keep quiet, I cannot prevent the

  Danes from spreading the news all around. I can only assure you that this affair will cause quite

a commotion in Denmark and Sweden.

    I again appeal to you personally to intervene and speed up the official response. I have to

  know whether or not the analyses conducted by myself and my friends in Copenhagen will be

  recognized by the IPV. Since a number of Berlin analysts will probably also settle in the North,

I am responsible not only to them but also to those who will study with us.

    I do not know if you realize that Dr. Harnik is going to Copenhagen as a training analyst,

  with the explicit consent of Dr. Eitingon. Dr. Harnik’s psychotic illness makes such a move

  seem extremely questionable. I refrain from describing the serious complications that are bound

to arise when his psychosis breaks out in the North. It obviously will not help the cause of

  analysis. In any event, Dr. Eitingon bears a heavy responsibility for placing Dr. Harnik in such

an exposed position.

                                                                        Respectfully yours,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Reich to Federn)

                                                                    Vienna, April 18, 1933

  My dear Doctor:

      About six days ago, in your capacity as acting chairman of the Psychoanalytic Association

  and in the name of several colleagues, you demanded that I give up public lectures in socialist

  and communist working-class circles. You based this request on the prevailing political climate

  and on the danger which threatens psychoanalysis from political reaction. At that time I told you

  that I could not give you such an explicit promise but that, if I received a lecture invitation from

  any organization, I would be ready to get in touch with you before I accepted; furthermore, I

  said  that  I  planned  to  stay  in  Vienna  only  for  another  ten  or  fourteen  days  and  that  the

  probability of my speaking in public during that time was negligible. I also pointed out that the

  avoidance of public talks, for the reasons you stated, could only foster an illusion since the

  previous publications and the previous work—and especially the nature of psychoanalysis itself

  —can never be argued away when faced by political reaction. On April 16th, you informed me

  on  the  telephone  that  my  explanations  and  my  promise  to  communicate  with  you  in  each

  separate case were not sufficient, but that you had to insist on my guarantee not to give lectures.

I requested a written confirmation, whereupon you informed me that you were acting in behalf

of Prof. Freud. I repeated that I could not make this kind of commitment, whereupon you barred

  me from participating in the meetings of the Association. On April 17, 1933, I received the

  following letter from you: “In accordance with your wishes, I herewith repeat my earlier verbal  request  in  writing,  namely,  to  refrain  from  lecturing  or  debating  in  political  meetings—

  particularly communist ones—here in Austria. Since the Executive Committee cannot meet at

  the present time, I have taken this step on my own responsibility. You are free to appeal to the

  Committee. I request confirmation in writing.…” I also note that you told my wife on the

  telephone that, if you were in my position, you would have resigned from the Psychoanalytic

  Association long ago.

    Let me assure you, my dear Doctor, that I am at least as concerned about the fate of the

  psychoanalytic movement as you are, although I started out from a different premise and have

  reached a different stand. At this time, without wishing to go into the basic question of my

  membership, I would like to observe, however, that the basic principles involved here force me

to regard the steps you have taken up to now as private measures—a view to which I am fully

  entitled by virtue of the formal aspects of this matter. If my assurances do not satisfy you, it is

  within your province to bring about a decision of the entire executive committee or, for that

  matter, of the plenum; without such a decision I cannot feel in any way committed, and even

  then I would have to reserve the right for the final word about carrying on my work, which, as

  you should know, is not strictly political but deals with the theoretical and practical application

of psychoanalysis in the field of sociology. I fully appreciate the difficult position in which the

  official representatives of psychoanalysis find themselves now with regard to my person, but I

  am unable to do anything about it, because it is not rooted in my person but in the very nature of

  psychoanalytic research and activity. As a member of the IPV, permit me to repeat in writing

  that we should try to find a solution in common discussion. However, I must reject the manner

in which you have tried to solve the problem as being fruitless and merely complicating the

  issue.

                                                                        Yours very truly,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Reich to Anna Freud)

To the

  Secretariat of the IPV

                                                                    Vienna, April 22, 1933

  My dear Miss Freud:

    In order to avoid misunderstandings, I wish to go over the state of affairs in yesterday’s

  board  meeting  of  the  Vienna  Psychoanalytic  Association.  In  view  of  the  current  political

  situation, the board of the Association asked me to stop my political work and my sociological-

  scientific publications. It demanded an explicit promise, although I explained that circumstances

  would not permit me anyway to continue with this work as I had done before, thus meeting the

  wishes of the board halfway. I declared that I could not give such a promise. However, I did

  propose that I would suspend further publications for a year or two, on one condition: provided

  the IPV took an official stand on my work, to create a basis for deciding whether my work and  my theory of sex-economy could be reconciled with my membership or not. I have the greatest

  interest in eliminating two facts: first, the IPV’s strategy of “killing by silence” as hitherto

  applied  to  my  work,  and,  secondly,  the  resultant  attempts  to  give  me  the  cold  shoulder

  unofficially, quietly, as it were by indirection. Dr. Eitingon’s private stand on the question of my

  call to Copenhagen as a training analyst, of which I informed you; Dr. Federn’s private proposal

  that I should be induced to resign from the IPV; the private attempts by several analysts to,

  dispute  my  competence  to  train  analysts  and  to  disavow  my  purely  analytic  work—these

  represent inappropriate attempts to resolve a conflict which can only be clarified by an open,

  official  stand.  Yesterday  I  tried  to  show  where  the  difficulty  lies:  the  various  official

  functionaries of the IPV who are against me are hard put to prove that I have ceased to be a

  legitimate exponent of psychoanalysis and that my theories are outside the admissible scope of

  variations. On the other hand, the nature of my work has become uncomfortable. Although I

  fully understand the resultant tendency, namely, to resolve this without fuss, in the interest of

  this historically significant conflict within the psychonanalytic movement I cannot absolve the

  IPV from taking an official stand. I therefore declared last night that under no circumstances

  would I voluntarily resign from the IPV, no matter how great the humiliations and unofficial

  acts of injustice; not the least of my reasons is that I regard myself as one of the few truly

  legitimate exponents of psychoanalysis and am regarded as such by an important number of IPV

  members. Upon mature consideration, I find that there is no other solution except this: either the

  IPV will dissociate itself, factually and organizationally, from my concept that psychoanalysis is
                                      15
a basic element of Kulturbolschewismus and is combated as such by the political reaction, or

  else it will grant me the same freedom of research and work within the framework of the IPV

  that is granted, as a matter of course, to other trends.

    You will surely understand that before making any further decisions, I will have to await the

  IPV’s stand on Dr. Eitingon’s opinion, to the effect that not only my sociological but also my

  purely clinical-analytic teaching activity in Copenhagen should be prohibited.

    Looking forward to an early reply from the secretariat, I am,

                                                                    Very sincerely yours,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Reich to Rado)

                                                                            Webers Hotel

                                                                  Copenhagen, May 1, 1933

  Dr. S. Rado

  New York

  Dear Dr. Rado:

    You may be surprised to hear from me after such a long silence. However, I feel you’re

  among the few colleagues with good judgment, and since the present situation is so confused  and difficult that one has to keep a clear head to master it, I would like to have your opinion. To

  get  to  the  point:  as  you  can  well  imagine,  I  had  to  leave  Berlin,  giving  up  practically  all

  laboriously achieved previous positions, prospects, and hopes, to say nothing of material losses.

  Collapse on all fronts, disappointments in former bulwarks, as well as serious personal troubles,

  were unable to shatter my optimism, but man does not live by optimism alone. Right now I’m

  sitting here in Copenhagen (because in Austria there will soon be the same conditions as in

  Germany), and I even have excellent possibilities for earning my living, better than elsewhere.

  But, wild as I am, I’m determined to get back into an atmosphere where I can be not just a well-

  behaved analyst and “leader” of a new psychoanalytic group, but where I can continue with the

  sociological and cultural-political aspects of my work. For this, Copenhagen is too narrow,

  remote and small. I plan to stay here for about a year, but would like to start looking around to

  see  if  I  might  go  to  America.  Naturally,  here,  too,  I  would  have  to  make  a  living  as  a

  psychoanalyst. Considering the prevailing conflicts, the question is whether or not the New

  York  group  would  allow  me  to  stay  alive.  Please  don’t  diagnose  paranoia!  Actually,  some

  shocking things have happened, and you’re familiar with some. I have the misfortune to be an

  extremely orthodox analyst and a Marxist all in one, which in our present world has produced

  some very unpleasant truths. Therefore Eitingon has decreed that I have no right to train analysts

in  Copenhagen.  (Harnik,  however,  has  been  officially  authorized,  which  is  a  calamity  for

  psychoanalysis in Scandinavia.) Sweden declares that I cannot go there under any circumstances

  because I am a Communist. Federn has requested my resignation from the IPV. Anna Freud had

a third party ask me to stop my publications and lectures. I could not make such a promise, but

  even  assuring  her  that  conditions  per  se  would  hinder  me  for  some  time  to  come  was  not

  satisfactory enough.

    Hence, could you investigate and let me know how the Americans feel about me? And if I

  could eventually get a purely formal invitation from overseas for visa purposes?

    I would also be grateful if, in your capacity as secretary of the IUK of the IPV, you would

  take  a  stand  on  my  teaching  activity  in  Copenhagen  by  writing  officially  to  Berlin  to  the

  Educational Committee. The passage from Eitingon’s letter reads:

    “I was interested in reading what you write about yourself and your plans, and must state the

  following:  from  the  attitude  of  the  overwhelming  majority  of  the  Educational  Committee

  members of the German Psychoanalytic Association toward you, it should be obvious that we

  cannot authorize you to teach. (The truth is that the majority of the members are for me. W.R.)

  Also, in my capacity as chairman of the IUK, I must call your explicit attention to the fact that

  the persons you have called upon to establish a psychoanalytic institute are doing so at their own

  risk  and  must  realize  that  the  recognition  of  such  an  institute  by  the  IPV  might  encounter

  difficulties.”

    That’s clear enough!

    How are you and your wife?

    With kindest regards to you and your family,

                                                                                  Yours,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH 


  (Eitingon to Reich)

                            GERMAN PSYCHOANALYTIC ASSOCIATION

                                                                      Berlin, May 19, 1933

  My dear Colleague:

    In reply to your letter to the educational committee of our Psychoanalytic Association, I

  wish to inform you of the following:

    In general, applications of candidates for membership in our Association are recognized

  provided the training analyses have been conducted by older members of the Association and

  the judgment of the training analyst agrees with that of the control analyst—both functions

  cannot  be  held  by  the  same  person—and  provided  the  plenary  session  of  the  Association,

  following the candidate’s lecture, has become convinced of his qualifications.

    In  cases  like  yours,  where  there  are  differences  between  an  older  member  and  the

  educational  committee  of  the  Association  about  scientific-theoretical  and  practical-technical

  problems of psychoanalysis, there is of course a stronger emphasis on the opinion of the control

  analyst and the plenary session of the Association in considering admission to membership.

                                                                              Yours truly,

                                                                      (signed) M. EITINGON


 


  (Reich to the German Psychoanalytic Association)

                                                                Copenhagen, May 30, 1933

To the Executive Committee of the

  German Psychoanalytic Association

  Berlin

    Dr.  Eitingon’s  letter  of  May  19th,  written  in  the  name  of  the  German  Psychoanalytic

  Association, not only contained information that surprised me but also confused a situation

  which, in the interests of all concerned, would require the earliest possible clarification. First of

  all, it is asserted that there are scientific and technical differences between me and the Executive

  Committee. Surely such differences would have become apparent in the many lectures and

  seminars I have given over the years under the auspices of the Association. I was convinced of

  the contrary because several members of the Educational Committee—such as Dr. Simmel, Dr.

  Boehm, Dr. Fenichel, Dr. Mueller-Braunschweig—repeatedly declared that my theoretical and

  technical concepts were completely in line with legitimate psychoanalysis. Only Dr. Eitingon

  argued against me, whereupon, as the minutes must show, his criticism was refuted by several

  speakers during the discussion. Therefore I find it incomprehensible how such an assertion as

  the one mentioned above ever could have been made. For this reason I very much hope that the

  Executive Committee of the group I belong to will take the occasion of my forthcoming book,                    16
  “Character Analysis,” either to dissociate itself from my work or to confirm its basic analytic

  validity. Surely you will understand that I cannot permit differences in philosophical outlook to

be  shifted  to  another  field  and  that  I  would  like  to  claim  the  same  rights  with  regard  to

  philosophical concepts that are unreservedly granted to other colleagues.

    As to the factual side of my pedagogic authority, I wish to remind you that for more than a

  decade I have conducted training and control analyses; furthermore, for six years, as head of the

  Vienna technical seminar, I have held the same concepts that I hold today, and yet the question

of limiting my authority to teach never came up. The remedy for this situation as proposed in the

  letter of the Executive Committee—namely, to submit my students to stricter control—signifies

in effect not only a vote of no confidence and a curtailment of my work as an analyst: it is also

  otherwise highly arguable. Up to now I have taken it for granted that I would control and judge

  any candidates analyzed by my colleagues not as a matter of form or out of regard for the person

of the analyst but solely on the basis of their ability. I have always expected the same from any

  colleagues who would carry on the further training of my analysands. Your letter, however,

  clearly shows that my natural assumption was an illusion and that personal, and not factual,

  considerations decide the issue. As a training analyst, I was fully conversant with the basic

  tenets of the bylaws, and their repetition failed to answer the question I posed in my letter to the

  Executive Committee.…

    As a member of the German Psychoanalytic Association, I would request the Executive

  Committee to explain the scientific and technical differences it has hinted at (my own concepts

  can always be checked in my publications) and then come to a clear-cut decision. I wish to

  assure you that I do not want to cause unnecessary difficulties; on the contrary, I wish to help

  eliminate those that now exist; furthermore, I am prepared to settle all questions in a friendly

  way and with the necessary analytic frankness. However, because I have no talent for it, I am

  incapable of responding in kind to tactics designed to obscure the facts—tactics which, judging

  by all that has transpired up to now, are apparently aimed at cold-shouldering me.

                                                                        Very truly yours,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Erik Carstens to Freud)

                                                                      10 November 1933

                            DANISH PSYCHOANALYTIC ASSOCIATION

                              Holbersgade 26 — Copenhagen K

  My dear Professor:

    The Danish Psychoanalytic Association has asked me to write you as follows:

    We are turning to you, the founder of psychoanalytic science, to help us in our difficulties.

    Our  efforts  in  behalf  of  psychoanalysis  are  threatened  from  two  sides—by  the  Danish

  authorities and the “wild” analysts.      Without  motivation,  our  Minister  of  Justice  has  rejected  our  petition  for  residence  and

  working permit for Dr. Reich, who is our training analyst and scientific director. We replied by

  inviting  the  public  to  a  lecture,  where  Reich,  Neergaard  and  I  discussed  the  “Struggle  for

    Psychoanalysis.” The evening was a success, about 600 people attended, the press gave us good

  coverage, and a group of physicians decided to send a new petition to the Minister of Justice.

  We have written to Dr. E. Jones, asking him for his expert opinion on the need of authorized

  training for psychoanalysts, for submission to the Danish authorities.

    The next attack on psychoanalysis happened a few days ago: the Attorney General is suing

  the editor of a journal for publishing an article by Dr. Reich on sexual education which he

  considers pornographic. This article is a translation of Reich’s paper published in 1928 in the
                                    17
  Journal for Psychoanalytic Pedagogy.

    We are determined to continue the struggle for authorized psychoanalytic training, but are

  further handicapped by the activities of wild analysts. One of them, Sigurd Naesgaard, Ph.D.,

  who has never been analyzed, has battled for years against the training analysis. He asserts that

  the training analysis is only a means of power. Publicly, he describes himself as your student,

  but his publications contain such a mixture of opinions by Stekel, Adler, Jung and yourself that

  no one can quite unravel who said what. He has asked many persons to practice psychoanalysis

  without previous training. Several have followed his suggestion. Recently he founded, together

  with Strömme (Oslo) and Bjerre (Stockholm) a Scandinavian Psychotherapeutic Association for

  the purpose of establishing psychotherapeutic training institutes. In the program brochure, the

  training analysis is not even mentioned.

    I am writing in such detail about Dr. Naesgaard because I know that you have corresponded

  with him and because I must assume that, living as far away as you do, you are not fully

  informed about him. A friend of mine who knows Naesgaard quite well recently told me that

  Naesgaard showed him a letter from you, in which you mentioned Harnik and Reich. You

  apparently wrote about Harnik that you had known for years that he was manic-paranoid. As to

  your comment on Reich, my friend had promised to keep silent.

    You will scarcely be able to judge from such a distance how much Harnik has damaged the

  psychoanalytic movement here. My letter would be very long indeed if I were to elaborate on

  this. Let me just say this: people in Copenhagen were greatly surprised, and still are, that a man

in  his  condition  was  a  member  of  the  teaching  committee  of  the  German  Psychoanalytic

  Association, that he was given the difficult assignment to teach psychoanalysis in Denmark, and

  that he was an authorized analyst at all.

    In contrast to Harnik, Dr. Reich has rendered us such valuable practical assistance as a

  training analyst and director of our technical seminar during his brief residence that we wish to

  keep him at all costs. His departure would not only disrupt our training program but would also

  cause great personal harm since our training analyses would suddenly stop. Most of us are

  prevented by external circumstances from following him abroad. But for several analysands

  with  strong  transference  feelings  such  a  break  would  be  just  as  harmful  as  an  interrupted

  operation would be for a patient whose doctor leaves him in the middle of surgery.

      Therefore, we would appreciate your helping us in this trying situation by sending us your  expert opinion on these two questions:

    1) Is a training analysis mandatory for those who wish to practice psychoanalysis?

    2) Is Reich’s article “Where Does Nudist Education Lead To?” (Journal for ps. Pedagogy,

  1928) pornographic?

    We further would ask your permission to forward your opinions to the Danish authorities

  and also—if we consider it appropriate, to publish them in Denmark. Please allow us to observe

  that we are in urgent need of this testimony and shall be most grateful to have it.

                                                                  Very respectfully yours,

                                                                  (signed) ERIK CARSTENS

 

    [Freud’s reply, dated November 12, 1933, acknowledged Reich’s stature as an analyst, but

  criticized  his  political  ideology,  which  he  felt  interfered  with  his  scientific  work.  Carsten’s

  appeal for help was rejected.]


 


  (Reich to Fenichel)

                                                                  Malmo, March 26, 1934

To Otto Fenichel

  For Dissemination to

  All Analysts in Sympathy with Marxism

  Oslo

  Dear Colleagues:

    Otto  Fenichel’s  report  on  conditions  in  the  IPV  is  extremely  disturbing  to  every

  psychoanalyst who is deeply concerned with psychoanalytic research, but to me it does not

  present anything substantially new. I feel that the catastrophic conditions prevailing in the whole

  world  have  merely  brought  to  a  head  longstanding  conditions  within  the  psychoanalytic

  movement itself—partly driven to the surface and visible to all, and partly sharpened to the

  point  of  absurdity,  as  in  the  political  switch-over  of  German  psychoanalysts  who  prior  to

  Hitler’s seizure of power were regarded as completely reliable. The ideological struggle within
                                    18
  psychoanalysis—science and Marxism versus mysticism and reaction—has been forming for

a  long  time,  having  been  fought  partly  underground  and  partly  in  opposition  to  my  own

  psychoanalytic and sociological work as far back as 1925. It is currently forcing a crisis in

  psychoanalytic research and the whole psychoanalytic movement which can, and will be, jointly

  determined by us and will press for a solution at the next Congress. Hence those who want to

  serve the cause should obtain complete clarity about the background of the conflict, its current

  structure and the probabilities of its future course.

    I wish to inform you that I am now preparing a presentation of the basic differences of

  opinion, together with their histories and consequences, which I shall be glad to submit for

  discussion as soon as I have completed it. This letter is not intended to clarify the problems but  merely to point up those issues which, in my opinion, will have to be placed in the foreground in

  the near future if we are to proceed correctly. Fenichel has done us a great service with his

  comprehensive  report.  But  beyond  this,  the  situation  requires  clarification  on  the  following

  points:

    1. In science, a political struggle usually does not present itself directly and thus is not easily

  recognizable, but is camouflaged as a difference of scientific theories. It requires considerable

  Marxist training to recognize whether such differences merely stem from factual confusion or

  whether,  regardless  of  the  facts,  they  arise  from  conflicting  political  ideologies.  I  do  not

  consider it very promising to wage a struggle within a scientific movement with weapons taken

  from the arsenal of party politics. I mean, it is not important to prove that one school of thought

is reactionary and the other revolutionary. What matters is not so much the private political

  conviction of the analyst; rather, it is important to show how the ideology of a scholar will

  influence  the  formation  of  his  theory  and  his  clinical,  therapeutic  work.  Any  critique  of

  psychoanalysis must grow from the subject matter itself; it must demonstrate from the raw

  material of research in which particular concepts the road forks off—to the right, or to the left.

  Therefore, dialectical-materialist criticism of the psychoanalytic movement can only be fruitful

if it proceeds from a specific standpoint it has already earned independently—in other words,

  from a theory. A concrete example: it is certainly characteristic that the attitude of the Paris

  group toward the German émigrés was reactionary. But what is decisive for the development of
                                                    19
  psychoanalysis is the fact not only that today Laforgue’s theories are published in preference

to authentic psychoanalytic works but that this distortion of psychoanalysis goes unopposed,

  even among analysts who have been the most dependable in the past. Therefore, whoever does

  not take an open stand against the wrong theories we criticize supports them, whether he likes to

or not, and runs the danger of slipping into the wrong path. For my part, since 1924, when I saw

  the beginnings of a schism in the formation of analytic theory, I have tried to gain a firm

  foothold for my criticism by the consistent development of the psychoanalytic libido theory. The

  attacks of the most prominent members of the Vienna association (Deutsch, Federn, Nunberg,

  etc.) on my orgasm theory were the first signs of the conflict between dialectical-materialist and

  bourgeois psychoanalysis at a time when neither side was aware of it. Even then Freud seemed

to  realize  the  depth  of  the  conflict.  He  once  said  to  me  after  a  lecture:  “Either  you  are

  completely wrong, or you will soon have to carry the heavy burden of psychoanalysis alone.” I

  knew I was not basically wrong, and today I know that the second part of Freud’s prediction has

  come true for me. So I already have my own theoretical platform on which to base my militant

  criticism. I suggest that you also find a theoretical position. Which brings me to the second

  point.

    2. I think that in Fenichel’s report I have lately detected a tendency that has always caused

  me great concern. I fully appreciate it, but for purely objective reasons I cannot agree with it.

  This tendency reads: “Wherever possible, Freud himself should be kept out of the conflict.” And

  this  is  precisely  what  cannot  be  done.  It  is  taken  for  granted  that  in  tone  and  attitude  our

  criticism of Freud will differ from our criticism of Roheim, but we cannot, and should not,

  exclude Freud from criticism. For we must note the following:                                  2021
    a. The scientific sins of Roheim, Laforgue, Jones, Klein, Deutsch, etc., are more or less

  rooted in Freud.

    b.  The  basic  debate  between  dialectical-materialist  and  bourgeois  psychoanalysts  will

  primarily have to prove where Freud the scientist came into conflict with Freud the bourgeois

  philosopher;  where  psychoanalytic  research  corrected  the  bourgeois  concept  of  culture  and

  where the bourgeois concept of culture hindered and confused scientific research and led it

  astray. “Freud against Freud” is the central theme of our criticism. Not for one moment should

we put our consideration for Freud before our consideration for the future of psychoanalysis.

  And from my personal relationship with Freud I have come to the conclusion that he would

  prefer it this way, all appearances to the contrary.

    3. I feel chiefly responsible for the conflict that has become so acute, for I was already in the

  midst of the dispute with Freud when even my best friends kept insisting that all would be well

“if only I were not so aggressive.” This personal comment is understandable; I do not wish to

  deny that my tactics were not always clever and that at one time I felt it was really important

  whether Deutsch was a good or a bad analyst. I first had to understand what was at stake when

  the analysts denied the role of genitality in the therapy of the neuroses, or the significance of

  negative  transference,  etc.  It  was  much  too  late  that  I  realized  we  were  separated  by  an

  ideological gulf. But I must also note that even in 1930, when I moved to Berlin, my reports on

  the concepts of the Vienna analysts were not given credence, that my dispute with Alexander in

  1927 about the need for punishment was considered exaggerated, that even today my fight

  against the death-instinct theory is not taken seriously enough, and that my economic concept of

  the neuroses is still regarded as Reich’s private whim. I do not mention this because I want to

  boast about being right. You may be sure that I have other matters to worry about, for instance:

  The awareness of differences within a movement is often useless if it arrives too late; we can

  never work hard enough to recognize and articulate these differences, which some day may

  acquire  great  significance,  and  to  understand  the  perspectives  of  the  development.  I  am

  convinced  that  in  the  none  too  distant  future  psychoanalysis  will  play  a  powerful  role  in

  resolving the battles of our century. This will require great responsibility, lack of illusions, hard,

    uncompromising  work,  the  clearest  scientific  perspective  and  the  ruthless  severing  of  all

  personal ties with those persons who have always given the impression that they would only

  stand in the way. If we do not admit our past mistakes, we will commit the same mistakes in the

  future—to the detriment of the cause. The present state of affairs would not have spread to such

an extent if Freud had not supported the reactionary trends and combated the Marxist trends. I

  wish to remind you of his steps concerning my paper “The Masochistic Character” in 1931, of

  Fenichel’s removal as editor of the Journal because he would not suppress the left, of his refusal

of organizational support in the Copenhagen, pornography affair, of the Naesgaard letter in

  which Freud said (incidentally, to a wild analyst) that my ideology interfered with my scientific

  work,  which  Naesgaard  circulated  all  over  Copenhagen,  and  of  many  other  big  and  small

  actions:  among  them  Freud’s  complete  silence  on  the  concepts  I  developed  about  anxiety,

  character, technique, orgasm theory, etc., all of which have become indispensable and are tacitly

  accepted by many but remain officially opposed. You must understand that I have to protect my  work,  not  because  I  have  taken  offense  but  because  I  believe  that  I  have  developed

  psychoanalysis along the most consistent scientific course. If people kill our work by silence—

  unless they just plagiarize and distort it, as Balint did at the last Congress—we must not only

  vigorously defend ourselves and even move to the attack, but we must have the courage of our

  own convictions. We must discard all false modesty and take the position that we are carrying

  on scientific—i.e., Marxist, dialectical-materialist—psychoanalysis, and that we are determined

to defend it even against Freud wherever he is inconsistent. You know by and large where the

  development of analytic theory has taken me: to the creation of a scientific sphere for which I

  have suggested the name of sex-economy and political psychology. Much as I regard myself as

a psychoanalyst in the truest sense, today I belong just as much to a new discipline which grew

  from  the  border  realm  between  Marxist  sociology  and  method  on  the  one  hand  and

  psychoanalytic clinical work and psychology on the other. Since my path has been consistently

  determined for a long time to come, but since very few sympathizing analysts share my basic

  views,  my  position  in  the  present  conflict  will  perhaps  be  somewhat  different.  However,  I

  believe that ways for common action can be found. My suggestions to Fenichel’s questions

  about the future attitude of the members of the IPV are briefly the following:

    1.  Not  only  independent  research,  but  also  sharp,  factual,  impersonal  criticism  of  our

  opponents.

    2. All convinced dialectical-materialist psychoanalysts should be merged into an opposing

  group within the IPV. Exclusion should be neither feared nor provoked. Young analysts and

  potential  sympathizers  should  be  won  over  by  specialized  scientific  work  and  irrefutable

  criticism. They should be grouped around the nucleus of the organization which in turn would

  give them scientific and organizational support.

    3. Training reform and expansion. I think the following points are indispensable, although

  they  cover  by  no  means  everything:  any  candidate’s  admission  to  the  organization  and  to

  clinical  practice  should  be  predicated  on  the  judgment  of  the  training  analysts  about  the

  applicant’s libido economy (reason: the catastrophic influence of analysts with sex neuroses);

  thorough training in the correct application of psychoanalysis to sociology; knowledge of the

  basic elements of Marxism; sound knowledge of sexology, an indispensable prerequisite for all

  therapeutic  activity.  Clergymen  and  reactionary-minded  physicians  who  in  analysis  fail  to

  recognize the contradiction between sexual reality and social ideology cannot become analysts.

  …

      Everything else will, and can be, settled only in the continuing intramural debate about

    psychoanalysis.

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Reich to dialectical materialistic psychoanalysts)

                                                                    Malmo, May 30, 1934

To the Group of  Dialectical Materialistic Psychoanalysts

  Attn: Otto Fenichel

  Oslo

  Dear Colleagues and Comrades:

    When  my  further  residence  in  Sweden  was  turned  down  owing  to  denunciations  by

  psychiatrists, as it recently turned out, a group of psychoanalysts and sympathizers wrote a

  circular letter to Freud, Einstein, Bohr and Malinowski, asking them to protest in writing against

  the persecution of scientists by political reactionaries. Freud declined: “In matters of Dr. W.R. I

  cannot  join  your  protest.”  This  attitude  of  Freud’s  may  perhaps  have  serious  and  decisive

  consequences for the next psychoanalytic congress. It is therefore necessary to clarify its nature

  and  meaning.  It  is,  after  all,  consistent  with  Freud’s  position  in  the  pornography  affair  in

  Copenhagen which resulted in a sixty-day jail sentence for the editor of the “Plan.”

    Freud’s personal motives may be extremely interesting, but for judging the over-all situation

  they are immaterial. The question cannot be clarified by pointing to his age, his weariness, his

  private convictions, etc. What concerns us here is an essential part of the struggle between

  reaction and revolution. The foundation of psychoanalysis was no more a personal, private act

  than was the book-burning in Berlin in 1933; the same goes for the correspondence between
                                22
  Einstein and Freud about the war and, for that matter, the refusal to judge whether an article

  published in an official pedagogic journal was pornographic or not. Nor are we concerned with

  “unmasking”  Freud,  as  some  colleagues  feel,  but  we  are  exclusively  preoccupied  with  the

  political and cultural position of psychoanalysis in today’s world.

    Surely this question cannot be decided only theoretically, in scholarly treatises, but must be

  solved in practice—to the advantage of the political left—by clearly separating the factions

  within the IPV. Precisely how to proceed would have to be the object of detailed consultations

  before  the  Congress.  The  Marxist  analysts  must  expect  that  the  IPV,  whose  leadership

  maneuvers with great diplomatic skill, will do everything to eliminate them. I feel that we will

  have  to  make  every  possible  preparation  to  increase  our  influence  so  that  we  can  explain

  objectively to the Congress what goals are at stake: the preservation, security and continuance of

  psychoanalytic research and the movement itself. Therefore, in my opinion, Freud should not be

  personally  blamed  for  his  intransigence.  To  the  contrary,  his  attitude  is  a  symptom  of  the

  scientific tension within the IPV, and we must explain this tension as an expression of the fight

  about the cultural-political significance of psychoanalysis. This will emphasize that we are the

  exponents of Freud’s basic principles, and that psychoanalysis is not merely a medical discipline

  but,  beyond  that,  a  doctrine  of  historical  significance.  Now  is  the  time  to  prove  why

  psychoanalysis has this significance, and why its function can be fulfilled in the camp of the

  political  left  alone.  We  have  to  prove  that  there  is  no  point  in  abstract  discussions  of  this

  cultural-political significance, as the conservative analysts do, but to turn this significance into

  reality, both in concrete practice and in theory.

    With kindest regards,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH 


  (Reich to analysts in opposition to Freud)
                                                                                      23
                                                                          July 21, 1934

To the Group of

  Analysts in Opposition

  through Otto Fenichel

  Oslo


 


    I just received a letter from Otto Fenichel informing me that the discussion with the Prague

  analysts  about  the  differences  between  Fenichel  and  me  as  revealed  during  the  Humlebaek

  debate has resulted in complete agreement with Fenichel. I cannot determine whether this would

  have happened if I had participated in the meeting. Here Fenichel’s moderating standpoint,

  which  does not  grasp  my  basic  concept,  was  completely  rejected  not  only  by  the  Danish

  candidates but also by Gerö and Lie-beck. Grave, decisive problems are at stake; they cannot be

  eliminated by any attempt to reconcile insurmountable contradictions, as Fenichel has tried to

  do, to the detriment of factual clarity. You all know my stand, my own theoretical basis, and

  those points of psychoanalytic theory that have brought me into conflict with Freud. To give but

  one example: Fenichel’s attitude toward this conflict was already revealed at the Oslo meeting,

  where he declared in his lecture that since the “Three Contributions” nothing important has

  appeared on the theory of sexuality. He had forgotten my orgasm theory. It is now clear that this

  was not a meaningless lapse. He seriously maintained that the function of the orgasm had been

  presented by Freud long ago. I have a reason for stressing this one example among many others.

  Historically, all differences between the Marxist and the non-Marxist concept of psychoanalysis

  have evolved precisely around this question. Moreover, this was the point where for the first

  time I discovered the moral and political bias of the analysts, where I first felt what it meant to

  reveal such important facts that have been neglected through unconscious intent. Even in the
                            24
  preface to my orgasm book, when I was still far from having obtained political and sex-

  political clarity, I had to admit that on the basis of my experiences I could not pride myself in

  describing  the  orgasm  theory  as  a  part  of  generally  accepted  psychoanalysis.  We  are  not

  concerned with priority but with facts: it turned out that Fenichel had neither emotional nor

  scientific  understanding  for  the  sex-economic  significance  of  the  problem.  But  everything

  hinges on the stand that is taken toward this question, for from here—and from here alone—can

  everything or nothing of what I worked out in painful struggles over the past twelve years be

  understood. Those who want to understand the current main conflict in psychoanalysis must first

  understand this. If Fenichel were right, we surely would have heard at least some comment on

  the  orgastic  function  either  from  Nunberg’s  compilation  or  from  Freud’s  second  series  of

  lectures. Please understand that on this point I must remain absolutely firm and cannot make any  concessions whatsoever. No one will relieve me of the responsibility for everything that depends

  on it. When I have more time, I will sit down and work out the full picture for you.

    As for the procedure at the Congress, I would once more like to define my position:

    1. If it turns out that the young Berlin analysts present correct psychoanalytic concepts and

  my clinical views, I will support the continued functioning of the Berlin association; otherwise,

  not.

    2. For the time being I will do nothing about the political aspect of the movement at the

  Congress. Whether and how I act will depend on the whole opposition’s attitude in looking after

  the interests of psychoanalytic research. Owing to the decisive theoretical differences within our

  group which have recently crystallized, I cannot commit myself. I have the impression that

  Fenichel, as he showed again in his latest paper on the pre-œdipal development of girls, is still

  trying to bridge the unbridgeable and to mend the broken pieces at all costs. He affirms my own

  concepts as well as those of others that are incompatible with mine, as, for instance, the role of

  phylogenesis. I do not wish to force a decision; I know that circumstances are stronger than I

  am, and will remain so for a long time to come. However, I must prevent my basic concepts,

  which brought me into conflict with Freud, from becoming prematurely diluted and from being

  ascribed to others who have rejected them. Above all, in view of the perspectives I have gained

  over the past months, I must prevent my instinct theory, my concept of anxiety, my technique,

  etc., from becoming obscured and blurred.

    I am also professionally interested in seeing that my findings are linked with my name;

  neither  do  I  want  to  be  judged  in  the  same  category  and  on  the  same  level  with  Melitta
              25
  Schmideberg; I want my writings to be studied at least as carefully as those of Miss Searl or

  Harnik. I will definitely defend myself if my concepts and findings, for which I have fought

  hard since 1924 against all generally held opinions, are now taken for granted without mention

of my name or are presented as new problems that have just come up.

      Everyone has the chance to convince himself, to reject or to criticize as he pleases, but I

  must continue to protect my scientific and organizational independence. At present I can only

  uphold the interest of my work, knowing that in doing so I can preserve the best, the most

  revolutionary and the most progressive elements in psychoanalysis from sinking into the mire of

  current analytic research. So I cannot promise anything before the Congress starts except that I

  will once again ascertain how matters stand.

    3. About demands at the Congress: I have already told Fenichel that the opposition group

  had better not call itself “Marxist.” Then it would have greater freedom of action and could even

  support liberal slogans. I advised supporting liberal slogans but maintaining our own basic,

  negative stand on reactionary research, if [later] we intend to come forward as a Marxist group,

for  essentially  we  will  not  be  able  to  conceal  this  appearance  from  the  world.  We  will

  collaborate better if the opposition does not undertake any more than it can now perform—

  personally,  structurally  and  scientifically.  After  all,  any  development  is  still  possible.  I  am

  convinced that these inner difficulties would not exist if for years I had not worked quite openly

  and if many members of the opposition were not personal friends of mine as well, which seems

to commit them more than the situation requires. My work happens to differ from most of thosein  the  opposition,  and,  as  I  said  before,  I  have  other  obligations  and  tasks  besides

    psychoanalysis,  which  makes  for  a  divergence  in  tactical  and  organizational  attitudes.  We

  should not conceal these divergences and then react with irritation and hostility. In spite of all

  differences  we  should  act  in  concert  wherever  possible,  but  otherwise  we  should  act

  independently.

                                                                          Very cordially,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


    (Mueller-Braunschweig to Reich)

                                                                      Berlin-Schmargendorf

                                                                          August 1, 1934

  My dear Colleague:

    With the forthcoming Congress, the IPV publisher plans to put out a calendar listing the

  members of the Psychoanalytic Association. Circumstances seem to require the elimination of

  your name from the register of the German Psychoanalytic Society. I would greatly appreciate it

if you would regard our request with understanding, relegating to the background any possible

  personal feelings in the interest of our psychoanalytic cause in Germany and expressing your

  agreement with this step.

    As a scholar and author you are too well known to the international world of psychoanalysts

for this omission to cause you the slightest harm, as it might, for example, affect a newcomer in

  the field. Furthermore, the whole problem will be academic once the Scandinavian group is

  recognized at the Congress, thus assuring your inclusion in future membership lists of this new

  group.

    May I ask for your immediate reply.

    With best regards,

                                                                          Yours sincerely,

                                                                  (signed) CARL MUELLER


 

                26
  (Reich to Liebeck)

                                                                    (Oslo), Nov. 10, 1934

  Dear Lotte Liebeck:

    Your letter was a great pleasure. I might have many things to say, but will have to be brief

  because I have little time.

    While  my  concept  of  masochism,  in Character Analysis,  wrests  the  problem  from  the

  metaphysical realm of the death instinct, it is still far from complete. Nevertheless, it can be

  comprehended; one merely has to dig deep down into the analyses to reach the anxiety about the  “bursting” of the genitalia. I have now finished my Congress lecture, and was able to expand on

  the relation between masochism and orgasm. Should I eventually send a copy or galley proofs to

  the group, for critical comment?

    With O.F. [Otto Fenichel] the situation is very difficult! This friendship and readiness to

  understand the orgasm theory, combined with a structural inability and unconscious hostility, is

a complicated problem for me. I am glad that you could judge this for yourself when you were
                27
in Sletten. Edith no doubt does not believe it.

    You have good reason to be shaken by reading Freud: he was a wonderful man. But I was

  even more shattered by the subsequent break in his work. This is tragic. I am curious to know if

  you will discern it before it becomes openly manifest. It goes back to the earliest writings

  (predominance  of  symbolic  interpretation  rather  than  questions  of  dynamics-economy,

  genitality, etc.). But this can only be discovered ex post facto. Enjoy yourself, then, and good

  luck in your work.

      Tomorrow will be the first decisive meeting with the physiologist. Am very excited.

    Best regards to all the colleagues and to yourself.

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Liebeck to Reich)

                                                                Berlin, November 22, 1934

                                                                      W.9, Tirpitzufer 14

  Dear Colleague:

  .…
                                                                                    28
    I would like to tell you briefly about the views I have so far reached during these studies. I

  am really shaken. Particularly since I have now found the first break (you know that, for the

  time being, I’m reading only the purely theoretical writings, disregarding, for example, the

  dream altogether). So one evening I pick up a paper dated 1896 on “The Role of Sexuality in the

  Etiology…” And that same night I read “My views on this role…” 1906! And this is the first

  break! The first work being lucid, courageous, with a brilliant prediction about the tremendous

  significance of the path shown and of the insights for mankind in general. The suggestion that it

is up to the coming century to build up further—and then, ten years later, a totally different man,

  even  in  tone!  What  once  was  courage  and  clarity,  combined  with  the  utmost  caution  and

  integrity of scientific thinking, is now replaced by anxious vacillation and the fear of his own

  courage.  How  many  disappointments  and  personal  blows  there  must  have  been  in  the

  intervening years! This consideration is not important for judging the work per se, nor does it

  have a place in objective criticism. But personally I’m inclined to believe that the retreat was

  prepared by a good deal of therapeutic failure during this period. Objectively, I note that he can

be beaten with his own weapons. Throughout his early works he disparaged the hereditary factor

in favor of the accidental element—only to smuggle in through the back door the same factor he  had previously thrown out! Sexual constitution organically determined! At one time he thought

  that  hereditary  damage  was  incurable  anyway;  now  it  is  for  us  to  tell  him  that  ourselves!

  Constitutional damage—in that case we’ll have to throw in the towel. But it is not so much the

  change of mind itself, and its consequences, but whether this change is in the right direction.

  And here he has convinced us too deeply and too eloquently for us to go along with him down

  this road. —Another word about the consequences: we have allowed ourselves to be seduced—

  more or less, and over varying periods of time—into thinking of our work as an interesting

  scientific  activity,  with  the  main  emphasis  on  scientific  findings.  Therefore  everything

  progressed along scientific lines. The longer I work myself, and the more courageously I do so,

  the more I become aware of the vast explosive element it contains. I have always sensed this,

  but have gone out of my way to avoid it for fear of drawing the ultimate conclusion. Our

  profession ceases to be gemütlich if we have to rake up the deepest primeval emotions! And this

we must inevitably do, or else we will get stuck just as inevitably halfway in between, or worse!

  And once we do this, we can no longer doubt the truth of the etiology anchored in the traumatic

  experiences  of  childhood.  I  believe  more  and  more  that  we  lean,  quite  without  cause,  on

  fantasies, and seriously neglect actual experience. Important as the discovery of fantasies is, I’m

  equally convinced by the eloquence of the experiences that I can now develop with my patients.

  Catharsis should not be belittled, either; it is vastly underestimated. Of course it should not be

  treated as an isolated phenomenon but rather as a fertile soil for continued work. In my opinion

it is better to overemphasize it than to throw it out the window. I’m now capable of clearly

  expressing and explaining what I have intuitively felt long ago. I deliberately take my cue from

  the works of 1896. From then on, the roads fork off. Here is how I see it: on the one hand, a

  continued development; on the other, a slow retreat. For some time both are in balance, and

  there are still many marvelous discoveries for us in subsequent writings, until the balance shifts

  more and more to the sterile side and leads to paths that deviate from the natural sciences. There

is only one thing I don’t understand: why haven’t the others noticed this? Or am I doing them an

  injustice out of my limited knowledge of literature? But perhaps it is an indispensable existential

  lie to have this blind spot. Because it does make you feel a little creepy, just thinking how much

  there still remains to be done. Current life problems with all their complexities, the raging

  storms of an earlier past, to treat all of this simultaneously is a big order! But please don’t

  discuss this letter with anyone; I plan to expand it into a major paper, perhaps in a year or two.

  But I would like to have your opinion, and I do want to thank you because without you I would

  have never been able to do it! The intellectual bluffing is over and done with.…

                                                  With many thanks and affectionate regards,

                                                                  (signed) LOTTE LIEBECK

  Please note my address, otherwise there will be much delay.


 


  (Reich to psychoanalysts in Denmark, Norway and Germany who are in opposition to, and in

  conflict with, Freud)                                                                  Oslo, December 16, 1934

  Dear Colleagues:
                              29
    My exclusion from the IPV resulted from a chain of circumstances that served the interests

of my opponents. The German association did not actually want to exclude me and had taken it

for granted that I would automatically become a member of the Scandinavian group. I was asked

  by numerous colleagues from various local groups to rejoin via the Norwegian group, and three

  members of this group, who were attending the Congress, assured me of acceptance. I could not

  make up my mind at that time and wished to consider the matter. Here are the names of several

  prominent colleagues who regarded the whole affair as a pure formality: Zulliger, Loewenstein,

  Bally, Landauer, Meng, Schjelderup, Hoel, Raknes, etc. When I moved to Oslo to carry out

  certain experiments concerning my sexual theory, people collaborated with me as if I were a

  member. The close connection of my work with the IPV group, and renewed assurances from

  colleagues in Oslo, prompted me to reapply for membership. No one had expected that Dr.

  Fenichel would sharply oppose me and use his influence against me. A few days earlier, I had

  asked Fenichel for his opinion, but he merely shrugged. The reason for his opposition is as

  follows: he said I harmed the cause of natural scientific (dialectical-materialist) psychoanalysis;

it would be better if I remained outside and if the cause were even dissociated from my name

  and person.

    1. Chairman Prof. Schjelderup’s stand:

    Schjelderup personally favors my readmission and only wished to bring up two questions for

  discussion:  (a)  Are  we  factually  (orgasm  theory  and  character  analysis)  in  agreement  with

  Reich?  (His  other  activities  do  not  concern  us  at  all.)  (b)  Are  we  willing  to  take  the  risk

  connected with Reich’s admission, as, for instance, exclusion of the whole group? Now Fenichel

  did not merely confine himself to that particular evening to state his opinion but had carried on

  active agitation against Reich among the members—most of whom are in analysis with him—

  fully aware that they were for R.

    2. Fenichel’s function:

    I must recall briefly that, before I moved to Berlin, in November 1930, Fenichel had neither

  called himself a dialectical-materialist analyst nor was he connected with the cause in any way

  except  through  my  writings  which  he  had  reviewed  since  1930.  In  Berlin,  there  was  soon

  formed a small circle of analysts who were interested in my scientific concepts, among them

  Fenichel. Since the situation in the association soon became difficult and the confusion in the

  field of libido theory—death-instinct theory was very great, and since I had no time myself, I

  asked Fenichel to keep the interested colleagues continually informed on the progress of the

  problem. I soon had the uncomfortable feeling that, although Fenichel reported on my concepts

  very ably and at first openly championed them, he increasingly—in direct ratio to the growing

    difficulties—tried to bridge contradictions, to water down concepts—in short, to reconcile all

  sides. In my paper “Dialectical Materialism and Psychoanalysis” I had clearly shown which of

  the  scientific  views  I  had  always  advocated  were  held  in  common.  But  the  contradiction

  between  the  death-instinct  theory  and  the  orgasm  theory,  between  the  biologistic  and  the

  sociological  concept  of  sexual  repression,  between  the  bourgeois-metaphysical  and  the    dialectical-materialist ideology had to be worked out with equal clarity. I know from experience

  that there is no better way to serve Freud and psychoanalysis than to separate the scientific from

  the non-scientific within the doctrine of psychoanalysis. This is the right way to gain adherents

to  psychoanalysis  in  those  circles  that  matter.  Fenichel  never  wanted  to  commit  himself

  unequivocally to my scientific platform. He did not want to be just one of the “Reich group,”

  but neither did he do anything on his own to oppose the death-instinct theory and everything

  connected with it. Instead, he based the struggle on purely organizational questions and carried

  on a childish, play-acting kind of opposition. I was always against it and tried to make it clear to

  him  that  a  struggle  within  a  scientific  organization  must  be  conducted  along  factual  and

  professional lines, excluding political and even organizational factors. I told him, if we arouse

  the  professional  interest  of  the  colleagues  they  will  be  more  likely  to  commit  themselves

  politically and organizationally. At the Congress, colleagues who were friends of Fenichel’s and

  had no connection with me made the same criticism (see circular letter on the Congress), and

  when the board resorted to all its diplomatic wiles, Fenichel caved in completely. The true

  reason is that he never intended to risk exclusion at all. However, he should have come out and

  said so, instead of hiding behind the excuse that first of all one had to have greater influence.

  How?  By  avoiding  all  controversy,  by  soft-pedaling  one’s  own  work  and  by  alienating  all

  sympathies by such timorous attitudes? Look how differently the non-Marxist Schjelderup stood

  up, purely by instinct! And look how much sympathy the Norwegians gained from his stand!

  Although I suffered an organizational defeat at the Congress, sympathy for me had never run so

  high. It was Fenichel’s job to use this as the basis for his own work. Instead, because he felt I

  was becoming more and more of a burden, he turned against me, became vindictive and finally,

as I have said, opposed my readmission—always on the pretext that he was protecting the

  “cause” against me.

    3. I would ask you to note that I deeply regret ever having placed any confidence in Fenichel

  and asking for his help. I cannot entrust the dialectical-materialist theory of psychoanalysis

  which I have worked out over many years amidst the gravest trials to anyone else, nor can I

  dissociate myself from it. I have no quarrel with anyone doing exactly as he pleases, but I must

  defend myself against usurpers and so-called services of friendship. The concern for the “cause”

of “dialectical-materialist psychoanalysis” and its core, the orgasm theory, must still be reserved

for me alone. Naturally, one may hold different opinions on what I have called dialectical-

  materialist psychoanalysis and sex-economy. But when I describe my orgasm theory as its prime

  criterion and when Fenichel, as has been shown, would not accept it or misunderstood it, we are

  back to the unhappy confusion of terminologies and concepts. I, therefore, find myself faced

  with the unpleasant task of summarizing my scientific position. Basically, it contains three main

  parts:

    1. The concepts held in common with Freudian theory (the materialistic dialectic already

  developed by Freud).

    2. Orgasm theory and character analysis as consistent extensions of Freud’s natural science

  and, simultaneously, representing those theories that I opposed to the death-instinct theory and

  the interpretive technique. Point 2 is still in the realm of psychoanalysis.    3. My own concepts of sexuality, based on the orgasm theory and transcending the sphere of

  psychology  (sex-economy  and  sex-politics).  Part  3  has  merely  points  of  contact  with

    psychoanalysis. It forms an independent field: the basic law of the sexual process.

    Whoever expounds a “dialectical-materialist psychology” without explicitly expounding its

  very core, with the risks and sacrifices this entails, has simply made up his “own” dialectical-

  materialist  psychology  and  is  at  liberty  to  teach  it.  There  is  nothing  we  can  do  about  the

  nuisance of naming certain activities by whim. Even Stroemme, for example, calls himself a

    “psychoanalyst.”

    I realize that these comments on the nature and peculiarity of the scientific trend I represent

  will continue to be misunderstood by those who have not experienced the development of the

  last twelve years as I have. I can only ask you to have patience until the planned comprehensive

  presentation is available. The basic principles which I developed individually for special fields

  are set down in my published writings.

    The fact that I dissociate myself from imprecise, nebulous concepts should not be held

  against me any more than I hold it against anyone for reacting cautiously or negatively toward

  my own concepts. It was from my teacher Freud that I learned the art of waiting and keeping my

  ideas  free  from  undesirable  interpretations  and  mongrelizations.  I  prefer  to  have  fewer

  relationships and, instead, more tidiness in my work.

    I would not like for this letter to be misconstrued in the sense that I am trying to alienate

  Fenichel’s “circle” and his friends. Every colleague is of course free to identify himself with

  Fenichel’s brand of dialectical-materialist psychoanalysis and to declare himself against my

  concept. But my own task is this: to continue developing the trend I have established, and to

  keep those groups that are interested continually informed on the progress of the work. I am also

  grateful for every suggestion and constructive criticism.

      Finally, a few comments on the struggle for the natural scientific trend in psychoanalysis. I

  do  not  believe  that  this  struggle  can  be  won  without  a  clear-cut,  courageous  and  factual

  differentiation of common features and differences. Whoever fears exclusion—which is not so

  reprehensible—cannot  take  part  in  this  struggle  and  is  much  more  valuable  as  a  quiet

  sympathetic bystander than he would be as an active fighter. However, it is self-evident that the

  victory  of  the  scientific  over  the  metaphysical  trend  in  psychoanalysis  will  be  more  easily

  attained and secured if we succeed in revealing the various consequences inherent in the raw

  material  of  their  own  problems  to  the  colleagues  of  all  those  groups  that  have  plainly

  demonstrated their scientific orientation in their own work. The commitment to the dialectical-

  materialist trend in psychoanalysis in no way entails a similar commitment to the political trend

of  communism.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  person  who  is  a  valid  scientist  in  his  chosen

  professional specialty is to that extent secured against the influences of political reaction. And

  scientific integrity carries infinitely more weight than a political commitment. These are the

  natural scientists who some day will become the decisive force of social progress. They should

  merely recognize the sources of error in their work.

                                                                    With very best regards

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH 

                  30
  (P.S. on Fenichel)

                                                                                (12/16/34)

  Postscript

      Fenichel finds himself in a grave conflict. On the one hand, he cannot deny the validity of

  my scientific position. On the other hand, he fears nothing more than taking an unequivocal

  stand for me and against Freud whenever the differences are manifest. He cannot oppose me

  factually without losing sympathies, and so he calls himself a friend of the cause while doing

  everything he can to avoid a conflict that is unavoidable anyway. No one is forced to go to battle

for the natural scientific trend. Gerö declared that he is on my side, but does not want to fight for

it. This is the proper attitude: Gerö will never become dishonest as long as he admits this to

  himself. Lantos told me that she sympathized with me, but that it was not her business and that

  she did not want to take any risks for it. We are on very good terms. Fenichel’s attitude is

  insincere because he is caught in a conflict between willingness and ability. I shall no longer

  argue with Fenichel, but the nature of his dishonesty should be clearly set down here. Perhaps

  my readmission would lead to a premature exclusion of the group. In Fenichel’s place, as the

  friend of a cause which was after all my own creation and which remains irrevocably tied to me,

I would have talked with Reich, consulted him as to what could be done in order to build up

  enough strength for some future date; I would have named all those who might sooner or later

be won over to the libido-theoretical point of view; I would have sent Reich’s papers around for

  discussion, etc., etc. What did Fenichel do? He never unequivocally argued against the death-

  instinct theory; he did not dare to engage in open polemics against Freud when necessary; he

  presents a theory of dialectical-materialist psychology which in its least important aspects agrees

  with the theory he ostensibly sympathizes with; no one knows how much scientific knowledge

  there really is that argues against the death-instinct theory, totem and taboo, etc.; in short, he is

  afraid. He might be valuable as a quiet co-worker, but he is completely unsuited to lead any

  scientific opposition because he is not willing to accept the slightest responsibilities.

      Furthermore, he bases his position on the fact that I declared at the Congress that, from the

  point of view of the death-instinct theory, my exclusion was understandable, and he twists that

  statement to mean that I supposedly approved of my own exclusion because I had moved so far

  beyond psychoanalysis. However, all I said was “from the psychoanalysis of today,” and I

  emphasized  that  I  regard  myself  as  the  most  consistent  exponent  of  natural  scientific

  psychoanalysis  and  its  logical  development:  the  exclusion  was  understandable  but  not

  affirmable. By his attitude, Fenichel merely upholds my opponents, instead of saying: “Reich

  represents  scientific  psychoanalysis;  I,  too,  am  opposed  to  the  death-instinct  theory.  His

  exclusion  is  understandable  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  death-instinct  theory,  but  from  the

  viewpoint of natural scientific psychoanalysis it is an arbitrary decision.” However, Fenichel is

  both terribly frightened and terribly ambitious. What he did was the inevitable result of this

  emotional confusion. I have neither time nor inclination for such organizational struggles. They  are sterile. I have developed a specific theory, and whoever wants to can join me …

                                                                          [end fragment]


 


  (Reich to Liebeck)

                                                                          January 7, 1935

  Dear Colleague:

    I’m not at all angry about your honest and friendly advice, and I’m sorry that you, too, think

  I’m a grouchy, growling old hermit. In many respects you’re quite right, for instance, when you

  criticize my disposition to be hurt by unfriendly tactical or diplomatic maneuvers, instead of

  being armored against them. But if I were to armor myself completely, I would lose a number of

  good qualities. Now about my isolation: it isn’t as bad as all that. Even outside the IPV there are

  many interested circles, which I can gauge by the general rise in interest. You’re basically right,

  but you don’t distinguish sharply enough between those who take the development seriously and

  those who are completely incapable of development and are just afraid without admitting it.

  Furthermore, in your attitude I miss an awareness that the controversy you’ve brought up is only

an infinitesimal part of my work, and that up to now no one has shown himself to be letter-

  perfect in handling all these complications and difficulties. I grant you I should be “above” these

  things, but I wouldn’t want to exchange polemics for dry-as-dust factuality. I find it hard to

  separate the factual from the personal, because the one acts on the other, and vice versa.… And I

  most sincerely believe that this isolation—not from Eitingon but from life itself, from the world,

  from  all  vital  things  and  processes—will  soon  prove  true  for  my  opponents  and  hesitating

  “friends.”  This  of  course  depends  on  more  general  problems  to  which  I  subordinate  such

  questions as penis envy in women, etc. I find that psychoanalysis has become isolated from

  reality, but I have reality on my side and am not alone. I have a number of very gifted students

  and I could well take the line that it is nonsense to go begging: I’m the one who has something

to  give  and  those  who  want  it  should  come  to  me.  I  can  wait.  For  years  I’ve  pleaded  for

  understanding;  now  I’ve  had  it.  Today  my  influence  permits  me  to  withdraw  into  strictly

  scientific work and to break off any further debate. Neither can I waste time on diplomatic and

  tactical skirmishes. It’s not in my nature. As I said in my letter, the best thing I can do for the

  cause is just to send out my publications. Our teacher spent fifteen years in isolation. I’m not

  striving to emulate him, but if necessary I, too, can take it. But I don’t believe it will come to

  that, because there’s too much momentum in my work. You’ll be glad to hear that I’m going to

  hold a continuous clinical course and a technical seminar at the university; there is great interest.

  .…
                                                      31
    The question of the physiological measuring apparatus will finally be settled in the next

  few days. Then I will begin.

    I’m fine. I work a great deal, almost too much. I have many connections and people trust me.

  Some splendid successes in the past few months have confirmed the validity of my “line.” It

  won’t be my fault if in the course of time fewer and fewer people will want to travel by a 1915  type train when a more modern one is available.

    How  is  the  work  you  recently  wrote  me  about?  Have  you  had  good  results  with  the

  characterological  work?  I’m  constantly  learning,  and  am  just  beginning  to  understand  the

  relation between masochism and libido stasis. This, too, encourages me not to fear isolation. I’m

  firmly convinced that under critical circumstances ignorance, fraud and cowardice can hold out

for a while; they may even be “victorious.” But the end will be all the more dark and tragic. So,

  dear Lotte, don’t get all entangled, but remember that even the worst will eventually pass to

  make room for something better.

    When  you  come  here,  I’ll  be  glad  to  talk  with  you  about  “tactics”  and  “personal

  considerations,”  and  if  you’re  in  the  mood  I’ll  tell  you  more  about  my  many  errors  and

  weaknesses than you’ve imagined.
                              32
    I’ve  only  scanned  Kaiser’s  paper.  I  was  amused  to  see  that Imago  simultaneously

  published another article completely contradicting it. I’ve gradually learned to take this kind of

  thing from the humorous side, although I feel that a certain type of humor is an evasion. I

  believe Kaiser handled the subject too academically; he wanted to be too consistent and he went

  ahead too fast. He forgets that a theoretical postulate can be substantially correct but may not be

  easily carried into practice. His conclusion that all interpretation is superfluous is correct, but in

  our  clinical  practice  we  still  cannot  do  without  terminal  interpretations.  From  my  own

  development I disliked the academic tone: it didn’t touch the essentials. But still, I liked the

  article.  But  I  have  one  suspicion:  just  as  they’ve  tried  to  dissociate  me  from  dialectical-

  materialist psychoanalysis, just as they’ve usurped my orgasm theory without mentioning my

  name, so now the IPV is collecting its “own character analysts.” I can assure you that my book

  was only the beginning: the real thing is still to come and cannot be mastered without me. For

  that, I have too much head start, namely, about ten years of extremely intensive research.

    Now don’t be angry about this chat, dear Lotte L. I have great confidence in you, and no

  “intuition” that warns me against it. I showed your letter to E. to explain the difference between

  true friendly criticism and the other kind. You basically understand the process and a part of my

  personal difficulties without taking advantage of them. But please be less trusting if you wish to

  avoid bitter disappointments.

                                                                      Affectionately yours,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Reich to Liebeck)

                                                                          January 15, 1935

  Dear Lotte L.:

    Ever  since  I  decided  to  stick  strictly  to  my  work,  I’ve  begun  to  perceive  the  whole

  emptiness, waste and injustice of the entire conflict. You’re right in pursuing a straight line by

  working through Sigmund’s theory. The only constructive thing one can do today is to analyze  the nature and origin of the “split” with complete intellectual honesty and independence. I’ve

  done my part—and that’s the end of it. I scarcely have time to carry on this controversy. The

  experiments are about to begin, the character-analytic seminar is starting, and, besides, I have

  other things to worry about: it will be very difficult to work out, unaided, the abundance of

  problems  presented  by  the  clinical  aspects  of  character  analysis.  Every  day  I  run  into  new

  technical questions, which in turn give rise to new theoretical questions. I realize more and more

  how sinful the death-instinct theory really is. What a choking off of life itself! Meanwhile I’ve

  had my congress lecture, “Psychic Contact and Vegetative Current,” typed up. You and Prag

  will each get a copy. Could you study it together with your colleagues and gradually start the

  collective work by making constructive criticism before I publish the paper? That would be a

  real beginning. I don’t intend to publish one comprehensive paper on the problem but to work it

  out successively in monographs. Thus I hope to establish, in the predictable future, a detailed

  basis  for  my  concept  of  the  two  kinds  of  work  performance  whose  differentiation  is  so

  important.
                          33
    One more thing: Nic H. had the idea that we should start thinking about ways and means

of protecting character-analytic technique from unwelcome distortions. What do you think?

  How should we go about it? I think it’s important to start soon—this is bound to become a fad.

  We would have to establish definite training requirements. I’ll never permit the work to get out

of my hands: it is my strongest weapon. Please write me about this. It is also in the interest of

  the younger colleagues. Under no circumstances will I allow the IPV, after the way they treated
                                          34
  me, to “practice” their own character analysis.
                                                                  35
    I completely share your opinion about the “Three Contributions,” with two exceptions:

  genitality is completely left out, and I consider his theory of the constitution to be inaccurate. By

  the  way,  our  circle  has  translated  the  book  into  Danish.  I’ve  written  the  preface  for  the

  translation.

    I had a letter from Edith which I didn’t like. I won’t answer it, either. It’s the old story: I

  “promised”—to  let  myself  be  quietly  slaughtered.  Just  because  it  would  have  been  more

  convenient to the Ediths and their ilk, to spare them any pangs of conscience.…

    I would like to know who in your circle would be a serious candidate for the rigorous

  problems of character work and the orgasm theory.

                                                                          Very cordially,

                                                                        (signed) W. REICH


 

                    36
  (Reich to F. Deutsch)

                                                                    Oslo, January 21, 1935

  Dear Doctor:

    I am extremely sorry that I did not recall the paper you sent me. But please do not forget the

  difficult conditions under which I have had to work in the past two years. In my paper (which is  only part of a series of contributions on “personal sex-economy”) I was not interested in taking a

  stand on the concepts of psychophysical interrelations. I would not presume to undertake such a

  critique. The way I see it, my only task is to develop my orgasm theory in whatever direction the

  facts will take it. So, for the moment, all I can do is constructive research. As for the available

  literature, I can only say—and this also applies to your paper—that it does not deal with the

  orgastic function. Now I happen to have a “prejudice” in that the orgasm problem might hold

  the key to the most basic questions, provided we are sufficiently capable of mastering it. But we

  are still far from it. I did not even succeed in arousing any interest in it for use in clinical

    psychoanalysis.  If  I  may  be  permitted  to  point  out  other  characteristics  of  my  work  which

  distinguish it from other, pertinent literature, I would first of all call attention to the connection

  between sexuality and vegetative anxiety rooted in the orgasm function, which I stressed as

  early as 1926; furthermore, the conscious application of dialectical-materialist methodology to

  psychology and physiology. I know that the concept of psychophysical functional identity is

  gaining  more  and  more  ground.  However,  I  postulate  a  different  concept: identity

  simultaneously with antithesis, which is a problem for dialectical materialism and will have to

be developed from the concrete facts. In a forthcoming paper I have carried this thought into the

  characterological field. You will no doubt be interested to learn that Oslo’s physiological and

  psychological institutes have declared their readiness to help me in mastering these problems.

  Beginning next week, the hypothesis of the electrophysiological nature of the orgasm and of

  sexuality in general, developed from the clinical application of analysis and character analysis,

  will be tested experimentally. I think it is important not only to assert that both psychophysical

  parallelism and the mechanistic interaction theory are wrong while the unitary (plus antithesis)

  concept  seems  to  point  in  the  right  direction:  above  and  beyond  this,  we  must  prove

  experimentally what this unity demonstrably consists of. I believe I have been successful in

  respect to the detailed functions of the parasympathetic and sympathetic systems (sexuality and

  anxiety).  But  under  the  circumstances  I  do  not  see  how  today’s  psychoanalytic  concept  of

  anxiety is at all tenable. Perhaps I am mistaken in this respect.

    I would be grateful for any criticism or suggestion; also, for a review of my work in a

  scientific journal. The problems on which all of us are working together will require a much

  greater effort and will not be solved without overcoming a great deal of confusion.

    With best regards,

                                                                                  Yours,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Reich to Liebeck)

                                                                          February 5, 1935

  Dear Lotte L.:

    You will be interested in my brief account that characterizes the therapeutic situation in the

  IPV. It is staggering, typical, almost the rule. I believe I wrote you that I took over someone who                                                                                      37
  had been in analysis for three and a half years, with Kempner, Pfister and finally with Fen.

  (for eight months), successively. This is a young, basically life-affirming girl who told me that

  she kept taking veronal—capriciously and out of spite—to show F. what she thought of him. F.

  developed tremendous anxiety, and the more he did, the more frequently she lived out her

  revenge in this form. Today she had her first session. I immediately noticed what three or four

  years ago I probably would not have seen till much later: rigid body attitude, stiff as a board,

  arms stretched out, hands folded, head practically nailed down. In speaking, the lips hardly

  moved, the voice without resonance, high-pitched, near inaudible. In previous analyses she had

  always insisted that she could not, and would not, speak: for three and a half years. The more

  she was urged to talk, the less she could do so. With F. she was silent for months, and so was he.

  Instead of making her aware of her body attitude, and nothing else, he asked her to change

  position (i.e., Ferenczi’s active technique); thereupon increased defiance. The first thing I tell

  her is: “You’re behaving as if you were facing an operation—completely stiff.” Her reply: “I’ve

  never been afraid of operations; on the contrary, I’ve always wanted them.” (Masochism!!!) I

  slowly begin to describe her attitude, feature by feature: mouth, voice, posture, masklike face,

  head virtually nailed down. After about fifteen minutes she starts speaking softly and urgently,

  and suddenly remembers the anxiety she felt as a child about operations. That she was always

  stretched out so expectantly; that at one time she was very angry with her mother because under

  some pretext she took her to a doctor without telling her the truth. It had hurt a great deal. The

  posture stiffened even more. I have an idea: “Corpse.” I tell her that a single word seems to me

to describe her attitude, but that I will not mention it because she would have to begin to feel it

  herself. Her reply: “Were you thinking of corpse?” Then come memories: once her hair got

  stuck in a crate while she was playing; she would go wild if someone suddenly grasped her from

  behind. The “nailed-down” head gradually acquired meaning, but I said nothing and merely

  continued describing her attitude. At the end of the hour she said “I don’t like my back. I’m

  lying here as if I were glued down, as if I had no back, as if I’d been cut in two lengthwise,” etc.

  Now what do you say to that? Not once in three years of analysis did she remember that she was

  afraid of surgery. Her very attitude communicated this. I confess I was shaken. Three years of

  money, effort, life itself!!! I’m pleased, and a little proud, to have found a way. No, I would be

  sinning against myself if I failed to draw the therapeutic line vis-à-vis the others, cautiously, but

  sharply and resolutely all the same.
                          38
    Which reminds me: Elsa wrote me that she cannot verbalize in her analysis. I forgot to tell

  you that she has characteristic mouth movements. She will not talk, or talk poorly, unless her

  neck cramps are made conscious to her first. Please watch this. Each silence—and this I’ve

  learned only recently—is rooted in anxiety bound up in tensions of the neck musculature. Very

  important for the beginning; may save months of effort if properly handled.

    That’s all for today!

                                                                            Affectionately,

                                                                      (signed) WILH. REICH 


  (Reich to Liebeck)

                                                                    Oslo, March 11, 1935

  Dear Lotte L.:

  .…

    I feel you’re doing character analysis an injustice if you believe that it is merely catharsis,

  combined with a thorough working through, that makes it something new. The old could only be

  freshly re-created because I succeeded in discovering the armor and its structure as a fact. I’ve

  come to realize more and more that the orgasm theory not only has established a new branch of

  science but—above and beyond this—many old concepts have either become untenable or must

  undergo complete revision. This could well be discussed at length and in detail. I can’t deny that

I sometimes feel dizzy when I gaze at the new vistas and at the uncertainties involving the

  mastery of the tasks ahead. A while ago it occurred to me that I might tackle the problem of the

  prophylaxis  of  neuroses  in  concrete  practice,  in  a  kindergarten  where  I  would  study  the

  emotional freezing of children by direct observation and find ways of preventing it. This seems

to me entirely feasible.…

      About  your  last  question:  I,  too,  have  at  times  great  difficulties  in  the  termination  of

  treatments. I also believe that you should continue working on the development of your own

  self.

    The equipment will arrive in a week and I hope I’ll be able to demonstrate the first concrete

  results within a few months.…

                                                                            (signed) REICH


 


  (Reich to Liebeck)

                                                                          March 30, 1935

  Dear Lotte L.:

    This  is  my  first  chance  to  answer  your  letter  in  greater  detail.  Your  letters  are  a  great

  pleasure. You and Schjelderup are the first analysts—may I say, character analysts—whose

  results show the true nature of character-analytic work. What you described in your cases has

  long been familiar to me, although up to now I haven’t been able to master all of it theoretically:

  the shattering insight into the previous wasteland of living and just existing; the tremendous fear

of happiness; the reactivation of the deepest—I would say, almost biological—reactions such as

  bursting; the timidity in coming to grips with reality in a healthy way, etc. From the terminal

  stages of clinical cases I first came to understand the world’s fear of the orgasm theory and,

  even more, its lack of understanding, which reflects a repression of its better judgment. Life

  doesn’t become any easier when one begins to feel things might be different.…

    I would appreciate it if you would elaborate your criticism of Freud in detail. The other day,  after a long interval, I was scanning the “Three Contributions,” and I was amazed by some of

  the passages, especially on genitality. I’ve done myself a grave injustice by working for so many

  years under the impression that my theory of genitality was rooted in Freud. This was merely

  due to my father fixation. Some day I hope to make a clean break.

    Gerö was here and caused a lot of trouble. So long as he knew he was structurally unsuited

for holding a concept and fighting for it, all was well. But then he began to have illusions. He

  broke some rules of conventional politeness toward me—clearly the result of a bad conscience

  —and his lecture to the group was poorly received.

    Yesterday Fenichel presented his “criticism” of my technique and everybody was against

  him, including most of his own analysands (Nic, Raknes). Did you know he’s leaving Oslo?

  Things have been hard for him lately because the superiority of character analysis had become

  obvious  to  all.  He’s  going  to  Prague.  Unfortunately,  he  believes  that  this  will  solve  his

  problems. The whole Norwegian group has sided with me, except for one who doesn’t know

  what it is all about, and two who’re honestly trying but are structurally incapable. Since the last

  discussion I haven’t been to the Association, but all of them are attending my lectures and my

  character seminar (where Mote, by the way, acquitted himself brilliantly).

    Now  about  the  equipment:  I  have  to  start  very  slowly  and  work  my  way  into  the

  electrophysiological technique. It will be very hard but looks most promising. The apparatus is

  among the most modern there is. It may soon be necessary to have a professionally trained

  assistant come from Germany because the local physiologist merely wants to “help,” but that’s

  not enough. The first experiments (recording of potentials at erogenous zones) will start soon.

  Further experimentation, however, will have to develop from whatever course the work takes.

  Please  try  to  find  an  unemployed  electrophysiologist  who  is  fully  acquainted  with  the

  oscillograph and knows about the physiology of the skin and the vegetative nervous system.

    .…

    Keep well. Cordially,

                                                                            (signed) REICH


 


  (Reich to Freud)

                                                                            May 20, 1935

                                                                      Dr. Wilhelm Reich

                                                                            Oslo/Norway

                                                                      Drammensveien 110 h

  Prof. Dr. Sigm. Freud

  Vienna IX

  Berggasse 19

  My dear Professor:

    I am enclosing a pamphlet containing my lecture at the XIIth Psychoanalytic Congress, in  expanded form. I was able to give this lecture only as a guest of the IPV.

      Several  years  ago,  when  I  reported  on  the  role  of  the  orgastic  function  in  the  psychic

  economy, you told me that either I had regressed to the pre-analytic level with its denial of

  pregenitality or, if this was not the case, that I would some day have to carry the heavy burden

of psychoanalysis alone. I do not know if you remember this. I was extremely impressed with

  your comment. Since the first part of your observation does not apply, the second has all the

  better anticipated a glimpse of the future.

    I would appreciate it if you would convince yourself, by reading my pamphlet, that I have

  sincerely tried not to turn the grave injustice I suffered into grounds for a personal and irrational

  reaction. I hope that, at least in this respect, I have succeeded.

    I also believe that in this paper I was more successful than before in explaining the clinical

  reasons that compelled me to clarify the contradictions which today dominate the doctrine of

    psychoanalysis. Furthermore, I feel that I was able to find a constructive formulation for the

  common roots as well as for the theoretical differences inherent in this contradiction.

    With best wishes,

                                                                  Very respectfully yours,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Reich to English)

                                                                    Oslo, August 14, 1937
                    39
  O. Spurgeon English

  255 So. 17th Street

  Philadelphia, Pa.

  Dear Dr. English:

    .…

    That American psychoanalysts do not understand the essence of character analysis does not

  surprise me. Character analysis is not supposed to be a continuance of Freud’s technique but

  originated from the criticism of the interpretational technique while consistently developing the

  resistance  analysis.  Please  do  not  regard  Dr.  Rado  and  Dr.  Homey  as  being  in  the  least

  representative of the character-analytic trend. I am enclosing a prospectus of articles which you

  may order from the publisher direct.

    The biological department of our institute is constantly growing. The forthcoming issue of

  our Journal, which is now available, will tell you about the direction this work is taking.

    I would greatly appreciate it if you could let me have the names and professions as well as

  the addresses of young colleagues who are interested in the continued development of character

  analysis.

    If you should come to Europe next year, I hope you will stop off at Oslo.

    I would be pleased to hear from you again.    With kindest regards,

                                                                                  Yours,

                                                                            (signed) REICH


 


  (Reich to English)

                                                                  Oslo, November 24, 1937

  Dr. O. S. English

  255 So. 17th Street

  Philadelphia

  Dear Dr. English:

    I acknowledge with thanks your letter of October 29th together with your check for …

    I would be pleased if you could send me a copy of your recent book for review in our

  Journal.

    Now  I  have  the  following  request:  Several  psychiatrists  here  are  currently  attacking

  psychoanalysis in general, and my development of character analysis in particular. Next week

  there  will  be  a  big  conference  of  the  psychiatric  association  where  our  people—the  sex-

  economic therapists together with the psychoanalysts—will oppose these attacks. Basically, this

  struggle also involves recognition by organized medicine [of our work] and training. Our friends

  will argue that both structural psychology of the neuroses and sexual theory are being taught in

  many  psychiatric  institutions  the  world  over—for  example,  in  your  own—but  that  certain

  psychiatric groups are still rejecting these new insights, sometimes with hostility, just as it

  happened twenty or thirty years ago. Now it would greatly assist our friends if you wrote up a

  factual letter that you, being the head of a psychiatric clinic and professor of psychiatry, have

  first-hand knowledge of the technique of character analysis, if only at its incipient stage, and

  that you are teaching analytic structural psychology to your students. I do not know if your

  position over there permits you to make this gesture. Please write me frankly about it. Such a

  letter would have to be here by Christmas.

    Here is an example of the tactics employed by some psychiatrists. In his attack on me,

  Professor Ragnar Vogt thinks he can draw on the anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski for

  support.  Now  we  can  prove  conclusively  that  Malinowski  approves  both  my  ethnological

  interpretations of his book [Rest of sentence missing Ed.]. Furthermore, he himself has disputed

  the biological roots of the child-parent conflict, and has interpreted it sociologically. I do not

  know if you are fully familiar with this struggle in the Psychoanalytic Association, and outside

of it, in 1926. If not, you might be interested in reading the back issues of “Imago” for 1926–27

  on Malinowski’s views—of course, only if you consider such orientation necessary and feel that

  the  avenues  of  approach  you  studied  with  me  in  Vienna  and  Berlin  are  insufficiently

  enlightening.

    I would very much appreciate your writing me more often and in greater detail about your  differences of opinion with other analysts. You know my own stand, as well as the difficulties of

  defending the scientific, sexual-theoretical basis of analytic psychologists against the theorists of

  the death instinct and those scholars who reject the scientific premise.

    With kindest regards,

                                                                                  Yours,

                                                                            (signed) REICH


 

                          40
  (Statement by Malinowski)

                    The London School of Economics and Political Science

                                  (University of London)

                                      Houghton Street,

                                        Aldwych,

                                      London, W .C. 2.


 


    DEPARTMENT OF ANTHROPOLOGY

                                                                        12th March, 1938

To those whom it may concern:

    I have known Dr. Wilhelm Reich for five years, during which period I have read his works

  and also on many occasions had the opportunity of conversation and discussion with him, in

  London  and  Oslo.  Both  through  his  published  work  and  in  the  personal  contacts  he  has

  impressed  me  as  an  original  and  sound  thinker,  a  genuine  personality,  and  a  man  of  open

  character  and  courageous  views.  I  regard  his  sociological  work  a  distinct  and  valuable

  contribution to Science. It would, in my opinion, be the greatest loss if Dr. Reich were in any

  way prevented from enjoying the fullest facilities for the working out of his ideas and scientific

  discoveries.

    I should like to add that my testimonial may have some additional strength, coming as it

  does from one who does not share Dr. Reich’s advanced views nor yet his sympathies with

  Marxian philosophy—I like to describe myself as an old-fashioned, almost conservative liberal.

                                                                          B. MALINOWSKI

                                                            Professor of Anthropology in the

                                                      University of London, Member of the

                                                  Royal Academy of Holland (Amsterdam)


 


  (Reich to Malinowski)                                                                      Oslo, April 29, 1938

  Dear Bronislaw:

    Many thanks for your letter of April 25th, which gave us all great pleasure. In the past two

  weeks we’ve had a very hard time. A couple of sex know-it-alls attacked my paper on “The

  Bions,” without knowledge of the subject matter and in an absolutely disgraceful manner. This

  caused a storm in the press, pro and con. As a result, I’ve leaped ahead by at least ten years.

  Now the question of sex-economy along with the bions is hitting the world press. I didn’t ask for

  this, but now that it has happened it’s a good thing.

    I’m not an incorrigible optimist, but thanks to my work I have deeply experienced not only

  man’s satanic impulses but also the human side of him. So if Hitler plucks the strings of the

  subhuman theme, why shouldn’t we concentrate on his human core which we know exists all

  along but has merely been buried?

    … We think of you often and fondly. Please write as often as you can.

    With affectionate regards,

                                                                                  yours,

                                                                  (signed) WILHELM REICH


 


  (Malinowski to Reich)

                                                                    Ellen Emerson House

                                                                            Smith College

                                                                        Northampton, Mass.

                                                                            July 21, 1939

  My dear Willy:

    Many thanks for your letter of July 10. As you can see, I am still in America, and I shall be

  only too happy to do all I can to help you.

      Unfortunately it is by no means easy to manipulate matters now, owing to the enormous

  pressure on the universities and teaching institutions here. The other unfortunate point in your

  case is the fact that many psychoanalysts will have nothing to do with you. You know where my

  sympathies are, so I need not tell you how indignant I feel when this attitude is revealed. This

  would not be so bad if American psychoanalysts were not so much dominated by people from

  Vienna or Berlin. But wherever can there be a psychoanalytical society with Rank or H. Sachs

or Alexander in the key position.

    I shall see, however, whether I shall not be able to do something. Since Dr. Wolfe has not

  gotten in touch with me, I am writing him a line. If I can do anything I shall write you.

                                                                            Yours always,

                                                                  (signed) B. MALINOWSKI

I am also writing to my friend Alvin Johnson of the New School of Social Research and to one

or two influential friends at Johns Hopkins.

                                                                                    B.M. 

                      41
  (Reich to Scharfenberg)

                                                                              Oslo, 1939

  Dr. Scharfenberg

  Chief Resident Physician

  Oslo

    Before moving to New York, I am taking the liberty to express my heartfelt thanks for the

  service you have rendered my scientific work. I would beg you to restrain your amazement over

  this somewhat unusual gesture. I am very much in earnest, for I have learned to appreciate the

  enormously important role of antagonists. The antagonist himself is usually unaware of this

  aspect of his achievement. You have advanced my extremely difficult scientific work by at least

a decade. A British scholar recently remarked that “the whole scientific world was now talking

  about the bions.” He added that I was crazy, but nevertheless the world must talk about them

  and can no longer silence them to death.

    I found it intellectually gratifying to discover that so-called convictions are a dime a dozen

  but that real actions are dangerous. You pretend to fight alcoholism and, if I remember rightly,

  you belong to several temperance societies. Now it may have escaped your notice that the case

  history you referred to with such abusive vehemence describes the cure of an alcoholic by

  means of the recently developed vegetotherapy. The damming up of sexual energy and the

  resultant vegetative anxiety are very likely the most important underlying causes of alcoholism.

It is known that alcohol has a vagotonic effect on sympatheticotonic anxiety, i.e., it resolves

  anxiety and depression. The effect of alcohol can be permanently canceled out through natural

  orgastic gratification. But to you, the enemy of alcohol, “morality” was more important than a

  new  scientific  explanation  of  alcoholism.  The  enormity  of  such  an  insight  can  only  be

  appreciated if we consider that medicine’s fight against nationwide epidemics must face not

  only disease itself but also the impact of such authoritarian influences.

      Furthermore, it became clear as never before that the exponents of the obsolete school of

  psychiatry are determined to collaborate with the police, while modern psychiatry works with

  the patient. You reacted to the modern treatment of the difficult problem of infantile onanism

  with police denunciations, while we work with kindergarten and teaching staffs in order to

  remove for all time a medieval inquisition that has eroded the vital energies of small children.

  Since  you  and  your  school  of  thought—if  such  it  can  be  called—are silent  on  practical

  suggestions, and since we regard the police approach to sexual misery as a corroding endemic

  disease, the advantages are unquestionably on our side. We enjoy the affirmative support of the

  people’s  innate  vitality.  Over  the  long  haul,  practitioners  who  threaten  with  deportation

  proceedings  are  fighting  a  losing  battle.  You  know  that  it  was  psychiatrists  of  your  own

  persuasion who conspired to make my residence in Denmark and Sweden impossible, and that

  local  and  foreign  fascists  openly  cheered  your  opinions  about  me.  That  this  scandalizing

  exposure could happen to a member of a workers’ party calling itself socialist, to a registered  member of the Friends of the Right of Asylum, to an “anti-fascist,” etc., was worth witnessing,

in spite of embarrassing inconveniences. It proves the close ties between fascist ideology and

  the false premises inherent in genetic-oriented psychiatry. Even Freud battled against the all-

  too-easy trend to “explain away” the sexual troubles of youth and the nightmares of frustrated

  women by unexplored genes. From the “theory of degenerative genetic substances” to Hitler’s

  “racial  theory,”  it  is  only  one  step.  True  science  will  stop  the  influence  of  such  atrophied

  thinking. In the history of science your name will go down on the minus side. And yet, you

  might be grateful to me in turn: thanks to your active opposition to me, you have gained the

  honor that sometime in the future you will at least be mentioned negatively in the history of

  science.

                                                              (signed) WILHELM REICH, M.D.


 


  (Malinowski to Reich)

                                                                          January 31, 1942

                                                                              128 H.G.S.

                                                                          Yale University

                                                                Department of Anthropology

                                                                  New Haven, Connecticut

  Dr. Wilhelm Reich

  99-06 69th Avenue

  Forest Hills, New York

  My dear Willi:

    I am delighted to hear that your difficulties with the immigration people have been resolved

  completely and favorably. The whole matter, of course, was ridiculous since no one in his

  senses can suspect you of pro-Nazi sympathies or leanings. Nevertheless, such things are most
          42
  disturbing.

    I  am  writing  these  few  lines  to  let  you  know  at  once  how  delighted  I  am  that  this

  unnecessary disturbance is over. I hope also to see you quite soon and shall make a special point

of getting in touch with you.

                                                                            Yours always,

                                                                  (signed) B. MALINOWSKI


 

                      43
  (Reich to Malinowski)

                                                                                    (n.d.)

  My dear Bronislaw,

    I was able to answer letters and such things first today, more than three weeks after my  release from Ellis Island. They had investigated my “case” for more than a year, found nothing,

  had no complaints, and yet I was behind bars for three and a half weeks. The whole thing was

  completely irrational, due to some denunciation by some coward who dares not oppose me in

  the open field of free discussion. My first wife has something to do with it. My daughter Lore

  told me several months ago that I had better watch out because her mother had, together with

  Dr. Kubie from the Psa. Society, prepared something against me in case that I don’t behave

  well. Here you are! Do you remember my troubles in Denmark and Sweden back in 1934 when

  psychiatrists had run to the police? Well, here’s the same story. The odds confronting our work

  are tremendous, but so are also the achievements. A book of mine, “The Discovery of the

  Orgone,” summarizing the past twenty years of biophysical and character-analytic research is

  coming soon in English, and so does a Journal issued by our Institut and the American branch.

    I wish to thank you for your affidavit which you sent on the occasion of my arrest. I really

  look forward to seeing you sometime soon. I hope you are well and not too much distressed

  about the international disaster. I think the psychiatrists who understand distorted biological

  functioning in the human beings will have to accomplish hard tasks once this is over.

                                                                            Always yours,

                                                                            (signed) REICH


 


  (Hitschmann to Reich)

                                                                            June 18, 1942

                                                                          57 Brattle Street

                                                                          Cambridge, Mass.

  Dear Dr. Reich:

    It  was  only  today,  forwarded  from  London,  that  I  received  the  first  issue  of  your  new
          44
  periodical, which I will read immediately and thoroughly, together with the English version of

  The Function of the Orgasm.

    Just  recently  I  was  able  to  cure  a  young  woman  with  severe  anxiety  and  strong

  depersonalization symptoms by restoring her orgastic potency. For the first time I heard her talk

of her frequent night orgasms and her dreams about the sex act with her husband.

    For twelve years I’ve now lived here with my capable wife—my daughter is married and in

  New York—right in the sticks, that’s how little psychoanalytic knowledge and achievement you

  find around here.

    Freud’s works untranslated; Fenichel’s out of print; no analysis in the hospitals, which have

to be content with “guessing at psychodynamics.”

    Life and work and more knowledge than others are my daily source of pleasure.

    With best regards,

                                                                                  Yours,

                                                                    (signed) HITSCHMANN 


  (Reich to Hitschmann)

                                                                            June 20, 1942

                        ORGONE AND CANCER RESEARCH LABORATORY

                                  Forest Hills, New York

  Dear Dr. Hitschmann:

    I was very pleased with your letter, for I often think of the important and stimulating years,

  back in the twenties, when we battled for the Vienna Psychiatric Clinic. Since then so many

  difficult and tragic things have happened, to society, to my work and to my person. You happen

to  be  one  of  the  very  few  psychoanalysts  who  do  not  recoil  from  the  fact  that  the  libido

  discovered by our teacher Freud is now both tangible and measurable as biologically efficacious

  orgone energy. It never fails to amaze me how little the true scientific principle of emotional

  energy has been grasped and applied.

    The journal and the book will show you that we have not only remained loyal to Freud’s

  good old doctrines but have also supplied “depth psychology” with the necessary depth. Your

  critique of the over-all situation is quite correct. Maybe this will change some day, thanks to the

  young science of biophysics which grew out of analytic thinking. It will be a long and hard

  struggle; people are after all terrified of Nature.

    I am glad you managed to escape from hell. My own life is still difficult, full of hostile

  attacks and dangerous incidents, but I may say that I am fully compensated by the fruits of my

  scientific research. With best regards, and please remember me to your wife.

                                                                                  Yours,

                                                                            (signed) REICH


 

                    45
  (Reich to A. S. Neill)

                                                                        December 9, 1948

  My dear Neill:

    We just received your letter. Yes, my work has burst open everywhere and it is now rather

  much to handle, since I feel quite like in a desert with no real, active, eager, fighting helpers

  around. There is some basic hesitancy or reluctance to stand up clearly and faithfully for our

  work and to defend it in public just as eagerly as the enemies of this work are attacking it by

  defamation. The latest news is that some psychoanalysts apparently ran to the District Attorney

to stop my work. They pulled out some law from the books which said that whoever directs

  mental-hygiene  work  must  be  licensed  to  do  so,  or  something  similar.  This  is,  of  course,

  nonsense, since I am the one who licenses doctors and educators to practice what I found and

  teach. I would appreciate it highly if you would make it widely known that the psychoanalysts

  and some psychiatrists who have no answer to my work are cowardly enough to use defamation,  distortion and denunciation.

    There is no doubt about it, as we have found out lately, through many witnesses who have

  sworn to their written statements, that there is a concerted effort on the part of the New York

  Psychoanaly.  Association  to  smash  my  work  by  denunciation.  For  instance,  the  rumor  was

  circulated about two weeks ago in many places that a woman patient had been masturbated at

  the Orgone Institute and thereupon had a breakdown. The woman whose name was mentioned

in this connection had never been here. We went after this story immediately with the help of
            46
  our lawyer, and the man who spread the rumor, a Dr. Miller, took it back immediately. Well,

  this is what I call plague.

  .…

                                                                  All my best to all of you,

                                                                            (signed) REICH                  2) EMOTIONAL PLAGUE:


                            The psychoanalysts




                                                                  1
Regarding Fenichel and the schizophrenia rumor


“I shall cite another example, one in which the projection mechanism of the

emotional plague, in the form of defamation, is even more clearly evident.

Back in Norway, I heard that a rumor was going around to the effect that I

had developed schizophrenia and had spent some time in a mental institution.

When  I  came  to  the  United  States  in  1939,  I  found  that  this  rumor  had

become widespread in this country, even more so than in Europe, where my

work was better known. It soon became evident that the rumor emanated

from the same European source, a person who had since moved to America.

  The situation did not lack a certain irony: This person, shortly after my

break  with  the  Psychoanalytic  Association,  had  suffered  a  nervous

breakdown and had to spend some weeks in a mental institution. The accident

of the nervous breakdown apparently gave the later rumor-monger quite a

shock. At that time, he found himself in a difficult conflict: On the one hand,

he realized the correctness of my scientific development; on the other hand,

he was incapable of breaking with his organization which had come into

sharp conflict with my development. As is apt to happen in such cases, he

grasped the opportunity of diverting attention from himself to me, who at that

time  was  in  the  center  of  dangerous  and  widespread  polemics.  He  was

convinced  that  I  was  hopelessly  lost,  and  the  temptation  to  give  me  an

additional push was too great. His reaction was a projection according to the

specific pattern of the emotional plague. I had never been psychotic or in a

mental institution.  Rather,  I  have  carried  the  heaviest  burden  to  this  daywithout disturbances of my capacity for work and for love.

  After all, a mental disease is not in itself a disgrace. Like any decent

psychiatrist,  I  have  deep  sympathy  for  mental  patients  and  often  even

admiration for their conflicts. A mental patient is much more serious, much

closer to living functioning, than a Babbitt or a socially dangerous plague-

ridden individual. This defamation was intended to ruin me and my work. It

led to some dangerous and difficult situations. For example, in many students

I  had  at  that  time  the  additional  task  of  convincing  them  that  I  was not

psychotic. In certain phases of orgone therapy, a specific mechanism of the

emotional plague makes its appearance in a typical manner: As soon as the

patient or student comes in contact with his plasmatic currents, he develops

severe orgasm anxiety. In this phase, the orgone therapist is considered a

‘dirty, sexual swine’ or as ‘crazy.’ I emphasize the fact that this reaction

occurs in all cases. Now, most of the students had heard of the rumor in

question. The theory of sex-economy is in many ways so revolutionary that it

is very easy to call it ‘crazy.’ It must be said that, as a result of this rumor,

complicated  situations  became  such  as  to  be  a  danger  to  life.  Such

consequences of a plague reaction should be made impossible by all available

legal means. I owe it only to my clinical experience that I was able to master

the dangers resulting from this rumor.”


  Excerpt from a letter by Harry Obeymeyer to

  Theodore P. Wolfe, M.D.

                                                                          Tel Aviv, Israel

                                                                            Oct. 16, 1943

    For the last 2 or 3 yrs Dr. Reich has been talked about in this country as having been in a

  mental asylum. I never bothered about this nonsense as the irrational make-up of this sort of

  slandering was too obvious. Whenever someone came out with this item of news I simply

  showed him a letter I had from Dr. Reich. But not until recently did I succeed in tracing the

  “news” to its sources. The chief propagandist was the late Dr. Eitingon, a sworn enemy of Dr.

  Reich. Dr. E. claimed to have been informed by Mrs. Anni Reich.

    This behavior on the part of psychiatrists is, to put it mildly, obnoxious. Can one do anything

  about it? 


                                                                      December 26, 1945

  Dr. Richard H. Hutchings, Editor

  The Psychiatric Quarterly

  Utica State Hospital

  Utica, N.Y.

  Dear Dr. Hutchings:

    In a review of Wilhelm Reich’s THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION, The Psychiatric Quarterly 19,

  1945, 717ff., I find the following statement, referring to Wilhelm Reich:

      “When he arrived at New York as a refugee, his admission to this country was long delayed

  while the government investigated charges against him of immorality.”

    This statement is pure fabrication. I was present at the dock when Wilhelm Reich arrived in

  this country. There was no delay, charge or government investigation of any kind whatsoever. A

  statement like the above is irresponsible and libelous.

    I fully understand that you, as the Editor, cannot be expected to check up on the accuracy of

  statements made by your reviewers. On the other hand, if you allow reviews to be published

  anonymously (a policy which I cannot understand either as an editor or as a reviewer), who,

  then, takes the responsibility for such statements? This statement is an example of irresponsible

  rumor-mongering and certainly has no place in a scientific journal. I trust that you will set your

  readers straight in this matter.

                                                                    Very sincerely yours,

                                                          (signed) THEODORE P. WOLFE, M.D.


 


                                                                      Oslo, Sept. 29, 1948

  Gabriel Langfeldt, M.D.

  Psychiatric Clinic

  Vinderen, Norway

    I  have  been  told  by  different,  completely  trustworthy  persons  that  in  a  meeting  at  the

  Psychiatric Clinic on, I believe, the thirteenth of this month, you said that in America now it is

  the general opinion that Dr. Wilhelm Reich is completely insane. None of the individuals who

  reported this to me had written down your statements verbatim, so I cannot give you your exact

  words. But according to these persons this was the content of what you said.

    I assume that the reports are true and I would like to ask you on what basis you make

  statements like these. I intend to report this to Dr. Reich so that he can take the necessary steps

to protect himself against attacks of this kind.

    The following is somewhat off-the-subject, but I would like to inform you that during the

  latter part of August and the first part of Sept. this year, I attended a conference of Reich’s  students and co-workers, among them seventeen doctors, most of whom were psychiatrists with

  long experience and some with previous and present university teaching positions. I talked very

  thoroughly with most of them and none of them seemed to have detected Reich’s insanity.

    In case you wish to add or correct any of your above-mentioned statement about Dr. Reich, I

  will wait till the seventh of October before I inform Reich about them.

                                                                                Sincerely,

                                                                      (signed) OLA RAKNES

 

    [Dr. Langfeldt has refused permission to print his reply to Dr. Raknes, together with other

    correspondence on the subject with Dr. A. Allan Cott (who has also refused permission to have

his letter printed). In his reply, Dr. Langfeldt gave as the source for his statement an article by

  Mildred  Edie  Brady,  a  free-lance  writer  (not  a  psychiatrist  as  he  had  assumed)  which  was

  published in Harper’s in April 1947. Entitled “The Strange Case of Wilhelm Reich,” it created

  the impression that Reich was insane. Prompted by her complaint that “the medical profession

  had not themselves made sufficient effort to warn the public of their non-approval of Mr. [sic]

  Reich,” the Menninger Clinic reprinted the article in their bulletin. According to Dr. Langfeldt,

  those  psychiatrists  with  whom  he  had  discussed  the  article  subscribed  to  this  viewpoint.

  Editors.]


 


  TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN

I, Nic Waal, M.D., hereby report the following facts: Mitja Fabian, M.D., Psychoanalyst at the

  Menninger Clinic, Topeka, Kansas, said in my presence and that of Dr. Bergman, that it is long

  recognized that Wilhelm Reich is crazy. She was also very disturbed about the fact that Dr.

  Meyer Silvert intended to study with Wilhelm Reich and told Mrs. Ruth Cohen that something

  should be done to prevent Silvert from going to Reich, because Reich is crazy.

    Dr. Karl Menninger, in a discussion with me, warned me against connecting my work with

  Reich’s name and asked me whether the orgone business of Reich wasn’t crazy. I believe that

  the rumors were originated years ago by the late Dr. Otto Fenichel.

  November 9th, 1948

                                                                    (signed)______________

                                                                          Nic Waal, M.D.

  Dated this 9th day of November 1948

  Anne Silverzweig

  Notary Public, State of New York


     Memorandum given by Reich’s lawyer, Arthur Garfield Hays, to Dr.

  Miller’s lawyer, Abraham Harris, at the conclusion of a conference

  with him

                                    December 22, 1948

  RE: ORGONE INSTITUTE

    Dr. Joseph S. A. Miller has made the following statement:

    That Dr. Oberndorf had phoned him and had given him the following information: That a

  Mrs.— — had gone to the Orgone Institute on the recommendation of Dr. Singer, and there had

  been undressed, manipulated and finally masturbated; that she was assured that this would help

  her and later treatments would go even deeper.

    Dr. Miller further stated that at Dr. Oberndorf’s call he had added that the patient had gone

  into an extreme panic for several days as a result of this examination, and that they had put her

in a box not unlike a steam box.

    This story is made up out of whole cloth, is wholly untrue, and is extremely damaging to the

  Orgone Institute. The same statement had been made by Dr. Annie Rubenstein and I believe by

  Dr. Nunberg. My own view is that the way to clear this thing up is for the doctors themselves to

  investigate the sources of this rumor. It is quite possible that Dr. Oberndorf got the story from

  someone else. I should expect Dr. Miller, or you his attorney, to investigate all the facts. We can

  prove to you that the above story is wholly untrue, and we ask you to start your investigation on

  that assumption. I should then expect, after running this thing down, for the doctors themselves

to clear it all up, have all those involved state where they heard this story, and for the people

  from whom it originally emanated to state the source of their information. I should then expect

an expression of regret and apology from all doctors who had anything to do with this, and

  assurances that they would avoid in the future spreading any rumors of fact unless they had

  evidence or proof of such facts. I would further suggest that the doctors state that if any such

  rumors come to them they make inquiries at the Orgone Institute to find out if the facts are

  correct before they repeat such facts.

                                                                  ARTHUR GARFIELD HAYS


 


    [In a letter dated September 17, 1950, Dr. A. Allen Cott drew Reich’s attention to a book by

  Hervey  Cleckley,  M.D.,  entitled The  Mask  of  Sanity,  in  which  Reich  was  presented  as  a

  psychopathic personality. Again, the material for this conclusion was drawn from the Brady

  article and its endorsement by the Menninger Clinic. Also, using the Journal of the A.M.A. as

his authority, Cleckey referred to the orgone energy accumulator as a fraudulent device and

  repeated the completely unfounded statement that it was intended as a means of curing cancer.
                              2
  Eds.] In a statement in the APA Newsletter of April 15, 1954, under the title “Orgone Energy

  Devices Barred from Interstate Commerce,” appeared the following: 


    “The acting Medical Director of the Federal Food and Drug Administration has expressed

his Agency’s appreciation for APA’s help in the successful development of its case.”                        3) MISCELLANEOUS





  The significance of style in psychoanalytic writing



INTRODUCTION TO “IBSEN’S PEER GYNT, LIBIDOKONFLIKTE

UND WAHNGEBILDE”

—October, 1952.


This manuscript, written by hand by Wilhelm Reich in 1919–1920, is being

deposited with the Sigmund Freud Archives not only because it had some

interest for the psychoanalytic historian. It is being deposited mainly to give

an impression of the academic atmosphere in which the early psychoanalytic

movement  was  submerged  at  that  time.  Psychoanalysis,  which  dealt  with

human  dirt  of  the  worst  kind,  and  at  the  same  time  had  to  survive  the

onslaught  of  the  maligning,  gossiping,  slandering  academic  world  of

established “sex-free” psychiatry, was forced to compensate for the dirt it

handled by a highly academic, “purified” style. It was, for example, a habit

with early psychoanalytic lectures to introduce their lectures with an excuse

as to their right to deal with the subject, or as to the subject itself. Also, the

psychoanalyst sat behind the patient and the patient’s eyes were covered with

a piece of cloth in many cases.

  This is not to depreciate early psychoanalytic procedures. It is to tell the

world what pioneering effort encounters.

  It is noteworthy that Freud’s simple style in his first papers of the 1890’s

became more and more involved, academic, and “Goethean” as the decades

passed by. Reich, who met psychoanalysis in 1919 and had grown up in the

spirit and language of German, academic, natural science and philosophy,discloses a shrouded, academic style in this manuscript, which deals little

with sex directly. Ten years later, he was engrossed in the rude, crude ways

of people’s sex behavior and sex lives. The academic style which he had

employed in the early 1920’s fell asunder. Still, it was noticeable in the first

German edition of his Mass Psychology of Fascism (1932). But as the years

passed by, and as the emotional plague increased its efforts to kill Reich’s

fight  for  the  love  life  of  infants  and  adolescents,  in  the  1930’s,  the  style

became more congruous with the contents: simple, straight, brief-sentenced,

hard-hitting,  direct,  avoiding  circumlocution,  evasion,  and  academicism.

Thus, the development of style in Reich’s writing demonstrates the way whch

led  him,  around  1930,  back  to  where  Sigmund  Freud  had  tended  in  his

development around 1900: The sexual stasis neuroses in the masses of the

population.  From  here,  also,  the  conflict  between  Sigmund  Freud  and

Wilhelm Reich is emerging in a clearly understandable manner. The social

consequences which Reich drew from the existence of sexual mass neuroses

in  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century,  consequences  which  were  so

severely refuted by the world at large and by the psychoanalysts in particular,

did not begin to emerge widely visible on the social scene before the late

1940’s when sexuality of children and genitality were openly discussed and

presented in textbooks as well as in novels in the American literature. The

triumph of the sex-economic development away from psychoanalysis began

to be obvious.


                                                                    1
Supplementation of Freud’s theory of the anxiety neurosis


As mentioned before, I came to Freud through the field of sexology. It is thus

not surprising that his theory of the actual neuroses (Aktualneurosen) which I

later termed stasis neuroses (Stauungsneurosen) struck me as much more in

keeping with natural science than the “interpretation” of the “meaning” of

symptoms  in  the  “psychoneuroses.”  Freud  applied  the  name  of  actual

neuroses to neuroses which resulted from present-day (aktuelle) disturbancesof sex life. According to this concept, anxiety neurosis and neurasthenia were

disturbances  which  lacked  a  “psychic  etiology.”  Instead,  they  were  the

immediate result of dammed-up sexuality. They were like toxic disturbances.

Freud assumed the existence of “chemical sexual substances” which, if not

correctly  “metabolized,”  caused  such  symptoms  as  palpitation,  cardiac

irregularity, acute anxiety attacks, sweating and other vegetative symptoms.

He did not establish a connection between anxiety neurosis and the vegetative

system. Anxiety neurosis, so his clinical experience showed, was caused by

sexual  abstinence  or  coitus  interruptus.  It  had  to  be  distinguished  from

neurasthenia, which, in contradistinction, was caused by “sexual abuse,” such

as excessive masturbation, and which was characterized by pain in the back,

headaches,  general  irritability,  disturbances  of  memory  and  concentration,

etc. That is, Freud classified according to their etiology syndromes which

official  neurology  and  psychiatry  did  not  understand.  For  this,  he  was

attacked  by  the  psychiatrist  Lowenfeld,  who,  like  hundreds  of  other

psychiatrists, denied completely the sexual etiology of the neuroses. Freud

was trying to adapt his concepts to clinical terminology. As he put it, the

symptoms of the actual neuroses, in contrast to those of the psychoneuroses,

especially  hysteria  and  compulsion  neurosis,  betrayed  no  psychic  content

whatsoever. The symptoms of the latter always had a tangible content, also

always of a sexual nature. Only, the concept of sexuality had to be taken in a

broad sense. At the bottom of every psychoneurosis was the incest phantasy

and  the  fear  of  injury  to  the  genital.  They  were,  indeed, infantile  and

unconscious sexual ideas which expressed themselves in the psycho-neurotic

symptom. Freud made a very sharp distinction between actual neuroses and

psychoneuroses. The psychoneuroses, understandably, occupied the center of

the clinical interest of the psychoanalyst. According to Freud, the treatment

of  the  actual  neuroses  consisted  in  the  elimination  of  the  harmful  sexual

practices, such as sexual abstinence or coitus interruptus in anxiety neurosis,

excessive  masturbation  in  neurasthenia.  The  psychoneuroses,  on  the  otherhand, called for psychoanalytic treatment. In spite of this sharp distinction,

Freud admitted a connection between the two. He thought it likely that every

psychoneurosis centered around an “actual-neurotic core.” This illuminating

statement, which Freud never followed up, was the starting point of my own

investigations of stasis anxiety.

  In the actual neurosis in Freud’s sense, biological energy is misdirected; it

is  blocked  from  access  to  consciousness  and  motility.  The  anxiety

(Aktualangst)  and  the  immediate  vegetative  symptoms  are,  as  it  were,

malignant growths which are nourished by the undischarged sexual energy.

But, on the other hand, the peculiar psychic manifestations of hysterias and

compulsion  neuroses  also  looked  like  biologically  meaningless  malignant

growths. Where did they derive their energy from? Undoubtedly from the

“actual-neurotic core” of the dammed-up sexual energy. This, and nothing

else,  could  be  the source  of  energy  in  the  psychoneurosis.  No  other

interpretation  would  fit  Freud’s  suggestion.  However,  the  majority  of

psychoanalysts  opposed  Freud’s  theory  of  the  actual  neuroses.  They

contended that actual neuroses did not exist at all; that these disturbances,

also, were “psychically determined”; that even in the so-called “free-floating

anxiety”  unconscious  psychic  contents  could  be  demonstrated.  The  chief

exponent  of  this  view  was  Stekel.  He,  like  others,  failed  to  see  the

fundamental difference between psychosomatic affect and psychic content of

a symptom. In other words, it was quite generally contended that every kind

of anxiety and nervous disturbance was of psychic origin, and not of somatic

origin, as Freud had assumed for the actual neuroses. Freud never resolved

this contradiction, but he continued to adhere to his distinction between the

two groups of neuroses. Notwithstanding the general assertions as to the non-

existence  of  anxiety  neurosis,  I  saw  such  cases  in  great  numbers  in  the

psychoanalytic  clinic.  However,  the  symptoms  of  the  actual  neuroses  had

undeniably  a  psychic superstructure.  Pure  actual  neuroses  are  rare.  The

distinction  was  not  as  sharp  as  Freud  had  assumed.  Such  specializedquestions may seem unimportant to the layman. But it will be shown that

they contained decisive problems of human health.

  There  could  be  no  doubt: The  psychoneuroses  had  an  actual-neurotic

core and the actual neuroses had a psychoneurotic superstructure. Was there

any sense in making the distinction? Was it not just a matter of a quantitative

difference?

  While most analysts ascribed everything to the psychic content of the

neurotic symptoms, leading psychopathologists, like Jaspers, contended that

psychological interpretation of meaning, and thus, psychoanalysis, were not

within the realm of natural science at all. The “meaning” of a psychic attitude

or action, they said, could be comprehended only in terms of philosophy, and

not  of  natural  science.  Natural  science  dealt  only  with quantities  and

energies, philosophy with psychic qualities; and there was no bridge between

the quantitative and the qualitative. It was plainly a matter of the question

whether or not psychoanalysis and its method belonged to natural science. In

other words: Is a scientific psychology in the strict sense of the word at all

possible? Can psychoanalysis claim to be such a psychology? Or is it only

one of the many philosophical schools? Freud himself paid no attention to

these methodological questions and quietly continued to publish his clinical

observations; he disliked philosophical discussions. But I had to fight such

arguments on the part of un-understanding antagonists. They tried to classify

us as mystics and thus to settle the question. But we knew that—for the first

time in the history of psychology—we were engaging in natural science. We

wanted to be taken seriously. It was only in the hard-fought controversies

over these questions that the sharp weapons were forged with which I later

was  able  to  defend  Freud’s  cause.  If  it  were  true  that  only  experimental

psychology in the sense of Wundt was “natural science,” because it measured

human reactions quantitatively, then, I thought, something was wrong with

natural science. For Wundt and his pupils knew nothing of the human in his

living reality. They evaluated him according to the number of seconds heneeded to react to the word “dog.” They still do. We, on the other hand,

evaluated a person according to the manner in which he handled his conflicts

in life, and the motives which activated him. To me, there loomed behind this

argument the more important question as to whether it might be possible to

arrive at a concrete formulation of Freud’s concept of “psychic energy,” or

whether it might be possible even to subsume it under the general concept of

energy.

    Philosophical arguments cannot be countered with facts. The Viennese

philosopher and physiologist Allers refused to enter upon the question of the

existence of an unconscious psychic life, on the grounds that the assumption

of an “unconscious” was “a priori erroneous from a philosophical point of

view.” I hear similar objections today. When I assert that highly sterilized

substances produce life, it is argued that the slide was dirty, or that, if there

seems to be life, it is “only a matter of Brownian movement.” The fact that it

is very easy to distinguish dirt on the slide from the bions, and equally easy to

distinguish Brownian movement from vegetative movement, is not taken into

consideration. In brief, “objective science” is a problem in itself.

  In this confusion, I was unexpectedly aided by such everyday clinical

observations  as  the  ones  provided  by  the  two  patients  mentioned  above.

Gradually  it  became  clear  that the  intensity  of  an  idea  depends  upon  the

somatic excitation with which it is connected. Emotions originate from the

instincts, consequently from the somatic sphere. Ideas, on the other hand,

certainly are a definitely “psychic,” “non-somatic” thing. What, then, is the

connection between the “non-somatic” idea and the “somatic” excitation?

For example, the idea of sexual intercourse is vivid and forceful if one is in a

state  of  full  sexual  excitation.  For  some  time  after  sexual  gratification,

however, it cannot be vividly reproduced; it is dim, colorless, and vague. Just

here must the secret of the interrelation between the “physiogenic” anxiety

neurosis and the “psychogenic” psychoneurosis be hidden. The first patient

temporarily  lost  all  his  psychic  compulsion  symptoms  after  he  hadexperienced sexual gratification; with the return of sexual excitation, they

recurred  and  lasted  until  the  next  occasion  of  gratification.  The  second

patient, on the other hand, had meticulously worked through everything in the

psychic realm, but in him, sexual excitation remained absent; the unconscious

ideas  at  the  root  of  his  erective  impotence  had  not  been  touched  by  the

treatment.

  Things began to take shape. I began to understand that an idea, endowed

with a very small amount of energy, was capable of provoking an increase of

excitation. The excitation thus provoked, in turn made the idea vivid and

forceful. If the excitation subsided, the idea would collapse also. If, as is the

case in the stasis neurosis, the idea of sexual intercourse does not arise in

consciousness, due to moral inhibition, the excitation attaches itself to other

ideas which are less subject to censorship. From this, I concluded: the stasis

neurosis  is  a somatic  disturbance,  caused  by  sexual  excitation  which  is

misdirected because it is frustrated. However, without a psychic inhibition,

sexual energy can never become misdirected. I was surprised that Freud had

overlooked this fact. Once an inhibition has created the sexual stasis, this in

turn may easily increase the inhibition and reactivate infantile ideas, which

then take the place of normal ones. That is, infantile experiences which in

themselves are in no way pathological, may, due to a present-day inhibition,

become endowed with an excess of sexual energy. Once that has happened,

they become urgent; being in conflict with adult psychic organization, they

have to be kept down by repression. Thus, the chronic psychoneurosis, with

its infantile sexual content, develops on the basis of a sexual inhibition which

is conditioned by present-day circumstances and is apparently “harmless” at

the outset. This is the nature of Freud’s “regression to infantile mechanisms.”

All cases that I have treated showed this mechanism. If the neurosis had

developed not in childhood, but at a later age, it was shown regularly that

some “normal” inhibition or difficulty of the sexual life had created a stasis,

and  this  in  turn  had  reactivated  infantile  incestuous  desires  and  sexualanxieties.

  The next question was: Are the customary antisexual attitude and sexual

inhibition  which  initiate  every  chronic  neurosis  “neurotic”  or  “normal”?

Nobody  discussed  this  question.  The  sexual  inhibition,  e.g.,  of  a  well-

brought-up middle-class girl seemed to be considered as entirely a matter-of-

course. I thought so myself, or rather, I just did not give any thought to the

question. If a young, vivacious girl developed a neurosis in the course of her

unsatisfying marriage, with cardiac anxiety, etc., nobody asked to know the

reason for the inhibition which kept her from achieving sexual gratification in

spite of all. As time went on, she would develop a full-fledged hysteria or

compulsion neurosis. The first cause of the neurosis was the moral inhibition,

its driving force the unsatisfied sexual energy.

  The  solution  of  many  problems  ramify  from  this  point.  There  were,

however,  serious  obstacles  to  the  immediate  and  vigorous  undertaking  of

such solutions. For seven years, I believed that I was working altogether as a

Freudian. Nobody had any idea that these questions were the beginning of a

dangerous mingling of basically imcompatible scientific views.


                      2
The “death instinct”


Around 1925, there began a parting of the ways in psychoanalytic theory, of

which  its  exponents  were  at  first  unaware,  but  which  has  become  quite

obvious by now.

                                                                                          3
  … Reik had published a book on “Geständniszwang und Strafbedürfnis”

in which the whole original concept of the neurosis was made upside down.

That the book was well received was so much the worse. Reduced to the

simplest terms, his innovation consisted in the elimination of the concept that

the  child fears  punishment  for  sexual  behavior.  Freud,  in Beyond  the

Pleasure Principle and in The Ego and the Id had assumed the existence of

an unconscious need for punishment; this was supposed to account for the

resistance against getting well. At the same time, the concept of the “deathinstinct” was introduced. Freud assumed the living substance to be governed

by two opposing instinctual forces: the life forces, which he equated with the

sexual instinct (“Eros”) and the “death instinct” (“Thanatos”). According to

him “eros” would rouse the living substance out of its equilibrium, which is

like the passivity of inorganic matter; it would create tension, would unite life

into  ever  larger  units.  It  was  vigorous,  turbulent  and  the  cause  of  life’s

tumult. But behind it acted the mute, yet “much more momentous” death

instinct; the tendency to reduce the living to the lifeless, to nothingness, to

Nirvana. According to this concept, life really was nothing but a disturbance

of eternal silence, of nothingness. In the neurosis, accordingly, these positive

life or sexual forces were opposed by the death instinct. Though the death

instinct itself could not be perceived, it was argued, its manifestations were

too  obvious  to  be  overlooked.  Humans  constantly  showed self-destructive

tendencies;  the  death  instinct  manifested  itself  in  masochistic  tendencies.

These tendencies were at the bottom of the unconscious guilt feeling, which

one might also call need for punishment. Patients simply did not want to get

well because of this need for punishment which was satisfied in the neurosis.

  It was only through Reik that I really found out where Freud began to err.

Reik exaggerated and generalized many correct findings, such as the fact that

criminals tend to give themselves away, or that to many people it is a relief to

be able to confess a crime. Up to that time, a neurosis was considered to be

the result of a conflict between sexuality and fear of punishment. Now, the

formulation came to be that the neurosis was a conflict between sexuality and

need for punishment, i.e., the direct opposite of the fear of punishment for

sexual  behavior.  Such  a  formulation  meant  a  complete  liquidation  of  the

psychoanalytic theory of the neuroses. It was in complete contradiction to all

clinical  insight.  Clinical  observation  left  no  doubt  of  the  correctness  of

Freud’s original formulation: the patients had come to grief as a result of

their fear of punishment for sexual behavior, and not as a result of any desire

to be punished for it. True enough, many patients developed secondarily amasochistic attitude of wanting to be punished, of harming themselves or of

clinging to their neurosis. But that was a secondary result—or a way out—of

the  complications  into  which  they  were  driven  by  the  inhibition  of  their

sexuality.  It  was  undoubtedly  the  task  of  the  therapist  to  eliminate  these

desires for punishment as what they were, namely, neurotic formations, and

to free the patient’s sexuality; not to confirm these tendencies to self-injury as

manifestations  of  deeper  biological  strivings.  The  adherents  of  the  death

instinct—who grew in numbers as well as dignity, because now they could

talk of “Thanatos” instead of sexuality—ascribed the neurotic self-damaging

tendency of a sick organism to a biological primary instinct of the living

substance. From this, psychoanalysis has never recovered.

  Reik was followed by Alexander. He examined some criminals and stated

that  quite  generally  crime  is  motivated  by  an  unconscious  need  for

punishment. He did not ask what was the origin of such unnatural behavior.

He failed to mention the sociological basis of crime. Such formulations made

any  further  thinking  unnecessary.  If  one  was  not  able  to  cure,  the  death

instinct could be blamed. When people committed murder, it was in order to

go to prison; when children stole, it was to obtain relief from a conscience

that troubled them. I marvel today at the energy that was expended at that

time on the discussion of such opinions. And yet, Freud had had something in

mind which merited considerable effort in evaluating it; this I shall show

later. However, inertia prevailed, and the labors of decades were lost. The

patients’ “negative therapeutic reaction” was later shown to be nothing but

the result of theoretical and technical inability to establish orgastic potency in

the patient, in other words, to handle their pleasure anxiety.


            4
Lay analysis


Until now, we have been concerned only with the question whether non-

physicians  should  practice  psychoanalysis  on  patients  (analysis  for

therapeutic purposes). The problem has now been shifted insofar as Prof.Freud, in his book on lay analysis, has taken a further step, proposing to

separate psychoanalysis, even in its medical aspects, from medicine; i.e., to

train “a special class of therapists.”

  Let us now discuss his three most important arguments. Lay analysis, the

practice of therapeutic analysis by non-physicians, is necessary:

  1.  Out  of  consideration  for  the  application  of  psychoanalysis  to  the

humanities.

  2. Because it is feared that if its practical application were restricted to

physicians, psychoanalysis could somehow sink into the insignificance of a

mere chapter on “therapy” in some textbook on psychiatry.

  3. Because the preparatory somatic training of physicians is secondary to

psychological thinking.

  To 1: It is said that non-medical analysts require practical experience in

order to engage in scholarly pursuits. But the facts show that the application

of  psychoanalysis  to  the  humanities  is  not  advanced,  but  on  the  contrary

suffers when its proponents become clinicians, too. The awakening clinical

interest supplants all other concerns. The development of psychoanalysis in

the  humanities  has  ceased  since  lay  persons  have  also  been  practicing

analysis. This argument is thus contradicted by experience.

  To  2:  The  second  argument  reveals  the  deep  distrust  shown  for

psychoanalytic physicians, to the effect that with them theoretical interest

and, with it, psychoanalysis as a science, would not be as well safeguarded as

with  the  non-physicians  because,  allegedly,  the  former  are  more

therapeutically inclined. The past does not justify this mistrust, and we do not

want to decide about the future. At all events, psychoanalytic physicians do

not seem to us to merit such distrust. In his discussion, Jones has emphasized

the counterpart of this, namely Prof. Freud’s exceedingly flattering opinion

regarding  lay  analysts.  Inasmuch  as  psychoanalytical  psychology  is  so

intimately related to the practical questions of everyday life that no step in the

therapeutic sphere is possible without theory and vice versa, the theory mustbe as well guarded with physicians as with lay practitioners.

  To 3: The third argument that the training of physicians “is practically the

opposite of what is required as a preparation for psychoanalysis;” that, thus,

somatic training is disadvantageous to psychoanalysis, likewise expresses the

distrust of physicians qualitatively. And suddenly we see that the question

whether lay persons should analyze alongside of physicians will be replaced

by the other question whether physicians should analyze at all. Had Prof.

Freud limited this criticism to the neurological concept of the neuroses, we

would have agreed with him without any reservations. However, when we

now oppose his authoritative opinion, we do so in the deep conviction of thus

being of service to the cause of psychoanalysis. If psychoanalysis were in

essence  contrary  to  organic  medicine,  the  following  facts  would  be

incomprehensible:

  A physician discovered psychoanalysis. Most analysts, and not the worst

ones, are physicians. Prof Freud once stated that psychoanalysis will one day

be placed on its organic base. Furthermore—and, until now, this has merited

much  too  little  consideration  in  the  question  of  lay  analysis—he  posited

something somatic as the core of the neuroses and the essence of the affects.

His concept of the libido means something physical (biological) as well as

psychical. There are almost no patients without bodily symptoms or sexual

disorders (disturbances of menstruation, potency, etc.). The analyst who is

not organically trained is helpless in the face of the actual neurotic core of the

neuroses, whether it concerns a vasoneurosis, neurasthenia or hypochondria.

  On the other hand, we should like to assume with Jones that Prof. Freud

has stressed so much the necessity of a “thorough” knowledge of theology

and ethnology only in the interest of lay analysis.

  Of course, we share Prof. Freud’s opinion that the interest of science in

this question must be decisive. However, it is precisely from this point of

view that psychoanalysis cannot be too closely linked to medicine.

  One  need  only  consider  the  great  area  of  the  organic  neuroses:hypochondria, neurasthenia and the psychoses. And do we not have much to

expect from a psychology of the organic diseases? Or, after psychoanalysis

has  been  separated  from  its  foundation,  must  there  be  analysts  who,  as

physicians, concern themselves only with the area bordering on the organic?

In  our  opinion,  neither  science  nor  the  patient  would  benefit  by  such  a

division. There would then continue to be doctors who know nothing of the

psyche and psychoanalysts who are ignorant of the body. Moreover, a group

of physicians would arise who would [only] be interested in the psychology

of the body. The doctor would understand the analyst even less than he does

today; and analysts, in turn, would completely forget that the “libido” has a

somatic (endocrinological) root and a biological function. Surely it is not

exaggerated to ask that everyone who wishes to treat the neuroses should be

adequately  trained  in  the  conceptual  content  of  the  libido  (“borderline

concept between the psychic and the somatic”).

  The question of lay analysis is thus narrowed down factually to the extra-

analytical preparatory training. At the present time, medical men offer the

best guarantee of an adequate preliminary education. The fact that physicians

have shown themselves so contemptuous and devoid of understanding toward

psychoanalysis must be ascribed not to their somatic training but to their

complexes. And have philosophers or biologists or academic psychologists

who have come in contact with analysis behaved differently? Why is the

“somatic prejudice” any more onerous than the philosophical one? Does not

the philosopher always have the most complicated objections to analysis?

With the analytically trained physician, the curse of somatic prejudice is at

least  compensated  for  by  the  blessing  of  natural-scientific  and  clinical

thought.  If  medicine  is  caught  in  the  meshes  of  mechanical-chemical

thinking, then psychoanalysis is called upon to liberate it from its errors. One

may condemn the medical man’s complex-conditioned lack of understanding,

but one need not, therefore, turn one’s back on medicine. What speaks most

in favor of the physician as therapist, even as a psychotherapist, is the factthat he has learned at the sickbed to deal with the sick and that brings along a

measure of therapeutic interest which justifies study of the patient. I have

heard lay analysts boast openly that they had no therapeutic interest. Why,

then do they want to practice therapy?

  .…


                                                                          5
Expulsion from the International Psychoanalytical Association


In the report of the Central Committee of the International Psychoanalytical

Association (Internat. Zeitschr. f. Psychoana. 1935), a painful event is left

out. For the orientation of the members of the Association, we complement

the report as follows:

  At the 13th International Psychoanalytic Congress (Lucerne, August 26 to

31,  1934),  Wilhelm  Reich  was  expelled  from  the  International

Psychoanalytical Association. This brought to an end the first stage of hard

struggle, of eleven years’ duration, for a correct natural-scientific psychology

and theory of sex.

  We cannot give here an extensive presentation of the motives behind this

expulsion or of the differences within the psychoanalytic movement. This

may be done at a time when further catastrophes in the scientific development

of psychoanalysis, catastrophes which are bound to come, will necessitate a

detailed  historical  explanation.  Here  we  shall  show  only  briefly  how

conservative scientific organizations of today fight workers who strive to take

scientific research seriously.

  The manner in which the expulsion of Wilhelm Reich took place is so

                                                                        6
grotesque as to appear incredible to the outsider. The Sexpol has developed

the  principle  of  not  ascribing  grotesque,  seemingly  senseless  fighting

methods to individual officials of organizations, but to focus attention on the

objective circumstances which are at the base of such personal methods. If

one wishes to understand this expulsion, one has to know the embarrassing

situation in which the present administration of the Association finds itself.As an organization, it has to represent a science which is, intrinsically and in

its  theoretical  origin,  revolutionary.  But  the  representatives  of  this

organization are steeped in the ideology and the milieu of the middle classes,

are convinced of the unalterability of present-day living to such an extent that

they could not escape coming into conflict with their own theory; this has

taken place to the same extent to which the world political situation turned

reactionary and threatened any correct scientific work with destruction of the

scientists.  Furthermore,  the  leading  representatives  of  psychoanalysis  had

never been willing to draw the inevitable practical consequences from the

psychoanalytic theory of sex and from clinical experience. The administration

of the Association had no grounds on which to object to Wilhelm Reich’s

scientific and clinical views. On the contrary, over a period of many years,

members of the Association, in great numbers, considered his work (theory of

genitality and character-analysis) as the consistent development of Freud’s

originally revolutionary theory. There were, then, no solid grounds for his

expulsion. For a number of years, therefore, the demand had been made that

he resign voluntarily. This he rejected, stating that he would never resign

voluntarily. Then, in the course of many misunderstandings, an opportunity

presented itself to rid oneself of the burden which Reich represented for the

Association.  True,  the  original  goal  of  securing,  unobtrusively,  the  social

acceptability  of  psychoanalysis,  was  not  achieved.  Before  the  Congress,

Reich  received  the  following  letter  from  the  Secretary  of  the  German

Psychoanalytical Society:


  Dear Dr. Reich:

    On  the  occasion  of  the  International  Congress,  the  Verlag  (International  Psychoanalytic

  Publishing  House)  plans  to  publish  a  calendar  containing  a  membership  list  of  the

  Psychoanalytic Association. The situation makes it imperative not to have your name in the

  membership list of the German Psychoanalytic Society. I would be glad if you could appreciate

  the situation and, setting the interest of the psychoanalytic cause in Germany above any possible

  personal feelings, would give your consent to this measure. Your standing in the international

  psychoanalytic world as a scientist and author is so well known that this omission of your name

  could  not  possibly  do  you  the  slightest  harm,  as  it  might  to  a  tyro.  Furthermore,  with  the  recognition of the Scandinavian group at the Congress and your future listing in this new group,

  the present problem will become objectless. May I ask for your immediate reply?


  Reich  protested  against  this  plan  and  at  the  same  time  wrote  to  the

General Secretary of the Association as follows:


  Dear Miss Freud:

    I have just learned that my name was omitted from the calendar which is about to appear. I

  learned about this indirectly and was asked to “consent sine ira” to this omission. There are

  many things in this which I do not understand and I would be grateful if you would tell me the

  meaning of this measure.

    To begin with, I don’t know whether the accent is on the “consent” or the “sine ira.” I also

  don’t understand why, in such an important matter, I was not approached directly, provided that

  the motive was nothing more than certain tactical considerations. Further, I don’t understand

  what  was  hoped  to  be  achieved  by  this  measure,  since  I  have  announced  a  paper  for  the

  Congress and see no way of keeping myself hidden there from the German public. Provided,

  still, that it is only a matter of “certain” considerations, the fact that one did not choose the way

of transferring me to another group, and the further fact that such things are done without my

  knowledge, behind my back, makes me think that something ominous is going on. To the world,

  the omission of my name must signify that I was either expelled or that I resigned. Since I have

  no intention of doing the latter, and since, to my knowledge, the former is not the case, the

  present attempt to solve the difficulty cannot be successful. I had occasion during the past year

to show that I fully appreciate the embarrassment that I represent but that, for objective reasons,

I cannot do anything to eliminate it. I would like to ask you, therefore, whether the omission of

  my name had the approval of the Executive Committee, and if so, the reasons for this measure,

  and the reason why I was not notified; it is also important for me to know what is the connection

  between this measure and my membership in the International Association.

    I would like to ask you, at the same time, to let the Executive Committee know that I protest

  against this measure, and that I ask again that the present difficulties and moot questions be

  discussed,  as  usual,  before  the  open  forum  of  our  members  and  readers.  As  painful  as  the

  circumstances may be, for everybody concerned, I must protest against being quietly put away

in a corner. The problems with which we are all concerned and which are decisive for the future

of psychoanalysis and its field of investigation need not fear the scrutiny of the world.


  On August 8th, Reich received the following reply from Anna Freud:


  Dear Dr. Reich:

    The program of the Congress is on press and will be sent to the members within the next few

  days. In the meantime, you will have received the communication as to the place of your paperin the program.

    Your complaint against the German Society I am referring to Dr. Jones. I did. not know

  anything about the whole affair, and I am asking Jones whether he did. He will communicate

  with you directly.


  On the eve of the Congress, Reich accidentally met a certain member of

the Executive Committee in the lobby of the Congress building. This man

told  Reich  privately  that,  a  week  previously,  the  German  Psychoanalytic

Society had decided on the expulsion of Reich, but that this expulsion was a

“mere  formality,”  since  the  recognition  of  the  Scandinavian  group  was

expected with certainty also to solve satisfactorily the problem of Reich’s

membership. Shortly afterwards Reich learned that the former president of

the International Association and of the International Training Committee,

Max Eitingon, had brought about Reich’s expulsion from the German, and

with  that,  from  the  International  Association, a  year  earlier,  in  a secret

                                            7
meeting of the Executive Committee. Of this, nobody had heard up to the

time of the Congress. When the expulsion became known at the Congress,

the members reacted in part with incredulity, in part with indignation, and in

part with the consolation that the whole thing was merely a formality after all

and  that  Reich  would  be  admitted  to  the  Scandinavian  group.  Nobody

believed  for  a  moment  that  the  Executive  Committee  would  confirm  the

expulsion. Very soon, however, it became obvious that it had been confirmed

by the Executive Committee.

  A decisive factor in the whole affair was the attitude of the Norwegians.

The Executive Committee of the International Association tried to make the

recognition  of  the  Norwegian  group  contingent  on  their  accepting  the

condition that they would not accept Reich as a member. The Norwegians,

however,  took  the  correct  point  of  view:  “We  will  not  have  conditions

dictated to us. Make up your mind whether you want to recognize us or not.

If  you  don’t,  we  will  resign.”  The  decisive  and  upright  attitude  of  the

Norwegians  (Hoel,  Raknes,  Schjelderup)  made  a  great  impression  and

intimidated the Executive Committee. They were recognized unconditionallyas a group of the International Association; however, the Swedish group was

separated  from  the  Norwegian  group,  in  order  to  remove  it  from  Reich’s

influence. After his expulsion, Reich read his paper to the Congress as a

guest.

  It is not too much to say that the whole Congress was under the impress

of this painful affair.

  On the eve of the business meeting, in order to prevent a public scandal, a

secret meeting was held of a representative of each of the local groups, under

the chairmanship of Anna Freud, in order to “hear Reich’s arguments.” The

whole thing was merely a gesture, for Reich’s “arguments” were well known

anyhow. He could only repeat there what he had said for years in his writings

and in his correspondence with officials of the Association: He could not give

in to the demand of the Executive Committee that he resign voluntarily. If the

Executive Committee expelled him, there was nothing he could do about it.

He understood the expulsion from the point of view of the death-instinct

theorists,  for  his  own  teachings  had  become  so  far  different  from  the

prevailing official teachings that there was no longer any common meeting

ground. He declared himself, however, the most consistent and legitimate

representative  and  developer  of  the  original  clinical  and  natural-scientific

psychoanalysis, and stated that from this point of view he could not recognize

his expulsion. He stated that, while this non-recognition on his part carried no

organizational weight, he had to insist on the publication of the reasons for

his expulsion in the official organ of the International Association. This was

promised but not done. The later rumor that the Committee had “come to

terms with Reich regarding his leaving the Association” only reflected the

intense embarrassment caused to all those involved in it by the expulsion

which had been decided a year previously.

  .…


On Freud’s eightieth birthday Our congratulations to Freud on his birthday

      8
(1936)By the time these lines reach the public, the noise of the celebrations will

have subsided and the celebrants will wait for the ninetieth—and, we hope

with them—for the hundredth birthday of Sigmund Freud to honor this man

again. At that time, there will be a great many articles presenting the data

from “The history of psychoanalysis” and from Freud’s “Autobiography” to

the public. Others, as at this time, will present the main features of Freud’s

theory  and  will  talk,  with  more  or  less  conviction,  of  its  revolutionary

character. All this is necessary and as it should be.

  To  us,  these  celebrations  were  food  for  serious  thought.  From  what

publications  we  have  seen,  it  was  abundantly  clear  that  nowhere  was  the

essential problem, “Freud and his environment,” touched upon. It is as yet too

early to present in detail the common fate shared by psychoanalysis between

1895 and 1920 and the young science of sex-economy, not to mention the

even  younger  Sexpol  movement.  The  event  of  Freud’s  eightieth  birthday,

however, should not pass without being correctly interpreted. It is necessary

to point out what a whole world passed over in silence.

  On  May  6,  1926,  the  members  of  the  Vienna  Psychoanalytic  Society

celebrated Freud’s seventieth birthday. There were many celebrants, flowers,

and presents. Freud made a brief speech, which will remain unforgettable;

nobody dared to make its contents publicly known. Freud warned that one

should not let oneself be deceived, that all the praise proved nothing, that the

world had not accepted psychoanalysis and continued to be inimical. A few

years before, Freud had expressed the same feeling when he wrote that the

world only accepted psychoanalysis, here and there, in order better to destroy

it.

  We fully agree with the point of view expressed by Freud on May 6,

1926. A look at the world and its important institutions shows us that things

are worse today than they were ten years ago. We should not relinquish our

watchfulness for a minute, for the fate suffered by psychoanalysis threatens

our work a hundred times more severely. We experience now a phase ofdeadly silence on the part of the academic world and other influential circles.

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  already  signs  of  a  method  of  benevolent

destruction. Sex-economy is being represented as one of the deviations from

psychoanalysis  like  that  of  Jung,  Adler  or  Stekel.  The  reasons  for  this

misrepresentation are stupidity as well as malice. He who knows the history

of the psychoanalytic movement can see the difference at first glance. All

deviations from Freud’s theory, without exception, are characterized by the

negation of sexuality. With Jung, the libido became a meaningless, mystical

all-soul concept, the best possible soil for the later Gleichschaltung in the

Third Reich. Adler replaced sexuality by the will to power, Rank denied the

existence of infantile sexuality. Sex-economy, on the other hand, took its

starting point precisely from those basic elements in Freud’s theory which

originally had aroused the ire of a world afraid of the truth. It developed the

orgasm theory and tried in vain to incorporate it into psychoanalytic theory,

where  it  organically  belonged.  It  clarified  the  theory  of  the  pregenital

infantile sexual drives and built the basis for a characterology which has the

sexual  process  as  its  core.  Character-analytic  technique  required  the  full

recognition of the laws of sexual economy. Many more things could be added

to show why the theory of sex-economy inevitably begins to feel the previous

fate of psychoanalysis. If it is to take itself seriously, it must do everything

possible to avoid the fate which is overcoming psychoanalysis, no matter

how noisy the sham praise of the world may be.

  There is, today, nowhere in the world any official institution, pedagogical,

psychiatric, or otherwise, which has made Freud’s revolutionary concepts its

own in a serious manner. Where is the mental hospital which systematically

investigates  the  causation  of  mental  diseases  by  the  disturbance  of  early

infantile sex life? Where is the academic institution which cultivates the rich

treasure of analytic knowledge, engages in analytic research, and recognizes

its full value? Where is the place where Freud’s revolutionary knowledge

finds its concrete expression? Who would, on the one hand, loudly proclaimhis conviction of the magnitude of Freud’s work and, on the other hand, take

consolation in the fact that, after all, psychoanalysts have been given teaching

posts at universities? Who believes that correct sexual theory could be taught

                      9
in America of today?

  And what do things look like in the psychoanalytic movement itself? The

English school is a sectarian circle completely divorced from life as it is. The

Berlin Society attempted Gleichschaltung and thus perished. The Hungarian

group  consists  almost  exclusively  of  the  house-analysts  of  rich  people,

without  either  scientific  development  or  serious  perspective.  The  Vienna

Society is under the pressure of political reaction and ruled by some death-

instinct theorists who no longer can be taken seriously from a scientific point

of view. The French group looks desolate.

  Has the socialist movement accepted psychoanalysis? Here and there in

words,  because  political  reaction  placed  Freud  in  the  camp  of

Kulturbolschewismus. In the Soviet Union, psychoanalysis has been without

development for years. There was ever so much talk about the significance of

Freud for the workers’ movement. Where, we must ask, has this significance

become socialist practice? Nowhere. Socialists recommend to the workers the

writings  of  reactionary  psychoanalysts  as  guidebooks  in  “socialist

psychology,”  such  as  an  article  by  Roheim  in  a  Hungarian  socialist

periodical.  Revolutionary  socialists  publish  articles  on  the  occasion  of

Freud’s birthday but betray complete ignorance of the fierce struggle that has

been going on for a decade within the psychoanalytic movement concerning

the problem, “workers’ movement and psychology.”

  The  structure  of  Freudian  theory  contains  contentions  of  very  diverse

kinds.  Besides  the  theory  of  early  infantile  sexuality  there  is  that  of  the

“primary process” in the Unconscious; besides the theory of repression there

is that of the death instinct; besides the theory of the determination of psychic

processes there is that of “cultural repression,” etc. The world asks for clarity.

There  are  contentions  which  are  indispensable,  others  which  are  non-essential, and still others which are only confusing. One would think that a

scientific  association  which  proclaims  the  world-historical  significance  of

psychoanalysis would adhere to those elements of the theory which are basic,

sound, and leading forward; but the opposite is the case. “Away from the

main thing, we like the non-essential things,” is the implicit slogan. It is most

closely  followed  by  some  analysts  calling  themselves  “socialists.”  They

avoid “the main thing” like the pestilence; if they did not, they would find

themselves, inevitably and immediately, in precisely that struggle which we

lead and which they pass over in silence. They do everything they can to

obliterate the front lines in the cultural struggle after they have been defined.

They are as dangerous as the preachers of the objective spirit. They usurp

findings and sabotage their meaning. It is necessary to warn against them.

  The decline of the psychoanalytic movement, its adaptation to existing

conditions, and the resulting sterility are not a matter for personal reproach.

We  have  learned  to  pay  attention  to  the  dependence  of  science  and  its

development  on  social  processes.  Consequently,  we  profess  a socially

conscious  science.  We  may  say  that  we  have  taken  into  our  care  the

revolutionary findings of Freud’s theory. This makes it necessary to become

clear in our minds about the existing situation and the factors which will

determine the further course of our work.

  The general world-political situation—in which we work with a theory of

sex which is at variance with all existing institutions and official concepts—

promises worse things to come. This world cannot acknowledge the fruits of

our  work  or  make  use  of  them.  It  was  we  who  were  able  to  show  what

advantages political reaction derives from the irrational feeling and thinking

of  the  masses,  from  their  longing  for  happiness  and  simultaneous  fear  of

sexuality.  The  diverse  socialist  parties  are  so  bogged  down  in  obsolete

economistic thinking and so preoccupied with the tremendous problems of

everyday that they cannot react differently towards us than with amazement

or enmity. Nevertheless, much has been achieved in these difficult years. Butwhat has been achieved is far from what is indispensable for the practical

accomplishment  of  our  tasks.  Apart  from  the  social  difficulties,  the  most

important factor inhibiting our work is our own structure.

  Our psychological criticism of Freud began with the clinical finding that

the unconscious inferno is not anything absolute, eternal, or unalterable, that

a certain social situation and development has created the character structure

of today and is thus perpetuated. We recognized that the fear of the “sexual

chaos” is justified but also that it applies to definite historical periods; and

our therapeutic work showed us that a different regulation of social living is

possible. We have never entertained the illusion that the evil in man can be

eliminated  suddenly.  We  learned  to  recognize  the  enormous  difficulties

which a political psychology must expect if it attempts to bring about a real

alteration of human structure. We ourselves, who have made this our goal,

are only too often confronted with the weaknesses of our structure. It is not

easy  to  master  them,  which  is  necessary  if  one  is  to  be  better  equipped

correctly to meet the effects of irrationalism in our fellow humans.

    Psychoanalysis once worked at the roots of life. The fact that it did not

become conscious of its social nature was the main factor in its catastrophic

decline. From this, we drew the following conclusion: A science which has as

its object of investigation life itself and which finds itself in a reactionary

environment must either submit to this environment and relinquish its own

principles, or it must organize itself, that is, create for itself the organs which

safeguard its future.

  Marxist  economics  was  organized  politically.  In  the  realm  of  political

economics,  the  political  organization  of  science  arouses  no  surprise.  It  is

different in other fields. Here, the illusion of an “unpolitical science” has

created much confusion. The science of human sexuality is in itself political,

whether it wants to be or not; consequently, it must draw the conclusions and

profess its social nature. From this, the necessity of organization follows.

Then, the wealth of new knowledge is no longer at the mercy of this or thataccident of social development, but is part of that political movement which

has  as  its  goal  a  rational,  scientific  guidance  of  society.  No  matter  how

concerned  one  may  be  with  the  irrational  thinking  within  the  socialist

movement, natural-scientific psychology and correct sexology can have their

                                      10
place only within this movement. Nobody will doubt this who has followed

the  development  of  mysticism  in  Germany  and  its  influence  on  natural-

scientific  research.  We  have  no  way  of  knowing  today  what  forms  the

organization of our work will take in the broad masses of the population. But

the necessity of creating a mass basis for it cannot be doubted. This not only

will be a protection against reactionary influences from the outside but will

also protect us against compromises with an inimical environment. If one is

left without social influence, the environment will prove the stronger force.

If, however, the people who count have understood the value of a scientific

undertaking for their existence and their future, they will aid the struggle and

diminish the pressure of an inimical outer world. Nobody can be absolutely

sure of himself, ourselves included. If, during a favorable period, we stood

out  for,  say,  the  necessity  of  a  gratifying  sex  life  in  adolescence,  a  less

favorable period may make us, nevertheless, give up such a contention or

even denounce it. If, however, a sufficient number of adolescents have made

our knowledge of puberty their own and are ready to defend it, we are spared

such a retreat, and our scientific work is realized. This example may suffice

to show what is meant here.

  The social anchoring of our scientific work promises yet another gain.

Freud started from physiology and discovered the nature of the psyche. Our

criticism of psychoanalysis began with the sociological concepts of Freud.

The  consistent  study  of  the  interrelationships  between  the  social  and  the

psychic  proved  highly  fruitful  for  clinical  work  also.  There  developed  a

basically new manner of studying the laws of sexual life. The orgasm theory,

with an inner logic, led back to physiology and biology. The nature of the

final results of this research cannot as yet be envisaged. The development isin  full  flux,  the  results  are  unaccustomed,  the  establishment  of  a

biophysiological basis of psychology seems to succeed. We can already say

that  one  of  the  most  important  of  Freud’s  expectations  is  coming  to  be

fulfilled: it will be possible to put the theory of psychic functioning on a solid

biological basis. True, in a different manner than one had usually thought

  11
of.

  Thus,  our  obligation  is  twofold:  that  of  safeguarding  the  practical

realization of Freud’s revolutionary achievements, and that of safeguarding

our  own  sex-economic  research.  If  we  succeed  in  making  the  masses  of

working individuals who are deprived of their happiness understand what our

work is about and why we have to struggle so hard, then, sooner or later, they

will help us, will, as a social power, protect our work against outer and inner

dangers and will themselves reap the fruits of the natural science about life.

  No matter how difficult or hurtful the conflicts between psychoanalysis

and sex-economy may have been, they will never cause us to forget what we

owe to the life work of Freud. For nobody knows better than we, nobody

experiences more painfully than we, why the world used to damn Freud and

today removes him from a fighting reality.


                                                                        12
Sex-economy and vegetotherapy in relation to psychoanalysis


Sex-economy is the theory of the basic laws of sexuality. These basic laws

are determined by the orgasm formula:

  tension→charge→discharge→relaxation.  Psychoanalysis  is  the  doctrine  of

unconscious emotional life. Within the context of emotional functions there

are  certain  relations  to  the  psychoanalytic  doctrine  of  the  neuroses.  The

psychoanalytic doctrine of repression and resistance is carried further and

becomes the sex-economic interpretation of the vegetative block. The basic

psychoanalytic theory of the specifically sexual etiology of the neuroses is

carried further and crystallizes into the sex-economic theory of the function

of  the  orgasm,  and  of  the  resultant  emotional  disturbances  if  the  orgasticfunction  itself  is  disturbed.  The  psychoanalytic  theory  of  determining

conscious emotional processes by unconscious emotional processes is carried

further  and  becomes  the  sex-economic  theory  of  vegetative  attitude  and

excitation.

  These are the basic similarities, expanded into sex-economy, which are in

harmony with the fundamentals of psychoanalysis.

    Sex-economy  is  distinguished  from  psychoanalysis  by  the  following

factors:

  The goal of psychoanalytic investigation is the discovery of unconscious

emotional mechanisms. The goal of sex-economic investigation, supported

by the character-analytic and vegetotherapeutic methods, is the discovery of

vegetative physical mechanisms. The emphasis is on influencing the physical

basis of emotional illness. This yields by-products which basically confirm

Freud’s theory of the unconscious. The vegetative conditions of attitude and

excitation which are released by the vegetotherapeutic technique invariably

have  a  specific  psychic  content.  The  psychic  content  (a  wish,  an  anxiety

fantasy,  an  expectation,  etc.)  is  not  conscious  to  the  patient.  Among  the

meaningful psychic structures brought to light by vegetative excitation are

most of the unconscious emotional ideas which psychoanalysis is accustomed

to  uncover  with  the  interpretive  method.  A  large  number  of  unconscious

mechanisms, such as the fear of bursting or the unconscious fear of orgasm,

cannot  be  reached  with  the  psychoanalytic  technique  of  free  association.

Beyond  this,  the  understanding  of  the  physical  attitude  leads  to  an

understanding of the form in which an emotional content is expressed. An

anxiety fantasy can be inhibitive or agitating. Vegetotherapy has nothing to

do  with  any  kind  of  calisthenics  or  breathing  exercises  such  as  yoga.  If

anything, it is diametrically opposed to these methods. Calisthenics and all

other  breathing  techniques  are  designed  to  teach  the  organism  various

movements  or  attitudes.  Vegetotherapy  strives  to  develop  those  attitudes,

movements, excitations, and natural breathing rhythms that are specificallycharacteristic of the patient’s personality.

  The essence and goal of psychoanalytic therapy is to render unconscious

material conscious by overcoming the emotional resistance to the awareness

of the unconscious. The essence and goal of character-analytic vegetotherapy

is to restore the biophysical equilibrium by releasing the orgastic potency;

that  is,  not  only  to  render  unconscious  material  conscious,  but  to  release

vegetative energies.

  The  psychoanalytic  goal  consists  in  influencing  the  unconscious

emotional content. For sex-economy, on the other hand, the therapeutic goal

consists in influencing the disturbed sexual economy by restoring the ability

to balance sexual energies. This is not done by influencing the unconscious

emotional content and experience, but exclusively by influencing the form in

which the emotional content is experienced.

    Differences in technique:

  The principal method of psychoanalytic therapy is “free association,” i.e.,

essentially  talking  and  communicating.  The  principal  method  of

vegetotherapy consists in the disturbance of involuntary (hence unconscious)

vegetative attitudes. Conversely, in vegetotherapy it is the not-talking—the

elimination  of  conscious  intensive  oral  expression—which  is  one  of  the

principal methods for bringing to the fore vegetative feelings and affects,

rooted in organic processes, before they become conscious.

    Psychoanalysis avoids diagnostic judgments and influences on physical

aspects traditionally associated with the medical profession.

  In vegetotherapy the initial emphasis is on the physical, and not on the

emotional, aspects. As a rule, the psychoanalyst sits behind the patient and, if

possible, should not be seen by him. In vegetotherapy, this rule is suspended

since it no longer relies on free association. Association of ideas has been

replaced  by  the  free  unfolding  of  all  vegetative  attitudes—especially

muscular action—characteristic of the patient.

    Psychoanalysis is a psychology; sex-economy is sexology. “Sexology” isthe science of the biological, physiological, emotional, and social processes

of sexuality. Sex-economy is the first discipline to establish the profession of

sex  physician.  Up  to  now  this  discipline  was  not  taught  as  a  specialized

medical branch at the universities, and was practiced merely as a side line of

other  physicians  such  as  gynecologists,  specialists  for  venereal  diseases,

neurologists, psychoanalysts.

  The abundance of emotional affects, which entail certain dangers in the

hands of unskilled practitioners, requires an extremely tight control both in

training and in practice. By definition, this control can only be exercised by

specially schooled and experienced physicians and pedagogues. Hence the

precondition for vegetotherapeutic practice differs fundamentally from that of

psychoanalysis. The practice of vegetotherapy requires:

  a) An adequate orientation in the fundamentals of sociology, i.e., of the

laws of the social process which influence the strength of man’s vegetative

drives.

  b)  The  knowledge  of  the  basic  elements  governing  the  developmental

history of sexual morality, from primitive society to the present state.

  c)  The  knowledge  of  basic  elements  of  psychiatry,  with  special

consideration of the mechanisms operative in schizophrenia and in manic-

depressive psychosis.

  d) The work of the vegetotherapist demands precise knowledge of the

autonomic  or  vegetative  nervous  system  and  the  fundamentals  of  human

physiology as well as endocrinology and sexual physiology.

  e) A knowledge of the fundamentals of cell biology, vegetative current

manifestations  and  electrical  phenomena  in  protozoa  are  among  the

indispensable prerequisites for the practice of vegetotherapy.

  f) Since vegetotherapy is increasingly penetrating the field of physical

illness, knowledge of the relationship of the state of the [bio]-electric charge

to the skin surface in neuroses and ego disturbances becomes a prerequisite

of practical everyday work.    Sex-economy and vegetotherapy share only historical connections with

psychoanalysis and meet together in the treatment of psychic processes in

neurosis, but have progressed far beyond this point into the realms of biology

and sociology.


                                13
Basic tenets on Red Fascism


1. Communism in its present from as Red Fascism is not a political party like

other  political  parties.  It  is  politically  and  militarily  armed organized

emotional plague.


2. This organized political and armed emotional plague uses conspiracy and

spying  in  all  forms,  in  order  to  destroy  human  happiness.  It  is  not,  as  is

usually assumed, a political conspiracy to achieve certain rational social ends,

as in 1918.


3. If you ask a liberal or a socialist or a Republican what he believes in

socially, he will tell you frankly. The Red Fascist will not tell you what he is,

who he is, what he wants. This proves that hiding is his basic characteristic.

And only people who are hiding by way of their character constitution will

operate in and for the Communist Party. It is conspiracy and hiding for its

own sake,  and  not  to  use  as  a  tool  to  achieve  rational  ends.  To  believe

otherwise will only lead to disaster.


4. Red Fascism as a special form of the emotional plague, uses its basic

characterological tool, hiding (“conspiracy”), “iron curtain,” to exploit the

identical emotionally sick attitudes in ordinary people. Thus the politically

organized emotional plague uses the unorganized emotional plague to gratify

its  morbid  needs.  The  political  aims  are  secondary  to  this,  and  mostly

subterfuges for emotionally biopathic activities. Proof: The political ends are

shifted according to the “political,” i.e., the emotional plague needs of hiding

and causing trouble from ambush.5. The hiding, conspiring, conniving are there before any political goals are

conceived, as draperies for the activities.


6. The sole objective of the conspiring is power with no special social ends.

The subjugation of people’s lives is not intended, but is a necessary and an

automatic result of the lack of rationality in the organization and existence of

the emotional plague.


7. The organized emotional plague relies upon and uses consistently what is

worst and lowest in human nature, while it slanders, destroys, and tries to put

out of function all that threatens its existence, good or bad. A fact to the

emotional plague is a fact only if it can be used to certain ends. It does not

count on its own behalf, and there is, accordingly, no respect for facts. Truth

is used only if it serves a special line of procedure or the general existence of

the emotional dirtiness. It will be discarded as soon as it threatens or even

contradicts such ends. Such an attitude toward fact and truth, history and

human welfare is not specifically a characteristic of Red Fascism. It is typical

of all politics. Red Fascism differs from other political disrespect for fact and

truth in that it eliminates all checks and controls of the abuse of power and

drives the nuisance politician to his utmost power. To believe that “peace

negotiations” are meant as such is disastrous. They may and they may not be

meant,  according  to  the  momentary  expediency.  Red  Fascism  is  a  power

machine using the principle of lie or truth, fact or distortion of fact, honesty

or  dishonesty,  always  to  the  end  of  conspiracy  and  abuse  by  human

malignancy.


8.  No  one  can  ever  hope  to  excel  the  pestilent  character  in  lying  and

underhanded spying. Espionage and counter-espionage may belong as part of

present-day social administration: It will never solve the problem of social

pathology. Using truth  in  human  affairs  will  burst  open  the  trap  and  the

unsolvable entanglement of spying and counter-spying. In addition, it will beconstructive in establishing the foundation for life-positive human actions.


                      14
Truth versus Modju


The pestilent character is usually a very active, mobile emotional structure;

his mobility, however, is short-circuited, as it were, in such a manner that all

splendid  ideas  and  good  intentions  somehow  evaporate  before  they  can

concentrate  enough  to  produce  lasting  results.  This  is  a  serious  work

disturbance  which  gains  importance  through  the  fact  that  the  pestilent

character most likely will turn out to be an “abortive genius.” The short-

circuit in performance renders the great abilities abortive and frustrates the

individual  who  suffers  from  this  inhibited  ability.  Thus,  he  suffers  from

chronic frustration which, like all biopathies, is based on a deep disturbance

of  the  function  of  full  genital  gratification  (“orgastic  impotence”).  Since

every  truth  will  increase  the  frustration  within  the  structure,  the  pestilent

character must hate truth. Since he could basically, but cannot factually live

truth, he develops great ability in using the lie; not necessarily always the

full, brutal lie, but most likely he will become a master in obtaining his goals

by means other than open and frank procedure. Naturally, one will find all

shades of lying, from the little innocent cheating in small matters to the BIG

LIE of Hitlerian scope.

  As a sexual cripple, the pestilent character who is endowed with more

than average bio-energetic agility must develop channels to somehow live out

his surplus energy. He will be a master in cunning, slyness, “know-how” in

getting along with people smoothly. He will stand out little from the crowd.

He will be a “good fellow,” people will like him, he will appear honest and

straight, and he will really mean what he says subjectively. But he will never

quite overcome the feeling of being an abortive genius, gifted and crippled at

the same time. This is strongly developed in him, and he has this trait in

common with most average people. The people in general, however, have far

less strained ambitions and are not as strong bio-energetically.  If, now, such a character joins a peaceful, hard-working group of people,

he will smoothly fit in on the surface, but his inner frustration will sooner or

later drive him to do underhanded mischief. Most spies who do not serve

rational  purposes  probably  are  structured  that  way.  To  be  hidden  and  to

remain undetected has initially nothing whatsoever to do with the political or

other  kind  of  mischief. The  underhandedness  is  there  earlier  than  the

mischief. It is the abortive genius, unable to accomplish lasting results, that

drives the pestilent character to his underhanded actions on the public scene.

  The pestilent character is basically a coward and he has much to hide,

especially sexually. The hiddenness is essential to his social and emotional

existence. It is safe to assume that such spies as Fuchs and others became

fascist spies for dictators because fascism offers particular opportunities to

integrate one’s hidden character structure. It is clear that such pathological

social  phenomena  as  political  movements  which  use  and  thrive  on

underhandedness are built on the foundations of such characters. It is clear

from the history of the Russian Revolution why it was that a sly Djugashvili

came to such power, riding high on the waves of the emotional plague. He

shows all the character traits which characterize the pestilent character. But

the riding to power and its misuse are not his fault or accomplishment. They

are truly the result of the average character structure of multitudes of similar

structures  who  feel  incapable  of  the  slowly  grinding  effort  of  lasting

accomplishment, and, therefore, prefer the easy way of the politician who is

obliged by nothing to prove his promises and contentions.

    Djugashvili rides to power over millions, carried along by the very people

whom he is going to suppress, supported and protected by what they have in

common with him, be it ever so minute and little.

  Let  us  briefly  survey  what  public,  pioneer,  and  administrator  have  in

common with the pestilent character. Unless we find this common quality, we

shall be unable to understand the great success of the emotional plague on the

social scene; of the prevalence of the lie over the truth. No “congressionalcrime investigations” will ever change much on the social scene unless this

point  is  brought  to  the  fore  and  is  understood.  Otherwise,  the  actions  of

justice will only again hit the innocent, and lead to confusion and public

panic. It is clear that the educator and psysician instead of the politician and

policeman should be in charge of these affairs of social pathology.

  Every living human being has something to hide—the pioneer, every soul

that  constitutes  “the  public,”  and  every  single  public  administrator.  They

have no big crimes to hide; these are little personal affairs which must be kept

off the public scene, which is governed to such a large extent by gossip and

character defamation. The core of this social anxiety always has been and

will be for a long while the so-called “private life,” or, put bluntly, the love

life of the individual. Here an administrator has embraced a girl he knew in

decency and honesty, but slightly out of range of what is considered “moral”

by “the public.” Many knew it, of course, but since everyone has such little

and perfectly decent secrets, there is a common bond, so to speak, among the

people who constitute what is called the public. Everybody has a more or less

pressing bad conscience, well hidden under a mask of righteousness. Fear of

getting into trouble with the law is quite general. Conformism stems from this

fear and from these little secrets. And there is nothing whatsoever in the

social  set-up  to  understand,  handle,  or  protect  such  innocent  little  secrets

against invasion by dirty minds.

  Sexual guilt feelings are quite general. Who has never touched his genital,

or has never played around with a member of the opposite sex, or has not

strayed off the path of marriage, and who has never committed a little crime

here or there? Everybody has, of course, and we should feel very humanly

about it, since one of the first things we do in fighting the plague is alleviate

the  severe  pressure  which  is  exerted  upon  the  people  by  the  false

righteousness of politically ambitious district attorneys or senators, looking

for “a case” or to further a career, or of policemen or politicians who find a

ladder to peaks of power by way of nuisance investigations.  It is all right to stop rampant cheating in the realm of public lotteries, but

one can see no harm in a little gambling or a little fun at pinball machines. It

is the pestilent character again who here, too, spoils the fun for the people by

misusing and abusing freedom of action.

  Thus,  everybody  has  something  to  hide.  And  it  is  this  weak  spot  in

everybody where our pestilent character sets in with his misdeeds. One can

easily observe that the innocent public school teacher or social worker or

mental-hygiene administrator will cringe before a letter written by a “tax-

paying housewife” who protests against this or that. Only very few have the

courage and the directness to step up and tell the public crank off.

  The emotional plague has in a masterly fashion found a way of building

its protective devices. Not only does it cunningly hook up with everyone’s

guilty  conscience;  it  has  put  into  circulation  high-sounding  ethical  rules,

which are perfect in themselves, such as: “One does not pay attention to such

things as slander,” or “It always has been that way and always will be,” or

“Every pioneer had to suffer.” That something evil that “always has been”

also has to be, is just as much empty talk as that of the “naturally suffering

pioneer.” The “liberal mind” has gone off the beam in a very bad way as far

as such tolerance is concerned. It will soon become quite clear that under the

cover of this protection enjoyed by the plague, innumerable murders have

been  committed,  multitudes  of  decent  adolescents  have  been  delivered  to

penitentiaries or lunatic asylums, millions of innocent babies and children

have suffered agonies and have been crippled for life, and, if we ultimately

include  the  wars  of  humanity  among  the  misdeeds  of  the  well-hidden

emotional plague, millions have died on the battle fields in vain, for MODJU

only.

  Thus, such slogans are more than empty. They are murderous talk, though

innocently  brought  forth.  However,  this  “innocence”  itself  will  require

clarification.

  Those  who  talk  that  way  mean  it  well.  They  are  convinced  of  theultimately decent nature of man. But, at the same time, they talk that way out

of  weakness  and  fear  of  the  plague.  They  are  factually  hypnotized  into

immobility by the plague like a hen by the snake. Also, they certainly admire

—at least some do so—the apparent toughness of the pestilent character, his

suavity, his cunning, and his “know-how.”

  All this protects underhanded, manifold murder.

  The  mass  of  people  are  held  down  by  fear  of  speaking  up,  by  actual

immobility of the emotional organism, by fear of trouble, by other serious

worries, and by latent sexual guilt feelings. This renders them easy prey for

the pestilent character.

  They  fall  prey  in  spite  of  knowing  the  truth,  of  understanding  the

importance of bodily love, in spite of a sense of decency deeply ingrained but

rendered helpless by so much cunning and conniving.

  And the pioneering men or women often fall prey to the mischief because

they are too busy, too honest, because they do not wish to soil their hands

with the evil stuff.

  And the administrator is dependent on public acclaim just as he is bound

down as a human being by his own little secrets.

  Now the pestilent character has easy going. He is protected on all sides

and can proceed safely, without any danger of being detected, put into the

bright sunlight, or challenged in any other way. If he adds political power

machinery  to  his  already  rather  well-set  position  he  can  conquer  whole

continents.

  A little slander, well placed, excellently formulated, will, without great

effort, kill many an important truth right away in its infancy or it will deprive

it of social effectiveness if it had the strength to mature under such social

pathology. The public will not act or render any help to the truth. It will

remain “sitting”  silently  and  watch  helplessly  or  even  gloatingly  any

crucifixion of innocent souls. The public administrator will be frightened to

bits and try to maintain public morals and order. The pioneer will be silencedor he may go psychotic or fall into deep depression. Nobody is served except

the pathological emotion of a nuisance biopath, MODJU again.

  It is truly as ridiculous as that. However, behind this ridiculousness there

waits for us a terrific problem of human existence:


  HOW COULD SUCH RIDICULOUS NUISANCE GET INTO THIS WORLD IN THE FIRST PLACE, AND HOW

  COULD IT, UNDISTURBED, DEVASTATE HUMAN ORGANIZATIONS OF WORK AND PEACE FOR AGES?


  However tough such problems may be to solve, we cannot ever expect to

even  start  solving  them  unless  we free  ourselves  from  the  nuisance

interference with serious human work exerted by the pestilent character. It is

necessary  first  to  achieve  a  certain  amount  of  safety  in  doing  the  job  of

finding answers to questions of living life.

  A few successful procedures in stopping such interferences in the bud are

the following:

  1.  Rely  on  the  distinction  between  an  honest  and  twisted  facial

expression.

  2. Insist on everything being aboveboard.

  3.  Use  the  weapon  of  truth  wisely  but  determinedly.  The  pestilent

character is usually a coward and has nothing constructive to offer.

  4. Meet the plague head on. Do not yield or appease. Master your guilt

feelings and know your weak spots.

  5. If necessary, reveal frankly your weak points, even your secrets. People

will understand.

  6. Help alleviate the pressure of human guilt feelings wherever you can,

especially  in  sexual  matters,  the  main  domain  of  abuse  by  the  emotional

plague.

  7. Have  your  own  motives,  goals,  methods  always  fully  in  the  open,

widely visible to everyone.

  8. Learn continuously how to meet the underhanded lie.

  9.  Channel  all  human  interest  toward  important  problems  of  life,especially the upbringing of infants.

  There can be little doubt that the ravaging plague CAN be mastered, even

easily, if the force of truth is used fully and without restraint. Truth is our

potential  ally  even within  the  pestilent  character.  He,  too,  is  somewhere

decent deep down, though he may not know it.


                        15
Freud, Reich, Kinsey


To  prevent  confusion,  we  must  keep  clearly  in  mind:  Freud  discovered

pregenital sexuality in the infant and child to the first puberty. He touched

upon genitality only in its phallic form in men and women (clitoral) alike.

Genital  functioning  was  to  Freud  “in  the  service  of  procreation”  or  else

sublimated. There was no talk of genital or even orgastic satisfaction in the

first and second puberty, the developmental stepping stones toward adult love

activity in the biological sense of WR [Wilhelm Reich].


Kinsey and associates did not touch upon genitality in the sense of WR. They

continued the line of thinking which derived from the German and English

sexologists of the end of the nineteenth century. These sexologists dealt with

the phallic-pornographic-clitoral  genitality  of  present-day  man  which  has

existed  for  some  six  to  ten  thousand  years.  They  mistook  and  are  still

mistaking  absence  of  vaginal  genitality  and  the  mere  presence  of

circumscribed clitoral genitality as “normal” because it is characteristic of the

majority of the female population. Accordingly, since clitoral genitality is a

neurotic substitute for a blocked vaginal excitation, they confused the acme

of the orgasm with the total orgasm which, in the orgonomic sense, includes,

in  addition  to  the  acme,  the  ensuing  convulsive  movements.  They  thus

confuse  the  present-day  structure  of  genitality  with  the  bio-energetic  one,

making  the  primordial  life  function,  the  orgasm,  dependent  upon  nerve

endings in the vagina. This view leaves no room for a comprehensive theory

of genitality. According to the bio-energetic view of clinical orgonomy, theorgasm  is  identical  with  the  total  involuntary  convulsion  of  the  organism

beginning with the acme (peak) of the orgasm and ending with complete

relaxation. The orgasm function in the orgonomic sense reaches far beyond

species and genus. It is older than the development of nerves. Its four-beat

      16
rhythm characterizes cell division and the pulsatory movement of a jelly

fish or the peristalsis of a worm or an intestine. It is clearly expressed in the

protrusion of the pseudopodium of an ameba.


There can be no doubt about the basic bio-energetic function of the orgasm.

However, from a biogenetic standpoint we may consider whether a developed

vaginal  excitability  exists  throughout  the  animal  kingdom,  including  the

female of the human species, or whether we are moving in the female of man

toward  a universal  vaginal  orgonotic  functioning  as  a  further  step  in

phylogenesis. Clitoral genitality would then only represent a first break out of

the female genital from either social suppression of genitality, OR a primitive

state of evolution.


            17
Conclusion


An immobilized, sitting humanity is waiting for an answer to its search for

the  ways  of  living  Life.  While  it  drudges  along  on  a  bare  minimum  of

subsistence,  waiting,  dreaming,  suffering  agonies,  submitting  to  new

slaveries after ages of futile revolts, it is harassed by theories and dogmas on

human  living.  To  add  a  new  dogma  of  human  living  to  the  maze  of

philosophies,  religions,  and  political  prescriptions  means  adding  another

piece of confusion to the building of the Tower of Babel. The task is not the

construction of a new philosophy of life, but diversion of the attention from

futile dogmas to the ONE basic question: WHY HAVE ALL DOGMAS OF HOW TO

LIVE SO FAR FAILED?


  The  answer  to  this  new  kind  of  inquiry  will  not  be  an  answer  to  thequestion of sitting humanity. However, it may open the way for our children,

as yet unborn, to search in the right direction. They have over the ages long

past, in the process of being born, carried all potentialities within themselves;

and they still do. The task is to divert the interest of a suffering humanity

from unfounded prescriptions to THE NEWBORN INFANT, THE ETERNAL “CHILD OF

THE FUTURE.” THE TASK IS TO SAFEGUARD ITS INBORN POTENTIALITIES TO FIND THE

WAY. Thus the child, yet unborn, becomes the focus of attention. It is the

common functioning principle of all humanity, past, present and future. It is,

on account of its plasticity and endowment with rich natural potentialities, the

only living hope that remains in this holocaust of human inferno. THE CHILD

OF THE FUTURE AS THE CENTER OF HUMAN ATTENTION AND EFFORT IS THE LEVER

WHICH WILL UNITE HUMANITY AGAIN INTO ONE SINGLE PEACEFUL COMMUNITY OF

MEN, WOMEN AND THEIR OFFSPRING. In emotional power, as an object of love

everywhere, regardless of nation, race, religion or class, it far surpasses any

other interest of human striving. It will be the final victor and redeemer, in

ways nobody can as yet predict.


  This  seems  to  be  obvious  to  everyone.  How  is  it  possible,  then,  that

nobody had as yet conceived the idea to center one’s effort on this single

hope and lever of true freedom, to unite man on this basis and to drain off his

misdirected interest from futile, aimless, senseless, bloody convulsions?

  The  answer  to  this  question  was  given: Man  lives  and  acts  today

according to thoughts which grew from the splitting up of the common stem

of mankind into countless variations of thoughts which contradict each other.

But the common root and stem of humanity remained the same: to have been

born  without  ideas,  theories,  special  interests,  party  programs,  clothes,

knowledge,  ideals,  ethics,  sadism,  criminal  impulses;  to  have  been  born

NAKED, just as the heavenly power has created it. This is the common root

and stem of all humanity. Accordingly, it contains the common interest and

power of unification of humanity. It is designed by the very condition of itsemergence  into  the  world  to  be  beyond  and  above  as  well  as  at  the

foundation of everything man thinks, acts, does, strives for and dies for.

  A brief survey may, in the end, show in what manner the kind of thinking

influences the use or the neglect of this common root and stem:

  The  world  of  Red  Fascism,  thoroughly  mechanistic  in  its  economic

system and perfectly mystical in its conduct of human affairs, meets with

human sitting on the spot and immobility, badly equipped to do anything

about it. It has, in sharp contradistinction to its spiritual founder, remained

sitting on “economics” and a mechanistic, industrial view of society. It has

thrown out and kept away with fire and sword all knowledge about human

emotions beyond those known to the conscious mind. It has condemned the

bio-energetic drives as “bourgeois ideology.” It rests its philosophy of man

on a merely conscious mind which is superimposed on Pavlov’s reflexes and

automatic  responses.  It  has  thrown  out  the  function  of  love  completely.

Accordingly, when it meets with human inertia, which is due to the armoring

of  the  biosystem,  it  believes,  quite  logically  from  its  own  standpoint  of

thinking, that it is dealing with conscious spite or conscious “reactionary”

“sabotage.”  Again,  in  full  agreement  with  its  way  of  thinking,  and

subjectively honestly (apart from the conscious scoundrel of politics whom

we find everywhere), the Red Fascist shoots to death the “saboteur.” This

must be so since, to this kind of thinking, what a man does or does not do is

due solely to conscious determination and resolve. To believe otherwise, to

accept the existence of a living domain beyond the conscious will, and with it

the  existence  and  power  of  an  unconscious  psychic  domain,  of  a  rigid

character structure, of an age-old impediment of bio-energetic functioning,

would right away and irretrievably undermine the very foundation of the total

system of suppression of the “saboteur of the Power of the State.” (Never

mind now “proletarian” or otherwise.) It would, with one stroke, reveal MAN

as he is, and the interest would be diverted from the “Capitalists” who are no

more  than  ultimate  results  of  an  economy  of  armored,  helpless,  sittingmankind.  It  would  reveal  the  truly  capitalist  character  of  Sovietism.  The

whole system of arch-reactionary oppression of living Life, of the total mess

in the disguise of a “revolutionary” ambition, would inevitably collapse.

  So much for the influence of thinking upon social action in terms of a

“conscious mind” alone.

  Let us now for a moment imagine that the psychoanalysts had acquired

social power in some country. They would, from their point of view of the

existence  of  an  unconscious  mind,  acknowledge  a  vast  domain  of  human

existence beyond  the  conscious  will.  They  would,  if  meeting  with  the

“sitting” of humanity, attribute it to “bad” unconscious wishes of one kind or

another.  Their  remedy  would  be  to  “make  the  spite  conscious,”  to

exterminate the evil unconscious. This, of course, would not help, just as it

does not help in the treatment of a neurotic, since the spiting itself is the

result of the total body armoring, and the “evil unconscious” is the result of

the suppression of natural life in the infant; and “I won’t” is superimposed

upon  a  silent  “I  CAN’T.”  This  immobility,  expressed  as  an  “I  Can’t,”  is

naturally inaccessible to mere ideas or persuasion, since it is what orgone

biophysics calls “STRUCTURAL,” i.e., frozen emotion. In other words, it is an

expression of the total being of the individual, unalterable, just as the shape

of a grown tree is unalterable.

  Thus,  an  emperor,  basing  his  attempts  to  better  the  human  lot  on  the

making  conscious  of  the  unconscious  and  condemnation  of  the  evil

unconscious, would fail miserably. The unconscious mind is not the last thing

and not the last word. It itself is an artificial result of much deeper processes,

the suppression of Life in the newborn infant.

  Orgonomy holds the view that human lethargy and sitting on the spot is

the outer expression of the immobilization of the bioenergetic system, due to

chronic armoring of the organism. The “I can’t” appears as an “I won’t,” no

matter whether conscious or unconscious. No conscious drill, no amount of

making conscious of the unconscious can ever rock the massive blocking ofman’s will and action. It is, in the single individual, necessary to break the

blocks,  to  let  bio-energy  stream  freely  again  and  thus  to  improve  man’s

motility,  which  in  turn  will  solve  many  problems  arising  from  inertia  in

thinking and acting. But a basic immobility will remain. Character structure

cannot basically be changed, just as a tree grown crooked cannot be made

straight again.

  Accordingly, the orgonomist will never aspire to break the blockings of

life energy in the mass of humanity. The attention will center consistently

upon  the  newborn  infants  everywhere,  upon  the  infants  who  are  born

unarmored, mobile to the fullest. To prevent the immobilization of human

functioning,  and  with  it  the  spiting,  the  sitting  on  the  spot  for  ages,  the

resistance to any kind of motion or innovation (“sabotage” in Red Fascist

terms), becomes the basic task. It is the Emotional Plague of man, born from

this  very  immobilization,  which  fights  living,  motile  Life  in  the  newborn

infants and induces the armoring of the organism. The worry is, therefore, the

emotional plague, and not the mobility of man.

  This  basic  orientation  precludes,  naturally,  any  kind  of  political  or

ideological or merely psychological approach to human problems. Nothing

can change as long as man is armored, since every misery stems from man’s

armoring and immobility which creates the fear of living, motile living. The

orgonomic  approach  is  neither  political  nor  sociological  alone;  it  is  not

psychological; it grew out of the criticism and correction of the psychological

assumptions  of  psychoanalysis  of  an  absolute  unconscious,  of  the

unconscious  being  the  ultimate  giveness  in  man,  etc.,  and  out  of  the

introduction of bio-psychiatry into socio-economic thinking. It is BIOLOGICAL

and BIOSOCIAL, resting on the discovery of the Cosmic Energy. 
Sigmund Freud. The photograph is inscribed (in German) : “To Dr. Wilh. Reich as kind remembrance

of Sigm Freud. March 1925.”138 The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud

everything else. Buj she was uttenly cshausted. Freud, on the other
hand, although HE 2 PeneBe. was rather triumphant
at having single anded defeated bis enemy without any help From
ber, and the huricane blew itsef out. How the remaining diffcultic
in the way of the mamiage were overcome will be related preseaty,

In reading through the tremendous story [ bave outined hee one
apprebends above all how mighty were the passions that auimated

T wd b el b e i i .t et bt
s e T T e T S e
e . o 2 e . shs o
oo et e e, ot The, s rSghE 592
T BTt i pbap the et v of oy
e i, e hd e o b o s e bl w1

| b2 e o e, ot thi v the aly tme i s T~
o s woaaa- ot th vk i
s s 1ot with deseiot f

, M—-——/m ‘
olane ~Irrot

Lte 8 tom —
AL
@ g lbr —

Sce page 58 for an explanation of the notations on
Reich's copy of The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud.
VIII

Marriage
(1886)

REUD S NOT OYLY MONOGANIG DA VERY AUSUAL DECREE, U FOX

DT o g s oo s It ot
D e el ol B S
o i e e e e o e A
Eipy maniaie woul b s tempestons thn the emoriona po
o ot reled . Sy s he o cannot i my e b
e an s v v gy ad bl thn 3 sty o
" A when ok G wile e ll the word
o Ve o7 e w4 g o e Gl bappne o o
v et o o ankind unl e e o o0t
Tt o e fo thos i 5 ey vy o wil
e o o i ot was ol e, bt  thr sl
oo s b the it ks f i appgmEn
e b avady formed ht hat s sk et fo bl -
iy to b fmy and n nge 0 b v S te et he
ot Meper s yar et e st condiion i vy
e o v the Aght to xpean's e s o

 

boen 2 onesided.

Ay howerc s peture ofthi ftur wasdrw in lighter
vein. “All we ned i two or thee ltle rooms where we can lv and
at and receive  guest and 2 heath where the e for cooking does
oot g0 out. And what things there will bave to be: table and chair,
beds, & mito, a clock o remind the happy ones of the passage of
tim, an srmchai for an hour of sgrcable day dresming, carpes so
that the Heusfreu can casly keep the for clan, lnen ted up io
ancy ribbons and stred on thei shelves, clothes of the newest cut
and hats with atifcial Bower, pictures on the wal, glasses for the

19
  
Reich in Davos, Switzerland, February 1927. The inscription reads: “Conflict with Freud.” 
Davos, March 1927. 
Sletten, Denmark, 1934. 
In his laboratory, 1944. 
At Orgonon, Rangeley, Maine, 1950. On the back of the photograph Reich wrote: “Still in doubt about

whether to fight EP [Emotional Plague] on its own ground.” 
The Orgone Energy Observatory at Orgonon. The building is now maintained as the Wilhelm Reich

Museum.                              Luce Studio, Farmington, Maine


















 
Reich’s study in the observatory at Orgonon.                                        Luce Stud





















 
The study and library at Orgonon. The paintings are by Reich. 
Laboratory in the observatory at Orgonon.                                        Luce Stu





























 
Reich’s tomb at Orgonon. The bust is by Jo Jenks, 1949.                                    NOTES






Editors’ preface

1. Abram Kardiner et al., “A Methodological Study of Freudian Theory,” International Journal of
  Psychiatry, Vol. 2, No. 5, Sept. 1966, p. 498.
2. Ibid., p. 497.
3. Donald Oken, M.D., “Block That Metaphor,” International Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 2, No. 5,
Sept. 1966, pp. 563–566.
4. F. Knobloch, M.D., “Marxists Reject Libido Theory,” International Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 2,
No. 5, Sept. 1966, p. 559.


Introductory note

1. In the negotiations which preceded the interview and his acceptance of the documents contributed by
the Orgone Institute, Dr. Eissler indicated that the Sigmund Freud Archives intended, wherever
  possible, to prohibit the use of all material deposited therein for at least one hundred years.


1. October 18, 1952

1.  Character  analysis  was  originally  a  modification  of  the  customary  psychoanalytic  technique  of
symptom analysis by the inclusion of the character and character resistance in the therapeutic
  process. However, the discovery of the muscular armor necessitated the development of a new
technique designed to liberate the bound-up vegetative energies and, thereby, to restore to the patient
his vegetative motility. The later discovery of organismic orgone energy (“bio-energy”) and the
  concentration of atmospheric orgone energy within an orgone energy accumulator led to the further
  development of character-analytic vegetotherapy into an inclusive, biophysical orgone therapy.
2. The usual Freudian indifference to the total expression of the patient, “his look, manner of speech,
facial expression, dress, hand clasp, etc.,” tends to eliminate essential areas of exposure and to place
  excessive reliance upon verbal communication. “The overestimation of the content of the material
usually goes with an underestimation if not with a complete neglect of the manner in which the
patient tells these things.” Character Analysis (New York: Farrar, Straus and Cudahy, 1949), p. 29.
    Even though Freud came to realize that these communications could not be taken at face value
and, thus, necessitated theoretical and technical modifications, the verbal productions remain the raw
  material  of  the  psychoanalytic  therapy.  The  attempts  to  alleviate  the  difficulty  in  verbal
  communication, utilizing free association, produced some improvement, but the ability of the patient
to communicate verbally remained an essential feature of the technique. It tended to exclude the
  uncooperative psychotic, for example, or the patient whose ability to communicate verbally was  impaired by the concealed spasm of the glottis. The attempt to relieve such spasm by initiating the
gag  reflex,  as  utilized  in  orgone  therapy,  would  not  be  a  recognized  means  of  eliminating  the
difficulty in psychoanalysis.
    See also letter from Reich to Lotte Liebeck in which he describes the reading of emotional
expression and its value in the therapeutic process, (here).
3. See photograph, following p. 142. This picture hangs on the wall in Reich’s library at Orgonon,
where the interview took place.
4. Freud died on September 23, 1939.
5. The Function of the Orgasm (New York: Farrar, Straus and Cudahy, 1961), p. 15.
6. The  Cancer  Biopathy  (New  York:  Orgone  Institute  Press,  1948).  “Carcinomatous  shrinking
  biopathy” is the term Reich has applied to the process underlying the disease known as cancer, in
which  he  discovered  the  functional  unity  of  psychic  resignation  and  biopathic  shrinking  which
  precede, often by many years, and accompany the appearance of the malignant tumor.
7. Rangeley, Maine—the location of Reich’s home and laboratories from 1945 to 1957.
8. The Children of the South, by Margaret Anderson (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1966), contains a
moving description of a recent example of this phenomenon occurring in connection with the sincere
efforts of a community in the South to integrate its school.
9.  Paul  Federn,  M.D.  (1871–1950),  Viennese  psychoanalyst  and  vice  president  of  the  Vienna
  Psychoanalytic Society from 1924 until its dissolution by the Nazis in 1938.
10.  Evidence  of  Federn’s  efforts  to  disturb  the  relationship  between  Freud  and  Reich  was  clearly
  revealed by Freud himself in a letter to Reich dated November 22, 1928, in which he told him that
Federn had requested Reich’s removal as director of the technical seminar. In a later letter from
Freud to Reich, October 10, 1930, Federn’s malevolent “digging” was again in evidence.
11. Ernest Jones, M.D. (1879–1958), English psychoanalyst and official biographer of Freud. In his
work The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 111, p. 191, Jones referred to the International
Congress held in Lucerne in August, 1934. “It was on this occasion that Wilhelm Reich resigned
from  the  Association.  Freud  had  thought  highly  of  him  in  his  early  days,  but  Reich’s political
  fanaticism had led to both personal and scientific estrangement” (Italics: ed.). Jones knew intimately
the circumstances of Reich’s expulsion from the IPA. Yet, in a work of historical importance we can
  assume  that  he  deliberately  falsified  the  facts  when  he  stated  that  Reich  resigned.  Involved,  of
course,  was  the  desire  to  minimize  the  importance  of  this  event  and  to  absolve  the  IPA  of  all
  responsibility. See Documentary Supplement, here.
    Concerning Reich’s “political fanaticism,” it should be made clear to the reader that the IPA, in
order to avoid the implications of the psychoanalytic therapy of the neuroses, sought to discredit
Reich’s effort to establish the significance of society in the etiology of the neuroses by referring to it
as “political fanaticism.”
12. See letter from Reich to Freud.
13. In a letter dated July 27, 1927, Freud assured Reich that, while he was aware of personal differences
and  hostilities  in  the  psychoanalytic  organization,  they  could  not  influence  his  high  regard  for
Reich’s competence which, he added, was shared by many others.
14. Otto Fenichel, M.D., psychoanalyst and author of The Psychoanalytic Theory of the Neurosis.
15. Unfortunately, Reich’s confidence that the rumor had subsided was ill-founded. It persists. As
  recently as February, 1966, the science editor of the New York Herald Tribune stated that “Dr. Reich
was mentally ill.” Also, Silvano Arieti, a prominent psychoanalyst, in his review of a book by Philip
Rieff,  suggested  that  the  author  may  have  been  unfairly  critical  of  Reich  in  not  taking  “into
  consideration at all the hypothesis that illness may have adversely affected Reich in the last part of
his life.” American Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 123, No. 2, August 1966, p. 235.
16. See footnote 6, here and here.17. The sensations of current appearing with the mobilization of vegetative (biological, sexual, orgone)
energy are frequently described as “streamings” by persons in orgone therapy.
18. Students of the various schools of psychoanalysis are required to read Character Analysis but are
often specifically warned not to read the contents of the third edition beyond the chapter on “The
  Masochistic Character,” to mark their separation from Reich’s later work. This separation is, of
course, correct, but the admonition to ignore the later work is given with defamatory emphasis.
        Also,  since  Reich’s  death,  there  has  been  considerable  pressure  from  foreign  publishers,
  particularly  the  German,  to  republish  the  original  edition  of  this  work,  but  stubborn  refusal  to
  publish the third edition.
19. “I must repeat what I have said in other publications, that these psychoneuroses, as far as my
  experience goes, are based on sexual-instinct motive powers. I do not mean that the energy of the
sexual impulse merely contributes to the forces supporting the morbid manifestations (symptoms),
but I wish distinctly to maintain that this supplies the only constant and the most important source of
energy in the neurosis…” Sigmund Freud, Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex (New York: E.
P. Dutton, 1962), pp. 26–7. Originally published as Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie (Leipzig
and Vienna: Verlag Franz Deuticke, 1905).
20. See letter from Reich to Federn.
21. See statement regarding “Freud, Reich, Kinsey,”.
22.  This  book,  published  in  1927  by  the  Internationaler  Psychoanalytischer  Verlag,  is  not  to  be
  confused with Reich’s later work of the same title. The early work was dedicated to Freud, and in a
letter to Reich dated July 9, 1926, he acknowledged its value, particularly because it dealt with the
  subject of the actual neurosis.
23. Eduard Hitschmann, M.D., joined the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society in 1905 and was the director
of the psychoanalytic clinic in Vienna from 1923 until its dissolution by the Nazis. He “always
  advocated searching for ‘organic factors’ as a background of the neurosis”—quotation from Minutes
of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society, Vol. 1: 1906–1908, edited by Herman Nunberg and Ernst
Federn (New York: International Universities Press, Inc., 1962), p. 42.
24. “We have laid down the concept of libido as that of a force of variable quantity which has the
capacity of measuring processes and transformations in the spheres of sexual excitement. This libido
we distinguished from the energy which is to be generally adjudged to the psychic processes with
reference to its special origin, and thus we attribute to it also a qualitative character. In separating
  libidinous from other psychic energy we give expression to the assumption that the sexual processes
of  the  organism  are  differentiated  from  the  nutritional  processes  through  a  special  chemism.”
  Sigmund Freud, Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex, pp. 74–75.
25. None of the present-day schools of psychology utilize the libido theory. Any attempt to revive it is
  considered  naïve  and  is  ridiculed.  “Bieber  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  libido  theory  remains
  permanently confused and concludes that ‘the entire libido theory can be discarded…’ He sees no
positive value in the concept of ‘psychic energy’ or, for that matter, in the entire libido theory.”
  Percival Bailey, Sigmund, the Unserene, A Tragedy in Three Acts (Springfield, Ill.: Charles Thomas
Co., 1965), p. 66. The reference is to I. Bieber: “A critique of the libido theory,” American Journal
of Psychoanalysis, Vol. 18 (1958), pp. 52–69.
    Also, Erich Fromm, Ph.D., in a recent interview in McCalls, October, 1965, is quoted as saying,
“Early in my practice, I found that certain things in Freudian theory—especially the libido theory—
really were not right.”
26.  “The unarmored  living  feels  and  understands  the  expressive  movements  of  other  unarmored
  organisms clearly and simply by means of its own instinctive empathetic movements and organ
  sensations. The armored living, on the other hand, can perceive no organ sensations, or it can feel
them only in a distorted way; thus it loses contact with the living, and the understanding of its  functions.” Reich, Ether, God and Devil (New York: Orgone Institute Press, 1949), p. 49.
    The term “armor” is applied to the sum total of the character and muscular attitudes which an
  individual develops as a defense against the breakthrough of vegetative sensations and emotions, in
  particular anxiety, rage and sexual excitation. According to this definition, character armor and
  muscular armor are functionally identical.
27. See unsent letter from Reich to Eissler.
28. Orgone Energy Bulletin. A publication of the Wilhelm Reich Foundation from January, 1949, to
March, 1953—ordered destroyed by the Food and Drug Administration in 1954.
29. Stalin’s real name was Josef Vissarionovich Djugashvilli, or Dzhugashvili.
30. See excerpt from “Truth versus Modju,”.
31. “The sexual impulse now [with the beginning of puberty] enters into the service of the function of
  propagation; it becomes, so to say, altruistic.” Sigmund Freud, Three Contributions to the Theory of
Sex, p. 66.
32.  “The  third  issue  in  normal  constitutional  dispositions  is  made  possible  by  the  process  of
  ‘sublimation,’  through  which  the  powerful  excitations  from  individual  sources  of  sexuality  are
  discharged and utilized in other spheres, so that a considerable increase of psychic capacity results
from an in itself dangerous predisposition.” Ibid., p. 94.
33. “Sublimation, as the essential cultural achievement of the psychic apparatus, is possible only in the
  absence of sexual repression; in the adult it applies only to the pregenital, but not to the genital
  impulses.” Reich, The Sexual Revolution (New York: The Noonday Press, 1962), p. 19.
34. See excerpt from The Function of the Orgasm, p. 248.
35. “In a manuscript accompanying a letter to Fliess dated May 31, 1897, he laid down the formula:
  ‘Civilization consists in progressive renunciation. Contrariwise the superman.’ This is a theme that
plays a central part in his later writings on sociology. It probably dates from early life when he was
  impelled by deep inner motives to renounce personal (sexual) pleasure, and compelled for economic
reasons  to  renounce  other  enjoyments,  with  the  compensation  of  achieving  thereby  intellectual
  development and interests.” Ernest Jones, The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 3 (New York:
Basic Books, 1957), p. 335.
36.  The  term  “epulis”  is  used  here  by  Reich  as  synonymous  with  cancer  of  the  jaw.  Technically
  speaking, Freud’s cancer was a malignant epithelioma which developed from a leukoplakia, whereas
an epulis is actually an inflammatory granuloma and is not malignant.
37. “All day, from breakfast until he went to sleep, Freud smoked practically without pause … usual
  quantum was twenty cigars a day.… He was so fond of smoking that he was somewhat irritated
when men around him did not smoke.” Hanns Sachs, Freud, Master and Friend (Cambridge, Mass.:
  Harvard University Press, 1944), p. 83.
38. “Once—and only once—I saw him terribly angry. But the only sign of this anger was a sudden
pallor and the way his teeth bit into his cigar.” Theodor Reik, From Thirty Years with Freud (New
York: Farrar and Rinehart, 1940), p. 7.
39. Oskar Rie, M.D., Viennese pediatrician and author, with Freud, of “Clinical Study on Cerebral
  Paralysis of Children.”
40. A Viennese four-handed card game.
41. Congress of the International Psychoanalytic Association.
42. “The world could no longer deny the facts of unconscious psychic life. So it began anew its old
  accustomed game of debasing what it cannot otherwise destroy. It gave him a great many pupils,
who came to a table all set for them and who did not have to work hard for what they got. They had
only one interest: to make psychoanalysis socially acceptable as quickly as possible. They carried
the conservative traditions of this world into their organization, and without an organization, Freud’s
work could not exist. One after the other, they sacrificed the libido theory or diluted it. Freud knewhow difficult it is to continue to advocate the libido theory. But the interest of self-preservation and
of safeguarding the psychoanalytic movement prevented him from saying what in a more honest
world he certainly would have fought for. He had with his science far transcended the narrow
  intellectual horizon of his contemporaries. His school pulled him back into it. He knew in 1929 that
in my youthful scientific enthusiasm I was right. But to admit this would have meant to sacrifice half
of the organization.” Reich, The Function of the Orgasm, pp. 186–187.
    Reich frequently warned that the same fate is in store for psychiatric orgonomy if the central issue
of genitality is evaded.
43. See letter from Reich to Adler.
44. “There was never any doubt but that the biology of man could not be separated from his social
  existence, that biological drives were moulded by the social forces at work in the particular period.
Freud  knew  very  well  that  he  had,  necessarily  so,  devoted  himself  mainly  to  the  biological  or
  psychological side of man’s structure; nobody else had done it before or had done it with his new
  method of opening up the unconscious mind. There is not the slightest doubt that Freud was fully
aware of the crucial importance of the ‘outer world’ which exerted its influence on the child by way
of the family (‘oedipus complex’). True, Freud adhered to the patriarchal view of the family, to the
  biological nature of the oedipus conflict. True, he interpreted society wrongly in many places, but he
was perfectly clear as to the impact of social, outer-world influence upon the ‘instincts.’ Only he had
not delved into sociology, except in such books as Totem and Taboo or the later The Future of an
  Illusion.” Reich, 1952. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
45. Reference to Reich’s work in the mental-hygiene movement.
46. See footnote 1.
47. “The concepts of traditional psychology and depth psychology are bound up with word formations.
The living, however, functions beyond all verbal ideas and concepts. Verbal language is a biological
form of expression on a high level of development. It is by no means an indispensable attribute of
the  living,  for  the  living  functions  long  before  there  is  a  verbal  language.  Depth  psychology,
  therefore, operates with a function of recent origin. Many animals express themselves by sounds.
But the living functions beyond and before any sound formation as a form of expression.” Reich,
  Character Analysis, p. 360.
48. “I have no inclination at all to keep the domain of the psychological floating, as it were, in the air,
without any organic foundation. But I have no knowledge, neither theoretically nor therapeutically,
  beyond that conviction, so I have to conduct myself as if I had only the psychological before me.”
  Sigmund Freud. The quotation appears in Ernest Jones, The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol.
1, p. 395.
49. Today, there is ample clinical evidence of the profound significance to mother and infant of this
  inhuman but routine separation at birth. For example, the work of Newton and Newton, University
of Mississippi Medical Center. Furthermore, all the routine procedures such as “prepping” during
labor, catheterization, episiotomy, nuisance procedures with little or no prophylactic or therapeutic
value, tend to create an unhealthy condition for the important contact to follow with the newborn
child.
    It should be noted, however, that while this recent intensification of interest in the newborn is all
to the good in ultimately eliminating the sinister influences upon the earliest development of the
child, a serious difficulty arises in connection with the methods of study that are being applied.
  Mechanistic measurements of reflexes and the entire mechanistic approach to the study of the infant
again creates a science that ignores the living process itself. Such an approach will provide volumes
of data, but no solution to such problems as levels of energy and degrees of contact between infant
and environment, the very essence of the living process. Something should also be said about the
actual injury inherent in the methods of study which ignore the plasticity of the newborns, thus  creating artifacts through the methods themselves. One wonders if the hatred of the living can be
seen in the elaborate but sterile studies that are being undertaken while ignoring the value of simple
  observation in an atmosphere of love without the so-called scientific detachment which is often an
excuse for indifference and sadistic unconcern.
50. Dr. René A. Spitz has stated: “I find it difficult to believe that circumcision, as practiced in our
  hospitals, would not represent stress and shock of some kind. Nobody who has witnessed the way
these  infants  are  operated  on  without  anesthesia,  the  infant  screaming  in  manifest  pain,  can
  reasonably deny that such treatment is likely to leave traces of some kind on the personality. This is
one of the cruelties the medical profession thoughtlessly inflicts on infants just because these cannot
tell what they suffer.”
51. Numerous articles in popular magazines express this theme of the original and permanent damage
to this plastic bit of protoplasm, the newborn.
52. Reich often referred to the pestilent character on the international scene as the “Moscow Modju,”
the  implication  being  that  in  the  U.S.S.R.,  in  the  twentieth  century,  the  emotional  plague  has
  achieved its highest and most efficient level of organization. See “Truth versus Modju,”.
53. “There was no talk anywhere of adolescent genitality. One spoke with great dignity of ‘Cultural
Puberty’; one meant complete genital abstinence during the years of adolescence.… There was no
  sexological institute in Vienna as yet. The Berlin Institute of Sexology under Hirschfeld was mainly
  concerned  with  the legal  affairs  of  sexology,  treatment  of  perversions  in  the  courts,  etc.  The
Marcuse Institute of Sexology was openminded, but the views of hereditary ethics, not science,
governed the scene.” Reich, 1952. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
54. The reader is referred to Part II of The Sexual Revolution by Wilhelm Reich.
55. Reich’s connection with the communist movement in the late 1920’s, which has been repeatedly
exploited to discredit him, arose simply from the fact that it was expedient, in order to carry on his
work in sexual hygiene, to encounter the masses of the people in a semblance of organization in the
  socialist and communist parties. Thus, “It was necessary to carry on sex-economic hygiene work
within the framework of the socialist and communist parties because that was where the masses of
  people were at that time. Their problems had to be handled in their life set-up if one wanted to get
out of the rut of individual treatment. Furthermore, the physicians who would aid in such matters as
birth  control,  and  other  aspects  of  sexual  hygiene  were  in  the  socialist  and  communist  parties,
  because Russia, at that time, was still connected with sex-affirmative legislation.” Reich, 1952.
From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
56. “Here you’re stirring up a hornet’s nest.”
57. Published originally in a limited edition, with its distribution carefully restricted to serious students
of orgonomy (Orgone Institute Press, 1953). This work has now been made available to the public.
The Murder of Christ (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, and The Noonday Press, 1966).
58. In the following unpublished statement, Reich indicates that Freud did know it. “Sigmund Freud
  permitted himself too readily to fall for the mystical attitude of his students, though he knew that he
was caught in organizational mire. Sigmund Freud accepted the world’s acclaim of psychoanalysis
too easily. He did not make it difficult enough for the world to accept him. He said clearly in 1926
that the world was accepting him only in order to destroy psychoanalysis, which it did. He knew
very well what was going on. But he did not resist strongly enough the pull of the world to level out
the sharpness of his discovery, and to mitigate what was so revolutionary in it: the discovery of the
psychic energy and the infantile sexuality.” Reich, 1952. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
59. In various references by Jones in The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Freud identified himself
with military heroes such as Hannibal and Oliver Cromwell.
60. Listen, Little Man (New York: The Noonday Press, 1965). This is a human and not a scientific
  document in which Reich reveals what the little, average man does to himself and to his leaders.61. Sandor Ferenczi, M.D. (1873–1933), founder of the Hungarian Psychoanalytic Association.
62. Karl Abraham, M.D. (1877–1925), the first psychoanalyst in Germany.
63. The reference, here, is to Freud’s objection to the “active technique” of Ferenczi, which involved
surrogate role-playing and degrees of physical intimacy to which Freud strenuously objected. In The
  Function of the Orgasm, p. 127, Reich referred to Ferenczi as “that talented and outstanding person
who was perfectly aware of the sad state of affairs in therapy. He looked for a solution in the
  somatic sphere and developed an ‘active technique’ directed at the somatic tension states. But he did
not know the stasis neurosis and failed to take the orgasm theory seriously.”
64. “The Vicissitudes of Instincts” and “The Unconscious.”
65. Reich attended the Medical School of the University of Vienna from 1918 until 1922.
66. At that time, a psychoanalyst was not required to undergo analysis as a prerequisite for the use of
this technique in treatment. The rule for a training analysis was adopted later, at the Congress in
  1926.
67. The Function of the Orgasm, p. 14.
68. Reich met Professor Albert Einstein on January 13, 1941. The basis for the meeting and their
  ensuing correspondence is contained in The Einstein Affair (Orgone Institute Press, 1953).
69. “It is wrong to speak of the psychoanalytic method of thinking. Freud really had no method. He
disliked method. And when he tried to do something with it, he went way off. He was a good
  empirical  worker,  but  not  a  scientific  methodologist.  The  first  attempt  to  put  method  into
  psychoanalysis was my work in character analysis. That’s what Reik criticized me for, just for
  method.  I  put  what  was  correct  in  psychoanalysis  on  a  natural-scientific  foundation,  but  my
  methodological, scientific work had in itself nothing to do with psychoanalysis, in the sense of being
a part of it or developing from it. What I did was to put my eagle’s egg in the nest of chickens’ eggs.
Then I took it out and gave it its own nest.” Reich, 1951. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
70.  Anna  Freud  (1895-  ),  Freud’s  youngest  daughter,  who  has  been  engaged  in  psychoanalytic
  treatment of children and in research in child development.
71. “Regardless of certain reservations, I consider Wilhelm Reich’s latest book on Character Analysis a
work of genius, and himself one of the best young students of Freud.” Professor Arthur Kronfeld,
quoted by Dr. Ernst Bien in a letter to Reich, July 26, 1934.
72. Herman Nunberg, psychoanalyst, now practicing in New York City.
73. “The clash between Wilhelm Reich and Sigmund Freud only reflects the clash of the cultured
secure world with the true life of the people at large. This is a frightening chapter of knowledge.”
  Reich, 1952. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
74. “When I coined the term ‘Sexual Revolution’ in the 1930’s, I had the vision of a basic change from
the prevalent negation of life and love to a rational, life-positive, happiness-enhancing handling of
the love function of mankind.” Reich, 1952. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
75. Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents. The word unbehagen means literally “disease.” According
to Jones (The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. III, p. 48), Freud had originally suggested as
the title for this volume “Man’s Discomfort in Civilization.”
76. Delivered in Freud’s inner circle on December 12, 1929.
77. “Culture takes precedence.”
78. See correspondence between Reich and Hitschmann, p. 226.
79.  Sandor  Rado  (1890-  ),  psychoanalyst  whose  recent  work  has  emphasized  “adaptational
  psychodynamics.” See preface.
80. See excerpt from The Function of the Orgasm, p. 248.
81. In his last will and testament, Reich arranged for the establishment of an Infant Trust Fund, to
which he left the bulk of his estate.
82. “This was the typical procedure of politicians in sexual and mental hygiene matters: As long as theydid not know what it really meant and as long as they saw people streaming into meetings to obtain
  information and help regarding their private lives, the politicians were all for it. ‘Politicians’, here,
not only means the party politician, but it means every man or woman to whom power, influence,
  career means everything, and human misery and knowledge nothing.
    “As soon as the sex-political question revealed its force, its tremendous social importance and its
  emotional impact on people, and as soon as the physician, educator, and functionary faced the grave
problem of how, practically, to go about the mass misery in the midst of all the ideological, medical,
  scientific confusion, with thousands of noises babbling and chattering wrong ideas all around them,
the politicians again slandered in order to destroy the true issue of the mental and sexual health of
the multitudes. Then, having destroyed the issue, or debased it by politicking means, they took over
the people for further betrayal. This was typical procedure, and it will occur until there are powerful
  centers based on knowledge and skill which will be able to cope with this tremendous issue of man.”
  Reich, 1952. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
83. See “Basic Tenets on Red Fascism,”.
84. “While I was accused by Freud of criticizing his psychoanalytic theory on behalf of and at the
  command of Moscow, Bischoff and Schneider, two Berlin stooges of the Moscow dictators, were
using the most intricate devices of defamation, underhandedness, distortion, lies and calumny in
order to wrest some fifty thousand men, women, adolescents and children from my influence. These
  people had joined the Sexpol organizations in Germany solely because I had made them look at
social institutions from the standpoint of the gratification of human needs. In contradistinction, the
red fascists were only interested in state power and in getting social influence by misusing what I
had built up. They were not at all interested in the factual, concrete solution of the sexual misery of
  people. Therefore, they fought me as an ‘anti-Marxist, counter-revolutionary Freudian’. A few years
later, I pulled out of this Freudian and Marxian mess and moved onto the road which led to the
  common functioning principle underlying both Freud’s and Marx’s discoveries, i.e. the living in the
human unconscious mind as well as in the human creative working power.” Reich, 1952. From the
  Archives of the Orgone Institute.
85. “The orgasm theory and the character-analytic technique both were rejected and never mentioned in
his writings by Sigmund Freud. I had to proceed on my own and called it, from 1928 onward, Sex-
  Economy.” Reich, in a letter to Dr. Eissler, February 19, 1952.
    Reich used the word “economy” in its sense of the managing or regulating of functions. Thus,
  “sex-economy” denotes that knowledge which deals with the economy of the biological energy in
the organism, i.e., with the capacity of the organism to regulate or balance its sexual (biological)
energy. See also Documentary Supplement, here.
86. Contrast this with the psychoanalytic position which does not bother to question the origin of the
existing social institutions, but treats them as if they are biologically given, and, therefore, proceeds
to bring about adjustment to them.
87. Compare this with Anna Freud:
    “… the child must learn how to conduct itself in regard to its instinctual life, and his [the
  therapist’s] views must in the end determine what part of the infantile sexual impulses must be
  suppressed or rejected as unemployable in the cultural world.” The Psychoanalytical Treatment of
  Children (New York: Schocken Books, 1964), p. 54.
    Also: “In working with an adult we have to confine ourselves entirely to helping him to adapt
  himself to his environment. It is far from us, and in fact lies quite outside our intention or our means,
to shape his surroundings to meet his needs.” Ibid., p. 61.
88. See letter from Reich to Fedem, April 18, 1933.
89. “Sexual Maturity, Abstinence, Marital Morality.”
90. “Your viewpoint has nothing to do with the middle road of psychoanalysis.”91. “Sorry, but that’s what I believe. That is my conviction. If you want to prevent neuroses, if you
want to do away with misery.…”
92. Freud’s position reflected his despair and did not represent knowledge based on experience. Reich,
  because of his practical experiences, felt that nothing could be done with human structure as it now
exists, and that only through the prevention of the biophysical armoring beginning in infancy can the
misery of the mass individual be eliminated.
93. Reich may have been somewhat premature. But there is no doubt that a change away from the
  compulsive marriage situation is appearing, not without agony and chaotic repercussions, however.
94. “Will make an effort into the discontent.”
95. Heinz Hartmann (1894- ), editor of the International Journal for Psychoanalysis, 1932–1941, at
present on the faculty of the New York Psychoanalytic Institute.
96. In a letter to Otto Fenichel dated March 26, 1934 (see documentary Supplement, here), Reich
wrote, “The basic debate between dialectical-materialist and bourgeois psychoanalysts will primarily
have to prove where Freud the scientist came into conflict with Freud the bourgeois philosopher;
where psychoanalytic research corrected the bourgeois concept of culture and where the bourgeois
  concept of culture hindered and confused scientific research and led it astray. ‘Freud against Freud’
is the central theme of our criticism.”
97. See documentation of this reference to the attacks upon Reich professionally and personally, p. 230
ff. The responsibility for the instigation and perpetuation of these vicious attacks culminating in
Reich’s imprisonment and death must be laid at the door of the psychoanalysts. Their attempts to
absolve themselves of this responsibility by references to Reich’s sanity must be scrutinized in the
light of this interview, which was requested and conducted amidst these desperate efforts to discredit
and destroy Reich and his work by groundless slander.
98. The term “sublimation” is flagrantly misinterpreted and misused. For example, the importance of
the direct gratification of human sexual needs has often been deliberately minimized in an effort to
  dispose of the problem of what is to become of the sexual energies released from repression during
the therapeutic process in the face of the obstacles of a sex-negating society. Sublimation, in its
  misused sense, is supplied as an inoffensive substitute mechanism. See footnotes here and here.
99. See the reproduced pages from Reich’s marked copy of Volume I of the Jones biography (following
p. 142), with his handwritten notations: (left) “Freud was simply love-starved, like a steam engine
before explosion”; (right) “Begin. Resig.” (Beginning Resignation.)
100. Helen Walker Puner, Freud: His Life and His Mind (Howell, Soskin, 1947).
101. See letter from T. P. Wolfe, M.D., to the editor of the Psychiatric Quarterly, p. 233.
102. “Sigmund Freud had a [sense of] humor which at times was colse to sarcasm. Such humor serves
the protection of the Ego from too great, unbearable sorrow.” Reich, 1952. From the Archives of the
Orgone Institute.
103.  See  Reich’s  statement,  which  accompanied  the  delivery  of  his  paper  “Ibsen’s  Peer  Gynt,
  Libidokonflikte und Wahngebilde” to the Sigmund Freud Archives, concerning the literary style of
Freud and the early psychoanalysts, p.
    An interesting parallel, today, is to be found in the stilted, formal, unemotional style of Masters
and Johnson in The Human Sexual Response, which attempts to deal with socially embarrassing
research in the sexual realm.
104. Sigmund Freud, Moses and Monotheism (New York: Vintage Books, 1955).
105. The obvious implication is that Freud, being and wanting to be German, was tormented by the
severe  blow  to  this  identification,  and  the  necessity,  under  the  circumstances,  to  reassert  his
  Jewishness.
106. Making the unconscious conscious, which is, in essence, the function of psychoanalysis, is a
  speculative,  intuitive  process  of  interpretation.  In  orgone  therapy,  the  attack  upon  the  characterological and muscular rigidities effects a release of bio-energy which is expressed in clonic
  movements  and  the  experience  of  bodily  sensations  described  as  streamings.  This  movement
provides an objectively expressive language, eliminating the need for the verbal psychoanalytic
  speculations condemned by many as unscientific.
107. “The man who founded the discipline which became the sharpest tool in clinical psychotherapy
was  himself,  in  the  second  half  of  his  life,  not  particularly  enthusiastic  about  its  therapeutic
  benefits … as the years passed he lost interest in psychoanalysis as a means of cure, and became
more  concerned  with  its  development  as  a  body  of  theoretical  knowledge  applicable  to  the
  interpretation of cultural phenomena … while he formulated the basic therapeutic procedure of
  psychoanalysis which is still widely used today, he eventually became negligent of the possibilities
the procedure offered.” Helen Walker Puner, Freud: His Life and His Mind, p. 261.
108.  Pierre  Janet  (1859–1957),  French  neurologist  and  psychologist  known  principally  for  his
  investigation of hysteria through the use of hypnosis.
109. “According to the common view, the function of the human intellect is exclusively objective and
  directed toward reality; ethics and philosophy, in particular, regard intellectual activity one that
  comprehends reality ‘incorruptibly’, and which is absolutely antithetical to the affect. This view
  overlooks two things: first, the intellectual function is itself a vegetative activity, and second, the
  intellectual function may have an affect charge no less intensive than that of any purely affective
  reaction. Character-analytic work, furthermore, reveals a specific defensive function of the intellect.
  Intellectual activity has often such a structure and direction that it impresses one as an extremely
clever apparatus precisely for the avoidance  of  facts,  as  an  activity  which  really detracts from
reality. The intellect, then, can work in both of the basic directions of the psychic apparatus, toward
the world and away from it; it can work in the same direction as a vivid affect, and it may be in
  opposition to it. That is, there is no mechanistic, absolute antithetical relationship between intellect
and affect but, again, a functional relationship.” Character Analysis, p. 312.
110.  “The  moralistic  world  has  for  thousands  of  years,  especially  since  the  beginning  of  early
  patriarchy, suppressed the natural genital drives. It has thus created the ‘secondary’ or perverse and
  pornographic drives, and was then forced to build up a wall of moralistic, hygienically disastrous
laws  and  rules  against  the  same  pornographic  human  mind  which  was  first  created  by  the
  suppression of natural sexuality.” Reich, 1947. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
    According to the psychoanalytic concept, “the unconscious mind is composed of nothing but
asocial drives which, quite logically, must be suppressed … it does not contain any instincts which
are essential for the process of living. All social and cultural attitudes are ‘sublimations’ of antisocial
drives. In short, psychoanalytic theory assumes that the unconscious is the last biologically given
realm; that there is nothing behind what the analyst can find in the depth of the person. This theory
knows  nothing  of  the  bio-energetic  functions  in  the  core  of  the  living  system;  neither  does  it
  penetrate  deeply  enough  into  the  realm  of  bio-energetic  functioning  to  realize  that  the
  ‘polymorphous perversity’ and antisociality of the unconscious are artifacts of our culture which
suppresses  the  naturally  given  bioenergetic  emotions;  it  does  not  realize  that  these  artificial,
  ‘secondary drives’ (Reich) are constantly fed by frustrated libido.
    “This outlook is, of course, quite hopeless as far as the prevention of neuroses is concerned: If the
  unconscious, antisocial drives are biologically given, if the child is born a ‘wild, cruel, asocial
animal,’  then  there  is  no  end  in  sight  for  the  emotional  plague.  Children  from  birth  on  are
  conditioned  and  adapted  to  the  culture  based  on  suppression  of  the  secondary  drives.  The
  psychoanalyst sees nothing but thwarted life which he mistakes as the naturally given biology of
man. The armoring which takes place from birth onward obfuscates completely the artificial nature
of what the psychoanalyst sees and describes.” Editorial note, Orgone Energy Bulletin, Vol. 2, No. 2
(April 1950).111. “Everybody around Freud wanted to be loved by him, but his intellectual accomplishment meant
  infinitely more to him than the people around him. As an inspired pathfinder he felt justified in
  regarding his co-workers as a means towards his own impersonal accomplishment; and with this end
in  mind,  probably  every  impulse  towards  originality,  when  it  subserved  other  than objective
  purposes, annoyed him and made him impatient. Freud was too far ahead of his time to leave much
room for anything really new in his own generation. It seems to be characteristic of every discoverer
of genius that his influence on contemporary thought is not only fructifying but inhibitory as well.”
  Helene Deutsch, The Psychoanalytic Quarterly, Vol. IX, 1940.
112.  “He  loved  those  who  were  critical,  who  were  independent,  who  were  of  interest  for  their
  brilliance, who were original.” Helene Deutsch, The Psychoanalytic Quarterly, Vol. IX, 1940.
113. Reich, here, is referring to neurasthenia as a specific example of a psychiatric disorder with a
  somatic core. Contrasting it with the psychoneuroses, Freud had classified neurasthenia and anxiety
  neuroses as actual (“aktuelle”) neuroses, i.e., disturbances lacking a psychic etiology. He did go so
far as to suggest that all psychoneuroses may have an actual-neurotic core, but he failed to pursue
the issue. Reich, on the other hand, searching for the somatic core, found ample clinical evidence to
justify the conclusion that the stasis of sexual energy was the common denominator of all neuroses.
This was the starting point of his orgasm theory and all his later investigations into the nature of the
sexual energy. See Documentary Supplement, p. 241. Also, Freud wrote to Reich on June 7, 1925,
expressing his interest in the latter’s attempts to comprehend the actual neuroses, in this instance the
  neurasthenia problem.
114. The Function of the Orgasm, pp. 62–63.
115. See footnote here.
116. “Just go ahead. Interpret.”
117. In view of this recognition of the importance of Reich’s contribution to psychoanalysis, it should
be  noted  that  in  the  text  of  Franz  Alexander’s The  History  of  Psychiatry  (1966),  written  in
  collaboration with H. G. Selznick, M.D., there is not a single reference to Reich.
118. The need for punishment.
119. “Just go ahead with your clinical work. What I’ve said here is merely hypothetical. It may, or may
not, hold up. It is not basically important for the structure of psychoanalysis.”
120. “Just go ahead with your clinical work. It’s nothing more than just playing with ideas.”
    It is of interest to note that as late as 1937, Freud, in a letter to Princess Marie Bonaparte, advised
“not to set too much value on my remarks about the destructive instinct.”
121. See excerpt from The Function of the Orgasm, p. 248.
122. In The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Jones states unequivocally that there is no “primary wish
for self-destruction on the part of the body; the clinical evidence points clearly in the opposite
  direction.” It was Reich who originally opposed this concept, both theoretically and clinically. The
only analysts, today, who apply the term “death instinct” in a clinical manner are, according to
Jones, Melanie Klein, Karl Menninger and Hermann Nunberg.
123. The Ego and the Id.
124. The so-called ego instincts are the “non-sexual” instincts. The increasing emphasis upon their
  importance  created  a  dualism  which  made  it  possible  to  diminish  the  importance  of  the  sexual
instinct. According to Reich, the distinction is basically incorrect for “the ego instincts are nothing
but the totality of the vegetative demands in their defense function,” i.e., the ego and the id are
merely different functions of the unitary biopsychic apparatus and should not be viewed as separate
and distinct realms of functioning.
125. At a conference in 1952, Reich commented on the fact that while, today, Horney and Erich Fromm
are associated with the sociological application of psychoanalysis, it was actually Reich who got out
and  worked  with  the  people  and  really  began  the  social  application  of  natural-scientific  psychoanalysis. During those early years, Horney knew nothing of it. She and most of the other
  analysts were still working with individual patients.


2. October 19, 1952

1. “An individual’s typical structure, his stereotyped manner of acting and reacting. The orgonomic
  concept  of  character  is  functional  and  biological  and  not  a  static,  psychological  or  moralistic
  concept.” The Function of the Orgasm, p. 359.
2. “With character analysis it became manifest that the neurotic symptom could not possibly grow in a
sound character structure, that the neurotic character was at the base of all mental distress. With
these new views on human nature, the way had been opened up to question the rationality of all
human  affairs  which  emerged  from  the  prevalent  character  structure.”  Reich,  1952.  From  the
  Archives of the Orgone Institute.
3. Character neurotic: that “character which, due to chronic sexual stasis, operates according to the
  principle of compulsive moral regulation.” The Function of the Orgasm, p. 318.
4. The reference is to the Socialist uprising in Vienna on that date.
5. Letter from Freud to Reich, July 15, 1927.
6.  The  Washington  (Harry  Stack  Sullivan)  and  Horney  so-called  dynamic-cultural  schools  of
  psychoanalysis  emphasize  environmental  and  cultural  factors  in  the  genesis  of  neurosis,  while
  tending to ignore the biological (libido).
7. The story of this period in Reich’s development appeared in People in Trouble (Orgone Institute
Press, 1953).
8. Socialist Society for Sexual Consultation and Sexual Research.
9. Edmund Bergler, M.D., psychoanalyst; at one time assistant director of the Psychoanalytic Clinic in
  Vienna.
10. Sexual stasis.
11.  From  the  beginning  of  the  attack  by  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  in  1947  until  his
  imprisonment in 1957, Reich was compelled to divert much of his time and energy to legal matters.
12. “Apart from the mass of diseases it creates, the process of armoring in early childhood makes every
living expression edgy, mechanical, rigid, incapable of change and adaptation to living functions and
processes. The living organ sensations, which have become inaccessible to self-perception, will,
from now on, constitute the total realm of ideas which center around the ‘SUPERNATURAL.’ This, too,

is tragically logical. Life is beyond reach, ‘transcendental.’ Thus, it becomes the center of religious
longing for the saviour, the redeemer, the BEYOND.” Reich, Ether, God and Devil, pp. 100–101.

13.  An  early  member  of  the  Viennese  psychoanalytic  organization  and  a  member  of  the  Vienna
  Municipal Council.
14. “To medicine itself he felt no direct attraction. He did not conceal in later years that he never felt at
home in the medical profession, and that he did not seem to himself to be a regular member of it.”
Ernest Jones, The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. I, p. 27.
15. Reich is referring to the frontal lobotomy which gained some vogue in the treatment of mental
  disease.
16. Among the early lay analysts were the Reverend Oskar Pfister, Otto Rank, Siegfried Bernfeld,
  Theodor Reik, Anna Freud, Ernst Kris and Robert Wälder.
17. “Foreseeing that the topic [lay analysis] was going to be one of major interest at the next Congress,
to be held in Innsbruck in September, 1927, Eitingon and I arranged for a preliminary discussion in
the form of contributions to be published in the International Journal and the Zeitschrift, the official
  organs of the Association. Twenty-eight such contributions, including two final ones by Freud and
Eitingon respectively, were published in the form of a literary symposium.” Jones, The Life andWork of Sigmund Freud, Vol. III, p. 293.
    Reich contributed to this symposium. See excerpt from his article, p. 251.
18. See Documentary Supplement, here.
19.  Alfred  Adler,  M.D.  (1870–1937)—Austrian  psychiatrist,  founder  of  the  school  of  individual
  psychology and proponent of the concept of the will to power as the central issue in the neurotic
  process, denoting the compensatory strivings against feelings of inadequacy and inferiority.
20. See letter.
21.  Carl  Gustav  Jung,  M.D.  (1875–1961)—Swiss  psychoanalyst,  founder  of  a  school  of  analytic
  psychology utilizing, in addition to the personal unconscious arising during the individual’s finite
  existence, the concept of the “collective unconscious,” a repository of “mystical, collective ideas”
arising from the “inherited possibility of psychic functioning in general.”
22. Reference to Jung’s “universal unconscious.”
23. “All that has been gained from psychoanalytic observation thus far is relinquished if one follows
the procedure of C. G. Jung in subtilizing the concept of the libido, permitting it to coincide with
psychic instinctive energy in its totality.” Sigmund Freud, Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex,
p. 76.
24. The Geiger-Müller counter is used to measure orgone energy in the atmosphere.
25. “Jung had generalized the concept of libido to such an extent as to make it completely lose its
meaning  of  sexual  energy.  He  ended  up  with  the  ‘collective  unconscious’  and  with  that,  in
  mysticism,  which  he  later,  as  a  national  socialist,  officially  represented.” The  Function  of  the
  Orgasm, p. 127.
26. Deadly orgone energy: stagnant, decaying energy in the living organism and in the atmosphere.
27. “The moment a man questions the meaning and value of life, he is sick, since objectively neither
has any existence; by asking this question one is merely admitting to a store of unsatisfied libido to
which  something  else  must  have  happened,  a  kind  of  fermentation  leading  to  sadness  and
  depression.” Sigmund Freud, in a letter to Princess Marie Bonaparte, August 13, 1937. From Letters
of Sigmund Freud, selected and edited by Ernst L. Freud (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), p. 436.
28. Wilhelm Stekel (1868–1940), German psychoanalyst, proponent of an active intervention technique
to shorten the duration of treatment, relying to a considerable extent on his own intuition.
29. Regarding Stekel, Freud is quoted as having said, “He plays the respectful disciple, and meantime
assumes the privilege of a superior. He forgives me so to speak for all that he has done to me.”
Joseph Wortis, Fragment of an Analysis with Freud (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1954).
30. Otto Rank (1884–1939), Viennese psychoanalyst who maintained that the act of being born is a
shock or trauma, thus of great consequence in the development of the psyche. Freud felt that Rank
  overestimated its influence.
31. “Rank also was aware of the inadequacies of technique. He recognized the longing for peace, for
return to the womb. He misunderstood the fear of living in this terrible world and misinterpreted it in
a biological sense as the trauma of birth, which he supposed to be the nucleus of the neurosis. He
failed to ask himself why people longed to get away from real life and back into the protective
  womb. He came into conflict with Freud, who continued to adhere to the libido theory, and became
an outsider.” The Function of the Orgasm, p. 127.
32.  Reich  refers  to  the  symbol  of  the  common  functioning  principle  signifying  a  unitary
  principle  from  which  two  antithetical  principles  are  derived,  making  them  identical  and
  antithetical at the same time.
33. “Just go your own way. Do your clinical work. Primary masochism or the death instinct
plays no role.”
34. The overvaluation of Freud’s speculations.
35. Oceanic feelings.36. In 1952, when Reich was rereading Freud’s letters to him, he commented that, for the first time, he
felt a certain fear on the part of Freud toward him.
37. Victor Tausk (1877–1919), author of a work on schizophrenia.
38. Princess Marie Bonaparte (1882–1962), personal friend of Freud who, in 1926, founded the Société
  Psychoanalytique de Paris.
39. “Your suggestion to link up the discovery of the Life Energy with Freud’s contributions to science
  cannot be put into effect. There is no such link. The utmost station of my work process which had
clear cut positive links with psychoanalysis is the presentation in the second edition of my Character
  Analysis. Even these positive links had been rejected by Freud, including the crucial orgasm theory,
the  starting  point  of  the  later  orgone  energy  developments.”  Reich,  in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Harry
  Slochower, January 3, 1956.


3. October 19, 1952 (continued)

1. “What is at stake at this point are the personal backstage events and emotional involvements of those
who helped to build up psychiatry in the early part of this century. These emotional involvements
are socially of such a crucial nature that perfect clarity is required on the part of all participants
  regarding the dynamic structure of the undertaking.” Reich, 1952. From the Archives of the Orgone
  Institute.
2. The role of genitality in the etiology of the neuroses.
3. The jailing of Reich achieved for his enemies what he had been able to avoid during so much of his
  eventful life. It was the final and tragically irrevocable solution to the endless attempts to segregate
him. Jailing succeeded where slander and defamation had failed.
4. Reich refers to the bust of him by Jo Jenks, 1949. It is now on his tomb at Orgonon. See photograph,
following p. 142.
5. Reich’s first wife, Annie Reich Rubinstein, M.D. See Documentary Supplement, pp. 225, 232, 236.
6. See excerpt from Character Analysis, p. 230.
7. See Documentary Supplement, Correspondence, p. 138ff.
8. “It is not simply a question of depositing a few documents with the Library of Congress, sealed off
  against  inspection  for  100  years  …  it  is  a present-day  general  and  crucial  problem  of  ‘social
  psychiatry.’” Reich, 1952. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
9. Sigmund the Unserene—A Tragedy in Three Acts by Percival Bailey is a clear expression of the
prevalent trend to discredit Freud and dispose of him.
10. See letter from Reich to the publishers and editors of the International Journal for Psychoanalysis,
here.
11. “In the years 1928 to 1930, I went into the communist-socialist camp to do practical field work in
mental hygiene. I introduced the concept of neurosis and genital misery into social thinking. My first
steps in this field resulted in the conclusion that, though the ideals of the movement were right, the
techniques  used  to  achieve  the  end  were  inadequate  if  not,  thoroughly  ghastly.  Accordingly,  I
  embarked on improving the leftist movement for freedom by introducing psychiatric basic concepts
into political sociology.
    From the point of view of later developments of misery for myself and my beloved ones, I wished
I had never started my program of improving the socialist movements. No more deadly enemies, no
greater danger to my life and liberty or happiness have ever come than that movement directed by
  liberators without knowledge of the laws of responsible freedom. From the standpoint of learning, I
  would do it again, in spite of the heartbreak.” Reich. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
12. “The Arbeiterhilfe (Worker’s Help) consisted mainly of people who were not party members but
  sympathized openly with the Russian revolution. The Arbeiterhilfe and the ‘Rote Hilfe’ (Red Help)were designed as a kind of Red Cross organization. However, these affiliates consisting of non-
  political members were in many cases abused for political power purposes in the early thirties,
without the consent or even the knowledge of the members of these organizations.” Reich. From the
  Archives of the Orgone Institute.
13.  Ernst  Simmel  (1882–1947),  president  of  the  Society  for  Socialist  Physicians  in  Berlin,  who
  pioneered in the development of hospital care of patients, using psychoanalytic principles.
14. “Lenin, as early as December 19 and 20, 1917, issued two relevant decrees. One was ‘About the
  dissolution of marriage’ … The other was, ‘About civil marriage, children and the registration of
  marriage.’ Both laws deprived the husband of his prerogatives of domination in the family, gave the
  woman the complete right to economic and sexual determination and declared it to be a matter of
course that the woman could freely determine her name, domicile and citizenship.
    “… Divorce was made very easy. A sexual relationship which was considered a ‘marriage’ could
be as easily dissolved as it had been established. The only criterion was mutual agreement among
the partners.
        “…  The  registration  of  a  relationship  was  not  mandatory.  Even  when  a  relationship  was
  registered, sexual relationships with others were ‘not prosecuted’. However, not telling the partner
about another relationship was considered ‘fraud’. The obligation to pay alimony was considered
only a ‘transition measure’. The obligation lasted six months after the separation and only if the
  partner was unemployed or otherwise incapable of making a living.” Reich, The Sexual Revolution,
pp. 166–167.
15. “People began to feel, in the middle of the 1920’s, that with Sigmund Freud something crucial had
  happened in human society. As Wilhelm Reich expressed it in one of his books: Sexuality became
aware of itself in the person of Sigmund Freud, just as economy began to be aware of itself in the
  person of Karl Marx. The trend in Europe to unite Freud and Marx began to prevail in about 1927.
At that time, nobody had an inkling of the future split of a mechanized and ruined Karl Marx who
  would be confined to an imperialist, Russian, tyrant state, and a badly mauled Freud confined to the
USA, appearing frequently in a commercial manner as thousands of ‘lay psychotherapists’.” Reich,
  1952. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
16. “Freud, Sachs, Nunberg, Deutsch, Alexander and most other analysts refused, to accept my concept
of the psycho-economic and therapeutic significance of genitality. Freud’s Introductory Lectures on
  Psychoanalysis, published as late as 1933, do not even mention the problem of the genital orgasm;
nor does Nunberg’s Neurosenlehre.” Character Analysis, p. 300.
17. “I have no objections whatsoever to anyone linking up Freud’s ideational concepts on the psychic
energy with my discovery. I have done so myself. However, I must guard against any attempt to
write me down in history as a Freudian or as one of the many psychotherapeutic schools which
  sprang from the deletion of the living nerve of the Freudian theory, namely, the libido theory. The
actual  discovery  of  the  cosmic  energy  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  Freud.  It  is  solely my
  responsibility, and I have to be on guard since the consequences of this discovery are so very grave,
resting on my shoulders only.” Reich, 1956. From the Archives of the Orgone Institute.
18. “We know that the mechanisms of the psychoses are in essence no different from those of the
neuroses, but we do not have at our disposal the quantitative stimulation necessary for changing
them. The hope of the future here lies in organic chemistry or the access to it through endocrinology.
This future is still far distant, but one should study analytically every case of psychosis because this
  knowledge will one day guide the chemical therapy.” Sigmund Freud, in a letter to Marie Bonaparte,
  January 15, 1930. Published in The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. III, p. 449, by Ernest
Jones.
19.  “The  basic  question  of  all  biology  is  that  of  the  origin  of  the  internal  impulses  of  the  living
  organism. Nobody doubts the fact that the difference between the living and the non-living lies inthe internal origin of the motor impulses. This internal impulse can be due only to an energy at work
within the organism.” The Cancer Biopathy, pp. 24–25.
    It is this energy, originally discovered in 1939 in a culture of “bions,” (microscopically visible
  vesicles  of  functioning  energy)  which  Reich  named  “orgone,”  a  term  derived  from  the  words
  “organism” and “orgastic” to indicate “the history of its discovery, namely, through the orgasm
  formula, as well as its biological effect (of charging organic substances).” Ibid., p. 78.
20. In a later notation, Reich suggested that “all ideas of energy, stasis and discharge came from Breuer
[Dr. Josef Breuer, Freud’s original collaborator], the sex point from Freud.”
21.  The  microscope,  telescope,  orgonoscope,  temperature-difference  apparatus,  electroscope,  field
meter,  fluorophotometer,  Geiger-Müller  counter  are  some  of  the  devices  used  to  visualize  and
otherwise demonstrate and measure quantitatively the orgone energy in biological specimens and in
the atmosphere.
22. “Blue is the specific color of orgone energy within and without the organism. Classical physics tries
to explain the blueness of the sky by the scattering of the blue and of the spectral color series in the
  gaseous atmosphere. However, it is a fact that blue is the color seen in all functions which are
related to the cosmic or atmospheric or organismic orgone energy:
    “Protoplasm of any kind, in every cell or bacterium is blue. It is generally mistaken as ‘refraction’
of light which is wrong, since the same cell under the same conditions of light loses its blueness
when it dies.
    “Thunder clouds are deeply blue, due to high orgone charges contained in the suspended masses
of water.
    “A completely darkened room, if lined with iron sheet metal (the so-called ‘Orgone Room’), is not
black, i.e., free of any light, but bluish or bluish-gray. Orgone energy luminates spontaneously; it is
  ‘luminescent.’
    “Water in deep lakes and in the ocean is blue.
    “The color of luminating, decaying wood is blue; so are the luminating tail ends of glowworms,
St. Elmo’s fire, and the aurora borealis.
    “The lumination in evacuated tubes charged with orgone energy is blue.” Reich, The Orgone
Energy Accumulator—Its Scientific and Medical Use (Orgone Institute Press, 1951), p. 15.
23. See letters, here, here.
24. A means of collecting and concentrating the atmospheric orgone energy by a certain arrangement of
organic and metallic materials, based on the observable fact that the former absorbs and the latter
  reflects this energy.
25. The Orgone Energy Accumulator—Its Scientific and Medical Use. This was among the works of
Reich that were physically destroyed by the Food and Drug Administration.
26. “The emphasis which I have put upon Freud’s libido theory, as a hypothetical forerunner of the
actual discovery of the cosmic life energy, is due to the fact that, as a psychoanalyst, I worked
  practically and clinically with it for twelve years, and thus, arrived at my own discovery in the
course of developments and conflicts within the psychoanalytic movement. However, I could have
  developed my discovery of the life energy as well from Driesch’s ‘Entelechy’ or Bergson’s ‘Elan
  Vital’,  or  from  any  of  the  biochemical  branches  of  science,  had  I  happened  to  have  worked
  practically in any of these fields. Similar conflicts would have arisen to free my thoughts. This is to
say  that  there  are  many  forerunners  of  my  discovery.”  Reich,  1954.  From  the  Archives  of  the
Orgone Institute.
27. “What psychoanalytic theory calls ‘id’ is in reality the physical orgone function in the biosystem.
The  term  ‘id’  expresses,  in  a  metaphysical  manner,  the  fact  that  there  is  in  the  biosystem  a
  ‘something’ the functions of which are determined outside of the individual. This ‘something,’ the
‘id’,  is  a  physical  reality;  the  cosmic  orgone  energy.  The  living  ‘orgonotic  system,’  the  ‘bio-  apparatus,’ represents nothing but a special state of concentrated orgone energy. In a recent review,
a  psychoanalyst  described  the  ‘orgone’  as  ‘identical  with  Freud’s  id.’  This  is  as  correct  as  the
  contention, say, that the ‘entelechy’ of Aristotle and Driesch is identical with the ‘orgone’. It is true,
  indeed, that the terms ‘id,’ ‘entelechy’, ‘elan vital’ and ‘orgone’ describe ‘the same thing.’ But one
makes things all too easy for oneself with such analogies. ‘Orgone’ is a visible, measurable and
  applicable energy of a cosmic nature. Such concepts as ‘id’, ‘entelechy’, or ‘elan vital’, on the other
hand,  are  only  the  expression  of inklings  of  the  existence  of  such  an  energy.  Are  the
  ‘electromagnetic  waves’  of  Maxwell  ‘the  same’  as  the  ‘electromagnetic  waves’  of  Hertz?
  Undoubtedly they are. But with the latter one can send messages across the oceans while with the
former one cannot.
    “Such ‘correct’ equations without a mention of the practical differences serve the function of
  verbalizing away great discoveries in natural science. They are as unscientific as the sociologist
who, in a recent review, referred to the orgone as a ‘hypothesis.’ With hypotheses, with such things
as the ‘id’ or ‘entelechy’, one cannot charge blood corpuscles or destroy cancer tumors; with orgone
energy, one can.” Character Analysis, p. 304.


Postscript

1. The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. I, pp. 379–395.
2. “I took the responsibility for Freud, that is for things Freud did not want.” Reich, in a telephone
  conversation with Dr. Eissler, March 26, 1952.


Explanatory note

1. From the Preface to the third edition of The Mass Psychology of Fascism (New York: Orgone
  Institute Press, 1946).


1. Correspondence

1. Unless otherwise noted, all material in this section was translated from the German by Therese Pol.
2. This letter was written while Reich was a medical student at the University of Vienna.
3. This is a fragment. It was not sent.
4. Freud.
5. “I. Journal 1921, p. 248.”
6. Der  Triebhafte  Charakter  (Leipzig,  Vienna,  Zurich:  Internationaler  psychoanalytischer  Verlag,
  1925).
7. Sigmund Freud, Gesammelten Schriften (Vienna, Zurich, Leipzig: Internationaler Psychoanalytischer
Verlag, 1924).
8. This letter was not sent. Across the top of the letter appear the following notes in Reich’s hand:
  “Nicht abgeschickt! Woch immer blind!—XII [Dec.] ’34—Still blind, 1952.” Under Federn’s name
  appear the words: “The Pestilent Digger.”
9. This letter was not sent.
10. Written in 1932.
11. Dated January 1, 1932.
12. Underlined by Reich with the notation: “i.e., Freud’s dogma of the death instinct.”
13. “Certain Berlin psychoanalysts opposed this procedure, and suggested instead that Reich’s article
  should be published together with a reply. This was done. This ‘reply’ was written by Siegfried
  Bernfeld  under  the  title  “Die  Kommunistische  Diskussion  um  die  Psychoanalyse  und  Reich’s  “Widerlegung der Todestriebhypothese,”’ and appeared in the same number of the Zeitschrift. This
article of some thirty pages did not deal with the problem of masochism at all, but with Wilhelm
Reich’s  contributions  to  Marxist  sociology.  In  other  words,  since  Reich’s  clinical  findings  and
  formulations could not be refuted, an attempt was made to discredit his theory of masochism by the
  imputation of political, emotional motives.” T. P. Wolfe, International Journal of Sex-Economy and
  Orgone-Research, Vol. III, 1944, p. 38.
14. Gleichschaltung means the political alignment of individuals and organizations with the Hitler
  regime.  Reich  uses  the  term  to  indicate  that  analysts  and  analysands  used  to  be  paired  off  in
  accordance with similarity of background.
15.  “The  term  ‘Kulturbolschewismus’  has,  in  this  context,  nothing  whatsoever  to  do  with  the
  Communist Party. It was a term used by Hitler to denounce any kind of progressive or liberal
thinking, especially in the realm of mental hygiene and infant upbringing.” Note added by Reich in
  1952.
16. Published independently in 1933.
17. “Wohin fuehrt die Nackterziehung.” Included in The Sexual Revolution, p. 61.
18. The term “Marxist” or “dialectical materialistic” is used in agreement with the view, then prevalent,
that they meant “scientific” and “rational” in contradistinction to metaphysics, which was considered
  bourgeois.
19. René Laforgue, French psychoanalyst, author of Clinical Aspects of Psycho-analysis.
20. Géza Róheim (1891–1953), anthropologist who applied psychoanalysis to the study of primitive
peoples, particularly in Australia.
21. Melanie Klein (1882–1960), whose psychoanalytic studies were principally with children.
22. Reference to “Why War?”, open letters between Einstein and Freud, published originally in the
New Commonwealth, London, 1934.
23. This letter was not sent.
24. Die Funktion des Orgasmus (Leipzig, Vienna, Zurich: Internationaler Psychoanalytischer Verlag,
  1927).
25. Melitta Schmideberg, psychoanalyst, daughter of Melanie Klein.
26. Lotte Liebeck, German psychoanalyst and student of Reich.
27. Edith Jacobson, M.D.
28. Liebeck refers to her study of Freud’s work.
29. See Documentary Supplement, here.
30. This postscript was not sent.
31. Reference to equipment for the bio-electric experiments. See The Function of the Orgasm, Ch. IX,
pp. 326–337.
32. Hellmuth Kaiser, author of Effective Therapy, published posthumously with the editorial assistance
of Louis B. Fierman, M.D. See also reference to Kaiser in Character Analysis, pp. 315–316.
33. Nic Hoel.
34. “Some psychoanalysts stole my principle of character-analysis without mentioning me, because to
  mention me as the originator of the character-analytic technique would mean to defend the orgasm
theory, and to stand the blows which follow in its path. So they have thrown out the orgasm theory
and are taking over a kind of ghost which does not mean yes or no, black or white, mah nor bah.
You are helpless against such procedure on the part of the so-called common or little man who grabs
where he can take without being punished, and pays tribute to where he is treated in an authoritative
  manner. Take, hit and run is their motto.” Reich, from a letter to A. S. Neill, June 24, 1944.
35. Liebeck had stated that Freud’s Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex contained “just about
everything that can basically be said on the subject! Everything else strikes me as mere elaboration.”
36. Felix Deutsch (1884–1964), internist, interested in psychosomatic research.37. Fenichel.
38. Elsa Lindenberg.
39. American psychiatrist who studied with Reich in Europe.
40. All of Malinowski’s letters were written in English.
41. This letter was not sent. It carries the following notation in Reich’s hand: “Leave the idiot be. But,
the idiots govern the world!”
42. On December 12, 1941, at two o’clock in the morning, Reich “was routed from bed by agents of the
FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) and taken to Ellis Island. It was perfectly clear, from Reich’s
record as well as from investigations carried on both prior to the arrest and afterwards, that there was
nothing whatsoever to incriminate Reich under the Enemy Alien Act. It took until January 5, 1942,
to  effect  his  unconditional  release.  Though  denunciations  with  the  police  as  a  weapon  against
Reich’s work had happened before in Europe, it had never come to an arrest.” T. P. Wolfe, in a note
to the Translator’s Preface of The Function of the Orgasm, p. xix.
43. Minor grammatical corrections have been made in this letter. Reich, at this time, was just beginning
to write in English.
44. International Journal for Sex-Economy and Orgone-Research.
45. A. S. Neill, educator, headmaster of Summerhill, Leiston, England. This is an excerpt of a letter
  written in English.
46. See Memorandum, p.


2. Emotional plague: The psychoanalysts

1. Character Analysis, pp. 269–271.
2. American Psychiatric Association.


3. Miscellaneous

1. The Function of the Orgasm, pp. 66–72.
2. The Function of the Orgasm, pp. 102–104.
3. “Compulsion to Confess and Need for Punishment.”
4. Excerpt from Reich’s contribution to the symposium on “Lay Analysis”—1927.
5. First published in Zeitschr. f. polit. Psychologie und Sexualökonomie, Vol. 2 (1935), pp. 54–61.
  Translated by T. P. Wolfe, M.D. Walter Briehl, M.D., author of the chapter on Reich in the recently
published Psychoanalytic Pioneers, perpetuates the myth that Reich “resigned” from the IPA. See
footnote 2, page 8–9.
6.  Sexpol  (Sex-Political)  was  the  name  of  the  German  organization  concerned  with  the  practical
  application of the concepts of sex-economy on the social scene.
7. Translator’s note: After the publication of this article, Eitingon wrote to Reich, in a letter from
  Palestine, of December 29, 1935, that this statement was untrue, but that the contrary was true: “As
late as 1933, when I was still in Germany, I was against your expulsion from the German Society
and kept pointing out to the Executive Committee that under my aegis a thing like that would not be
  allowed to happen.” In his reply of January 9, 1936, Reich stated that he was very glad to hear that
Eitingon had no part in the action of the German Society against him; he regretted not to be able to
correct publicly the presentation in the article as long as no public correction had been forthcoming
from the administration of the Association; and that he would be glad to have Eitingon’s letter
published in the Zeitschrift für polit. Psychologie und Sexualökonomie, if he so wished. T. P. Wolfe,
M.D.
8. First published in Zeitschr. f. polit. Psychologie und Sexualökonomie, Vol. 3, (1936), pp. 150–156.  Translated by T. P. Wolfe, M.D.
9. When I was about to start my lectures at the New School for Social Research in New York, in 1939,
a psychiatrist and member of the Psychoanalytic Association advised me to keep off the sexual
problem. Many things indicate that the sexual problem in its social functions is taboo. In spite of
this, the prospects for sex-economy in the U.S.A. are good, provided that pornography is soon
  recognized and properly evaluated. Reich, 1946.
10. Footnote, 1946: This statement is no longer correct. The socialists, led by the communists, have in
the meantime regressed sex-politically far behind the most primitive demands. Thus, social sex-
  economy finds itself in a great void, and its organization is left to future development. Reich.
11. Footnote, 1946: This prediction was confirmed by the later development. It took the form of orgone
  biophysics, which developed into a new, fruitful branch of natural science. It owes its existence to
the consistent adherence to the orgasm theory and orgasm research at which so many look askance.
  Reich.
12. Elucidation occasioned by the Norwegian Government’s Authorization of Psychoanalytic Practice
  (1938). Translated by Therese Pol.
13. People in Trouble (Orgone Institute Press, 1953), pp. 158–159.
14. Excerpt from the Orgone Energy Bulletin, Vol. IV, No. 3 (July 1952), pp. 166–170.
15. From Reich’s diary, October 15, 1953.
16.  Known  as  the  orgasm  formula  or  “life  formula,”  characterized  by  mechanical  tension  →  bio-
  energetic charge → bio-energetic discharge → mechanical relaxation, observable not only in the
orgasm,  but  in  all  the  autonomic  functions  of  the  human  organism;  in  unicellular  as  well  as
  multicellular organisms; in the division of cells, etc.
17. The Murder of Christ, pp. 196–199.                                    INDEX






The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the

pages in your eBook. Please use the search function on your eReading device

to search for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that appear in the

print index are listed below.


Abraham, Karl

Actual neurosis; see also Neurasthenia

Adaptationalists

Adler, Alfred

Alcoholism

Alexander, Franz

Angel, Annie

Arieti, Silvano

Armor


Bailey, Percival

Bergler, Edmund

Bergman

Bernfeld, Siegfried

Bibring

Boehm

Bohr, Niels

Bonaparte, Marie

Brady, Mildred E.

Breuer, Josef

Bruno, Giordano


Cancer

tumorsand Freud

Carstens, Erik

Character analysis

Character neurosis

Characterological resignation

Freud’s, see also Cancer

Character structure

genital

neurotic

  orgonomic picture of

Christ

Circumcision

Cleckley, Hervey

Common functioning principle

Communism

and libido theory

Reich’s relation to

attempt to discredit Reich

sexual laws

see also Red fascism

Compulsion neurotic

Cott, A. Allan

Cultural adaptation


“Death instinct,”

Deutsch, Felix

Deutsch, Helene

Dialectic materialism

Dialectic materialistic psychoanalysis

DOR


Ego instincts

Eidelberg

Einstein, Albert

Eitingon, Max

Emotional plague

Engels, Friedrich

English, O. S.


Fabian, MitjaFedern, Paul

Fenichel, Otto

Ferenczi, Sandor

Freud, Anna

Freud, Ernst

Friedjung

Frischauf, Marie

Fromm, Erich


Genital embrace

Genitality

Freud’s hampering of

Gerö


Harnik

Hartmann, Heinz

Hays, Arthur Garfield

Hitschmann, Eduard

Hoel, Nic (Waal)

Horney, Karen, school


Id

Ibsen, Henrik


Janet, Pierre

Jaspers

Jekels, Ludwig

Johnson, Alvin

Jokl

Jones, Ernest

Judaism

Jung, Carl Gustav


Kaiser, Hellmuth

Kardiner, Abram

Kinsey, Alfred

Klein, Melanie

Kris, Ernst

Kronold

Kubie, Lawrence S.Laforgue, René

Langfeldt, Gabriel

Lay analysis

Lantos

Libido

functions

Jung’s generalization of

stasis

as a reality

Liebeck, Lotte

Life energy; see also Orgone energy

Lucerne Congress


Malinowski, Bronislaw

Marx, Karl

Marxism; see also Communism

Masochism

Medical schools and doctors

Menninger Clinic

Menninger, Karl

Mental hygiene

movement

Miller, Joseph S. A.

Misch, Kaethe

MOCENIGO

Modju

Moscow Modju

Mueller-Braunschweig, Carl


Negative therapeutic reaction

Neill, A. S.

Neurasthenia

Newborn child

Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm

Nunberg, Hermann


Obermayer, Harry

Oberndorf

Oedipus complex

Oken, DonaldOrgasm formula

Orgasm theory

Orgastic potency

Orgone energy

blue color of

  demonstration and measurement

genital excitation

libido as a reality

Orgone energy accumulator

Orgone therapy

Orgonomy

“Ozeanische Gefühle”


Pavlov, Ivan

Pestilent character; see also Modju

Pfister, Oskar

Politics

Freud’s position on

Puner, Helen Walker


Rado, Sandor

Raknes, Ola

Rank, Otto

Red fascism; see also Emotional plague

Reik, Theodor

Religion

Religious concept of “paradise,”

Rie, Oskar

Róheim, Géza

Rubinstein, Annie Reich


Sachs, H.

Scharfenberg

Schizophrenia

rumors

bio-energetic emotions in

  confusion with genital character

Schjelderup, Harold K.

Schmideberg, Melitta

Secondary emotionsSex-economy; see also Orgasm theory

Sexual revolution

Silberer, Herbert

Simmel, Ernst

Stalin, Josef

Stasis neurosis; see also Actual neurosis

Stekel, Wilhelm

Sterba

Streamings

Strindberg, August

Sublimation

Freud’s personal


Tausk, Victor

Technical seminar, (Vienna)


Vegetotherapy

Vogt, Ragnar


Walder, Robert

Waal, Nic; see Hoel, Nic

Wolfe, Theodore P. 


Copyright © 1967 by Mary Boyd Higgins, as Trustee of the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund

All rights reserved

Library of Congress catalog card number: 67–27519

The editors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Katharine Ann Keller in the preparation of the

manuscript of this book.

Permission to reprint correspondence has been received from the following: Lotte K. Bernstein, the

Estate of Arthur Garfield Hays, the Estate of Bronislaw Malinowski, Ola Raknes, and Gladys Meyer

Wolfe

eISBN 9781466846999

First eBook edition: May 2013