THE CANCER
BIOPATHY

VOLUME II OF
THE DISCOVERY OF THE ORGONE

BY WILHELM REICH

TRANSLATED BY
ANDREW WHITE WITH
MARY HIGGINS AND
CHESTER M. RAPHAEL, M.D.

P
><f>t

 
THE CANCER
BIOPATHY

VOLUME II OF
THE DISCOVERY OF THE ORGONE

BY WILHELM REICH

TRANSLATED BY
ANDREW WHITE WITH
MARY HIGGINS AND
CHESTER M. RAPHAEL, M.D.

o
==
 


The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your personal

use  only.  You  may  not  make  this  e-book  publicly  available  in  any  way.

Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy of this

e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify

the publisher at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.                                  Contents






                                      Title Page

                                  Copyright Notice

                                        Epigraph

                                        Foreword

                                        Preface



                    I. The Function of Tension and Charge

II. Orgone Energy Vesicles (Bions) and the Natural Organization of Protozoa

                  III. The Actual Discovery of Orgone Energy

            IV. The Objective Demonstration of Orgone Radiation

                  V. The Carcinomatous Shrinking Biopathy

                                VI. The Cancer Cell

    VII. Nature and Development of the Orgone Therapy Experiments

  VIII. Results of Experimental Orgone Therapy in Humans with Cancer

          IX. Anorgonia in the Carcinomatous Shrinking Biopathy

          X. The Cancer Biopathy as a Problem of Sexual Sociology



                                          Notes

                                        Appendix

                                          Index

                              Books by Wilhelm Reich                                      Copyright 


      Love, work and knowledge are the well-springs of our life. They should also govern it.

                                      WILHELM REICH                                  Foreword






Reich’s theory that cancer is not primarily a tumor that arises mysteriously in

an otherwise healthy organism but a systemic disease due to chronic sexual

starvation will startle the average person who tends to view a disturbance of

sexuality as distressing but not pathogenic. It will also enrage many who,

because of moral prejudice, find such a connection offensive and untenable.

Wilhelm Reich, with unerring appreciation for the relatedness of all natural

phenomena, disregarded this prejudice and included the orgasm as a subject

for serious investigation. His studies eventually led to an inquiry into the

exact nature of the energy expressed in the orgasm and to its demonstration

not only in the living organism but as the common functioning principle in

nature.

  The path Reich followed to the discovery of this ubiquitous energy, which

he called orgone, is described in The Function of the Orgasm. Here, in The

Cancer  Biopathy,  he  details  the  actual  discovery  of  orgone  energy  and

reveals its practical importance to the problem of cancer. In so doing, he

makes a contribution of enormous significance to an understanding of the

gravest and most perplexing disease afflicting humanity today.

  First published in 1948, The Cancer Biopathy is virtually unknown. It had

an extremely limited distribution and was subsequently forced out of print by

an injunction that caused Reich’s books to be withheld or destroyed by an

agency of the United States government. Fortunately, this new translation

appears  concurrent  with  a  growing  openness  to  innovative  approaches  to

cancer.  At the basis of Reich’s cancer theory is orgone energy, which can be

utilized  in  the  study  of  all  natural  phenomena  and  in  the  investigation,

treatment, and prevention of disease. One would think that the actual proof of

the existence of a cosmic energy, about which man has speculated during the

entire  course  of  his  history,  would  be  eagerly  received.  However,  the

incapacity of the average human being to experience or understand his own

bodily sensations—which are manifestations of the movement of this energy

—has  made  him  reject  the  reality  of  a  specific  force  that  governs  his

organism. Consequently, he has viewed the discovery of orgone energy by

Reich as a fantasy or a fraud.

  A  major  obstacle  to  an  understanding  of  Reich’s  cancer  theory  is  the

conventional,  mechanistic  way  of  comprehending  disease.  Until  fairly

recently, actually less than a hundred years ago, diseases were attributed to

the  effects  of  the  interaction  of  many  variables  in  the  individual  and  his

environment.  However,  beginning  with  the  investigations  of  Pasteur  and

Koch,  “the  doctrine  of  specific  etiology”  emerged,  according  to  which  a

disease  is  caused  by  a  specific  factor,  e.g.,  a  bacterium  or  a  virus  or  a

hormonal  deficiency.  Modern  medicine  is  based  on  this  mechanistic

viewpoint and it is the one that is presently being supported with vast federal

grants in the investigation of cancer. Enthusiasm for this approach derives

from the knowledge that a single, isolated factor can be introduced to produce

disease in an experimental animal or that a mechanical procedure or chemical

substance, often serendipitously discovered, can be effective in the treatment

of disease. There are prominent scientists who take issue with this approach

and assert that the search for a specific causal factor is futile. Nevertheless,

the search continues.

  Several individual “causes” for cancer are being investigated at this time,

among them the viral, psychosomatic, and biochemical theories. Thus, some

investigators are convinced that cancer is an infectious disease of viral origin

and  believe  that  a  vaccine  is  soon  to  be  developed.  Others  have  drawnattention  to  the  possibility  of  an  interactional  psychosomatic  etiology  and

have  speculated  about  the  relationship  of  psychic  depression,  lack  of

aggression, etc., to the development of malignant tumors. Still others suggest

that  psychological  factors  upset  the  hormonal  balance  of  the  organism  or

depress the mechanisms of immunity, thereby contributing to the etiology of

cancer. Finally, in the biochemical area, the long-neglected finding by Otto

Warburg that the normal oxidative processes are irreversibly damaged in the

cancer cell and replaced by anaerobic processes is being reconsidered today,

in view of the observation that lack of oxygen appears to contribute to the

development of cancer.

  Despite the interest stimulated by these diverse theories, it is evident that

many questions about etiology remain unanswered and that much is obscure

and confused. For instance, if viruses are involved, where or how do they

originate?  If  there  is  something  more  fundamental  than  viruses  at  work,

something chemical, what is it? If the emotions are etiologically involved,

how do they actually produce cancer? That there is a relationship between

cancer and viruses, the emotions, the lack of oxygen, etc., appears certain, but

what it is or how it brings about the malignant transformation in the tissues is

unknown.

  In the absence of known etiology, the treatment of cancer has been largely

symptomatic  and  the  results  have  been  unpredictable  and  generally

discouraging. In fact, the suffering of the cancer patient is often due as much

to the means that are employed to treat the symptoms as to the disease itself.

Since the tumor is the most visible feature of the disease and is considered by

most investigators to be the disease per se, treatment consists either in its

excision or in an attempt to destroy it by radiation or chemicals. Controversy

rages  as  to  the  value  of  these  measures.  For  instance,  there  is  constant

disagreement  about  how  much  tissue  need  be  removed  in  order  to  make

certain that there are no cancer cells left that will invade and destroy the

surrounding healthy tissue. George Crile, Jr., M.D., of the Cleveland Clinic,has found many surgical procedures to be excessive and has complained that

“in our haste to stamp out cancer by indiscriminate use of surgery, we are

forgetting the patient and even disseminating the disease.” Yet, despite the

limitations  in  treating  the  disease  by  removing  or  destroying  the  tumor,

standard medical practice considers the tumor to be virtually the only target

for therapeutic intervention because of the mechanistic premise that the tumor

arises de novo in an otherwise healthy organism.

  In The Cancer Biopathy, Reich presents a functional theory of cancer that

explains the origin and development of the disease and offers possibilities for

its  treatment  and,  more  importantly,  its  prevention.  This  is  accomplished

without  excluding  the  prevalent  speculations  about  the  relationship  of  the

disease to infection, emotional disorder, damage to cellular metabolism, the

value of simple excision of large tumors, etc. The theoretical “cancer virus” is

undoubtedly related to Reich’s T-bacilli, which produced cancerous tumors

in  experimental  animals,  thus  supporting  the  present  infection  theory.

However, to accommodate Reich’s views, the infection theory would have to

include the fact that the T-bacillus originates endogenously from the bionous

disintegration  of  living  substance.  (This,  of  course,  discredits  the

metaphysical theory of “air germs” from which all bacteria are presumed to

develop.)  The  psychic  depression  or  lack  of  aggression,  noted  by  the

psychosomaticists, is Reich’s “characterological resignation.” But, for Reich,

“resignation” is not just an interesting finding that is obscurely involved in

the origin of the disease; it is the first phase of a shrinking process that results

from a disturbance in the discharge of biosexual energy. The current theory

of oxygen deficiency on the cellular level, originally noted by Warburg, is

not  an  isolated,  unexplained  finding  but,  according  to  Reich,  the  internal

biochemical expression of the impairment of external respiration. In other

words,  in  Reich’s  theory  of  cancer  these  and  other  factors  are  not

miscellaneous and unconnected; they are symptoms of a systemic disease that

has its origin in the prolonged stagnation of the organism’s biological energy.That is, these factors have a common origin and then become capable of

functioning autonomously, thereby giving the impression of being of primary

etiological significance.

  Every feature of cancer is accounted for in Reich’s theory, in contrast to

the insufficiencies of all other explanations offered so far. He not only made

the same observations that are now being individually investigated, but he

demonstrated  a  functional  relationship  between  them  which  mechanistic

methodology has been unable to discover. The tragedy is that his findings

were greeted with scorn, neglect, and, above all, indifference when they were

disclosed over a quarter of a century ago, and that no attempt has ever been

made to examine them impartially. Even the present interest in Reich’s early

writings, which continue to be appropriate and timely in our current social

climate, does not extend to his later works, which relate to the discovery of

orgone  energy.  Perhaps,  however,  this  new  interest  will  stimulate  a  more

favorable reception for his orgone theory and make possible the utilization of

orgone energy in the study and treatment of somatic diseases, such as cancer.

  One  hopes  that The  Cancer  Biopathy  will  provoke  neither  mystical

enthusiasm nor blind rejection. Reich anticipated the possibility of irrational

reactions to this work and warned that his solution of the cancer problem

does not imply that a cure has been found. Yet, in spite of his efforts to

clarify  misunderstandings  and  discourage  excessive  expectations,  he  was

ridiculed and condemned for claims he not only did not make but predicted

would  be  falsely  attributed  to  him.  The  fact  that  he  was  mindful  of  the

inevitability of the distortions and malevolent reactions is distinctly stated in

his preface. It should be read carefully to avoid any misconceptions regarding

what he actually did claim. In addition, to dispose of any lingering doubt in

this respect, the attention of the reader is also directed to the last chapter, in

which  Reich  emphatically  states  that  the  ultimate  solution  to  the  cancer

problem lies in preventing the disease rather than in curing it. The means to

this  solution  are  to  be  found  primarily  in  the  social  realm,  for  it  is  ourrepressive  social  order  that  creates  the  sexual  misery  and  the  resulting

stagnation of biological energy from which cancer originates.


                                                            Chester M. Raphael, M.D.

Forest Hills, N.Y.

1973                                    Preface






This book is the second volume of The Discovery of the Orgone and is the

direct continuation of the first volume, The Function of the Orgasm. It is

composed of a series of articles concerning the discovery of cosmic orgone

energy, first published between 1942 and 1945 in the International Journal of

Sex  Economy  and  Orgone  Research.  These  essays  are  being  offered  in

collected  form  so  that  orgone  biophysics  may  be  seen  more  clearly  as  a

logical outcome of relevant observations, experiments, and work hypotheses.

The unprejudiced reader will now be able to convince himself more easily

than through the individual articles that the discoverer of orgone energy was

much more a tool of scientific logic and consistency than a creator of “new

theories.” The wealth of facts and deductions recorded in this volume far

exceeds the inventive capacities of the human mind. During the process of

the discovery of cosmic orgone energy my task was not to construct theories

but simply and solely to record my observations with care, integrity, and

objectivity,  to  verify  them  by  appropriate  experiments,  and  to  build  the

logical bridges of thought between one realm of functioning and another.

  I  have  in  part  rearranged  the  previously  published  articles  in  order  to

avoid  repetition  and  to  present  the  contributions  in  chronological  order.  I

have also added an account of the errors inherent in the “air-germ theory.”

Further, for the benefit of the specialist in cancer research, a discussion is

included  to  establish  the  relation  between  classical  and  orgonomic  cancer

research. At the conclusion of the sections on orgone physics, there is a short

note on the demonstration of atmospheric orgone energy by the use of theGeiger-Müller  counter.  Unfortunately,  a  comprehensive  account  of  this

phenomenon was impossible for reasons of time, since it was not discovered

until the summer of 1947.

  I hope and believe this volume will be accessible to the scientifically

untrained reader who has familiarized himself with the principles of scientific

research in general and orgonomy in particular. Sections that are too technical

can be passed over by such readers without undermining their understanding

of the whole.

  The present volume comprises the results of work done over a period of

seventeen years, between 1930 and 1947. I have concentrated on essentials,

since  any  attempt  to  include  all  the  details  would  have  made  the  book

unreadable. There will be opportunity enough in other contexts to provide

any important information omitted here.

  It  is  regrettable  but  understandable  that  this  volume  cannot  provide  a

complete account. There are still many gaps in orgone research, as is always

the case in objective natural science. It provides neither a “system of thought”

nor  a  new  “philosophy  of  nature,”  merely  new  facts  and  some  new

connections between known facts, insofar as they have hitherto been verified.

Where uncertainties remain, I have made appropriate notations.

  Present-day orgone research is much more advanced than this book. The

orgonometric results of recent years must await later publication. Similarly, a

systematic exposition of the technique of functional thinking, fundamental to

all our observations, experiments, and conclusions, has to be postponed until

a later date. The omission is unfortunate but cannot be avoided. Over the

course of the last twelve years, it has become obvious that orgone research is

either not understood or misunderstood by biologists and physicists, because

they  fail  to  see  the  new  facts  from  the  point  of  view  of energetic

functionalism, and instead try to comprehend them with the aid of traditional,

mechanistic methods of thinking. This is impossible. The bacteriologist, for

instance, sees the staphylococcus as a static formation, spherical or oval inshape, about 0.8 micron in size, reacting with a bluish coloration to Gram

stain, and arranged in clusters. These characteristics are important for orgone

biophysics, but are not the essentials. The name itself says nothing about the

origin,  function,  and  position  of  the  blue  coccus  in  nature.  What  the

bacteriologist calls “staphylococcus” is, for orgone physics, a small energy

vesicle in the process of degeneration. Orgone biophysics investigates the

origin  of  the  staphylococcus  from  other  forms  of  life  and  follows  its

transformations.  It  examines  the  staphylococcus  in  connection  with  the

processes  of  the  total  biological  energy  of  the  organism  and  produces  it

experimentally through degenerative processes in bions, cells, etc.

  I  give  this  example  merely  as  an  indication,  and  no  more  than  an

indication, of why the facts of orgonomy cannot be comprehended if one uses

classical mechanistic and chemical methods, and why a systematic exposition

of the thought techniques and methods of orgonomy is so important for an

understanding of orgone energy. But I have to limit myself and can only hope

that the facts and functions presented will speak for themselves, even if they

should  appear  new  and  strange  to  bacteriologists,  biologists,  and  medical

specialists trained in the classical way.

  The  natural  processes  discussed  here  will  not  be  easy  to  understand

without knowledge of the biophysical function of the orgasm. Just as the

student  of  animal  species  must  have  adequate  knowledge  of  geology,  the

scientist who wishes to investigate cosmic orgone energy must have precise

knowledge about the function of the orgasm. The other requirement of the

observer working with orgone energy, namely that his organ sensations be

relatively  unimpeded,  can  only  be  stated  here  and  not  substantiated.  But

certainly it is clear that the emotional structure of the natural scientist will

color his observations and thinking and that therefore organ sensation is a

tool of his work. This is just as true for me as for anyone else working with

orgonotic  natural  functions.  Experiment  of  course  has  to  be  applied  to

confirm  or  refute  observations  and  work  hypotheses.  But  the  manner  ofconceiving and executing experiments depends upon the researcher’s organ

sensations.  Sensory  perceptions  and  organ  sensations  are  decisive  factors

here.  It  is  a  mistake  to  believe  that  experiments  alone  can  provide

enlightenment.  It  is  always  the  living,  feeling,  thinking  organism  that

explores, experiments, and draws its conclusions.

  So much for the broad, difficult subject of the technique of functional

thinking, an area of study only marginally touched upon in this book.

  Our subject is a very serious one, with decisive implications for natural

science  in  general.  I  have  been  fully  conscious  of  this  fact  from  the

beginning. For that reason I have always allowed several years to pass before

submitting a new observation or an unusual experiment to public scrutiny. I

have made it a rule not to announce any new fact until it has been verified by

additional findings. I ask the attentive reader to trust that I have not invested

my private income since 1933, more than $100,000, in my research merely

for the benefit of some “illusion,” or a mere “idea,” or just for fun. On the

contrary,  many  people  acknowledge  that  orgone  research  has  overthrown

several old and incorrect ideas about nature. Many people already understand

that the rigid boundaries between the specialized sciences are broken down in

orgonomy. Every person who works with cosmic orgone energy must possess

adequate knowledge of medicine, biology, sociology, physics, and astronomy

to understand the orgone functions in their various realms. Nature knows no

boundaries  between  specialized  functions.  My  own  original  starting  point

was biopsychiatry. The knowledge of human emotions plays a large part in

orgone  research,  not  only  in  understanding  the  basic  functions  of  orgone

energy but especially in understanding human reactions to the existence of a

universal cosmic energy, which, in the living realm, functions as “biological

energy,”  the  energy  of  our  emotions.  This  certainly  has  very  serious

implications.

  Since my investigations into the essential biological functions of orgone

energy have been carried out in connection with the cancer biopathy, thisdisease understandably is the hub of the orgonomic thesis as presented here.

It may be considered a triumph for the field of biopsychiatry that it opened

the  way  to  an  understanding  of biological  cell  energy.  In  turn,  that

understanding  led  to  the  discovery  of  atmospheric  orgone  energy.  This

process will become apparent in a logical way in the accounts that follow. It

is a further satisfaction that it was the sex-economic branch of biopsychiatry

in particular that succeeded in solving the riddle of cancer and raised hopes

for a possible method of cancer prevention. In making such statements, I

carry a frightening responsibility. But I cannot shy away from it if I am to

communicate to the reader my sense of the gravity of this book’s subject

matter, which in itself demands a thoughtful and critical evaluation of my

facts and claims. To offer a brief summary:

  Cancer, the essential mechanism of which consists in a gradual shrinking

of the autonomic system, is easily understood as soon as one overcomes his

resistance to comprehending the following facts as a unified whole:


  1. The air-germ theory must be abandoned and “endogenous infection” recognized.

  2. The role of the emotions in organic diseases must be given full consideration.

  3. The development of a living, spontaneously moving substance from other living or even

    non-living substances, indeed from mass-free orgone energy, must be acknowledged. In

    other  words,  in  dealing  with  cancer  we  are  directly  confronted  with  the  problem  of

    biogenesis.

  4. It is imperative, in our work on cancer, that we place sexual pathology, which is generally

    hated and avoided, at the center of our medical efforts.

  5. If cancer is to be understood in a simple way, we must finally acknowledge the existence of

    a basically new, ubiquitous, cosmic energy that obeys functional rather than mechanistic

    laws. I have called this energy orgone.


  Any one of these five points is enough to initially arouse skepticism in the

serious natural scientist. I assure the reader, however, that I waited many

years before I dared reveal to others the wealth of newly discovered facts and

their application. Dr. Walter Hoppe once wrote to me, quite rightly, that the

biggest difficulty about my work was that too much had been discovered.  In  serious  scientific  research  there  is  the  obligation  to  recognize  facts

even if it means risking one’s neck. It was neither possible nor proper for me

to evade this obligation if I was to do justice to the discovered facts. In time,

the  enormous  significance  of  these  facts  began  to  seem  less  terrifying.  I

believe that the open-minded reader will also become less frightened of my

discoveries when he considers the following:

  1.  Work  in  medicine  and  basic  research  is  greatly  facilitated  by

overcoming the sharply drawn boundaries between specialties in the natural

sciences. In spite of its infinite variety, nature is basically a unified whole.

The unity and simplicity underlying nature is revealed when we work with

orgone functions. It is my belief that orgone energy is far less frightening and

complex than other forms of energy which make possible the annihilation of

entire cities.

  2. The more familiar one becomes with the orgone functions, the more “at

home” one feels with them. For example, the understanding provided by this

work relieves the constant pressure felt when working with cancer patients

without a knowledge of biological energy. After a few years of habitually

using this knowledge, one cannot conceive how it once was possible to get

along  without  it.  Choreatic  movements  and  epileptic  seizures  lose  their

mystery. These processes become simple and clear.

  3. One gradually learns how to deal with human irrationality more easily,

how to better understand what is going on inside people who fall victim to

mysticism or the emotional plague.

  4. Furthermore, it is a great relief, which is not to be underestimated, to be

able to have a deeper and fuller understanding of the religious person because

one knows that, present everywhere, there is an all-pervading cosmic energy

(Newton’s  “ether,”  the  “God”  of  all  ages  and  peoples)  that  can  be

experienced,  seen,  and  also  measured  by  means  of  the  thermometer,  the

electroscope, and the Geiger-Müller counter.

  5. Finally, it is a relief to be able to give the medical term “disposition” aconcrete meaning. It is a relief to understand why one person is constantly

suffering  from  colds  and  another  never;  why  only  certain  individuals

succumb to an epidemic and others do not; why one person dies from cancer

or  vascular  hypertension  and  another  does  not;  and  what  biologically

distinguishes a lively child from a sluggish child.

  In short, the enlightenment derived from knowledge of orgone energy

more than compensates for the fear experienced when the great mysteries of

nature reveal themselves.

  I  would  like  to  conclude  with  a  few  comments  addressed  to  those

colleagues who have made the research and practical application of cosmic

orgone energy their life’s work.

  The revolutionary character of our work necessitates certain new attitudes

toward  the  world  around  us  and  the  relinquishing  of  a  few  of  the  usual

techniques of dealing with it, if we are to fulfill our responsibility as orgone

researchers.  It  is  not  personal  interest  but  rather  interest  in  achieving

recognition of cosmic orgone energy for the common good that compels me

to make the following remarks:

  In  our  relations  with  professional  colleagues  and  with  laymen,  we

encounter  sharp  hostility,  even  dangerous  attacks  on  our  personal  and

professional integrity. As psychiatrists, we understand the irrational nature of

the  hostility  and  the  attacks  and  recognize  their  true  sources.  They  have

nothing to do with the personal character of this or that orgone researcher or

orgone therapist, and consequently they are dealt with in a prescribed manner

by me and by others living and working far from my laboratory. In public, we

cannot  apply  our  knowledge  of  the  motives  of  irrational  behavior  in  any

personal  way,  nor  can  we  tell  a  physicist  who  neurotically  dismisses  the

functions  of  orgone  eneregy  what  is  really  motivating  him  to  make  his

judgments. We can point out these motives only in general; we can never

make personal judgments about specific individuals. The only thing we can

do in good conscience is ask ourselves whether a certain attack is rational orirrational.  Irrational  attacks  should  never  be  responded  to.  Our  retaliation

takes the form of revealing the irrationalism in human behavior. For the most

part, these attacks will pass with time, even if they occasionally appear to be

dangerous.  We  are  perfectly  aware  that  the  average  person  today  fears

nothing so much as the knowledge of his biological nature; at the same time

his greatest longing is for the fulfillment of his biological nature. Both the

fear of knowledge and the longing for fulfillment confront us simultaneously.

We must therefore always try to find the rational in the irrational and attempt

to understand and reveal it without hatred or indignation. In time, the rational

will prevail. Unfortunately, however, I am unable to offer any advice as to

how one can protect oneself from the kind of irrationalism that is a threat to

life. Neither lawsuits nor name-calling are any use here.

  However, there is one proven way to force both laymen and professionals

to  respond  to  us  rationally: Delegate  no  authority  in  matters  of  orgone

research if the critic cannot prove that he has thoroughly familiarized himself

with our publications and findings over a long period of time. Our science

can be judged only from the standpoint of its own premises, methods, and

thought  techniques,  and  from  no  other.  This  is  a  strict  rule  in  scientific

intercourse, upheld wherever scientific research is conducted. We expect and

welcome criticism, but only immanent criticism.

  Therefore if a sexually abstinent court psychiatrist, or a “bogged-down”

cancer specialist, or even a “free-lance writer” presumes to damn our work

because he either does not understand it or takes it personally, or because it

shatters  his  world  view  or  threatens  his  political  party,  we  respond  with

silence. We refuse to involve ourselves in any irrational discussion or brawl. I

would like to stress this rule; it has proved very useful.

  It is customary when one has made a discovery to try to have it endorsed

by certain “authorities,” to humble oneself and to make use of all kinds of

stratagems  and  underhanded  tactics  to  secure  its  recognition.  Usually  an

attempt is also made to gain publicity in the newspapers as soon as possible.Such  activities  are  not  proper  for  those  of  us  whose  work  is  extremely

serious. If we work honestly and conscientiously, sticking to the facts and not

yielding to the temptation to make compromises in essential issues like the

orgasm function, then, sooner or later, we will win public confidence. There

is  little  the  world  needs  more  urgently  than  knowledge  of  the  orgone

functions, inside and outside of the organism.

  We  cannot  concede  authority  in  questions  concerning  orgone  energy,

where no proven authority exists. And yet we have to delegate responsibility.

A hospital that treats people suffering from cancer has, without question, the

responsibility to work with orgone energy. It is the responsibility of every

individual physician who has seen the therapeutic effects of orgone energy to

advocate  these  facts  professionally  and  not  ignore  them  or  wait  for  the

opinion of “authorities.” It is the responsibility of every individual who has

enjoyed  the  therapeutic  effects  of  orgone  energy  to  help  his  fellowman

wherever it is possible. It is the indisputable responsibility of a writer not to

hinder the use of the life-saving effects of orgone energy with scandalous,

sensational newspaper articles. He must be made to realize that indirectly he

kills people when he agitates against us. Finally, it is the responsibility of the

government  of  this  or  that  country  to  decide  whether,  and  how  quickly,

cosmic orgone energy is made available to the general public. We do our

duty in every way and as well as we are able. We work hard, for decades. We

sacrifice money and leisure. We try as hard as possible to be decent and

honest. We make known our results in a responsible manner. There is nothing

more we can do. The rest is up to the public. A public that tolerates the

publication of defamations, untruths, and distortions is hurting itself and not

one or another orgone therapist. I wish I did not have to say these things, but

it is my duty not to be silent about them.

  At the same time, we have to understand that the world of serious natural

science needs much time to orient itself in our field, which contains so much

that is new. Human welfare is undermined by the fact that the ignorant andincompetent can so quickly and easily find an outlet for the articles they

write; our political process makes the publication of an inflammatory article

much  easier  than  the  publication  of  vitally  important  facts.  It  is  true,  of

course, that significant facts develop more effectively and sharply when in

conflict with irrational human reactions. But it is an unfortunate fact that, in

the social sphere, it takes time for the rational to achieve full acceptance—a

great deal of time!

  I  should  like  to  thank  all  those  friends  who  helped  me  through  the

difficult years to build the framework that this book describes. I could list

many  important  names,  but  those  who  have  shared  in  our  work  will

understand why I do not name them here. A few of my close friends and

colleagues themselves advised me to depart from custom in this regard.

  It should be obvious from many of my publications that I am well aware

of how much I owe to the great pioneers in natural science, without whose

careful efforts the discovery of cosmic orgone energy would not have been

possible. I have repeatedly stressed the continuity and interdependence of all

branches of vitally important scientific work. Furthermore, I must emphasize

that the wealth of material gathered together by the painstaking efforts of

mechanistic cancer research was indispensable for my new understanding of

the  cancer  biopathy,  despite  the  fact  that  the  orgonomic  theory  of  cancer

differs  greatly  from  the  classical  theory  and  even  contradicts  it  in  many

details. Many cancer specialists are already aware that the problem of cancer

is solved, and that its solution required the discovery of orgone energy and

the elucidation of biogenesis.

  On the other hand, some unjustified claims of priority put forward in the

field of psychosomatic medicine after the publication of The Function of the

Orgasm  (1942)  must  be  rejected.  As  the  basis  for  the  understanding  of

psychosomatic disturbances, the orgasm theory is much older (1923) than any

of  the  other  concepts  derived  from  psychoanalysis.  If  the  function  of  the

orgasm,  the  central  problem  of  psychosomatic  processes,  is  ignored  socompletely in those concepts, they merit little consideration. We can only be

amazed at the consistency with which the most important factor is avoided.

Those who suffer most are only, again, the many sick.

  I do not publish this book without serious concern, mainly that many

readers of our literature will now assume that a cure for cancer has been

found.  This  is  not  at  all  the  case.  It  is  true  that  the  riddle  of  cancer  has

become fully accessible through the discovery of orgone energy. But it is

incorrect to believe that every cancer victim can now be saved. A great deal

of hard work and cooperation will be needed before we will know how much

orgone  energy  can  help  in  specific  cases  of  cancer.  But  a  beginning  has

certainly been made.


ORGONON

September, 1947

                                                                        WILHELM REICH                                        CHAPTER I


            The Function of Tension and Charge




              1. THE FUNCTION OF THE ORGASM


Those familiar with Volume I of The Discovery of the Orgone know of the

important event in 1933 that marked the turning point in the development of

our research: the discovery of the biological function of tension and charge. I

would like to describe in brief the substance of this discovery.

  From  clinical  investigation  we  have  learned  that  the  function  of  the

orgasm  is  the  key  to  the  problem  of  the  source  of  energy  in  neurosis.

Neuroses result from a stasis of sexual energy. The cause of this stasis is a

disturbance  in  the  discharge  of  high  sexual  excitation  in  the  organism,

regardless of whether or not this disturbance is perceived by the ego. It makes

no difference whether the psychic apparatus does or does not misinterpret the

process neurotically; nor does it matter that the person may develop false

notions  about  the  disharmony  in  his  energy  system  and  glorify  it  with

ideologies.  Experience  in  everyday  clinical  practice  leaves  no  doubt: The

elimination of the sexual stasis by the orgastic discharge of the biological

excitation removes every kind of neurotic manifestation. The difficulty that

must be overcome is largely of a social nature. Attention must be drawn to

these simple basic facts again and again.

  It  has  long  been  a  known  fact  in  sex-economy  that  the  orgasm  is  a

fundamental  biological  phenomenon;  “fundamental”  because  the  orgastic

discharge of energy occurs at the very root of biological functioning. This

discharge  appears  in  the  form  of  an  involuntary  convulsion  of  the  entire

plasma system. Like respiration, it is a basic function of every animal system.Biophysically  it  is  not  possible  to  make  a  distinction  between  the  total

contraction  of  an  amoeba  and  the  orgastic  contraction  of  a  multicellular

organism. The most salient characteristics are intense biological excitation,

repeated expansion and contraction, ejaculation of body fluids, and rapid

subsidence of the biological excitation. To understand these characteristics as

biological functions, we had to free ourselves from the lascivious emotional

reactions that every consideration of sexual functions—in fact, of autonomic

functions  in  general—arouses  in  man.  These  emotional  reactions  are

themselves  neurotic  expressions  which  constitute  a  problem  in  our

psychiatric work.

  More precise observation shows that these four functions are not paired

but  occur  rather  as  a  specific,  lawful,  four-beat  pattern.  The  increasing

tension that occurs in biological excitation appears as sexual excitement and

produces  a  charging  of  the  organism’s  periphery.  This  phenomenon  was

demonstrated  unequivocally  by  measurements  of  the  potentials  at  the

erogenous zones during pleasurable excitation. Once the tension and the bio-

energetic  charge  have  reached  a  certain  intensity,  they  are  followed  by

convulsions,  i.e.,  contractions  of  the  entire  biological  system.  The  high-

energy tension at the periphery of the organism is released. This is revealed

objectively  as  a  sudden  drop  of  the  bio-electric  skin  potential  and  is  felt

subjectively as a rapid decrease of excitation. The sudden shift from high

charge  to  discharge  is  called  the  “acme.”  Following  the  discharge  of

biological energy, a mechanical relaxation of the tissues occurs as a result of

the  flowing  back  of  body  fluids.  That  the  discharge  of  energy  occurs  is

demonstrated by the evidence that the organism is not capable of renewed

sexual excitation immediately thereafter. In the language of psychology, this

state is called “gratification.” The need for gratification, or in biophysical

terms, for the discharge of excess energy by merging with another organism,

occurs at more or less regular intervals, varying with the individual as well as

the species. The intervals generally become shorter in the spring. In animals,there  is  the  phenomenon  of  heat  or  rut  in  which  a  concentration  of  this

biological need occurs at certain times of the year, predominantly in spring.

This fact reveals a close connection between the function of the orgasm and

an energy function of a cosmic nature. Along with the well-known effects of

the sun on the living organism, the orgasm function is one of the phenomena

that cause us to regard the living organism as a special, functioning part of

non-living nature.

  The  function  of  the  orgasm  thus  reveals  itself  as  a  four-beat  rhythm:

mechanical tension → bio-energetic charge → bio-energetic discharge →

mechanical relaxation. We shall call it the function of tension and charge or,

in brief, the TC-function.

  Earlier investigations have demonstrated that the TC-function not only is

characteristic of the orgasm but also applies to all functions of the autonomic

life  system.  The  heart,  the  intestines,  the  urinary  bladder,  the  lungs  all

function according to this rhythm. Even the division of cells follows this

four-beat pattern. The same is true of the movement of protozoa and metazoa

of all kinds. Worms and snakes, in the movements of their individual parts as

well  as  of  their  total  organism,  clearly  display  the  rhythmic  functioning

designated  by  the  TC-formula.  There  seems  to  exist one  basic  law  that

governs the total organism, in addition to governing its autonomic organs.

With our basic biological formula, we encompass the very essence of living

functions. The orgasm formula thus emerges as the life formula itself. This

corresponds exactly to our earlier formulation that the sexual process is the

productive  biological  process  per  se,  in  procreation,  work,  joyful  living,

intellectual  productivity,  etc.  The  acceptance  or  refutation  of  orgone

biophysics  depends  upon  the  acknowledgment  or  rejection  of  this

formulation.

  The  mechanical  tension  of  organs  through  tumescence  may  be  easily

understood: the tissues take up body fluids, and the individual particles in the

biological colloid separate. Conversely, mechanical relaxation occurs throughdetumescence:  the  fluids  are  forced  out  of  the  tissues  and,  thereupon,  a

mutual coming together of the particles occurs. The question of the nature of

charge  and  discharge  is  more  difficult.  The  fact  that  we  can  measure

electrical  potentials  gives  rise  to  the  temptation  to  dispose  of  a  gigantic

problem by labeling the process merely a matter of “electrical charge” and

“electrical discharge.” After all, the quantities of electrical energy produced

in contracting muscles and by electric eels, for instance, have been measured.

And have we not progressed to the point where the electrical waves of the

brain  are  measurable?  In  the  accounts  of  my  bio-electrical  experiments

(1934–1936), I recorded the changes in potential occurring in pleasure and

anxiety in terms of millivolts.


    2. THE POSTULATE OF A SPECIFIC BIOLOGICAL

                                      ENERGY


Is the specific biological energy identical with electricity? The problem is not

as simple as it may seem. It would certainly be convenient if we were able to

describe  the  functioning  of  the  organism  in  terms  of  familiar  physical

concepts.  The  organism  would  then  appear  as  nothing  more  than  “a

particularly  complicated  electrical  machine.”  It  would  be  convenient,  and

very easy, to explain away the reaction of rheumatic persons to changes in

the weather by asserting that their “body electricity” is influenced by the

“electrical” charges in the air. The attempt has also been made to apply the

laws of iron magnetism to the living organism. We speak of a beloved person

as having a “magnetic” attraction, or we feel “electrified” with excitement.

We shall soon find, however, that such analogies are erroneous. In previous

publications,  I  have  spoken  of  “bio-electricity,”  using  the  customary

terminology. The organism undoubtedly contains electricity in the form of

electrically charged colloid particles and ions. All of colloid chemistry as

well as neuromuscular physiology depends upon this. Muscular contractions

can be induced by the application of an electric current. Combing the hair canproduce “electric” sparks. Nevertheless, there are a number of phenomena

that in no way correspond to the theory of electromagnetic energy.

  First of all, there are the effects of body “magnetism.” Many physicians

and lay therapists make practical use of these magnetic forces. Yet we are not

convinced  that  these  forces,  which  emanate  from  organic,  colloidal,  non-

metallic  substance,  are  iron-magnetic.  In  what  follows,  we  shall  provide

experimental proof that the energy in the living organism is not identical with

iron magnetism.

  The electrical effects of a galvanic current are experienced by the body as

foreign,  “unorganic.”  Electrical  energy,  even  in  the  minutest  quantities,

always  causes  disturbances  in  our  normal  functioning.  The  muscles,  for

instance,  contract  in  an  unnatural,  “senseless,”  biologically  inappropriate

manner. There is no evidence that an electric charge applied to the body ever

produces an organic movement bearing the slightest resemblance to normal

movements  by  entire  muscle  systems  or  functional  groups  of  muscles.

Electrical  energy  generates  a  movement  that  lacks  the  most  essential

characteristic  of  biological  energy,  namely  the  movement  of  a  group  of

organs  in  a  coordinated,  functionally  meaningful  form.  By  contrast,  the

disturbances of biological functioning by an electric current do possess the

character of electrical energy. The movements generated are rapid, jerky, and

angular,  exactly  like  the  oscillographic  reactions  produced  by  rubbing  an

electrode on metal (cf. The Function of the Orgasm).

  In a muscle-nerve preparation, the electrical impulse does not manifest

itself directly in the movement; otherwise the smooth muscle would contract

just as quickly as the striated one. Actually, the contraction of the smooth

muscle follows the slow, wave-like rhythm characteristic of its functioning.

Thus,  an  unknown  “something,”  is  merely  stimulated  by  the  electrical

impulse, which inserts itself between the electrical impulse and the muscle

action, manifesting itself as a movement that is accompanied by an action

current. But the “something” itself is not electricity.  Our  organ  sensations  clearly  indicate  to  us  that  emotions  (which

undoubtedly are manifestations of our biological energy) are fundamentally

different  from  the  sensations  one  experiences  from  electrical  shocks.  Our

sense  organs  completely  fail  to  register  the  effect  of  the  electromagnetic

waves that fill the atmosphere. In proximity to a radio transmitter, we feel

nothing. A radio reacts when near a high-tension wire; we do not. If our life

energy, which is expressed in our organ sensations, were electricity, it would

be incomprehensible that we should perceive only the wave lengths of visible

light  and  otherwise  remain  totally  insensitive.  We  perceive  neither  the

electrons  of  an  X-ray  machine  nor  the  radiation  from  radium.  Electrical

energy does not convey a biological charge. Thus far, it has not been possible

to  determine  the  potency  of  vitamins  with  electrical  measurements,  even

though  they  doubtless  contain  biological  energy.  The  examples  could  be

continued indefinitely. Another problem is how our organism keeps itself

from  being  destroyed  by  the  infinite  number  of  electromagnetic  fields

surrounding it.

  It is true that sensitive voltmeters react to our touch, but the magnitude of

this reaction is so minute compared with the amount of energy produced by

our organism that there does not seem to be any connection.

  These are major contradictions which are impossible to resolve within the

framework of known forms of energy. They have been well known to biology

and natural philosophy for a long time. Attempting to bridge the gap, some

people have put forward concepts that were intended to make the specific life

function  comprehensible.  Most  of  these  concepts  were  advanced  by  the

opponents  of  mechanistic  materialism,  the  vitalists.  Driesch  suggested  an

“entelechy,” a life force inherent in all living matter and governing it. But,

since it was neither measurable nor tangible, it ended up as a contribution to

metaphysics.  Bergson’s élan  vital  attempted  to  take  account  of  the

incompatibility between the known forms of energy and living functioning.

His force  créatrice  represents  an  explosive  function  of  matter  whichmanifests itself most clearly in the way life functions. Bergson’s hypothesis

was directed against both mechanistic materialism and teleological final-ism.

In theory, it grasped correctly the basically functional character of the life

process, but it lacked empirical validation. The force in question was not

measurable, tangible, or controllable.

  The famous German physiologist Pflüger assumed a connection between

life energy and fire on the basis of the function of cyanide. His assumption

was  correct.  Prominent  biologists,  among  them  the  Viennese  Kammerer,

were  convinced  that  a specific  biological  energy  exists,  possessing  no

immediate connection with electricity, magnetism, etc.


If transgressing the frontiers of what is permissible, I should finally state what seems to me to be

  the most probable—an unproven, and at the present time, unprovable, scientific credo—then I

  have to say: the existence of a specific life force seems to me highly plausible! An energy which

is not heat, nor electricity, magnetism, kinetic energy (including oscillation and radiation), nor

  chemical  energy,  and  is  not  an  amalgam  of  any  or  all  of  them  but  an  energy  belonging

  specifically to only those natural processes that we call “life.” That does not imply that its

  presence is limited to those natural bodies that we call “living beings” but that it is present also

at least in the formative process of crystals. A better name for it, to prevent misunderstanding,

  might be “formative energy” instead of “life energy.” It possesses no supraphysical properties,

  even  though  it  has  nothing  in  common  with  physical  energies  already  known.  It  is  not  a

  mysterious “entelechy” (Aristotle, Driesch), but a genuine, natural “energy”; however, just as

  electrical energy is connected to electrical phenomena, so this “formative energy” is linked to

  living phenomena and the development and change of forms. Above all, it is subject to the law

of the conservation of energy and is fully capable of conversion into other forms of energy, just

as, for instance, heat can be converted into kinetic energy and vice versa. [Paul Kammerer:

  Allgemeine Biologie]


  Kammerer came across the problem of a formative “life force” during the

course  of  experiments  designed  to  demonstrate  the  heredity  of  acquired

characteristics  in  salamanders.  The  “inherited  substances”  and  “genes”

postulated by the heredity theoreticians only obscured an understanding of

the living process, and seemed to have been devised to block every access to

it. Their theories might best be described as resembling an inverted pyramid,

a veritable mass of hypothetical contentions precariously balanced on a smallnumber  of  dubious  facts.  One  typical  example  would  be  the  unscientific,

unwarranted, and moralizing conclusions drawn from the notorious “family

Kallikak” study. In reading hypotheses on heredity, one consistently has the

impression that there is more frantic ethicizing than there is science. The life

process  is  smothered  beneath  a  mound  of  mechanistic  hypotheses.  These

theories finally degenerated into Hitler’s pernicious race theory.

  In the work of the vitalists, the life force became an elusive specter, while

the mechanists converted it into a lifeless machine. Bacteriologists postulated

the existence of a special germ “in the air” (yet to be seen) for every living

organism. During the second half of the nineteenth century, Pouchet took

upon  himself  the  wearisome  task  of  testing  the  accuracy  of  the  air-germ

theory.  Pasteur  showed  experimentally  that  there  are  no  living  germs  in

liquids brought to certain temperatures. If living organisms were found, he

ascribed their presence to air infection. Lange, in his book Geschichte des

Materialismus,  criticizes  Pasteur’s  conclusions  and  cites  Pouchet’s

experiments. Pouchet passed hundreds of cubic meters of air through water,

then  examined  the  water.  He  invented  an  apparatus  that  collected  dust

particles  from  the  air  and  deposited  them  on  glass  plates.  Pouchet  then

analyzed  the  dust.  He  conducted  these  experiments  on  glaciers  in  the

Pyrenees, in the catacombs at Thebes, in the desert and on the sea in Egypt,

and atop the cathedral in Rouen. He found many things, but only rarely did

he  find  a  spore  of  a  fungus,  and  even  more  rarely  a  dead  infusorium.

Pasteur’s  refutation  of  the  early  theories  of  spontaneous  generation  was

basically misunderstood. Questions about the origins of the first germs of life

were  taboo,  and  in  order  not  to  conflict  with  the  doctrine  of  a  “divine

creation,”  it  was  usual  to  resort  to  the  notion  of  a  plasmatic  substance

descending upon our planet from outer space.

  Not  one  of  these  schools  of  thought  succeeded  in  approaching  the

functional problems of the life process, nor did they find a connection with

experimental  physics.  The  life  process  emerged  from  their  theories  as  amystery, a special preserve of “divine providence” hidden away somewhere

in the midst of the vast realm of natural science.

  But the sprouting of every plant, the development of every embryo, the

spontaneous movement of muscles, and the productivity of every biological

organism demonstrate the existence of incalculable energies governing the

work of living substance. Energy is the capacity to work. No known energy

can compete with the total work capacity of the living organisms on our

planet. The energy accomplishing this work must have its origin in non-living

matter. Yet, for thousands of years it has been ignored by science.

  What prevented an understanding of this energy? It was first necessary to

understand the manifestations of the unconscious and repressed sexual life.

Freud’s discovery of the function of sexual repression made the first breach

in  the  wall  that  had  blocked  our  comprehension  of  the  life  process.  The

second  step  was  a  correction  of  Freud’s  theory  of  the  unconscious:  The

repression of human instinctual life is not a natural but rather a pathological

result  of  the  suppression  of  natural  instincts,  in  particular,  of  genital

sexuality. An organism that uses most of its energy to keep the natural life

process imprisoned within itself cannot comprehend life outside itself. The

central manifestation of life is expressed in the genital sexual function, to

which life owes its existence and continuation. A society of human beings

that has excluded the most essential manifestations of this function and made

them unconscious is not capable of living rationally; indeed, everything it

says appears distorted and pornographic. Only the mystics, far removed from

scientific insight, have preserved contact with the living process. Once the

living  process  became  the  domain  of  the  mystic,  serious  natural  science

shrank  from  any  concern  with  it.  The  literature  of  the  biological  and

physiological sciences contains no indication of even an initial understanding

of autonomic movement, such as may be observed in the worm, for example.

This movement is too reminiscent of the despised sexual acts of the animal

world.  Mysticism  and  mechanistic  biology  thus  stand  in  opposition.Meanwhile, the force of religious feeling itself betrays the existence of a

powerful “something” experienced by man, which he is unable to define in

words, or to manage. Religion, too, has mysticized the living process.

  The problem enters the province of natural science only if and where

there exists a measurable and controllable energy function that makes the

basic life function understandable and, at the same time, does not conflict

with  physics.  It  follows  that  such  a  specific  energy,  expressing  itself

biologically, would have to possess these properties:


  1. It would be fundamentally different from electromagnetic energy, and yet related to it.

  2. It would have to exist in non-living nature independent of living organisms, if the principle

    of life originating from non-living matter is to hold true.

  3. It would have to elucidate satisfactorily the relationship between living organisms and non-

    living nature (respiration, orgasm, nutrition, etc.).

  4. In contrast to galvanic electricity, it would function in organic substance, which does not

    conduct electricity, and in animal tissue.

  5. It would permeate and govern the entire organism instead of being limited to individual

    nerve cells or groups of cells.

  6. It would have to explain simply the basic pulsatory function (contraction and expansion) of

    life, as it manifests itself in respiration and the orgasm.

  7. It would manifest itself in the production of heat, a characteristic of most living organisms.

  8.  It  would  definitively  clarify  the  sexual  function;  i.e.,  it  would  make  sexual  attraction

      comprehensible.

  9.  It  would  reveal  why  living  organisms  have  failed  to  develop  an  organ  sensitive  to

      electromagnetism.

  10. It would contribute to an understanding of the difference between protein that is dead and

    protein that is alive, and would explain what must be added to the chemically complex

    protein to make it alive. It would be capable of charging living matter; thus, it would have a

    life-positive effect.

  11. Further, it would reveal the processes involved in the symmetry of form development and

    explain the basic function of form development.

  12. Finally, it would make comprehensible why living matter exists only on the earth’s surface.


  The enumeration of these problems is intended to show the indispensable

context within which any discussion of biophysics and biogenesis must take

place.                                        CHAPTER II


  Orgone Energy Vesicles (Bions) and the Natural


                        Organization of Protozoa




EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATION FOR UNDERSTANDING

                        THE CANCER BIOPATHY


Orgone energy was discovered in a bion culture. My first task, therefore, is to

give an account of the orgonotic phenomena that represent transitional stages

of evolution between living and nonliving matter.

  Because  of  the  functional  relationship  between  bions  and  atmospheric

orgone energy, it is essential that a discussion of orgone functions in bionous

matter precede the presentation of the actual discovery of the orgone.

  It  is  difficult  to  determine  a  date  for  the  discovery  of  orgone  energy.

Orgonotic functions of attraction, penetration, pulsation, and lumination had

already been observed in the period between 1936 and 1939, and had been

subjected to investigation in a variety of bion preparations. However, I had

no  presentiment  that  I  was  working  with  manifestations  of  a  specific

biological energy. Experiments with bion cultures led to the discovery of

orgone energy in SAPA (sand packet) bions during January 1939 and in the

atmosphere during July 1940. It was only after I had worked on the purely

physical  functions  of  orgone  energy  (1939–1942)  that  I  understood  the

observations I had been making on bions and bion cultures since 1936. The

description in my book Die Bione (1938) conforms completely to traditional

bacteriological and biological concepts.

  Later knowledge of orgone functions caused me to modify much of what

I had written in that book. For instance, cultures of cocci and bacilli derivedfrom bions represent not, as I thought then, a more advanced stage in the

development of the bion but, on the contrary, a degeneration of bions to a

biologically sterile form incapable of further development. I found that bions

actually develop in the direction of protozoal organization. On the other hand

staphylococci,  streptococci,  T-bacilli,  and  rot  bacteria  are  due  to  a

degeneration of the orgonotic living plasma.

    Mistakes, such as the one I just mentioned, and the subsequent necessary

modifications  are  unavoidable  in  working  in  unexplored  territory.  The

following  account  of  the  bion  experiments  is  given  in  the  context  of

knowledge of atmospheric orgone energy, and its perspective is therefore no

longer biologistic but functional, based on energy principles.

  “Bion” and “energy vesicle” designate one and the same microscopically

visible, functioning formation.  The  term  “bion”  refers  to  the  vesicles  into

which  all  matter  disintegrates  if  made  to  swell.  These  vesicles  represent

transitional  forms  between  non-living  and  living  matter. The  bion  is  the

elemental functioning unit of all living matter. At the same time, it is the

bearer of a quantum of orgone energy and, as such, functions in a specifically

biological way. It is an energy unit, compounded of a membrane, a fluid

content, and an amount of orgone energy, i.e., an “orgone energy vesicle.” In

what  follows,  I  would  like  to  give  an  account  of  the  observations  and

experiments  on  which  the  far-reaching  conclusions  just  summarized  are

based.


1. THE VESICULAR DISINTEGRATION OF SWELLING

                            MATTER (PA BIONS)


Carbon  is  the  fundamental  substance  that,  when  combined  with  oxygen,

nitrogen,  hydrogen,  and  water,  forms  the  basis  of  the  infinite  variety  of

organic compounds as well as living matter. Our intention is to ignore the

already well-known chemical reactions and simply concentrate on examining

a particle of carbon under a good microscope equipped with apochromaticlenses. Reichert microscopes (the Z microscope), which permit magnification

up to 5000x, were used for the experiments. The finer biophysical processes

like expansion and contraction, vibration, and formation of a radiating bridge

can be observed only at magnifications greater than 2000x, and are best seen

at 4000x. What matters is not the resolution of fine structural details but

rather the visualization of movement. For this purpose, we can use carbon,

derived from blood charcoal (obtained from Merck & Co.) or from ordinary

soot.  Since  the  process  of  combustion  converts  all  organic  compounds  to

carbon, the origin of the carbon used for the experiment is not important.

  First,  we  examine  the  particle  of  carbon  dry,  at  a  magnification  of

approximately  300x.  What  we  see  is  a  black,  uneven  structure  which  is

motionless.  In  the  dark-field,  we  observe  an  essentially  striated  structure

interspersed  with  occasional  vesicular  formations.  Along  the  margins,

between the striated structure and the tiny oval-shaped vesicles, the light is

strongly refracted.



















 

Carbon particle, dry

0-0-0-8-¢

1. Thick wall of carbon, inelastic

2. Increased fluid content, swelling

3. Membrane thinner, elastic; blue color inside, vibrating
4. Indentation of carbon bion

. Division into two bions
FIGURE 1. Development of a carbon bion


  We  set  the  microscope  at  a  magnification  of  approximately  2000x

(objective 80x, eyepiece 16x, and inclined binocular tube, which increasesmagnification  by  50%).  The  striated,  vesicular  structure  can  now  be  seen

more clearly. There is not the slightest indication of movement.

  We add a drop of ordinary water and look again, first at 300x then at

2000x. Essentially, there is no change. We see no movement; only here and

there a round or uneven particle may be in motion. Its size seldom exceeds

one micron in diameter. Overall, the field is “lifeless.” There is no sign of

contraction or expansion.

  Using  a  spatula,  we  add  finely  pulverized  carbon  powder  to  water

contained in a test tube. A portion of the powder sinks to the bottom, while

the remainder floats on the surface. The water itself retains its clarity and no

colloidal solution forms. The preparation is not sterile. Each day we draw off

a drop of the fluid and examine it under the microscope. The object is to

discover whether changes are taking place in the carbon, and if so, what kind.

But  a  change  is  observable  only  after  several  weeks.  The  tiny  individual

spherical  particles  moving  weakly  across  the  field  are  becoming  more

numerous.  In  the  dark-field,  the  larger  particles  of  carbon  display  a  very

gradual  increase  in  the  number  of  spherical  formations  within  them.

However,  the  overall  scene  remains  unalive.  Months  pass  without  much

change. We are struck by the absence of ordinary air bacteria. (The test tubes

are of course sealed with cotton plugs.) Macroscopically, the fluid appears

unchanged. It is still clear. This is our control experiment. The experiment for

the production of coal bions is as follows:

  From  now  on,  we  apply  strictly  sterile  procedures.  All  liquids  are

autoclaved at 120°C.; all dry substances and instruments are dry sterilized at

180°C.

  Test tubes containing a preparation of 50% bouillon and 50% 0.1n KCl

solution  are  autoclaved.  Then  we  heat  a  small  amount  of  coal  dust  on  a

spatula tip in a gas flame to white incandescence. While the coal dust is still

white-hot  it  is  plunged  into  the  sterile  fluid.  The  fluid  immediately  turns

black and only the heavy particles of coal sink to the bottom. The lighterparticles remain suspended. A colloidal solution has been formed, in contrast

to the control experiment. Over the course of a half hour, the black fades to

gray. The solution remains colloidal for three to six days, then it becomes

clear. All the particles have sunk to the bottom.

  The  preparation  completed,  we  draw  off  a  small  drop,  using  sterile

procedures, and examine it under the microscope in bright-and dark-field,

again  starting  with  a  magnification  of  300x  (cf. Fig. 25,  Appendix),  then

using  2000–3000x  (for  PA  bions  seen  at  this  magnification, cf. Fig.  30,

Appendix). What we see is fundamentally different from what was observed

in the control preparation.

  The structure of the individual coal particles is primarily vesicular. With

continued observation, we are able to see small vesicles approximately one

micron in diameter disengaging themselves from the margins of the larger

particles  and  moving  about  freely  in  the  fluid.  When  the  preparation  is

successful,  movement  may  be  observed  at  the  margins  of  the  particles,

expanding,  contracting,  vibrating,  etc.  But  even  the  smaller  particles  that

move about appear to change before our eyes if we observe long enough.

First, they appear “hard,” the membrane black and thick. Gradually, however,

the membrane becomes thinner. On the inside, we see increasingly a blue and

blue-green  glimmer.  The  vesicles  become  more  taut  and  show  increasing

internal movement. Wave-like vibrations may be observed in many vesicles.

The thinner the membrane becomes, the more intense the blue and the more

elastic the movement. Soon, on the same or, still better, on the following day,

we can clearly see movements of expansion and contraction. No one who has

studied  these  preparations  for  any  length  of  time  can  doubt  the  living

character  of  these  movements.  We  distinguish  movements  of  the  vesicles

from place to place and inner movements of their contents, fluctuations of the

blue color, variations in brightness, protrusion and retraction. The vesicles

pulsate with an irregular rhythm.

  We pass a galvanic current of approximately 0.2–0.5 Ma. through thepreparation.  The  vesicles  move  toward  the  cathode  and  therefore  have  a

positive electric charge. After several days, when the particles are no longer

in  colloidal  suspension,  the  cataphoretic  phenomena  fade  or  disappear

altogether. The charge of the vesicles seems therefore to be a prerequisite for

colloidal suspension and motility, as Pauli surmised. It is also a prerequisite

for the capacity to form cultures (cf. Die Bione, pp. 54 ff.).

  We try an experiment with biological stains, using Gram stain or carbol

fuchsin. As a control, we stain plain coal dust. The unprepared coal does not

accept any biological stain. The particles remain black. The coal bions, on the

other hand, show a positive stain reaction (blue when Gram stain is used). It

can also be observed that the staining is restricted to those particles that have

attained a certain degree of bionous development (thin membrane, increased

fluid, blue on the inside), while the undeveloped particles react neutrally, like

those in the control preparation.

  We examine the stained preparation at a magnification of 3000x, using oil

immersion, and find that most of the blue vesicles that previously had every

possible form have now become spherical. A new phenomenon is especially

striking:  alongside  the  large-sized  vesicles,  approximately  one  micron  in

diameter, there are tiny red bodies which were not visible at a magnification

of 300x. The smallest of them are approximately 0.2 micron in length, i.e.,

only  barely  visible  microscopically.  They  lie  in  groups  around  the  larger

round,  blue  vesicles  and  unstained  crystals.  They  are  elongated,  and  are

pointed at one end like miniature lancets. They were not observed in the

fresh, wet preparation, but can be found in a live state in other coal-bion

preparations  (photograph  of  blood-charcoal  preparation  at  5000x

magnification, cf. Fig. 26. Appendix).

  After  long  experimentation,  it  became  clear  that  these  Gramnegative

bodies are of the greatest significance. They are the so-called T-bacilli, which

play such a crucial role in cancer. More on this subject later.

  Our conclusion is that bions are biologically active forms because, incontrast to the substance from which they originate, they react to biological

stain.

  There is another specifically biological characteristic of bions. Non-living

substances viewed under the fluorescent microscope always show only their

own characteristic color: coal, black, sodium chloride, yellow, etc. Coal bions

viewed  fluoroscopically  show  not  a black  but  a blue  glimmer,  as  does  a

staphylococcus culture or any organic cell tissue. This is additional proof of

the biological character of the coal bions.

  Before proceeding to an investigation of other properties of the energy

vesicles,  we  must  establish  whether  the  blue  vesicles  develop  exclusively

from  carbon  or  from  other  substances  as  well.  If  they  were  to  be  found

exclusively  in  carbon,  the  fundamental  question  concerning  the  nature  of

biological  energy  in  non-living  matter  would  be  easy  to  answer.  But  the

problem is complex, because the more substances we examine and subject to

swelling, the more the following conclusion is confirmed: All matter heated

to incandescence and made to swell consists of or disintegrates into blue-

glimmering vesicles:

  1. Cooked foodstuffs: Muscle, when it is cooked, loses its predominately

striated structure and consists of blue, motile vesicles. The same results are

obtained with every kind of vegetable. Size and shape of the vesicles may

vary, but the content invariably shows a blue glimmer.

  2. Egg yolk consists of individual blue vesicles, sometimes in the form of

a heap of vesicles surrounded by a membrane. Milk contains, apart from fat

globules, blue bions. The same applies to cheese, especially those varieties

processed  with  the  aid  of  bacterial  fermentation,  e.g.,  Kephir,  Roquefort,

yoghurt; and casein of every kind. Vitamins, examined at a magnification of

2000x,  consist  of  blue  vesicles,  irregular  in  shape,  which  refract  light

strongly. Egg  white  when  raw  is  without  structure;  when  cooked,  it

disintegrates into heaps of blue vesicles. Blood serum reacts similarly and

blood platelets along with the red and white blood corpuscles show an intenseblue glimmer.

  The structure of moss and grass is striated without vesicles, similar to that

of animal muscle. When both are cooked, they disintegrate into blue vesicles,

which look like algae. This raises the question whether the algae found in

stagnant ponds are not the same as our bions, namely, matter disintegrated

into  energy  vesicles.  Blue  vesicles  abound  in  stagnant  water,  serving  as

foodstuff for protozoa. The bion experiments yield a surprising answer to this

question, which we will discuss in a different context.

  We try to find out more about the formation of bions. We mix certain

structureless substances together in a certain sequence. First, we make the

following solutions: (a) 100 cc. water + 50 cc. 0.1n KCl + 2 mg. dissolved

gelatin + 50 cc. filtered bouillon; (b) a few drops of egg white in KCl; (c) a

small amount of fresh lecithin in KCl. These solutions show no structure.

Only  the  lecithin  mixture  shows  space-enclosing  membranes,  without  an

inner structure. We now mix the three groups of substances. Within minutes,

the blue bion vesicles are visible microscopically. Previously there had been

no motion of any kind. But now the solution is swarming with moving forms.

The gelatin combines a number of blue vesicles together into a heap, which

contracts and expands. The effect is one of individual vesicles inside the heap

straining  to  move  in  a  variety  of  directions  and  thereby  generating  inner

motility. In general, four types of motion can be distinguished:O 0

O
Oo

lon-moving vesicles
O
=)
Q s
=
2. Vesicles moving back and forth in place

3. Vesicles moving from place to place

zOO

1O

0L
63089

4. Heap of vesicles showing amoeboid motility,
“protozoan” (amoeba)
FIGURE 2. Forms of movement visible in bions


  If  we  now  add  finely  pulverized  blood  charcoal,  we  can  follow  the

development of highly motile coal bions. We witness the carbon absorbing

the fluid containing egg white. The previously empty lecithin tubes fill with

vesicles. The whole scene is one swarming with “life.” We then autoclave the

mixture; the movements become even stronger. Now the T-bacilli appear.

The  biological  stain  reaction  (carbon  fuchsin,  Giemsa  or  Gram)  is  now

positive.

  In January 1937, I rendered an account of this experiment (No. 6) to theAcademy  of  Sciences  in  Paris.  In  January  1938,  I  received  word  from

Professor Lapique that, after one year, the autoclaved preparation still showed

life-like movement and contained contractile forms. The news was all the

more surprising since the preparation was sterile and sealed, air-tight. Here is

Professor Lapique’s letter:


                                                                Sorbonne, le 25 Janvier 1938

  Université de Paris

  Faculté des Sciences

  Laboratoire de Physiologie Générale
                      e
  1, rue Victor-Cousin (5 Arr.)

  Monsieur le Docteur,

    Chargé par l’Académie d’étudier votre communication du 8 Janvier de l’année dernière, j’ai

  d’abord attendu le film que vous annonciez. Puis, ne le recevant pas, j’ai examiné au microscope

les  échantillons  que  vous  aviez  joints  à  votre  premier  envoi.  J’ai  constaté,  en  effet,  les

  mouvements d’apparence vitale que vous annonciez. Il y a là quelque chose de curieux, en

  raison du long délai depuis la préparation.

    Je  suis  disposé  a  proposer  a  l’Académie  de  publier  brièvement  votre  constatation  en  la

  faisant suivre d’une courte note de moi-même confirmant le fait avec une interprétation physico-

  chémique n’engageant que moi. Laissant de côté votre théorie électrique qui n’a rien a faire avec

  l’expérience,  voulez-vous  accepter  que  votre  communication  soit  insérée  simplement  sous

  forme de l’extrait ci-joint qui en réalité, est un résumé de la partie importante? Il me semble

  qu’ainsi vous recevriez satisfaction pour votre désir de voir vos recherches prendre place dans

  nos Comptes-Rendus.

      Veuillex agréer, Monsieur, l’assurance de ma considération distinguée.

                                                                      DR. LOUIS LAPIQUE

                                                          Professeur honoraire à la Sorbonne

                                                      Membre de 1’Académie des Sciences

 

  Translation of preceding:

                                                                Sorbonne, January 25, 1938

  University of Paris,

  Faculty of Sciences

  Laboratories for General Physiology,

  1, rue Victor-Cousin (5ème)

  My dear Doctor,

      Requested by the Academy to study your communication of January 8 of last year, I first

  waited for the arrival of the film you were to send. Then since I did not receive it, I examined  microscopically  the  samples  you  included  with  your  initial  communication.  I  have  in  fact

  verified the life-like movements that you described. That fact itself is remarkable considering

  the length of time that has elapsed since the preparations were made.

    I should like to propose to the Academy the publication of your findings in brief, together

  with  a  short  annotation  by  myself  confirming  the  fact  and  offering  a  physical-chemical

  interpretation representing my own personal viewpoint. Would you agree to the publication of

  your contribution in the excerpted form attached, which is actually a résumé of the important

  part, while leaving out your electrical theory, which has nothing to do with the experiment? It

  seems to me that this arrangement would be in accord with your wish to have your research

  recorded in our bulletin.

    Permit me to convey to you my sincerest respects,

                                                                      DR. LOUIS LAPIQUE

                                                    Honorary Professor, University of Paris

                                                            Member, Academy of Sciences


  I  withdrew  my  consent  for  publication  in  the  bulletin  of  the  French

Academy of Sciences on the following grounds:


  1. The physical-chemical interpretation would have obscured the biological character of the

    experiment.

  2. During 1937, I produced bion cultures that were confirmed experimentally by Prof. DuTeil
          1
    in Nice. This decisively important fact would not be published.

  3.  The  résumé  proposed  for  publication  in  no  way  represented  the  detailed  report  I  had

    submitted to the Academy. Its publication could only have led to misunderstandings, and

    unsuccessful control experiments would have been the result.


  Soft  iron  filings  are  the  most  suitable  metallic  substance  for  our

experiment.  Only  a  few  minutes  after  introducing  sterile  filings  into  our

standard  bouillon—KCl  solution,  delicate  vesicles  develop  from  the  iron

particles. This process can be followed microscopically. A single iron particle

is placed on a slide and a small amount of potassium chloride added. Within a

short time, bions are produced whose motility lasts only approximately ten

minutes. Like tiny magnets they order themselves along lines of magnetic

force and cling to each other (cf. Figs. 27 and 28, Appendix).

  A solution of iron bions becomes colloid within a few days. The particles

consist  of  heavy,  angular,  intensely  blue  energy  vesicles  which  becomeprogressively “softer” and more elastic (cf. Fig. 3). The blue vesicles can

form cultures, but this subject will be discussed later.

  Humus  is  composed  of  mostly  motile  vesicles  having  an  intense  blue

glimmer. Soil subjected to autoclavation disintegrates completely into energy

vesicles.  The  progressive  disintegration  can  be  observed  microscopically

each day. (cf. Fig. 29, Appendix).






























 

1. Angular form, showing in the dark-field a
fine, vesicular structure with striations

< @

2. Appearance of marked striations with typical
rectangular and rhomboidal figures.

3. Apparent softening and bending of striated structure

s w8

 

. Advanced stage of development Tron-filing bions of the.
into bion heaps. Content be- PA type. Motile, contrac-
tween the structures shows tile, with a blue glimmer.
intense blue glimmer. The heap Cultivatable

already shows motility
FIGURE 3. Changes in the structure of iron filings in bouillon and potassium chloride during the

swelling process


  These experiments are difficult and require great patience and persistence.

One cannot simply throw some substances into bouillon and wait for the

development of bions, as did a biologist I knew. Nor can these experimentsbe performed without knowledge of the underlying process.


    2. THE QUESTION OF “BROWNIAN MOVEMENT”


A few fundamental problems must be cleared up before we can draw any

conclusions from our observations. The concept of “Brownian movement”

has  been  invoked  as  an  objection  to  the  claim  that  specific bio-energetic

forces account for the motility of bions. Physicists have known for a long

time that the smallest colloidal particles are in motion, i.e., that they move in

the field in various directions. These movements have even been calculated.

They are attributed to collisions between the molecules in the solution and

the larger colloidal particles.

  This interpretation is purely physical and mechanistic. Nothing in it is

consistent with the biological energy manifestations of pulsation. Can this

interpretation  be  applied  to  the  phenomena  observed  in  bionous  energy

vesicles?  An  interpretation  is  valid  only  if  it  makes  new  phenomena

comprehensible. It is invalid if it conflicts with the observations. And when it

directly  contradicts  the  observations  and  can  be  replaced  by  another

interpretation that offers a more satisfying explanation of the phenomena, it is

useless.

  The  mechanical  Brownian  movement  is  defended  by  physicists  as  a

dogma.  Insofar  as  it  is  directed  against  mystical  interpretations  of  living

phenomena this defense is justified. But experience shows just as clearly that

the  “molecular  movement”  interpretation  is  itself  not  without  irrational

motives. Otherwise, the physicist who sees all around him only Brownian

movements of a purely physical nature would not so stubbornly refuse to

consider a few facts that contradict his interpretation in certain instances. I do

not believe I will ever be able to convince these physicists, but I know that

the blind alleys into which the purely mechanistic viewpoint leads will one

day force science to face up to new facts and arguments.

    Doubtless, there exist movements of extremely fine particles that allow amechanical interpretation. For example, I myself believe that the movement

of the vesicles (cf. Fig. 2) back and forth in place is not of a biological nature.

Whether molecules are moving them back and forth I do not know, since I

have never seen molecules, any more than have the proponents of the purely

mechanical Brownian movement.

  Now, let us clarify what the physical-mechanical interpretation advocates.

Since neither the particles nor the molecules ever disappear in the solution,

the molecular impulses should, logically, continue indefinitely, as should the

movement  of  the  particles.  In  addition,  all  particles  in  approximately  the

same  size  range  would  have  to  be  in  motion.  Finally,  the  only  type  of

movement possible under these circumstances would be from place to place.

  Contraction  and  expansion  of  the  contents  of  the  particles  cannot  be

explained by the mechanical interpretation. How could an impulse from a

molecule outside the particle cause vibration or an expansion inside? Later,

we will become familiar with other properties of the bions that could not

conceivably be explained in mechanical terms.

  These observations can be seen only at magnifications of at least 2000x.

This  is  the  absolute  minimum  requirement.  Actually,  reliable  conclusions

require  a  magnification  of  3000–4000x.  Just  as  indispensable  is  the

microscopic examination of a living  preparation  before  it  is  destroyed  by

biological stain. The Copenhagen biologist A. Fischer became very upset and

even  somewhat  hostile  when  he  was  unable  to  achieve  a  magnification

greater than 1500x, as I had insisted he must in order to be able to see what I

claimed as fact. The Giemsa stain of the bions done at his institute in 1936

was positive. Under the correct conditions, the following phenomena, which

cannot be interpreted mechanistically, manifest themselves:


  1. Movement is sometimes present, sometimes absent. It occurs, then stops. Bion vesicles

    appear  at  the  margin  of  coal  or  moss  particles  and  exhibit  movement  once  there  is  a

    sufficient degree of tension and charge. Certain bionous preparations show no movement at

    all. What has happened to the molecular impulses in such cases? The molecules have not

    gone away and neither have the particles! And mechanistic science does not postulate a    third factor in the origin of the movements. The external motion of the energy vesicles must

    therefore be related to their inner charge.

  2. The internal motility of many bions, their expansion, contraction, vibration, and glimmering,

    is a fact that cannot be ascribed to external impulses, only to shifts in internal energy. Thus

    the inner motility must also be connected with internal charge.

  3. Bion research comprehends living red blood corpuscles as orgonotic vesicles. Examined at a

      magnification above 2000x they are blue and pulsate. Dead red corpuscles are not blue but

    black. They are non-motile and do not pulsate.

     The motility of red corpuscles originates in the internal charge only, not in external

    impulses. With the disappearance of the blue, orgonotic color, motility also ceases.


  The fundamental question of all biology concerns the origin of the inner

impulses in the living organism. No one doubts that the living is distinguished

from the non-living by the internal origin of the motor impulses. The internal

motor impulse can be ascribed only to an energy active within the organism.

The  question  of  the  origin  of  this  energy  itself  is  answered  by  the  bion

experiment.

  The biologically effective energy, within the organism, that generates the

impulses originates from the same matter as the bion. I introduced the term

“orgone”  for  the  energy  observable  in  motile,  bionous  matter,  deriving  it

from  the  words  “organism”  and  “orgastic.”  Henceforth,  the  expression

“orgonotic” encompasses all energy phenomena and processes specifically

pertaining to the energy governing living matter. Every living organism is a

membranous structure containing a quantity of orgone energy in its body

fluids; it constitutes an “orgonotic system.”

    Moreover, the purely physical-mechanical interpretation fails to clarify a

single one of the specific biological reactions. We have freed ourselves from

any suspicion that we are dealing with a supranatural life force transcending

energy and matter. Therewith, we acknowledge a connection between the

energy vesicles and Einstein’s functional theory of matter and energy. We

have observed some fundamental processes that indicate the manner in which

orgone originates from matter, specifically, the processes of disintegration of

matter and the swelling of the disintegrating particles. The solution to theenigma of the way life functions is contained in these processes. The essential

objective functions of biological energy correspond to the essential functions

of living matter. The basic functions of highly developed organisms are the

same as those of the smallest bits of contractile plasma. Every mechanistic or

chemical approach fails completely here. It is not a matter of substances, but

of biological energy functions. In this viewpoint, we are in accord with many

biologists. Üxküll, for instance, writes:


    Animal  biology  today  owes  its  existence  to  the  introduction  of  physiological

  experimentation  into  the  study  of  lower  animals.  In  these  experiments  the  physiologists’

  expectations  of  new  research  horizons  were  not  fulfilled.…  The  breaking  down  of  living

  phenomena into chemical and physical processes did not advance matters at all … for all those

  scientists  who  see  the  essential  element  of  biology  in  the  life  process  itself  and  not  in  its

  reduction to chemistry, physics, and mathematics. [Umwelt und Innenwelt der Tiere, Berlin:

  Springer, 1921, p. 2]


                              3. THE T-BACILLI


In my account of the experiment on coal bions, I mentioned the discovery,

using  Gram  stain,  of  tiny  bodies,  shaped  like  lancets.  These  bodies  were

given  the  name  “T-bacilli,”  i.e., Todes  bacilli,  because  of  their  dual

connection with the process of dying:


a) T-bacilli develop from the degeneration and putrid disintegration of living and non-living

    protein.

b) Injected in strong doses, T-bacilli are capable of killing mice within twenty-four hours.


  If staphylococcus cultures or rot bacteria (B-proteus, etc.) are allowed to

stand for a sufficient length of time, a greenish margin forms around the edge

of the culture. Against the light, this margin is seen to have a blue glimmer

which tends to spread. At the beginning of the experiment, we established

that the culture was pure, containing nothing but staphylococci. After a few

weeks or months, we take a sample from the bluish-green margin, and find

that although there are now very few cocci, the culture is swarming with avariety of much smaller bacilli moving in lively zigzag patterns. These are

roughly 0.2–0.5 micron in length, and examined at a magnification of at least

2000x, appear slightly oval-shaped (cf. Fig. 4-c). Inoculated in bouillon, they

develop  a  culture  fluid  with  a  strong  blue-green  glimmer  and  an  acrid,

ammoniacal odor. The longer the bouillon culture is allowed to stand, the

denser it becomes and the deeper its blue or green-blue color. After a few

days, rot bacteria cultures (B-proteus, B-subtilis, and staphylococci) (cf. Fig.

4-b)  agglutinate  at  the  bottom  of  the  test  tube  or  as  a  membrane  on  the

surface. The agglutination of the T-bacilli, on the other hand, does not occur

for months. In the case of a mixed culture, all other bacilli agglutinate very

rapidly, whereas the T-bacilli remain alive.





























30 &

a) Blue bions. About 2 to 10

oo J

b) Staphylococei ~ Streptococei Bacilli
About 1 s diameter About 4 to 8 p long

Q"

About 0.2 to 0.5 .

 

) T-bacilli
FIGURE 4. Typical forms of blue bions, black cocci and bacilli, and T-bacilli  T-bacilli  can  be  obtained  from  degeneration  of  every  kind  of  protein

substance.  To  date,  T-bacilli,  identical  in  form  and  reactions,  have  been

cultivated from fifteen different sources. T-bacilli are therefore the product

of  degenerative  putrid  processes  in  tissues.  Following  is  a  list  of  some

sources of T-bacilli:


  Blood of cancer patients: T-bacilli can be cultivated from the blood of patients with advanced

    cancer by simple inoculation in bouillon. In our laboratory, this process became one of our

    most important tests for cancer.

  Cancer tissue:  Every  kind  of  cancer  tissue,  fresh  or  old,  shows  T-bacilli  on  microscopic

    examination,  and  yields  T-bacilli  cultures  in  bouillon  and  on  agar.  When  boiled,  it

      disintegrates almost totally into T-bodies with the characteristic red Gram-stain reaction.

  Precancerous cells and tissue: These also yield T-bacilli; i.e., they disintegrate into T-bodies

    or already contain them fully developed. Epithelium from the vagina, tongue, skin, or from

    sputum is normally without structure. In the precancerous state, it shows extremely fine T-

    bodies on dark-field examination.

  Degenerating blood (experiment): 2 to 3 cc. of blood are spread on a sterilized Petri dish and

    dried for twenty-four hours in an incubator. The dried blood is then dusted with blood

    charcoal that has been heated to incandescence. After a further twenty-four hours, enough

    potassium chloride and bouillon are added to cover the substance. Microscopic examination

    and biological stain reaction immediately confirm the presence of T-bacilli.


  T-bacilli of every origin generate cancerous, destructive, and infiltrating

growths in healthy mice. However, I would like to deal separately with this

element  of  the  bion  experiment  and  restrict  myself  here  to  the  essential,

biologically significant reactions pertaining to the problem of orgone energy.

  Bion preparations regularly yield two types of bions: the blue PA bions

described  earlier  and  the  small  black  T-bacilli.  These  two  types  are

antagonistic to each other in the biological experiment; the PA bions are

capable of killing or immobilizing the black T-bacilli. This process occurs in

the drop under the microscope as well as in the living mouse (cf. Fig. 4-a).

  We place a drop of solution of earth and iron or coal bions on a hanging

drop slide and add a small drop from a T-bacillus culture. At 400x in the

dark-field, or more clearly at 2000x in ordinary light, we can see that the T-bacilli in the vicinity of the blue bions become agitated, spinning around and

around, then remain on one spot, quivering, and finally become immobile. In

time,  more  and  more  T-bacilli  accumulate  around  the  blue  bions:  they

agglutinate. The “dead” bacilli seem to attract and to be lethal to those still

living. The orgone energy experiments with cancer had their origin in this

significant fact.

  Subtilis or proteus bacilli, which are five to eight times the size of T-

bacilli, are affected in the same way. In these organisms, the lethalness of the

blue bions can be observed much more clearly. Ultimately, the whole field is

covered with dead bacilli.

  Between January 1937 and January 1939, injection experiments with PA

bions and T-bacilli were carried out on 178 healthy mice. The following table

shows the results:













Injection
T-bacili
PA bions

T-baelll
PA bions
T-bacilli
then
PA bions

Number
of Mice

Deadin  Deadin

IWeek 15 Monthe
20 2
0 o
o o
0 8

(2kiled)

Sick after
15 Months
2

Healthy
after
15 Months

o

88
  Of the 30 T-mice that died within fifteen months of the T-bacilli injection,

25  were  carefully  examined  for  cancerous  growths.  Seven  mice  revealed

ameboid cancer cells in various tissues; 13 revealed destructive, infiltrative,

cellular  growths  of  a  cancerous  nature.  The  remaining  5  had  chronic

inflammatory growths. The cancer tumors were furthest advanced in the mice

that had survived the T-bacilli injection for the longest period.

  The connection between T-bacilli and cancer is of crucial importance and

will be discussed later.

  For an evaluation of orgone energy, the results of the experiments have

the following significance:  1. Theoretical: At the basis of the life process, at the boundary between

non-living and living, we encounter a way of functioning that is completely

encompassed by our generally valid schema of biological functioning: All life

functions  obey  the  natural  law  of  the  dissociation  of  the  unitary  and  the

functional antithesis and unity of the dissociated.

  Out of non-living matter A, motile bions B, containing orgone energy,

develop. These bions divide into two groups: the PA group and the T-group.

The  two  groups  have  an  antithetical  relationship  in  that  the  PA  bions

paralyze the T-bions. There is only one plausible explanation of this fact in

the context of our knowledge of the physical functions of orgone energy: The

PA bions are fully developed, highly charged orgone units. T-bions, on the

other  hand,  represent  products  of  degeneration,  appearing  when  tissues,

cells, or bacteria begin to lose their orgone charge. They contain only small

quantities of orgone and therefore are very weak orgonotic systems.














Bionous
matter (B)

 
  Since the stronger orgonotic system always attracts the weaker and draws

              2
off its charge, the paralyzing of T-bions by PA bions is easily explained: The

biophysical  functional  connection  between  PA  and  T  is  derived  from  the

purely physical functions of orgone energy.

  2. Practical: The T are produced either by degenerative processes, i.e.,

through loss of orgone energy in highly developed forms, or they originate

because  of  an  insufficient  amount  of  mass-free  orgone  inside  the  energy

vesicle.  T-bacilli were produced in my laboratory from the degeneration of the

following tissues and bion preparations: dried blood, dried feces, autoclaved

cancer tissue, autoclaved egg medium that had been dusted with incandescent

charcoal and covered with potassium hydroxide, tongue epithelium damaged

by  dental  bridgework,  degenerated  vaginal  epithelial  cells,  degenerated

spermatozoa, degenerated rot bacteria, coal bion preparations of all kinds,

and from egg medium treated with potassium cyanide.

  The  deficient  orgone  content  of  T-bacilli  manifests  itself  in  a  strange

phenomenon  which  I  would  like  to  designate  as  “orgone  hunger.”  The

observations are as follows:

  We  filter  blood  that  has  been  diluted  about  ten  times  with  the  usual

potassium chloride solution. (A Berkefelt filter with a pore size of not more

than 0.25 micron catches whatever T-bacilli might be present.) Microscopic

examination at a magnification of 2000–4000x reveals only fluid, with no

structures at all. We add to the serum a tiny drop of pure T-bacillus culture,

containing  no  PA  bions.  Within  a  few  minutes,  an  extremely  exciting

spectacle unfolds, one which in all probability holds the secret of “immune

bodies” in the serum.

  At first, we see only T-bacilli moving around in the field. Before long,

however, large blue vesicles appear here and there, with more and more T-

bacilli surrounding them, exactly as in a mixture of PA and T. The T seem to

have stimulated the formation of the blue PA bions; a control serum without

T does not show any PA. The PA bions, once formed, exercise a paralyzing

effect on the T, which begin to agglutinate.

  A  second,  even  more  astonishing  process  now  begins.  The  heap  of

agglutinated T is black; there is no evidence of blue. But within fifteen to

thirty minutes, this dead black heap begins to take on a strong blue coloring

and to form membranous vesicles. They are nothing other than PA bions. The

dead T have drawn off orgone from the serum and transformed themselves

into PA bions.  These two phenomena have not yet been thoroughly studied. On the one

hand, they are connected to the immunity factor and, on the other hand, to the

vesicular structuring or the vesicular disintegration of tissues that come into

contact with the T-bacilli.

  A few days after a healthy mouse is inoculated subcutaneously with T-

bacilli,  a  non-purulent  swelling  appears  on  the  skin,  which,  under

microscopic  examination,  proves  to  be  tissue  in  a  state  of  vesicular

disintegration. By the same process, the degeneration of epithelial cells in

cancer is marked by the appearance first of T-bacilli; then of large numbers

of blue PA bions in the surroundings.

  At this point I would like to interrupt the account of these observations,

which yield so much information about organismic orgone energy, and await

the results of further experiments before deciding what conclusions to draw.

Nevertheless, it is certain that T-bacilli stimulate bionous disintegration and

that cancer cells are organized from bionously disintegrated tissue, just as

amoebae and other protozoa are formed from moss bions.


                            THE T-BLOOD TEST


The biological vigor, i.e., functioning power, of a cell is determined neither

by its structure nor by its chemical composition. Disintegration of structure

and  chemical  composition  must  be  regarded  as  consequences  rather  than

causes  of  the  biological  degeneration.  The  structure,  along  with  the

biochemical equilibrium of the cell, is the expression of the cell’s biological

vigor,  but  the  biological  function  itself  has  hitherto  been  a  mystery.  The

orgonotic  charge  of  the  cell  now  provides  us  with  the  possibility  of

determining it experimentally.

  The red blood corpuscles of two persons can be alike in structure and

chemical make-up while differing sharply in biological function. Under the

microscope, both may have the same form; the red corpuscle count and the

hemoglobin content may well be normal and identical for both persons.  Let  us  now  expose  blood  samples  from  each  person  to  the  same

destructive agent. We autoclave a few drops of blood from each person in

bouillon and potassium chloride for thirty minutes at a temperature of 120°C.

with steam pressure 15 lbs. per sq. in. Microscopic examination may now

yield  two  very  different  results.  The  autoclaved  blood  of  one  person  has

disintegrated into large blue bion vesicles. The blood of the other person

yields no blue vesicles, only T-bacilli. Gram stain confirms this difference:

one  blood  sample  produces  blue,  Gram-positive  vesicles  (cf. Fig.  31,

Appendix),  the  other,  red,  Gram-negative  T-bacilli  (for  T-bacilli  from  a

sarcoma, cf. Fig. 32, Appendix). This conclusion may be drawn:

  The former blood sample shows a strong orgonotic charge of the red cells.

The charge reveals itself, after autoclavation, in the blue bions (“B-reaction”).

The latter blood sample shows a weak or minimal orgone charge of the red

cells. The lack of orgonotic charge manifests itself, after autoclavation, in the

absence of blue bions and in the presence of T-bacilli, which result from the

degeneration of the red corpuscles (“T-reaction”).

  The  T-reaction  is  typical  for  cases  of  advanced  cancer  in  which  the

orgone content of the blood has been totally consumed in the organism’s

struggle against the systemic disease (cancer biopathy) and the local tumor.

This T-reaction is usually present before any symptoms of anemia and often

reveals the cancer process long before a perceptible tumor has formed.

  On  the  other  hand,  red  corpuscles  weak  in  orgone  energy  absorb  it

greedily  when  it  is  supplied  to  the  organism  by  the  orgone  accumulator.

Subsequent autoclavation tests yield a shift from the T-reaction to the B-

reaction;  i.e.,  the  red  blood  corpuscles  have  become  more  resistant  to

autoclavation; they contain more orgone.

  The red corpuscles can be charged by atmospheric orgone energy. (The

effects  of  solar  radiation  are  based  on  the  same  principle.)  This  can  be

confirmed experimentally. On a microscope slide, we mix biologically (i.e.,

orgonotically) weak blood with rot bacteria or T-bacilli. The blood, beingenergetically weak, does not destroy or agglutinate the bacteria or the T-

bacilli.  However,  once  the  organism  has  been  orgonotically  charged  (the

degree of charge can be ascertained by means of the autoclavation test), the

blood  has  a  decidedly  paralyzing  and  agglutinating  effect  on  the  same

pathogenic micro-organisms. Smaller protozoa respond in the same fashion;

that is, they are not damaged by orgonotically weak blood but are paralyzed

by orgonotically strong blood.

  The red corpuscle is an orgonotic system in miniature, containing a small

quantity of orgone energy inside its membrane. At 4000x magnification, the

red blood corpuscles show a deep blue glimmer and lively vibration of their

contents. They expand and contract and are therefore not rigid, as is usually

thought. They carry atmospheric orgone energy from the lungs to the tissues.

The  nature  of  the  relationship  between  atmospheric  oxygen  and  orgone

energy can only be surmised at this time. Whether orgone is identical with

the  chemical  particles  of  the  air  or  fundamentally  different  from  them  is

unknown.











s 0 ¢

 

weak strong
Orgone margin narrow Orgone margin wide
Blue color weak Blue color intense

Membrane often shriveled
(“poikilocytosis™)
FIGURE 5. Red blood corpuscles showing weak and strong orgonotic charge (in the living specimen at

4500x)


  The orgonotic charge is also revealed in the shape and structure of the red

blood corpuscles. Cells with a weak charge are more or less shrunken and

have a narrow blue margin which glimmers feebly. Once the organism is

charged,  the  red  blood  cells  swell,  while  the  blue  margin  intensifies  and

widens, sometimes including the entire cell. No pathogenic micro-organismcan survive in the vicinity of these orgonotically highly charged red blood

cells.

  How these facts are connected to immunity against infectious diseases,

colds,  etc.,  is  still  obscure;  but  finding  the  connection  should  not  be  too

difficult.  Probably,  the  orgonotic  charge  of  the  tissues  and  blood  cells

determines  the  degree  of  susceptibility  to  infections,  the  “disposition  to

disease.”

  The  fact  that  during  the  process  of  destroying  the  pathogenic  micro-

organisms the erythrocytes gradually lose their blue coloration, turn black,

and sometimes degenerate into T-bodies demonstrates that the orgone charge

of the red blood corpuscles actually kills protozoa and bacteria. Examination

of tissue from tumors in treated mice shows that when charged red blood

corpuscles permeate cancer tissue it disintegrates into non-motile T-bodies. In

this process, the red blood corpuscles disappear and only T-bodies can be

seen. The cancer tumor shows large cavities which are filled with T-bodies,

visible on dark-field examination at 300–400x. Macroscopically, the content

of the cavities at first appears blood red, but gradually turns a rust brown due

to  hemosiderosis.  The  iron  pigment  has  separated  from  the  disintegrated

corpuscles, which have lost their charge of biological energy. The typical

secondary anemia of cancer patients is the expression of the loss of biological

energy from the blood in the struggle against the T-bacilli and the cancer

cells.

  More details on this subject will be presented later in connection with our

cancer experiments. What is important here is to learn how the orgonotic

charge of the blood cells acts under a variety of conditions. To put it briefly:

Erythrocytes  with  a  strong  orgone  charge  act  upon  bacteria  and  small

protozoa in exactly the same way as do earth, iron, coal, and other bions.

Since  they  originate  in  bone  marrow,  it  must  be  assumed  that  the  bone

marrow has the capacity to generate bions constantly. Energy vesicles are

basic to both animal and plant tissue. Taken together, these facts form thebasis for the orgone therapy experiments on cancer patients. The introduction

of orgone energy from the outside relieves the organism of the burden of

consuming its own body orgone in the struggle against the disease. This is a

further proof of the identity of atmospheric and organismic orgone energy.

    Experiment reveals the following:


  1. A grass infusion develops no protozoa, or very few, when kept from the beginning in the

    orgone  accumulator.  Clearly,  orgone  energy  charges  the  grass  tissue  and  prevents  its

      disintegration into protozoa.

  2. Fully developed protozoa are not destroyed in the orgone accumulator.

  3. T-bacilli are not destroyed in the orgone accumulator but, on the other hand, a cancer

    patient’s blood can be cleared of T-bodies within a few days if the patient is exposed to

    intense orgone irradiation.


              4. LUMINATION AND ATTRACTION


It is a generally known fact, first discovered by Gurwitsch, that animal blood

radiates. Since, from the point of view of orgone biophysics, erythrocytes are

nothing  but  orgone  energy  vesicles,  it  is  important  to  demonstrate  the

radiation  microscopically.  One  of  its  most  salient  characteristics,  as  we

discover  in  pure  orgone  physics,  is  “orgonotic  attraction,”  which  has  no

connection with iron magnetism. Observation of this orgonotic attraction is

made possible by the following experiments, all of which consist of bringing

together bions of various origins in the usual preparation of bouillon and

potassium chloride and examining them under the microscope.

  Seen bio-energetically, the destruction and agglutination of bacteria by

various  kinds  of  bions  is  quite  simply  the attraction  and  subsequent

withdrawal of orgone energy by the stronger orgonotic system, the PA bion.

By mixing different kinds of bions, we discover other important effects of

orgone energy.

  Let us experiment first with a sterile mixture of red blood corpuscles and

earth bions. We use a drop of diluted blood and one of earth bion solution

that is sufficiently thinned out to permit easy observation of each individualbion.  No  results  can  be  expected  at  less  than  2000x  (a  good  80x,

apochromatic objective lens combined with a 16x eyepiece in a microscope

with inclined binocular tube would serve the purpose). The use of a special

water-immersion  lens,  which  can  simply  be  dipped  into  the  solution,  is

advantageous. The work is easier and faster with direct water immersion and

mechanical interferences are quickly offset. An effect from the metal need

not be feared, since the phenomena is the same when a cover glass is used.

But at this magnification and with the necessary use of hanging drop slides,

cover  glasses  are  inconvenient,  since  they  break  so  easily.  Any  control

experiment  will  prove  that  the  immersion  of  the  objective  lens  into  the

solution does not affect the results in any way.


THE RADIATING BRIDGE BETWEEN TWO ORGONOTIC

                                      SYSTEMS


At first, the earth bions and red blood corpuscles move about separately.

Gradually,  however,  grouping  begins,  with  several  erythrocytes  gathering

around one of the larger, heavier, earth bions and moving nearer and nearer

until they are touching. At each point of contact, a strong radiation appears.

At points where the bodies do not touch each other directly but are separated

by  approximately  0.5  to  1  micron, a  strongly  radiating  bridge  is  formed

between the earth bion and the erythrocyte, and apparently connects them.

This  bridge  vibrates  intensely,  becoming  alternately  wider  and  narrower.

Finally, the membranes between the bodies appear to be less distinct. With

sufficient observation, it is possible to see clearly that the erythrocytes refract

the light more strongly, that their blue color becomes more and more intense,

and that they become larger and tauter and show a lively pulsation. In this

manner, erythrocytes can be orgonotically charged just as effectively as the

body is charged by orgone irradiation of the organism. If weak, deformed

erythrocytes from the blood of cancer patients are used for this experiment,

their  expansion  and  radiation  are  more  evident.  Orgonotically  weakerythrocytes exercise little or no influence on bacilli and small protozoa, but

they  do  become  effective  when  they  are  charged  with  orgone.  The

erythrocytes “drink their fill” of orgone from the earth bions.















EO

L0 oF 20
B O
2 Oon G

 

3. Formation of a radiating bridge 4. Dissolution of the membrancs
and orgonotic fusion
FIGURE 6. Phases in the formation of a radiating bridge and orgonotic fusion between earth bions (B)

and erythrocytes (E)


  The injection of sterile earth bions into cancer mice achieved the same

effect as exposure to orgone radiation in the orgone accumulator: inhibition

of  the  growth  of  the  tumor,  replacement  of  the  tumor  tissue  by  strongly

radiating blood, and destruction of the T-bacilli. What actually occurs in the

organism as a result of the bion injections can be seen in the microscopic

study  of  the  bion  mixture.  (Bion  injection  was  the  method  of  orgone

application  utilized  in  my  laboratory  before  the  discovery  of  atmospheric

orgone  energy,  after  which  it  was  replaced  by  irradiation  in  the  orgone

accumulator.)

  There is no fusion of earth bions and erythrocytes, only the formation of

the radiating bridge. This is also true of iron bions, coal bions, etc. On the

other hand, coal bions and bions produced from autoclaved blood or from any

protein  do  interpenetrate.  This fusion  is  extremely  significant  for  an

understanding of the experimental production of tumors in mice by means of

tar.              5. FUSION AND INTERPENETRATION


Sexuality has in common with procreation the fact that two living systems

fuse orgonotically. In single-celled organisms, mutual penetration of body

substance  follows  the  fusion  that  occurs  in  copulation.  Fusion  and

interpenetration  are  not  only  energy  processes  but  processes  that  involve

substance as well. In the metazoan, however, these processes are much more

complete in terms of energy than of substance. In the copulative act, the male

organ penetrates the female. Both organs now form a functioning unit. In

many  hermaphroditic  molluscs  (snails,  worms),  penetration  is  mutual  but

restricted to the genitals. The union of two gametes to form a zygote, on the

other  hand,  is  a  perfect  example  of  total  interpenetration  and  fusion  of

substance. Although in multicellular animals fusion is restricted to the genital

organs  and  the  reproductive  cells,  the  orgonotic  function  is  total;  i.e.,  in

copulation,  two  beings  fuse  temporarily  into  a  single  orgonotic  energy

system.  (In  the  case  of  humans,  this  is  true  only  if  both  partners  are

orgastically potent.)

    Orgonotic  fusion  is  regularly  preceded  by  lumination.  Orgonotic cell

lumination,  physiological excitation,  and  psychic sexual  emotion  are

functionally identical processes. Psychic perception of a sexual object can

cause physiological excitation (erection); conversely, physiological excitation

(stroking, friction) can evoke sexual emotion. This psychosomatic process

leads  to  orgonotic  lumination  of  the  entire  organism.  On  the  other  hand,

strong orgonotic lumination in an organism tends to intensify the urge for

physiological friction with accompanying psychosexual emotion. Therefore,

our diagram of biological functioning is again valid:Psychic sexual Physiological (somatic)
emotion excitation

Orgonotic cell
Jumination
  The concept that energy manifestations of the multicellular organism are

present in each individual cell and, strictly speaking, have their origin there

must be taken seriously. Orgone lumination of the individual cell is identical

with  the  physiologist’s  and  biologist’s  “cell  excitation”  and  the  depth

psychologist’s “organ libido” or “cell libido.” We have taken an important

step toward the understanding of these processes, since we now know that a

demonstrable,  specifically  biological  energy  is  active  in  the  cells.  The

principal  energy  functions  are  formation  of  a  radiating  bridge  (“sexual

contact”),  lumination,  fusion,  and  interpenetration.  Our  purpose  here  is

simply to observe the energy processes of fusion and interpenetration as they

are revealed in the bions. Our sense of triumph when we witness the fusion of

a coal bion and an earth bion is justified; the hypothetical concepts “cell

excitation” and “organ libido” have become tangible realities.

  After the coal bions are attracted to the heavier, and therefore less motile,

earth bions and the radiating bridge is formed, the energy process continues

to parallel every phase of copulation. The “excited,” i.e., luminating, bions

move  ever  closer  to  each  other.  At  the  point  where  the  radiating  bridges

appear, the coal substance (in bion form) gradually begins to penetrate the

earth bions. One has the impression that the earth bion absorbs the coal bion.

Eventually, the smaller coal bions completely penetrate the earth bions. Their

black membranes are clearly distinguishable from the brownish membranes

of the earth bions. As a whole, this mixture of earth bions and coal bions

appears  brownish  black.  Then,  gradually,  the  black  disappears;  themembranes  of  the  coal  bions  dissolve.  The  earth  bions  take  on  a  darker

coloration and their blue vesicles emit a stronger radiation. Finally, all traces

of the coal substance vanish.

  Another way of describing this process would be to say that the earth bion

“eats up” the coal bion. But it would make no sense to subdivide fusion into

“eating”  or  “copulating”  since,  at  this  most  primitive  biological  stage,

biological energy functions without differentiation. It would be difficult to

differentiate functionally between copulation and the incorporation of smaller

protozoa by larger ones.

  This  statement  is  equally  true  of  the  multicellular  animal  when  we

describe energy processes and avoid the anthropomorphic trap of ascribing

purpose. A suckling child is fulfilling a completely different “purpose” than

is a woman who takes the male organ into her vagina. The first act “serves”

the  “preservation  of  the  individual,”  the  second  the  “preservation  of  the

species.” But these finalistic distinctions are incorrect when the problem is

one  of  biological  functioning.  In  terms  of  energy—and,  biophysically,  no

other view is valid—the process taking place between the mother’s breast and

the baby’s mouth is precisely the same as that between the erect penis and the

vagina.  This  functional  identity  extends  to  the  most  minute  physiological

detail.  Moralistic  hypocrisy  should  not  be  permitted  to  obscure  the

significance of these matters by representing the “holy” suckling process as

“asexual” so as not to “profane” it by identifying it with the “devilish, dirty,

sexual act.” It is not a matter of holy or unholy, but of biological functioning.

We only now understand biophysically Freud’s fundamental discovery that

the nursing child’s mouth is just as much a sexually excited organ as is the

mother’s nipple in excitation. This one insight will help more in diagnosing

the inability of some women to breast-feed their children than all medical

theories.

  It is therefore a matter of indifference to us whether the earth bion has

“eaten up” the coal bion in order to “strengthen” itself, thereby behaving in a“moral” or “rational” manner, or whether it has fused “sexually” with the

coal bion. Instead we are concerned with the energy functions, which are

fundamental  in  the  process  itself  and  common  to  all  basic  biological

functions, whether we are considering ingestion, conjugation, copulation, the

formation of zygotes, or the sexual act of the metazoon.

  It should be noted that the orgone hunger of bions does have a satiation

point. If a limited number of coal bions are introduced into a solution of earth

bions, after a few days no coal bions are left. But if a large number of coal

bions are added, not all of them disappear. Different species of bions display

varying  degrees  of  “orgone  hunger.”  The  behavior  of  sand  bion  cultures

toward coal bions is, for instance, “gluttonous.” Iron bions also fuse easily

with  coal  bions.  Bions  formed  from  cooked  organic  substances,  such  as

muscle, are far less greedy in their absorption of coal bions. This indicates

that  the  smaller  the  original  amount  of  carbon  contained  by  a  bion,  the

stronger its tendency to take in carbon. SAPA bions, originating from sand,

initially contain no carbon; iron bions contain only traces of it. Muscle bions

are, however, composed of carbon compounds. Their hunger for carbon is

therefore far less than that of sand bions. I shall refrain from drawing far-

reaching  conclusions  about  the  origin  of  plasma  on  our  planet  and  hold

strictly to the facts.

  Coal bions are not the only ones that fuse with others. Fusion also occurs

between earth bions and iron bions, iron bions and muscle bions, etc. Here is

a broad field for fruitful research.

  To  summarize: Orgone  energy  vesicles  show  the  basic  functions  of

completely  developed  living  substance:  attraction,  lumination,  a  radiating

bridge, fusion, and penetration. These functions are specific properties of the

orgone vesicles; they are absent in bions that have lost their orgone charge.

These functions are therefore determined not by substance but by energy.

They  are  specific  functions  of  the  orgone  and  have  nothing  to  do  with

magnetism or electricity.  We are now better prepared to approach the observations provided by our

investigation of the organization of protozoa and cancer cells.


  6. THE NATURAL ORGANIZATION OF PROTOZOA


I would like to begin this section with the excellent statement by the biologist

Üxküll,  taken  from  the  foreword  to  his  book Umwelt  und  Innenwelt  der

Tiere:


    Today, the word “science” has become a ridiculous fetish. It therefore seems appropriate to

  point out that science is nothing more than the aggregate opinion of living scientists.… In time

  all opinions are forgotten, rejected, or changed. For that reason, the question “What constitutes a

  scientific truth?” can be answered without exaggeration by saying “An error of today.” … We

  hope to progress from gross to smaller errors; but whether we are really on the right track at all

is a matter of extreme doubt so far as biology is concerned.


  In the summer of 1938, I published in Die Bione a number of photographs

taken with fast-motion techniques and time exposures. They unequivocally

demonstrated that single-celled organisms do not evolve from air bacteria that

no one has ever seen but rather from bionously disintegrating moss and grass.

The world of biology kept silent on this “error of today” and with just a few

exceptions made no comment on the microphotos. Today, the facts speak for

themselves (cf. Figs. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41-a, b, c, 42, Appendix).

  The animal is not a mechanical sum of organs, just as the organ is not a

mechanical sum of cells. The animal in its totality—every organ and every

cell,  individually  and  collectively—is  a  self-contained  orgonotic  system

characterized by the four-beat pattern of tension → charge → discharge →

relaxation, and thereby a functional unit. It is a property of the living system

that each one of its parts can operate according to the tension-charge formula

independently or in connection with the organism in its totality.

  In  modern  biological  literature,  since  approximately  World  War  I,  the

functional  approach  has  slowly  been  making  some  headway  against  the

substantive-mechanistic viewpoint. One of the crucial problems of biology isthe fact that whereas the functions of structures (musculature, nerves, glands,

etc.) are understandable mechanically, the functions of protoplasm are treated

as though they were a miracle. Protoplasm is fundamentally different from a

machine in the very fact that “fluid machines are inconceivable” (Üxküll).

Protoplasm  functions  on  the  basis  of  characteristics  not  possessed  by

machines. It functions without being structured. It is preserved by a balance

between assimilation and dissimilation, which is to say through function and

not through material structure. When function ceases, the material state falls

apart. The substantive structure is itself dependent upon the function of the

living plasm. “The animal is an event” (Jennings).

  These facts are inaccessible to the mechanistic-materialistic orientation of

biology. What answer, then, does knowledge of orgone functions give to this

riddle? One thing is clear: Any concept that deduces everything from “germ

Anlagen,”  while  assuming  the  eternal  existence  of  germ  plasm  without

investigating its origin, cannot enlighten us about plasmatic functioning. Such

a concept, which sees everything to be already “materially” existent in the

germ,  is  similar  to  the  old  notion  of  the  “preformation”  of  all  future

generations in the germ cells. If, now, the transformation of matter originally

non-plasmatic into plasm can be observed microscopically and on film, it is

possible to arrive at conclusions about the development of plasmatic function

itself. We can, without hesitation, consider plasmatic function as identical

with the function of tension and charge. For all complex functions can be

traced back to the alternation of expansion and contraction in the biological

pulsation. Non-living substance does not pulsate. Living substance pulsates.

The solution of the enigma of biogenesis should be sought precisely at the

point  of  transition  between  non-motility  and  pulsatory  motility.  This

transition point can, in fact, be observed microscopically and recorded on

film.

  The damage the metaphysical germ theory has done in biological research

can  be  assessed  by  the  following  facts:  Not  one  single  biology  textbookknown to me contains a description of the material of protozoal infusions.

We learn nothing about what is actually happening in the grass or moss. The

protozoa  are  represented  as  simply  present,  a  “finished  product.”  The

argument that no protozoa exist in moss that has been heated, so often raised

against the concept of the natural organization of single-celled organisms,

cannot be taken seriously. Its inadequacies were pointed out by biologists a

long time ago and the stubborn adherence to it only betrays an interest that is

not scientific but religious. We can now state that if heated moss contains no

                                            3
protozoa, it still contains blue bions. However, such bions are also to be

found in unheated moss, which undergoes a process of gradual swelling.

  Every  authoritative  book  on  biology  contains  the  assertion—blindly

copied by one author from another—that protozoa evolve from “encysted

germs”:  protozoa  can  become  spherical  in  shape,  it  is  observed.  The

observation is correct, of course, but the interpretation of it is erroneous. Two

separate processes are being treated as though they were one. One process is

the assumption of a spherical shape by protozoa when they are damaged. The

other process involves the evolution of spherical shapes in grass infusions

that have no connection with the spherical protozoa. These spherical forms

are  the  result  of  a  gradual  development  of  bions  into  a  heap  of  bionous

vesicles. The spherical heap of bions represents a typical stage in the natural

formation of single-celled organisms.

  Biology textbooks claim that the infusions are full of “algae,” which in

turn are supposed to have evolved from “germs.” It is true that protozoa take

their nourishment from these “algae.” Yet, who has ever seen the germ of

such “algae”? And how does it happen that these so-called algae can be found

in large numbers, motile, in preparations consisting of only autoclaved blood

or muscle tissue? The “algae” are nothing but our bion vesicles, into which

every kind of organic tissue disintegrates on swelling.

  There are no protozoal “germs” in the air (Pouchet). Biologists’ notions to

the contrary will appear to us no less remarkable than the phenomena that weourselves  are  about  to  see.  For  while  others  are  busy  maintaining  that

protozoal “germs” are to be found in the air and that they “settle down” to

start  their  evolutionary  process  wherever  they  “find”  a  “suitable”  culture

medium, we will take the trouble to observe an infusion microscopically for

an  hour  a  day  from  the  moment  of  its  preparation,  at  a  magnification  of

2000x.

  As a preliminary, we conduct a simple experiment to see if we cannot

perhaps find some of these “spores from the cosmos” which have drifted

down and settled upon blades of grass or moss. Holding a few blades of grass

in a pincette, we scrape “germs” into a glass of unsterile water. (The grass has

been  examined  to  see  that  it  is  not  already  in  a  state  of  vesicular

disintegration but still has its usual cellular structure.) No matter how we

conduct the experiment, not a single protozoan nor a single cyst is to be

found in the unsterile water into which we have dipped the grass blades.

What processes, then, are at work in the infusion?

  Over the course of two to three days, the grass blades undergo vesicular

disintegration,  as  does  every  other  substance  subjected  to  the  swelling

process (cf. Figs. 34, 35, Appendix). Even at a magnification of 4000x, there

is  not  a  trace  of  bacteria,  cysts,  or  protozoa.  However,  the  grass  blades

disintegrate more and more. After an additional two to three days, there is

scarcely a blade left that still retains its original cellular, striated structure

intact. Individual protozoa may well be present, but we direct our attention to

the bions. Here and there, the bion vesicles can be observed to gather into

heaps surrounded with membranes. Each step in this development can be

followed. Occasionally, within a heap, individual bion vesicles begin to show

delicate rotating or vibrating movements. They become increasingly taut and

begin to look like cysts. However, they are not dried-up protozoa but forms in

the process of developing from bion heaps. These bion masses, or heaps, take

on a variety of sizes and shapes. The tauter they are, the more spherical they

become. They have filled with fluid, and are thus mechanically tense. Thefirst stage of the tension-charge function is complete. It is worth the trouble

to examine a single formation for many hours at a magnification of 2000x,

replenishing the fluid to keep it in focus. We can film this one formation in

fast motion, which makes the work easier, but many interesting details are

lost. The development of such a bion heap into a pulsating, single-celled

organism takes one to two days. The protozoal germ vesicle (the bion heap)

remains immobile for hours, but as the fast-motion film shows, it becomes

tauter  and  more  and  more  sharply  delineated  from  its  surroundings.

Gradually, a movement of the energy vesicles begins to set in within the bion

heap. The following types of motility can be distinguished:

  1. Rolling: The energy vesicles inside the bion heap roll rhythmically

toward  and  away  from  each  other,  creating  the  impression  of  mutual

attraction and repulsion. The causes of this rolling movement can only be

surmised. Initially the vesicles of the disintegrating grass firmly adhere to

each other. Their orgone charge is the same as that of the grass bions that do

not  develop  into  protozoa.  As  the  spherical  heap  of  vesicles  swells  and

becomes  tauter,  more  orgone  has  to  be  developed  inside  the  individual

vesicles, since, as with the coal bion, the swelling thins out the membrane

and intensifies the orgone charge. Once the vesicles inside the bion heap have

lost their mechanical adhesion to each other, the orgone charge can begin to

express  itself  in  motion,  with  the  subsequent  development  of orgonotic

attraction between the vesicles. The attraction effect exercised by the more

remote vesicles results in mutual attraction and repulsion.

  2. Rotation: In many bion heaps the entire contents of the vesicles begin

to rotate in one direction. This movement can last for hours. It increases in

intensity until, in the end, the whole mass, including membrane, is rotating.

During  this  process,  the  membrane  separates  from  the  surrounding  grass

tissue.

  3. Confluence  of  the  energy  vesicles:  Not  all  bion  heaps  retain  the

vesicular structure of their plasm. In many kinds of amoebae, the boundariesbetween the individual energy vesicles disappear, and the plasm then forms a

homogeneous mass with a blue glimmer. In others, the vesicular structure

persists throughout the complete development. This is true also for cancer

cells,  which  organize  themselves  from  disintegrating  animal  tissue  by

precisely the same process as that by which protozoa are formed from grass

or  moss. Cancer  cells  are  nothing  but  protozoa  that  form  in  the  animal

organism from tissue bions. The natural organization of protozoa in grass or

moss infusions is the key to understanding the organization of cancer cells in

animal tissue.

  4. Pulsation:  At  a  magnification  of  about  3000x,  extremely  fine

movements of expansion and contraction can already be seen in the bion

heap. Those forms in which the energy vesicles coalesce are apparently much

more capable of pulsation than those which retain the vesicular character of

the plasm, as, for instance, the “orgprotozoan” (vorticella) (cf. Figs. 39, 42,

Appendix).

  A variant of the confluence of bions can be seen in the primal vesicles of

many paramecia. In this case, the small bions do not converge together into

one mass, but instead form vesicles of medium size, and group in the interior

of the larger body. The vesicles then start rolling and rotating movements

around and toward each other, just like the bions from which they originate.

The more bions flow together, i.e., the more fluid the plasm, the more motile

is the total organism.

  In addition to “finished” animals, evolving organisms and shapes at all

stages  of  development  may  be  seen—principally  at  the  margins  of  the

disintegrating  moss  or  grass.  As  in  the  amoeba  limax  and  B-proteus,  the

nuclei are formed by a distinct concentration of energy vesicles, which is

revealed in a stronger lumination.

  It is difficult for the observer to follow the transition from one stage of

development  to  another  because  of  fatigue.  The  device  for  making  fast-

motion films is an invaluable aid in this respect. For filming over the courseof several days, a cover glass should be placed over the hanging drop slide in

such a manner that a portion of its cavity remains uncovered. In addition,

some fluid should be drawn over the edge of the cavity, forming a reservoir

on the outside that can be used continually to refill the preparation without

having to disturb the focus. Filming with the cover glass completely covering

the cavity is impossible, first because it would cause the formation of air

bubbles, and second because it would make the micro-organisms suffocate.

Filming of the bionous structure and plasmatic motility in org-protozoa has

thus  far  been  successful  at  a  magnification  of  2300x.  The  fast-motion

technique allows a process that took two to three days to complete to be

viewed in a matter of minutes.

  In all protozoa the development is identical, up to the stage when the

bionous primal vesicles are formed. From that point on, the protozoa are

differentiated  according  to  a  law  not  yet  apparent.  After  years  of

observations, I cannot assume that the initial primal vesicles belong to any

specifically  individual  forms.  My  own  surmise  is  rather  that  the

differentiation of forms sets in only at a certain point of common evolution

(cf. Fig. 7). Here, further observation will make it necessary to amplify and

correct a great deal. One of the greatest mysteries is why certain forms, once

they  have  developed,  reproduce  thereafter  in  the  same  form.  In  this

connection, the functional standpoint will have to enter into many battles

with the metaphysical theory of heredity that substitutes ready-made “genes”

for comprehension.

  The primal cells that incline toward a rotating movement and possess a

large vesicular structure usually develop into paramecia. The resting primal

cells,  in  which  the  bion  content  liquifies,  develop  into  flowing  amoebae

(amoeba limax) (cf. Figs. 36, 37, Appendix). The way in which both types

separate  from  their  matrix  is  likewise  characteristic:  the  paramecia  roll

themselves free, while the amoebae simply flow away from the bion mass (cf.

Fig. 38, Appendix).  The vorticellae, which I called “org-protozoa” because of their orgasm-

like contraction and expansion, often adhere to the grass blade until fully

developed (cf. Fig. 39, Appendix). But in some cases they detach themselves

and  swim  around  freely,  sometimes  with  a  tiny  piece  of  bionous  grass

adhering to them.

  When completely developed the protozoa absorb bions from the fluid by

attraction. The attraction exerted by paramecia and colpedia on the energy

vesicles is enormous and cannot be attributed to the mechanical movement of

the cilia. For the vesicles in the fluid do not move past the body with the

current,  as  would  be  expected  from  the  action  of  the  cilia;  instead,  once

within a certain proximity to the paramecium, they are drawn toward it with

great force. The impression is unmistakable. After it has contracted, the org-

protozoan expands and opens wide at the mouth end; the bions in the fluid

then stream into it with great force. The mouth closes, the protozoan contracts

back  to  its  spherical  shape,  and  the  energy  vesicles  inside  start  up  a

rhythmical, grinding movement.

    Observation  at  2000–3000x  reveals  interesting  information  about  the

origin  of  the internal  movement  impulses.  With  absolute  regularity,  the

vesicles, which have an intense blue color, begin a vigorous rotary movement

at the point where a pseudopodium is about to be formed. Then the plasm

starts to stream outward toward the periphery; i.e., expansion begins. Many

of the blue vesicles are swept along in this process, losing their blue color and

becoming black. This permits the following explanation: The protrusion of

the pseudopodium is preceded by a rapid, intense concentration of orgone,

which is the source of the expansion impulse. If the impulse is expressed in

movement, then, clearly, orgone energy is being used up; there is no other

explanation for the fact that the vesicles become black. I would not care to

generalize this correlation, since the phenomenon just described is not to be

found in all protozoa. There can be no doubt, however, that the energy for

movement, in the form of expansion impulses, is provided by the orgonecharge of the bions in the protozoan. The mechanistic interpretation based on

Brownian  movement  fails  completely  here.  Equally  inadequate  is  the

chemical concept of plasma as merely a highly complex carbon substance.

Living protoplasm is a complex protein governed by mass-free orgone.






























  
     
   
   
 

Nucleated amoeba
with structureless
protoplasm

Amoeba limax without
nucleus; protoplasm
with bionous structure

Paramecium

Vorticella
org-protozoan
FIGURE 7. Development of various protozoa from the same membranous heap (1–4 = the common

stages of development; 5–7 = the differentiation)


  The body of the protozoan shows an orgone energy field which influences

its surroundings. It affects bions, small bacteria, and other small protozoa,

mostly by attracting or paralyzing them. (Charged erythrocytes seem to be

orgonotically stronger than paramecia and amoebae, since they are capable oflimiting  the  motility  of  these  organisms.)  From  the  standpoint  of  orgone

physics, then, the protozoan consists of a nucleus, a plasmatic periphery, and

an orgone energy field, which together comprise an “orgonotic system.”

  It should be pointed out that the origination of protozoa from bionous

plant  tissue  does  not  contradict  their  procreation  through  division.

Development by natural organization and procreation through division occur

simultaneously, as can easily be observed microscopically.

  There is probably nothing more suitable for the study of the functions of

tension  →  charge  →  discharge  →  relaxation  than  protozoa.  Their

movements, their plasmatic currents, their expansion and contraction speak

an entirely unequivocal language in terms of our formula of the life function.

By using weak currents of electricity it is possible to change, accelerate, and

even  destroy  these  functions.  But,  as  the  development  of  the  protozoan

shows, the energy involved in these functions emanates from the bions that

compose  the  protozoal  primal  vesicles.  The  locomotor  functions  of  the

amoeba must be ascribed solely to orgone energy, in view of the lack of all

structural composition. The appearance and disappearance of pseudopodia

are expressions of the expansion and contraction functions. The amoeba does

not form a pseudopodium “for the purpose of” reaching an object, i.e., on the

basis of a “goal” (finalistically speaking). It does it functionally, i.e., when a

suitable object, by means of attraction, provokes an expansion impulse in the

orgonotic plasma.

  If only to protect future research, it is essential to maintain the principle

that  living  matter  simply functions,  without  “sense”  or  “purpose.”  If  one

resorts to “purposes,” everything is easily explained. It is much more difficult

to discover the nature of unknown functions. The “purposeful behavior” of

the  amoeba  can  be  reduced  to  the  function  of  orgone  energy;  e.g.,  it

incorporates  a  bion  vesicle  because  the  stronger  orgone  charge  of  the

protozoan attracts the weaker-charged free bion. It may be correct to say that

the “purpose” of nourishment is thereby fulfilled, but this fulfillment is aneffect, not a cause, of the act of ingestion. The protoplasm does not function

according  to  mechanical,  or  metaphysical,  finalistic  principles,  but  on  the

basis of orgonotic energy functions.

  In principle, all biological functions can be reduced to pulsation, i.e., to

the  alternation  of  expansion  and  contraction.  Pulsation  itself  is  a  natural

expression of the two antithetical functions of orgone energy, the dissociation

and  attraction  of  orgone-charged  organic  matter.  On  the  basis  of  the

processes that occur in the plasm of the amoeba, we must assume that the

immediate  state  of  matter  has  the  following  influence  on  the  function  of

orgone energy:

  The individual vesicles, with their orgone energy content, can arrange

themselves in rows, as in moss, and form a striated tissue structure. This

process  is  a  product  of  the  organizing  function  of  attraction.  With  other

protozoa, the energy vesicles converge and form a homogeneous mass. Every

concentration  of  orgone-charged  matter,  as  a  consequence  of  attraction,

automatically  triggers  the  impulse  for  dissociation,  thus  effecting  a

separation  of  the  particles.  If  the  amoeba  has  already  taken  on  spherical

shape,  then,  at  the  point  where  the  energy  vesicles  are  most  densely

concentrated, a lively rolling movement appears. This movement evolves into

an  expansion,  i.e.,  a  separation  of  the  vesicles.  On  the  other  hand,  the

separation  of  the  vesicles  from  each  other  triggers  the  impulse  for

rapprochement through attraction. In this way, contraction takes place. As

long  as  the  plasm  is  sufficiently  charged  with  orgone  energy,  every

contraction induces an expansion, every expansion a contraction. This inner

process appears externally as biological pulsation, whatever its rhythm. Since

expansion is accompanied by swelling, and contraction by detumescence, the

mechanical and orgonotic functions meet in the four-beat pattern: swelling

(tension) → expansion (charge) → contraction (discharge) → detumescence

(relaxation). But pulsation itself is essentially bound up with the alternation

of dissociation  with  attraction  and attraction  with  dissociation  of  theparticles.

  This process may be seen with particular clarity in the expansions and

contractions  of  the  vorticella  (org-protozoan):  after  every  contraction,  a

grinding  or  frictional  movement  of  the  vesicles  begins  in  the  body,

culminating in an expansion. Connected with this expansion is the opening of

the mouth end, which causes an attraction of energy vesicles from the fluid

(“eating”), i.e., a charging. This is followed by a contraction to the spherical

shape, i.e., a rapprochement of the inner vesicles. The process is endless.

  We  will  encounter  this  biophysical  functioning  repeatedly. Biological

pulsation (i.e., contraction and expansion), the central phenomenon of living

substance, is thus explained by the two antithetical, basic physical functions

of biological energy: attraction and dissociation.


                                    SUMMARY


  1. When matter is exposed to high temperatures and made to swell, it

undergoes vesicular disintegration.

  2. Although high temperatures, such as heating to incandescence (about

1500°C.)  or  autoclavation  at  120°C.,  destroy  life,  they  produce  energy

vesicles which may then develop into living organisms.

  3.  The  energy  function  in  bions  originates  from  the  vesicular

disintegration of matter, not from an external source.

  4. Energy vesicles are infinitesimal quantities of matter that contain a

quantum of energy originating from this matter.

  5. Bions are carriers of biological energy. They represent a transition from

the non-living to the living.

  6. The blue color of bions is a manifestation of this energy. With the

disappearance of this color, the basic biological character of the bion ceases.

  7. The bion experiments do not “create” artificial life. They merely reveal

the natural process by which unicellular organisms and cancer cells derive

spontaneously from the vesicular disintegration of matter.                                                          4
                              EXPERIMENT XX


  ON THE ORGANIZATION OF PLASMATIC MATTER

              FROM MASS-FREE ORGONE ENERGY


In the following pages I would like to report on an experimental finding that

owes its discovery to one of those accidents that often occur in the course of

systematic  experimental  investigations  and  which  when  looked  at  more

closely, usually prove to be completely logical consequences of experimental

thought and work processes. The occasion in this particular case was a simple

experiment (No. XX, 1944–1945).

  For several years, I had been observing earth bion preparations which I

kept  alive  by  continuously  replenishing  the  water.  I  noticed  after  a  few

months—in other cases, only after several years—the appearance in these

preparations of small, rapidly moving forms, shaped like beans or the heads

of spermatozoa and resembling living organisms. I was able to clearly follow

the evolution of these forms from strongly radiating, slowly pulsating bions.

As we already know, such living forms do not originate in the air. First, they

are not found in air dust; second, they cannot be cultivated from air infection;

and  third,  their  appearance  in  the non-sterile earth-bion preparations only

after  months  and  years  confirms  their  organization  from  the  preparations

themselves. In addition we found that autoclaved preparations, which were

kept sterile, yielded the same living forms.

  In December 1944, we acquired an apparatus designed for the quantitative

measurement of the fluorescence of liquids, and also for colorimetry. The use

of this apparatus was to be based on the following considerations:

  Earlier experiments had demonstrated that orgone energy possesses the

property  of  “lumination.”  It  was  to  be  assumed  that  fluids  with  a  higher

orgonotic potency, which is to say, those containing more orgone energy,

would luminate more strongly than fluids with weaker orgonotic potency.

Accordingly, the intensity of fluorescence in fluids would be considered as anexpression  of  lumination.  As  a  working  hypothesis,  the  degree  of

fluorescence was made the measure of orgonotic potency. These assumptions

were  subsequently  confirmed  and  led  to  practical  and  controllable

experimental results.

    Measurement  of  the  fluorophotometric  intensity,  i.e.,  the  orgonotic

potency, of fluids that had contained earth bions for months and sometimes

years showed immediately a far higher fluorophotometric value than that of

ordinary water.

  We now wanted to determine in what way the orgonotic potency, which

we  had  measured  fluorophotometrically,  would  change  under  various

conditions. After first measuring their fluorometric content, we left several

sealed ampoules of earth bion water in the laboratory itself, and put others in

a small three-layered accumulator, in the X-ray room, in the open air, and

buried  in  the  ground.  Our  only  purpose  was  to  measure  the  fluorometric

values again at the end of a specified time. After three weeks, we noticed that

the ampoules that had been left outside in the open and had frozen contained

dense flakes after thawing. We were about to throw away these particular

ampoules as “contaminated,” when it occurred to me to look at the flakes

under a microscope. This proved to be a fortunate decision. To my great

astonishment, I discovered that the flakes, which had formed in a crystal-

clear, that is to say, an absolutely particle-free, fluid, were, when examined

microscopically, intensely radiating particles of bionous matter. At a higher

magnification (3000x), it was possible to observe contracting and expanding

bions, with which we were already familiar. We repeated the experiment,

filtering and freezing crystal-clear bion water, until all doubt was eliminated:

We  had  discovered  a  process  by  which  orgone  energy  existing  freely  in

water, i.e., not bound up in bionous matter, can organize itself into plasmatic,

living substance exhibiting all the criteria of life.

  In the following account, I shall restrict myself to reporting the technique

of Experiment XX and providing the verified facts. For the moment, I wish torefrain from discussing the experimental data in a larger theoretical context.

Their  implications  are  of  extraordinary  significance,  but  they  are

understandable only when considered within the total context of the orgone-

physical  function.  This  will  be  attempted  elsewhere.  Here,  I  would  like

merely  to  point  to  the  advance  that  this  experiment  represents  in  the

preparation of bions, i.e., of viable orgone energy vesicles. To summarize:

  1.  From  1936  to  1945,  bions  were  prepared  exclusively  from  fully

organized  matter  (humus,  grass,  iron,  sand,  carbon,  etc.).  The  advance

represented by Experiment XX consists of the fact that now orgone energy

vesicles, possessing all the properties of living matter, also can be obtained

from mass-free orgone energy. We may therefore differentiate between the

production  of  bions  from  matter  already  organized  (“secondary  bion

formation”) and the organization of orgone energy vesicles from unorganized

energy (“primary bion formation”). The significance of this distinction for

biogenesis and biochemical problems will be presented elsewhere.

  2. Experiment XX also represents an advance on past bion experiments

insofar as it provides a new, irrefutable proof of the life-specific nature of

orgone energy.


    THE FLUOROPHOTOMETRIC DEMONSTRATION OF

            ORGONE ENERGY IN EARTH BION WATER


  1.  Ordinary  garden  soil  is  sieved  free  of  stones  and  lumps  of  clay.

Examined microscopically after water has been added, the sieved earth shows

no motility.

  2. Distilled water and spring water are examined fluorophotometrically. If

the  fluorophotometric  value  of  distilled  water  is  set  at  1,  then  water

containing salts, i.e., spring or tap water, has a value of 3 to 4, as meaured in

Forest Hills, New York. We take the fluorophotometric value of a fluid as the

expression  of  its  orgonotic  lumination,  i.e.,  its  “orgonotic  potency.”  The

galvanometer connected to the fluorophotometer has a scale of equidistantgraduations from 1 to 100. The orgonotic potency of the fluid measured can

then be seen as a multiple of the orgonotic potency of distilled water. The

table on page 64 lists the orgonotic potency (OP) values of a series of fluids.

  3. Next the sieved garden soil is boiled in distilled water or ordinary tap

water for one hour, or autoclaved for half an hour at 120°C. and 15 lbs.

pressure.



























Fluid (or)

 

 

Distlled water 1
Rain vater 3
Tap water 1
Sea water 8
Sand in Hy0, fitered 1
Tron flings in 50, ltered 5
Charcosl powder in Hy, itered 7
Earthin H,0, fltered s
Eerth bions in H,0, fitered 50 (average)
Gras in Hy0 (after development of bions and protosoa), ftered 13
Urine B
NaCl (physiol. sol.) 1
KCI (0.1 normal) 2
Gcl, * 25
Ha' 1
NeOH * " 2
Ringer'ssolution 15
FigCl, (disifectant) 35
Aleok (95%) 3
Gulturo broth 5
508 Broth, 50% KCI o
White sugar (saturated solution) 9
Bownsuger " 18
Maple syrup . o7
DextiMallose " a
Honey )
Orange fuico 7
Milk (pasteurized) 55
Milk (not pasteurized) 100+
Egg white 8
Tea 2

Whisky (blended) 1
  4. The water is filtered off from the boiled earth, crystal clear. We call

this fluid “bion water.” In contrast with the original colorless water, this fluid

is one or another intensity of yellow. The fluorophotometric measurement of

the orgonotic potency of the bion water is taken immediately after boiling

and filtering. The value obtained, i.e., its OP, usually varies between 30 and

60 and averages about 45. In other words, the orgonotic lumination of bion

water is, on average, forty-five times stronger than before boiling. Since thegalvanometer records the reaction of the photoelectric cell to the fluorescent

light rays, the rise in the fluorophotometric value of the water after boiling

the soil indicates a higher energy content in the fluid. This can be estimated

in micro-amperes. Understandably, however, the micro-ampere reading taken

from the galvanometer is not the real measure of orgonotic lumination. It is

simply the measure of the excitation of the photoelectric cell transformed into

electrical  energy.  As  I  have  demonstrated  in  another  context, electrical

measurements record only an extremely small fraction of the actual energy

values of orgone energy.

  5. That boiled bion water attains energy values approximating those of

organic  fluids  such  as  bouillon,  milk,  or  vitamins  seems  astounding  and

incomprehensible at first. But further consideration shows this result to be

perfectly logical.

  The  boiling  process  transforms  the  substance  of  the  soil  into  motile,

bionous  matter,  and  energy  is  freed  from  the  matter,  as  is  unequivocally

demonstrated by the internal motility, the slow rhythmic pulsations, and the

contractility of the orgone energy vesicles (in contrast to the non-motility of

the  particles  of  the  same  soil before  the  boiling  process).  But  the

transformation of the earth particles into bions and the release of the energy

inside the particles were not the only effects. In addition, this energy entered

the  water,  because  water  attracts  orgone  and  vice  versa.  The  orgonotic

potency of the water therefore rose from its own basic value to the level of

biochemical fluids of high orgonotic potency.

  6. Experience has shown that boiled bion water develops rot bacteria even

when  immediately  sealed  air-tight.  For  this  reason,  in  more  recent

experiments  bion  water  has  been  autoclaved  for  thirty  minutes  at  15  lbs.

pressure and 120°C. This procedure at first causes the OP to drop 5 to 8

points,  but  it  recovers  its  initial  level  over  the  subsequent  twenty-four  to

forty-eight hours. The auto-claved bion water is then refrigerated in sealed

ampoules or in sterilized flasks stoppered with sterile cotton plugs.AN 0K o

 

 

+ 4 + o ndppwmy o Xx 6wl
.
4 + o+ 4 e s o (wespeRoRY PO XX 6O
.
H+ o+ + 4+ + + Tusoy paNROIMY Pg XX 604
Seren o
g, % + s wdpmp ey Bo Xy 0w
w
o pase pue wezosy
e & ¥ W 18 Amwwa pwrpony P9 XX £°®d
s pap o8
+ o+ + + 18 wdpapipostpony fog XX om
sép
+ o+ o + 0w vy prax
sép
+ ++ + o+ + 09 cwzoyipasspomy Py XX 0f wf
oo poEs
o+ o+ o+ + @t ko aed 31w ool
w
e 3 + + o+ + %8 puesoy pewspony P XX 95w
o o + stepywzos 33 XX sg el
+ + + + oy woosuwpiday powenun X1 XX 8 U
+ + + + + T wdepawpamy ST XX 9w
. + B ow® sprgwmd T XX oWl
skep
+ 4+ 4 or ogsompumey sdyB0T XX 8.5
T o s wds apy ey wog mew  smpwoq @ wa
w3 omp oy e oS o s
pL ooy  sesmasvosvmmo  vmwows %06
om0

XX INFWINIIXT
R
HEE b
e

b R

‘e

++ + + ++ + + +4+ +

+
+ o+t

shep.
¢ uozosy fpasepoiny POZXX 9 udy
stop o1 ooz
‘oorong 10 oo
pnop fpaspany P ETXX P
iy
¥ wotony pApORY  PITXX 8 WK
“dop g wanony
vozcroud e wmonq
TorasjvpmIE) LXK LN
skep
5 wanos spaarons
o el oy 3
o ed T wonnG S9TXX LI
e
g umd pouq SSIXX S
seporwzond  JSIXX 3R
siop
yusnon fponpoiny PYIXX  TRK
stup y uazo
POIJO IRy ApropD  JETXX T
séop g woronas ‘pores
~ousdop fslsp L waosy JTIXX 15
gumol JTIXX 06°Pd

 

 

o worq ot

20d ‘poup ‘ponvpainy B 0rXX 1 Wd
oo

o upand Pouq 3OUXX €10
stop

¥y papoy ROTXX €19

Sy JOIXX o1
o

dwupd ppas 3 1 BT XX 1P
  THE ORGANIZATION OF BIONOUS AND PLASMATIC

  MATTER FROM THE ORGONE ENERGY IN BION WATER


Bion water, which is sterile, completely free of particles, and has a high OP,

is put into several vials and test tubes two days after autoclavation or boiling.

The vials are sealed air-tight and the test tubes stoppered with sterile cotton

plugs. We divide the tubes into three groups: Group A is placed into a three-

layered orgone accumulator, 1 cubic foot in size; Group B is left standing in

the  laboratory; Group  C  is  put  into  the  freezer  compartment  of  therefrigerator.  As  a  control  measure,  we  store  similar  containers  of  sterile

ordinary water with each group.

  Two to eight days later, Group C is removed from the freezer. Before

thawing begins, we are impressed by the fact that the yellow color of the bion

water has concentrated in the center of the ice in an opaque, brown-yellow

spot. The surrounding ice is completely bright and clear. As soon as the ice

has liquefied, whitish and brownish flakes are observed in the previously

crystal-clear fluid. Macroscopically, the flakes are approximately 1–5mm. in

length and about 1mm. in width. The fluid itself is homogeneously yellow.

  Groups A and B develop the same flakes, but much more slowly, taking

three to eight weeks. Of the control groups, neither Group B (placed in the

laboratory) nor Group C (frozen) develops flakes. However, control Group A

(the sterile ordinary water stored in the orgone accumulator) does develop

flakes over an extended period of time (several months), but they are much

less dense and more imperfectly formed than those of experimental Groups

A, B, and C.

  Microscopic  examination  of  the  flakes  always  shows  two  basic  types:

smooth,  plasmatic,  well-defined  forms,  in  which  dark  granules  and

occasional blue PA bions are scattered in varying densities; or bionous heaps

of orgone energy vesicles with an intense blue glimmer and a sharp margin

(cf. Figs. 43–47, Appendix).

  The preparations, kept sterile, show, after a few days, and especially after

two to three weeks, an increase in the number of flakes. Microscopically, it is

possible  to  establish  that  the  flakes  grow  individually  through  an

accumulation  of  substance  and  that  they  also  divide.  The  thread-like,

winding, serpentine, bright flakes are transformed in the course of weeks into

strongly radiating bionous heaps.

  Culture  experiment:  To  obtain  a  clearer  and  more  demonstrable

understanding of this process of growth and multiplication, some flakes are

placed, under sterile conditions, in clear, sterile bion water. After one or twoweeks, a culture formation can be clearly observed in the samples. The flakes

have become more dense. In accordance with our previous experience, the

OP  of  the  culture  fluid  stays  at  approximately  the  same  level,  or  even

increases.

  If we examine the preparations under the microscope at regular intervals

(about once a week for several months), we can see quite gradual biophysical

changes in the flakes. In some, there appear spherical bions measuring 2–3

microns in diameter, with a margin and a strong blue glimmer. Gradually,

they stretch out until they eventually assume the following bean shape:





Under  favorable  conditions,  i.e.,  when  no  premature  T-disintegration  has

occurred  in  the  preparations,  these  “bean  forms”  develop  into  contractile

protozoa which move in a rapid, jerky manner. For the most part the plasm of

these protozoa has a granular and striated structure, though in a few instances

it is smooth, without structure. Pure cultures of protozoa can also be obtained

by inoculating the supernatant fluid without disturbing the flakes which lie at

the bottom. The protozoa multiply in the new culture and without difficulty

from culture to culture.


        OBSERVATIONS AND TESTS TO DETERMINE THE

            BIOLOGICAL NATURE OF ORGONE FLAKES


  1. The  thawed-out,  flaky  bion  water  preparation  XX  represents  an

unresolvable colloid: If crystal-clear, yellow bion water of high orgonotic

potency is evaporated, a golden yellow, smooth, opaque coating forms on the

bottom of the vessel. Scraped off, this coating yields a powder consisting of

small,  yellow-to-brown  crystals,  which  we  have  named  “orgontin.”  These

crystals  cannot  be  dissolved  again  in  either  ordinary  water  or  in  water

containing a high orgone content. They merely swell and react precisely like

flakes obtained by the melting of frozen bion water. They, too, exhibit thephenomena of growth, multiplication, and protozoal formation.

  2. Microscopic observation of organization: The flakes grow in length

and width; bion heaps accumulate more bions from the fluid. Larger flakes

sprout smaller ones and the small ones grow larger. The bions frequently

arrange themselves in groups. As the flakes grow larger, they become darker,

showing a brown to black color.

  3. Orgonotic attraction and sterilizing effect: The orgone flakes react like

all other bionous matter investigated so far. In the vicinity of rot bacteria, the

flakes either kill the bacteria or, at least paralyze them.

  4. T-degeneration and putrefaction: Like all organic or living substance,

the  orgone  flakes  degenerate  by  putrefaction  and  disintegrate  into  the  T-

bodies already familiar to us. Protozoa form more slowly and with greater

difficulty  in  strongly  degenerated  preparations  than  in  sterile  ones.

Degenerated preparations can, however, be freed of T-bacilli and rot bacteria

again and again by repeated freezing. This seems to promote the capacity for

the organization of motile protozoa.

  5. Flakes that are dried and crushed into small particles burn in a flame to

a black, coal-like substance, thus reacting like living protoplasm and non-

living  organic  carbon  compounds.  Even  if  the  flakes  are  not  burned,  the

identical black carbon substance that has proven to be combustible in the

flame develops, probably through oxidation.

  6. Sugar content: Bion water with a high orgonotic potency tastes sweet.

Burning flakes give off an odor like that of caramel. (It has not yet been

possible to conduct an exact biochemical analysis, but one is planned.)

  7. All containers that have had contact for a considerable length of time

with bion water or bion earth feel fatty to the touch.

  8. Bion water reacts to weakening influences like autoclavation in the

same way a living organism would react, namely, with a falling-off of OP,

which is regained only gradually.

  9. Contractility of mass-free orgone in bion water: There can be only oneplausible  explanation  for  the  appearance  of  a  concentrated,  brown-yellow

spot in the center of the crystal-clear ice. Mass-free orgone energy reacts in

freezing water exactly as does orgone energy in a freezing living organism: it

contracts and withdraws from the point where the freezing occurs. Mass-free

orgone  energy  is  therefore  capable  of  contraction.  In  the  process  of

contraction, matter is created, evidently through condensation. This process

needs intensive study.

  10. The orgone flakes develop into protozoa more rapidly when T-bacilli

are added to the preparation. The appearance of plasmatic spindle forms of

coarse structure, similar to the Ca III formations, can then be observed (cf.

Chapter VI).


    STAGES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTOZOA IN

            STERILE, PARTICLE-FREE, BION WATER


  1.  After  the  bion  water  solution  thaws,  granulated  plasmatic  flakes  of

typically organic form appear.

  2. Many of the individual granulae expand and develop into spherical

orgone energy vesicles with an intense blue glimmer. The majority of these

groups of bions merge into larger formations by association or confluence.

  3. In a matter of weeks, the spherical bions become bean-shaped, but are

not yet motile.

  4.  These  bean-shaped  formations  then  become  motile  in  two  different

ways:  At  3000–5000x,  the  content  of  the  energy  vesicles  reveals  delicate

movements of expansion and contraction; the formations stretch more and

more, their membranes soften, and they begin to move about. The forms that

have  become  markedly  elongated  develop  serpentine,  corkscrew-like

movements. The accompanying sketches are drawn from life as seen with a

magnification of approximately 240x.  5. When bion water fluid containing protozoa is inoculated with sterile

bion water, the protozoa multiply and can be reinoculated ad infinitum. To

these protozoa I have given the name orgonomia.


                          CONTROL EXPERIMENTS


  1. The freezing of ordinary, non-sterile spring water or distilled water

yields neither flakes nor protozoa. The organization of plasmatic matter must

therefore be ascribed exclusively to the high orgone content as measured by

the fluorophotometer.

  2.  When  bion  water  of  approximately  40–50  OP  is  distilled,  a  small

number  of  flakes  can  be  observed immediately  after  cooling  and  a  large

number after actual freezing. This is additional confirmation of the preceding

statement.

  3. Since sea water is extraordinarily rich in orgone, it is not surprising that

it also yields flakes and protozoal growth after filtration and autoclavation.

Nevertheless, there is some slight mystery here. Sea water taken at Jones

Beach, on the Atlantic coast of Long Island, New York, and measured one

hour after extraction, was only approximately 8–10 OP. Earth bion water

with so low an OP content yields no, or at best, deficient, bionous growth,

and it is therefore difficult to explain why the low OP of sea water makes no

difference. The phenomenon is undoubtedly important; unfortunately it is not

possible to understand everything at once.

  4. Water from autoclaved grass also yields flakes after freezing which

multiply and grow.


                        GENERAL CONCLUSIONS


  1. Humus contains orgone energy. The transformation of humus in water

into earth bions causes a rise in the orgonotic potency of the water from 4 to

between 30 and 70 (with the OP of distilled water set at 1).

  2. Orgone energy in high concentration colors liquids yellow.  3.  Orgone  energy  homogeneously  distributed  in  a  fluid  at  room

temperature contracts when chilled or frozen to form a brownish yellow core

in the ice.

  4. Protoplasmic flakes, i.e., matter, develop from concentrated mass-free

orgone.

  5. Fluid with a high orgonotic potency develops protozoa by way of the

formation of orgone energy vesicles.

  6. The formation of plasmatic matter from concentrated orgone energy

indicates  a  general  process  by  which  matter  originates.  Thus,  we  must

consider orgone energy to be the primordial cosmic energy.

  7. On the basis of our findings in Experiment XX, the development of

living plasma on our planet preceded the organization of coal substance and

carbohydrates.  Coal  is  a  product  of  the  disintegration  of  living  matter.

Biochemical molecules did not exist prior to the development of plasmatic

substance, but appeared as one of the mechanical constitutents in the process

of plasmatic organization.                                        CHAPTER III


          The Actual Discovery of Orgone Energy




      1. ABSURDITIES OF THE AIR-GERM THEORY


Until now, we have had to defend ourselves against an objection, or to be

more accurate, a slogan, to the effect that bions are a “quite ordinary infection

from the air.” I have used three arguments against this claim:


  1. The bion structures can be seen forming immediately after the preparation is made, whereas

    in the incubator several hours are required for air infection to develop.

  2. Bion culture experiments are successful under sealed, air-tight, conditions.

  3. In the bion cultures, certain forms not previously identified are found, e.g., the SAPA bions.


  In order to discuss the manifold questions raised by the cultivation of

bions, we must first refute the objection of air infection and demonstrate the

absurdity  of  trying  to  apply  this  argument  today  either  experimentally  or

theoretically. In the struggle for scientific progress, new facts are less of an

obstacle than obsolete concepts.

  The formations that I refer to as bions (PA and T) and bion cultures are

not present in cultures of air germs. This claim can easily be substantiated by

the following series of experiments:

  a) Dirt is scraped from the palm of the hand with a sterile spatula and put

into  bouillon.  After  twenty-four  hours  in  the  incubator,  a flocculent

cloudiness appears which, however, disappears in the course of a few days or

weeks.  It  is  replaced  by  a  thin  membrane  over  the  surface  and  a  thick

precipitate at the bottom. Under the microscope, we see tiny cocci, round to

oval in form, with a blackish glimmer, and some bacilli having a serpentine

movement, but no contractile amoeboids of the PA type, no nucleated cellforms, and (in the fresh preparation) no T-bacilli.

  b) We put a few drops of ordinary tap water into bouillon. It frequently

takes several days for cloudiness to develop (and sometimes culture growth

does not take place at all). Microscopically, the same types of round, small

cocci and bacilli can be seen.

  c) We let a small bowl of water stand for half an hour in the open air by

the side of a dusty road and then inoculate a sample of it on bouillon. Culture

growth may not appear. If it does, the turbidity gives way, after a few days or

weeks, to a membrane on the surface and a dense flocculent sediment at the

bottom. Such culture growth as does occur may take two to three days to

develop, appearing as small cocci and sausage-shaped bacteria with a slow,

serpentine movement. There are no formations of the type of our cultures

(packet amoebae and T-bacilli).

  d)  We  let  an  open  test  tube  containing  bouillon  stand  vertical  in  our

laboratory for half an hour, and then incubate it for twenty-four hours. By the

end of this time cloudiness has developed, only to dissipate and eventually be

replaced by a membrane over the surface and a flocculent sediment at the

bottom. Once again we find the tiny cocci already familiar to us, plus rows of

streptococcal forms and occasional club-shaped formations. Also seen are the

previously mentioned sausage-shaped bacilli having a serpentine movement.

There is no sign of our bion types.

  e) We let a sterile agar culture stand open in our laboratory for half an

hour. After twenty-four hours in the incubator, a growth consisting of typical,

small, non-contractile heaps of vesicles has developed. Occasionally, bacilli

are also present. But there are none of our bion types. If the agar plate is left

open no longer than is necessary for inoculation, we should be convinced that

it is extraordinarily difficult to bring about an air infection.

  f) We conduct a variation of the control experiment by collecting dust

from the surface of a cupboard or from an open oven with a spatula and

putting it into our standard solution of bouillon and 0.1n KCl, thus exposingit to the same conditions as those of the bion culture. The findings, again, are

familiar.  A  growth  usually  appears  after  twenty-four  hours;  sometimes,

however, only after forty-eight or seventy-two hours. We find no bions, just

elongated, thread-like bacteria, spirilla and spirochete-like forms, as well as

small, non-contractile, rapidly moving cocci. Inoculated on agar, the culture

yields, as a rule, only bacillary forms with a serpentine movement. Like all

other non-sterile cultures, this culture forms a membrane and after a certain

time flocculates. When egg medium is used, massive dust infection occurs,

usually mold.

  These control experiments on the problem of air infection can be done

repeatedly, in any variety of ways. They inevitably yield two facts:


  1. Air contains only certain forms of larger bacilli and simple cocci.

  2. Bions cannot be cultivated directly from the air no matter what the culture—bouillon, agar,

    or egg media.


  The control experiments reinforce a third fact: The case for the danger of

air infection has been greatly overstated by those who use it as an argument

against the idea of bionous organization of nonliving matter.

  Having made doubly certain that our bion cultures have nothing to do

with “air germs,” we would now like to undertake a critical investigation of

the  concept  of  “air  germs”  itself.  Let  us  summarize  the  conclusions  that

follow from the claim that protozoal organisms cannot originate from any

other source but germs that are present in the air:

  1. For each and every kind of protozoal and bacterial organism there is a

specific corresponding germ.  In  other  words,  there  are  as  many  types  of

germs as there are micro-organisms, which is to say, millions of types. Such a

claim is contradicted by the fact that the cultivation of air bacteria yields only

a  minimal  fraction  of  the  forms  actually  known  to  pathology.  This

discrepancy  alone  raises  a  number  of  questions  that  would  need  direct

answers  from  the  proponents  of  the  air-germ  theory.  For  instance,  havecholera vibrios, plague bacilli, or syphilis spirochetes ever been cultivated

directly  from  the  air?  The  truth  is  that  these  forms  have  hitherto  been

cultivated only from animal tissue and a theory of their origin has merely

been tacked on. As long as there exist forms of microbes, and now also bions,

that cannot be cultivated directly from the air, the hypothesis of air infection

will not be valid.

  2. Refutation of the metaphysical air-germ theory: The bion experiment,

which has been filmed, established the fact that single-celled organisms, such

as protozoa, evolve by natural organization from the vesicular disintegration

of moss. The metaphysical theory of sporogenesis, on the other hand, claims

that protozoa originate from germs omnipresent in the air which develop in

places favorable to their growth. As yet, not one of its proponents has been

able to authenticate this germ theory, and its fundamental inaccuracy can be

demonstrated by the following experiment.

  If the protozoa originate from germs attached to moss and hay and can be

made to form in infusions after a few days, the following procedure should

demonstrate that fact. Non-sterile dried hay is washed in ordinary water, by

either passing the water through a filter containing the hay, or by swishing a

piece of hay through the water a few times with pincers, thereby preventing

the smallest particle from getting into the water. Thus “contaminated,” the

water shows no protozoal growth, nor any trace of it. On the other hand, an

infusion of hay or moss exhibits the progressive swelling of the tissue and all

of  the  other  stages  in  the  evolution  of  protozoa,  from  the  first  vesicular

disintegration, occurring along the margins, to the formations that grow out

of the tissue and disengage as completely formed protozoa.

  If the adherents of the air-germ theory insist upon its authenticity, they

must take the trouble to demonstrate experimentally, first, that the spores

from which the protozoa are supposed to evolve can be isolated by stripping

them off from the matter to which they are supposed to be attached, and

second, that they are capable of developing into protozoa.  But even if we assume for a moment that all known forms of microbes,

and  the  new  bion  forms,  could  indeed  be  found  in  the  air,  would  the

expression “air germs” represent a scientific explanation for the origin of

these forms? We could very well reply: True, these forms are present in the

air, but where did they come from?

  If this question is thought over carefully, the scientific worthlessness of

the  air-germ  theory  will  have  to  be  admitted.  If  our  claim  that  micro-

organisms  form  themselves  from  inorganic  material  and  disintegrating

organic substances is correct, then we have a valid explanation for the origin

of air germs. There can be nothing else in the air except inorganic and dead

organic substances. Furthermore, at most only the spores of a few primitive

organisms have been found; no one has ever seen the germ or spore of an

amoeba or of a paramecium. The slogans that are substituted for the actual

experience of seeing, and propounded as absolute theological theses, e.g.,

omne vivum ex vivo and omnis cellula ex cellula, cannot be regarded, in the

context  of  these  considerations,  as  serious  scientific  statements;  they  are

merely an emotional protection against very hard facts.

  Now that we have demonstrated the absurdity of the air-germ theory as it

dominates medical thinking today, we would like to show just how damaging

it is to the understanding of a large number of vastly important phenomena in

medicine,  e.g.,  how  medicine,  by  its  dismissal  of  the  concept  of  natural

organization, robs itself of every possibility to observe simple and obvious

facts, to investigate them in detail, and to use them in a practical way.

  1. It is common medical knowledge that living organisms are constantly

being formed in the animal organism, e.g., the red and white corpuscles in the

bone marrow and the lymphatic system, and the egg and sperm cells in the

epithelia of the gonads. The discrepancy between this acknowledged fact and

the  germ  theory  has  not  so  far,  strangely  enough,  disturbed  the  scientific

world in the least. Erythroblasts form, and from them erythrocytes develop;

the female ova form in the follicles of the ovary, the sperm cells, from thespermatogonia. The transitional forms evolve from the epithelia of the organs

in  question. One  cell  form  is  transformed  into  another  fundamentally

different form. This process occurs in cancer, and is one of the central factors

of  the  entire  cancer  problem.  The  formation  of  biologically  independent

entities from biological organisms of a different kind goes on continuously

within the body. But precisely this process must remain incomprehensible

without acknowledging the transformation of organic tissue into independent

protozoal formations.

  2. There are various kinds of micro-organisms on the mucous membranes

and orifices of the human body. Intestinal bacteria, for instance, presumably

reach the alimentary canal from some infection external to the body. But why

the bacterium coli is to be found only in the colon, and not, say, on the

mucous  membrane  of  the  throat  as  well,  remains  a  mystery.  Why

pneumococci  find  their  way  from  the  air  to  the  lungs  but  not  into  the

alimentary tract is equally mysterious. Furthermore, if, in fact, thousands of

varieties of deadly bacteria are present in the air and consequently on the

mucous membranes, it is completely unfathomable that the human species did

not become extinct a long time ago. The magic formula used for answering

this  particular  puzzle  is  the  notorious  “disposition.”  But  the  concept  of

“disposition”  reveals  precisely  what  the  air-germ  theory  conceals.  For

instance,  it  is  incomprehensible  how  hundreds  of  thousands  of  cultivable

micro-organisms fatal to mice are found in cancer tissue freshly extracted

from the inside of a bone. How did they get into the bone? The information

that they “came in from the air and nested in the mucous membranes” and

then “traveled in the bloodstream from there into the bones” can hardly be

taken  seriously,  because  the  question  it  fails  to  answer  is,  why  the  air

bacteria,  in  their  complex  wanderings,  chose  to  settle  precisely  in  the

cancerous  bone,  and  why  all  kinds  of  infectious  diseases  were  not  set  in

motion along all the pathways of the human body. The fact that there are

pathogenic organisms in the throat that are harmful only at certain times andfor  certain  persons  is  a  marvel  that  cannot  be  adequately  explained  by

“disposition”  or  “latent  virulence,”  because  these  are  merely  words.  The

important issue is to establish exactly what is going on within the organism

that  makes  it  possible  for  the  micro-organisms  to  exercise  their  effect  at

certain times and not at others.

  3.  In  the  literature  on  micro-organisms,  the  frequent  repetition  of  the

statement  that  certain  organisms  flourish  only  in  certain  culture  media  is

striking. The fact is, it is no less than mystical to assume that the amoeba

germs,  which,  according  to  theory  are  everywhere  in  the  air,  seek,  of  all

places, muddy pools of stagnant water and the underside of plant leaves, or in

other cases are unable to develop during the spring in fresh moss, whereas

they appear in large numbers on the autumn moss. It is difficult to understand

how  one  can  fail  to  notice  the  illogicalness,  inconsistency,  and  factual

inaccuracy of such thinking.

  4. In the context of these considerations, we may venture on a problem

likely to arouse all kinds of passions. According to the air-germ theory, the

bacillus that causes cholera or bubonic plague is buzzing around in the air all

the time but does not appear under normal conditions of careful hygiene. It

zooms in from the air to cause epidemics—in which hundreds of thousands

of human lives may be lost—in time of war, or in those densely populated

areas where hygienic precautions and habits are poor. But are we really to

believe that in these epidemics the biological condition of people exposed to

the  chronically  poor  hygienic  environment,  or  to  the  horrors  of  extended

warfare, plays no part at all? Is it really possible that all the responsibility

must go to the bacillus, none to the living organism in which it wreaks its

devastations? What reason is there for ascribing so much importance to the

bacterium and so little to the human organism? I am afraid the “air germ” is a

good deal easier to fight than the biopathies! Without wishing to offer here an

answer to all the questions raised, I would nevertheless like to stress that the

biopathic condition of the victims of cholera and bubonic plague deservesmuch more attention than the respective bacterium, about whose origins there

is no clarity even today.

  To summarize: Not only is the air-germ theory false and incapable of

providing enlightenment about central phenomena of biology and pathology;

it actually hinders a factual comprehension of the mechanisms of disease. It

has become a dogma which, like all dogmas, eschews thinking and inquiry.

We can now see how much the bion theory and the facts on which it is based

contribute to the clarification of those problems not explained by the air-germ

theory.

  Let us now turn our attention to a specific bion culture in which the actual

discovery of orgone energy was made.


    2. THE CULTURES OF RADIATING SAND-PACKET

                                  BIONS (SAPA)


In order to thoroughly refute the theory of air infection, I started, as early as

1936,  to  autoclave  bion  preparations  for  half  an  hour  at  120°C.  By  this

procedure, disintegration into vesicles turned out to be more complete than

when I simply used the process of swelling. The blue bions appeared more

rapidly and the biological stain reaction (Gram, carbol fuchsin) more intense.

In May 1937, I began to heat coal and earth crystals to incandescence in the

Bunsen flame before introducing them into the culture medium that induces

swelling. This heating process accelerated the formation of bions still further.

Now the bionous disintegration of matter could be carried out in the space of

just a few minutes, with the certainty of complete sterility. I no longer needed

to wait for days and weeks for the process of swelling at room temperature to

yield bions. To bring about the swelling of the substances, I used caustic

potash and potassium chloride solution. Over the course of two years (1937–

1939), experiment after experiment confirmed the vesicular disintegration of

                                                                                      1
swelling matter and the organization of bacteria and cells from the bions.

  In  January  1939,  one  of  my  assistants  was  demonstrating  theincandescence experiment to a visitor in the laboratory in Oslo. By mistake,

she  took  the  wrong  container  from  the  sterilizer  and  instead  of  earth  she

heated ocean sand to incandescence. After two days a culture had started to

form in the bouillon–potassium chloride solution which, when inoculated on

egg medium and agar, yielded a yellow growth. Under the microscope this

new kind of culture appeared as large, scarcely motile, packets of energy

vesicles glimmering with an intense blue. The culture was “pure”; i.e., it

consisted  of  only one  kind  of  formation.  At  a  magnification  of  400x,  its

formations looked like the sarcinae occasionally found in water. Examination

at magnifications of 2000x and 4000x showed strongly refracting formations

consisting of packets of six to ten vesicles between 10 and 15 microns in size.

We repeated the experiment eight times over the course of a few months, and

five times we obtained the same formations (cf. Figs. 48a and b, Appendix).

  These  bions  received  the  designation  SAPA  (sand packet).  They

possessed properties of extreme interest.

  The effect of the SAPA bions on rot bacteria, protozoa, and T-bacilli was

much more powerful than that of other bions. Brought together with cancer

cells, they killed or paralyzed the cells even at a distance of approximately 10

microns. At this proximity to SAPA bions, the amoeboid cancer cells would

remain rooted on one spot as though paralyzed; then they would spin around

frantically and, finally, become motionless. This process was recorded on

film.

  For four weeks, I examined the SAPA bions every day for several hours.

After  a  few  days,  my  eyes  began  to  smart  whenever  I  looked  into  the

microscope  for  any  length  of  time.  In  order  to  isolate  the  basis  of  this

problem, I began to use a monocular tube. Now it was only the eye I used for

looking through the microscope that hurt. However, after a while, a violent

conjunctivitis developed in both eyes; they became very sensitive to light,

and I was obliged to see an ophthalmologist. To him, my account seemed

“fantastic.” He treated me, prescribed dark glasses, and forbade microscopicwork for a few weeks. My eyes improved, but by this time I knew that I was

dealing with a radiation phenomenon. Several months before this event, the

Dutch physicist Bon had written to ask me whether I had ever noticed any

radiation in bions. I had replied in the negative. For many years, Bon had

been quarreling with his colleagues because of his insistence that life is a

manifestation of radiation. I was directly confronted with this fact, and did

not know how I should approach it. Of course I had been trained in the basic

theoretical problems of physics, but I had never had any practical experience

with  radiation.  This  created  great  difficulty,  but  at  the  same  time  had  its

advantages. The radiation I had discovered turned out to be new; it possessed

highly unique properties. Traditional methods of radiation research were to

yield negative results. Orgone radiation required the development of special,

hitherto unknown, methods and research procedures that could be worked out

only gradually, step by step, with observations over a long period of time.

Routine, schematic methods failed.

  I first tried a very primitive method of testing the cultures for radiation by

placing the test tubes against the palm of my left hand. Each time, I thought I

felt a fine prickling, but was not sure of the sensation.

  Then I placed a quartz slide, on which I had put a small quantity of SAPA

culture in potassium chloride solution, on the skin and let it stand for about

ten minutes. Where the culture lay (separated from the skin by the quartz

slide),  an  anemic  spot  with  hyperemic  margin  developed.  I  repeated  this

experiment  with  all  my  students,  whose  vegetative  reactions  were  well

known to me. Those who were vegetatively very alive always gave a positive

result.  The  emotionally  weaker  ones  showed  little  or  no  reaction.  These

results were an indication of something, but were still far from being clearly

understandable.

  I sought help from the radium physicist of the Cancer Hospital in Oslo,

Dr. Moxnes. He tested one of the culture tubes with the radium electroscope.

It gave no reaction. The physicist declared that there was “no radiation.”Since his electroscope was equipped for radium only, I objected that the only

conclusion that could be fairly drawn from the test was that there was no

radium activity, not that there was no radiation of any kind. There could be

no  doubt  about  the  skin  reaction,  and  I  was  puzzled  about  the  kind  of

radiation with which I was dealing. The speed of the skin reaction suggested

enormous  energies.  X-ray  and  radium  radiation  take  several  days  after

exposure to produce reddening of the skin, but the SAPA cultures reddened

the skin within a few minutes. As will become evident later, there was in fact

a completely logical reason for the negative reaction of the electroscope.

  The following events solved the riddle bit by bit:

  After two more weeks, the palm of my left hand was highly inflamed and

very  painful.  There  could  be  no  further  doubt  that  the  cultures  were

exercising a biological effect.

  As time went by, it struck me that the air in the room where the cultures

were kept was becoming very “heavy” and causing headaches whenever we

closed the windows, if only for an hour.

  One day, during the course of an experimental procedure, I noticed that

all metal objects, such as scissors, pincers, needles, etc., had become highly

magnetic. This phenomenon, so obvious today, was incomprehensible to me.

I had never before observed it and was not prepared for it. But since the

electroscope of the Oslo physicist had shown no reaction, I was prepared for

surprises.

  I experimented with photographic plates in various ways: In a dark room I

placed culture preparations on uncovered plates, on plates in plateholders, on

plates  wholly  or  partly  covered  with  lead,  and,  in  addition,  for  control

purposes,  I  put  some  plates  without  cultures  in  the  same  room.  To  my

amazement, all  the  plates  became  fogged.  On  some  plates,  there  was  a

blackening corresponding to the glued cracks in the wooden plateholders; on

others,  I  saw  marked  blackening  where  the  plate  had  not  been  directly

affected by the culture but where the lead covering was pervious. To mysurprise, the control plates in the same room were also fogged. I could not

understand it. It seemed as if the energy was active not just around the edges

of  the  plateholder  and  through  its  joints; the  radiation  seemed  to  be

omnipresent.  However,  it  was  also  possible  that  there  had  been  some

experimental oversight.

  Over the course of two decades of clinical and experimental work, I had

learned  not  to  ignore  such  seemingly  incidental  ideas  as  “energy  present

everywhere.” I value these flashes of insight, which if combined with strict,

objective controls, lead to the ultimate goal. My surmise turned out to be

correct: orgone radiation is indeed present everywhere. But at the time this

idea had no concrete meaning.

  The experiments with the photographic plates seemed to have reached a

dead end. If the effect was omnipresent, the phenomena could not be isolated

and controlled. Since all objects were exposed to the radiation, there could be

                                                                                2
no possibility of a comparison with some object not influenced by it.

  I  transferred  the  cultures  to  dark  basement  rooms  and  continued  my

observations there. To intensify the effect, I prepared dozens of cultures. The

observations made in the dark had something uncanny about them. Once my

eyes had become accustomed to the darkness, the room appeared not black

but grayish blue. I saw fog-like vapors, streaks of blue light, and dots darting

about. Light of a deep violet color seemed to come from the walls and the

objects around the room. Looked at through a magnifying glass, these light

impressions intensified and the individual streaks and dots grew larger. Dark

glasses weakened the impressions. But when I closed my eyes, the blue light

impressions continued. That was disconcerting. I did not know at this point

that orgone energy radiation irritates the optic nerves in a particular way and

generates after-images.

  After only one or two hours in the basement, my eyes would hurt and be

inflamed.  One  evening,  however,  I  spent  five  consecutive  hours  in  the

basement room. After two hours, I began to see quite distinctly a radiationfrom the palm of my hand, the sleeve of my shirt, and (looking in the mirror)

the hair on my head. Gradually, the blue glimmer surrounded my body and

objects in the room like a hazy, slow-moving, gray-blue luminous vapor. I

admit I felt frightened. I telephoned Dr. Bon in Holland that night and told

him  of  the  experience.  He  warned  me  to  take  precautions.  But  since  the

radiation seemed to be present “everywhere” and to pervade everything, I did

not know how I could protect myself.

  I had our friend Dr. Havrevold participate in the dark-room observations.

Though completely  uninformed,  he  confirmed  the  majority  of  my

observations. Over the next few months I subjected one person after another

to the skin test and to the observation in the dark. The descriptions provided

by the subjects were so completely in agreement that no possible doubt could

remain about the existence of the radiation. The most difficult task was that

of isolating  the  objective  phenomena  in  the  room  from  the  subjective

sensations in the eye. As the investigations proceeded, however, a variety of

techniques for making this distinction evolved. For instance, I had subjects

reach for luminous objects in the dark or determine where my arm was at a

given time. I had them turn their eyes away from the light impression until its

after-image had disappeared, then try to find the light impression again. The

radiation  was  very  irritating  to  the  optic  nerve.  A  businessman  who  had

obtained a piece of equipment for me and who served once as a subject said:

“I feel as if I’ve been staring into the sun for a long time.”

  This comment by a layman provided much food for thought. It seemed

especially relevant to the conjunctivitis that many of the subjects developed.

One day the idea “sun energy” suddenly occurred to me, providing a simple

solution which sounded absurd only at first: SAPA bions had originated from

ocean sand. But ocean sand is nothing more than solidified solar energy. The

incandescing and swelling of the sand had released this energy once again

from its material state.

  I overcame the emotional reluctance I felt to accepting such a conclusion.If the radiation in question were directly connected with solar energy, then

many phenomena could be easily explained; e.g., the irritation of the eyes,

the conjunctivitis, the rapid reddening of the skin and its subsequent tanning.

(I had conducted the experiments during the winter and early spring of 1939,

had not been exposed to the sun, yet had a deep tan over my entire body.) I

felt extremely vigorous, as “strong as a bear,” and vegetatively alive in every

respect.  Gradually,  the  fear  of  dangerous  effects  from  the  radiation

disappeared and I began to work with it without any further worry about

protective measures.

  There  was  no  doubt  of  the  existence  of  an  energy  possessing

extraordinarily high biological activity. It remained only to discover what its

nature was and how it could be measured. One of my colleagues told an

assistant at the Bohr Institute in Copenhagen about the SAPA bions. This

person  considered  the  notion  of  the  production  of  bions  from  sand  so

“fantastic” that I decided not to expose my new radiation discovery to the

danger of a biased investigation, prejudiced from the start by fundamental

disbelief.

  Furthermore, there was nothing I could really offer as starting points for

the qualitative and quantitative determination of the radiation, apart from the

biological  effects  and  subjective  sensations.  The  negative  reaction  of  the

cultures with the Oslo physicist’s electroscope was another warning to me

that  caution  was  advisable.  Moreover,  the  recent  press  campaign  of  Oslo

pathologists  and  psychiatrists  against  my  orgasm  and  bion  research  had

destroyed any possibility of friendly cooperation. So, at first, there seemed to

be no avenue to a quantitative investigation. Everything would have to be left

to the spontaneous development of the facts and to chance. This “chance”

soon appeared.

  I had begun reproducing well-known electroscopic phenomena obtained

from  friction  between  various  materials.  One  day  I  started  to  set  up  an

electroscope experiment involving high voltage. For insulation, I put on apair of rubber gloves kept in a glass cabinet in my laboratory. When I brought

my hands near the electroscope, there was a strong deflection of the leaf. It

curled upward, shifted sideways toward the glass wall of the electroscope,

and stuck to it. I knew of course that insulators can be “charged.” What was

really astounding was the sideways deflection of the leaf and its tenacious

adhesion to the glass wall, i.e., the fact that non-magnetic aluminum was

sticking  to  glass,  which  was  an  insulator  and  had  not  been  subjected  to

friction. I had not rubbed the insulator gloves. So where did the effect come

from? Then I realized that the gloves had been lying near a number of SAPA

cultures. To confirm this possibility, I placed one rubber glove in a shaded

place in the open air and the other in a metal box containing bion cultures.

Then I exchanged and tested them at various intervals. The rubber glove that

had been exposed to the open air for about fifteen minutes did not influence

the electroscope; whereas the previously neutral glove, placed for half an

hour with the cultures, did in fact show a strong electroscopic reaction. The

same result was achieved on several consecutive evenings.

  Lengths of hard rubber, rubber gloves, paper, cotton wool, cellulose, etc.,

absorbed energy from the cultures and caused the leaf of the electroscope to

curl without the application of any friction. Humidity, shade combined with a

strong breeze, or touching the substances with the hands for several minutes

caused the effect to disappear.

  Thus a start had been made toward a qualitative understanding of the

radiation.  It  was  an  indisputable  fact  that  the  cultures  were  charging  the

rubber and other organic substances; I was able to charge them by bringing

them into contact with the cultures and to discharge them by exposing them

to fresh air or putting them in water.

  The situation became more complex when I acquired a new pair of rubber

gloves and found that they, too, caused a reaction of the electroscope, without

having been exposed to the cultures or previously rubbed. It was therefore

clear  that  the  energy  not  only  was  in  the  cultures  but  also  was  present“elsewhere”! This discovery spoiled the unequivocal nature of the culture

reaction, but seemed important. Again, I had the feeling that I had had during

the  experiments  on  the  photographic  plates: the  radiation  is  present

everywhere.

  It was then that I remembered the statement of my experimental subject:

“I feel as if I’ve been staring into the sun for a long time.” The radiation must

be related to solar energy. If the radiation is present everywhere, it can come

only from the sun. I placed a pair of uncharged gloves in the bright sunlight.

After an exposure of from five to fifteen minutes to sunlight, without prior

friction, the rubber gloves elicited a strong reaction from the aluminum leaf

of the electroscope. I now had double proof of the solar origin of the energy

—first, because the heating experiment had released solar energy from the

sand; second, because solar radiation had charged the insulators. Protracted

irradiation of insulators with an ultraviolet lamp produced the same effect.

  But if bions and the sun emit the energy in question, then it must also be

present in the living organism. I placed uncharged rubber gloves directly on

the abdomen of a vegetatively alive patient, carefully avoiding friction. The

result was positive. Five to fifteen minutes after contact with the abdominal

skin, the gloves registered a strong reaction at the electroscope. I repeated this

experiment  with  several  students  and  patients.  The  result  was  always

positive. With people who were vegetatively sluggish or whose exhalation

was shallow, the reaction was weaker. The results improved if the breathing

                3
was deepened.

  Now  I  was  able  to  understand  several  previously  incomprehensible

phenomena. Obviously, I was dealing with an unknown energy possessing a

specific biological activity. It originates from matter heated to incandescence

and made to swell. It is presumably released through the decomposition and

disintegration of matter (as with radiating bions). Furthermore, it is radiated

into the atmosphere by the sun and is therefore present everywhere. This

clarified the apparent contradiction that the electroscope reacted not only tothe rubber charged by the SAPA bions but also to the rubber gloves that had

not been near the culture.

  The newly discovered energy is found also in the living organism, which

absorbs the energy from the atmosphere and directly from the sun.

  It was the same energy with which my blue bions, from any source, killed

bacilli and cancer cells. The only difference was that in bions the energy was

contained within the small blue vesicles.

  The  energy  was  named  “orgone,”  in  reference  to  the  history  of  its

discovery  through  the  study  of  the  orgasm  and  to  its  biological  effect  of

charging substances of organic origin.

  Now I was able to understand the blue-gray vapors that I had seen in the

dark around my head, hands, and white coat: organic matter absorbs orgone

energy and retains it.

  The electroscope of the Oslo physicist had not reacted to the cultures

because orgone energy can influence an electroscope only indirectly, by way

of charged insulators.


    3. VISUALIZATION OF ATMOSPHERIC ORGONE

                                      ENERGY


It  was  necessary  to  study  the  radiation  of  SAPA  bions  by  the  least

complicated means. For this purpose, an enclosed space had to be constructed

that would contain and isolate the radiation emanating from the bions and

prevent its rapid diffusion into the surroundings. Organic matter could not be

used because it absorbs radiation. However, on the basis of my observations,

I was certain that metal would reflect the radiation and hold it within the

enclosed space. But the radiation could also penetrate the metal and disperse

outward. To prevent this, the apparatus had to be walled with metal on the

inside and with organic matter on the outside. The radiation generated by the

cultures on the inside would be reflected by the inner metal walls, while the

outer surface of organic matter (cotton and wood) would prevent, or at leastreduce, the transmitting of the radiation by the metal to the outside. The front

wall of the apparatus was to have an opening fitted with an eyepiece to enable

the radiation to be observed from the outside.

  The apparatus was constructed, and a dozen or so culture preparations

were put into it. For magnification, I adapted a device used for viewing film,

assuming that the rays would strike the cellulose disk of the viewer and thus

become visible on it. The experiment was successful. I was able to distinctly

observe  blue  moving  vapors  and  bright,  yellow-white  streaks  and  dots  of

light.  The  phenomena  were  confirmed  by  several  persons  who  served  as

subjects in repetitions of the experiment. The results now seemed conclusive

enough for publication. But just at this point a completely incomprehensible

finding  intruded.  I  had  expected  that  after  having  been  emptied  and

thoroughly  ventilated,  the  box-like  apparatus  would  not  show  any  light

phenomena. Otherwise, my contention that the visible rays emanated from

the cultures would be invalidated. I did not doubt for a moment that a control

experiment would confirm my assumption.

  I  was  astonished  when  I  saw  the  same  rays,  blue  vapors,  and  bright

streaks of light, in the empty box. I took it apart completely, dipped the metal

plates into water, replaced the cotton, ventilated for several days, and then

repeated  the  experiment.  I  was  assuming  that  the  covering  material  had

absorbed  radiation  from  the  cultures  and  was  now  producing  after-effects

during the control experiment. But I was wrong. I simply could not remove

the radiation phenomena from the empty box, and I was at a loss to explain

why.  What  was  the  origin  of  the  radiation  in  the  box  if  it  contained  no

cultures? To be sure, the light phenomena were not so intense as when the

cultures were present, but they were there nevertheless.

  I had another box constructed, with a front wall of glass and no organic

covering; I was careful to keep it away from rooms where there were SAPA

cultures. Since this box had no covering of organic matter, there could no

longer be any question of a residue of absorbed energy.  It was all to no avail. The radiation was still there. After several days of

complete bafflement, I remembered that a similar phenomenon had occurred

with my rubber gloves and the electroscope. Rubber, exposed to the cultures,

had charged the electroscope; then water and ventilation in the shade had

eliminated the phenomenon. Reexposure of the rubber to the cultures had

promptly and consistently restored it. But even rubber gloves that had never

been near the cultures had produced the phenomena without prior friction. At

that time, I had had to conclude that the energy the cultures emitted was one

that was present everywhere. I now drew the same conclusion from the fact

that the box, even without cultures, clearly emitted radiation. Where did it

come from?

  Today,  with  orgone  energy  measurable  and  in  practical  use  in  the

treatment of cancer patients, my earlier puzzlement seems unintelligent. From

the  very  beginning,  I  had  had  the  feeling  that  the  radiation  was  present

everywhere, and surely the incident with the charged rubber gloves that had

never been exposed to cultures should have made me anticipate the presence

of radiation in the empty box. It is very easy to be clever after the fact, but for

the first two years I doubted every one of my observations. The idea that

“radiation  is  present  everywhere”  and  the  impression  of  “spontaneously

charged gloves” were not very convincing and, in fact, drew my attention

away from the radiation itself. In addition, the constant doubts, objections,

and negative findings of physicists and bacteriologists greatly inhibited me

from taking my observations as seriously as they deserved to be. Because of

the smear campaign against me in the Norwegian press, which was just dying

down at the time that I discovered the radiation, my self-confidence was not

very great. It was certainly not strong enough to support the flood of insights

that poured in on me. My observations were calling into question seemingly

unshakable  convictions  in  biology  and  bacteriology:  the  air-germ  theory,

“body electricity,” the idea that protoplasm is merely highly complex protein,

the  mechanistic  as  well  as  the  vitalistic  view  of  life,  etc.  Only  thespontaneous development and logic of my experiments sustained me.

  It is interesting and useful to look back on such times of uncertainty,

when what have become facts of everyday work seemed to be the strangest of

phenomena. It provides the courage necessary to go on in spite of disturbing

and  apparently  negative  findings  in  control  experiments;  not  to  invalidate

new facts with superficial controls; always to check negative control findings

personally; and, finally not to give in to the temptation of saying, “It was just

an illusion.” The existence of the radiation was proven beyond doubt. I could

not expect to be able to explain each individual phenomenon with one stroke.

Consequently,  I  could  not  allow  myself  to  give  way  to  the  doubts  and

emotional upheavals such a confusion of findings arouses.

  Naturally  it  was  unsatisfactory  to  say  that  radiation  in  the  absence  of

cultures corresponded to the electroscope’s reaction to rubber that had never

been  near  the  cultures.  This  explanation  was  simply  a  temporary  bridge

across a void I was not yet able to fill.

  For several weeks, I observed the radiation in the empty box. It remained

unchanged; it was not affected by sunshine or rain, fog or clear weather, high

or low humidity, night or day. It could not, therefore, be the result of direct

solar radiation, as was the charge of the rubber exposed to the sun. It came

from  “everywhere,”  but  there  was  no  way  of  determining  what  the

“everywhere” was.

  During the summer of 1940, I took a holiday and traveled to Maine. One

night, while I was still struggling with this riddle, I observed the sky above a

nearby lake. The moon was low on the western horizon. Opposite, in the

eastern sky, there were strongly flickering stars. I noticed that stars at the

zenith  flickered  less  intensely  than  those  near  the  eastern  horizon.  If,  as

theory has it, the flickering of the stars is the result of the diffusion of light,

then the flickering would have to be uniform all over the sky; if anything,

stronger near the light of the moon. But exactly the opposite was true.

  I began to look at individual stars through a wooden tube, at one pointunintentionally aiming the tube toward a deep-blue spot in the sky between

the stars. I was amazed to see a lively flickering followed by flashes of fine

rays  of  light  in  the  circular  field  of  the  tube.  The  phenomenon  gradually

faded as I moved the tube in the direction of the moon, being the most intense

in the darkest portions of the sky between the stars. It was the same fine

flickering and flashing, with dots and streaks of light, that I had observed so

often in my box. I inserted a magnifying glass in the tube to enlarge the rays.

Suddenly  my  box  lost  its  mystery.  The  phenomenon  had  become  quite

understandable: The  radiation  in  my  culture-free  box  originated  in  the

atmosphere. The atmosphere contains an energy of which I had no previous

knowledge.

  What I saw that night could not have been “cosmic rays.” No one had yet

seen  cosmic  rays  with  the  naked  eye.  Moreover,  physicists  contend  that

“cosmic rays” come to the earth from outer space; i.e., they do not have their

origin on our planet. It is true that recently there have been objections and

challenges to this hypothesis. But even if the cosmic rays of the physicists

should be of planetary origin, they would merely be identical with orgone

rays. The so-called great power of penetration of the “cosmic rays” would

then  simply  be  explained  by  the  fact  that orgone  energy  is  present

            4
everywhere.

  Looking  at  earth  and  rock  through  the  tube,  I  observed  the  same

phenomenon, sometimes stronger, sometimes weaker. It was also present in

clouds, only in this case it was more intense. Now I understood: During my

control experiments on SAPA radiation I had discovered atmospheric orgone

energy.

  I shall now try systematically to describe orgone energy so that anyone

can discover it for himself, without having to travel the tortuous path down

which my bion experiments led me. This description, which will reveal many

properties unknown to us in any other form of energy, should make clear the

logic that connects the “blue bion” and its energy function with atmosphericenergy. Atmospheric orgone energy could doubtless have been discovered

without SAPA bions. Yet, because of this complex detour, by way of the bion

radiation,  we  had  an  insight  of  profound  significance: The  energy  that

governs  everything  that  is  alive  is  necessarily  identical  with  atmospheric

energy;  otherwise  it  would  not  have  led  to  the  discovery  of  atmospheric

orgone energy.                                      CHAPTER IV


  The Objective Demonstration of Orgone Radiation




1. ARE THERE SUBJECTIVE IMPRESSIONS OF LIGHT?


When we were children the light phenomena we saw with our eyes shut were

a  constant  source  of  fascination.  Small  dots,  blue-violet  in  color,  would

appear from nowhere, floating back and forth slowly, changing their course

with every movement of the eyes. They floated quite slowly in gentle curves,

looping periodically into spirals, in a path somewhat as follows:







 
  It was a delightful game to change the shape and track of the light dots by

rubbing the eyes through our closed lids; we could influence even the color of

the dots, the blue becoming red, green, or yellow. Part of the fun was to open

the eyes suddenly, look into the bright light of a lamp, then close the eyes

again and see the afterimages. With a little imagination we could turn these

forms  into  all  kinds  of  things:  rainbows,  balloons,  animal  heads,  human

figures.

  But such childish pleasures lost their interest as we grew up and studied

physics,  mathematics,  and  biology.  We  had  to  learn  that  such  subjective

optical  phenomena  were  “unreal,”  something  to  be  distinguished  from

objectively measurable, physical manifestations of light and its seven colors.

In  time,  our  concern  for  what  could  actually  be  measured  and  weighed

obliterated the strong impressions of our sense organs. We no longer tookthem  seriously.  The  practical  everyday  world  demanded  concentration  on

concrete details exclusively; fantasy only interfered. But the subjective light

impressions remain, and the question must nag at many whether such clear

phenomena as light impressions observed with the eyes closed do not, after

all, represent a reality. The illusionary nature of these optical sensations is not

so obvious as it appears.

  We were educated to regard such things as these light impressions as

“purely subjective” and therefore “not real.” They could be of no concern to

scientific research and were relegated to the realm of “human fantasy.” Man’s

fantasy  life,  of  course,  is  far  removed  from  reality,  being  inspired  by

subjective desires and, moreover, unstable—which is why scientific research

had to develop an objective, realistic foundation through experiment. The

ideal  experiment  makes  judgment  independent  of  subjective  fantasies,

illusions,  and  wishes.  To  put  it  succinctly,  man  has  no  confidence  in  his

faculties  of  perception.  He  prefers,  with  good  reason,  to  rely  on  the

photographic  plate,  the  microscope,  or  the  electroscope  when  examining

phenomena.

  Yet in spite of the progress made by turning from subjective experience to

objective observation, an important quality of research has been lost. What

we observe objectively may well exist in reality, but it is dead. In the interest

of scientific objectivity, we kill what is alive before making any statements

about it. The result is necessarily a mechanistic, machine-like image of life,

from which life’s most essential quality, its specific aliveness, is missing—an

aliveness  uncomfortably  reminiscent  of  the  intense  organ  sensations

experienced  in  childhood.  Every  kind  of  mysticism—yoga,  the  fascist

“surging  of  the  blood,”  the  receptivity  of  the  spiritualist  medium,  or  the

ecstatic, divine epiphany of the dervish—is grounded upon these subjective

organ sensations. Mysticism claims the existence of forces and processes that

natural science denies or disdains. One moment of sharp deliberation tells us

that man cannot feel or imagine anything that has no real, objective existencein one form or another, for human sense perceptions are only functions of

objective natural processes within the organism. Could it not be that behind

the “subjective” light impressions of our closed eyes there exists a reality

after all? Is it not possible that through our subjective ocular sensations we

perceive biological energy of our own organism? This thought seems strange,

daring. But let us see!

  To  dismiss  these  subjective  light  impressions  as  simple  “fantasy”  is

incorrect. Fantasy is an active property of an organism governed by certain

natural laws and must therefore be “real.” Not so long ago medicine rejected

all functional and nervous ailments as unreal and imagined, because it did not

understand  them.  But  headache  is  headache,  and  light  impression  is  light

impression, whether we understand it or not.

  Naturally we reject mystical claims based on misinterpretation of organ

sensations. But that is not to deny the existence of these sensations. We must

also reject a mechanistically fragmented natural science, because it separates

organ sensations from the vital processes of the organs. Self-perception is an

essential part of the life process. It is not a case of nerves being here, muscles

there, and organ sensations somewhere else. The processes within the tissues,

and our perception of them, form an indivisible functional unity. This must be

one of the essential, experimentally documented, theoretical guidelines of our

therapeutic  work.  Pleasure  and  anxiety  express  a  particular  state  of

functioning of the total organism. It is therefore important to make a clear

distinction  between  functional  thinking  and  mechanistically  fragmented

thinking, which can never penetrate to the essentials of the life process. Let

us note four important principles of a functional view of nature:


  1. Every living organism is a self-contained, functional unit, not merely a mechanical sum of

    organs. The fundamental biological function controls the total organism just as it governs

    each individual organ.

  2. Every living organism is a part of surrounding nature and is functionally identical with it.

  3. Every perception is based upon the correspondence of a function within the organism with a

    function in the external world, i.e., upon orgonotic harmony.  4.  Every  self-perception  is  the  immediate  expression  of  objective  processes  within  the

    organism (psychophysical identity).


  Little can be expected from philosophical speculations on the reality of

our sensations if they exclude the principle that the observing, perceiving ego

(subject) and the observed, perceived object together form a functional unity.

Mechanistic research divides this unity into a duality. In its total rejection of

sensation,  contemporary  mechanistic  empiricism  is  beyond  redemption.

Every  important  discovery  originates  in  the  subjective  sensation  or

experience of an objective fact, i.e., in orgonotic harmony. What is required

is to objectivize the subjective sensation, separating it from its stimulus and

comprehending the origin of the stimulus. As orgone therapists, we do this

every hour of every day when we try to understand the bodily expressions of

the patient by identifying ourselves with the patient and his functions. Once

we comprehend these expressions emotionally, we let our intellect work and

objectivize the phenomenon.

  Now, with this understanding of orgonotic harmony, let us return to our

childhood  fantasies  and  impressions  of  light.  How  can  we  establish

objectively whether these impressions “seen” with our eyes closed correspond

to real processes?


2. FLICKERING IN THE SKY MADE OBJECTIVE (THE

                                ORGONOSCOPE)


First of all we try to determine whether similar phenomena can be perceived

with open eyes in broad daylight. If we observe carefully for a sufficient

length of time, we discover that they can. We gaze at a screen, a wall, or a

white door. We observe a flickering. The impression is of shadows or foggy

vapors traveling more or less rapidly and rhythmically over the surface of

things. Rather than disregarding this observation as a mere “subjective ocular

impression,”  we  resolve  to  establish objectively  whether  this  flickering  is

taking place merely in our eyes or all around us.  Devising a method of differentiating is not easy, however. We begin by

closing our eyes. Instantly the flickering seems to change into a movement of

small dots, shapes, and colors. We open and close our eyes repeatedly until

we are convinced that the phenomena we perceive with our eyes closed are

different from those we observed while looking at the wall opposite us.

  We look into the blue sky, as though gazing into the far distance. At first

we see nothing. But if we continue to observe, we discover, to our surprise, a

rhythmical, wave-like flickering, clearly perceptible across the blue sky. Does

this flickering exist merely in our eyes, or is it in the sky? We continue to

observe the phenomena over several days, under varying weather conditions

and at different times of the day. It is striking that the flickering in the sky

varies a great deal in kind and in intensity. Next we experiment at night.

Since our observations are now unhampered by diffused daylight the wave-

like flickering is even more distinct. Here and there we believe we catch a

glimpse of a lightning flash in the form of a streak or dots. The flickering and

delicate flashings are also to be observed in dark clouds, where they are more

intense. As we observe the sky over a period of weeks, we notice that the

flickering of the stars varies in intensity. On some nights, the stars shine

clearly and calmly; on others their flickering is subdued; on still others, it is

extraordinarily  vivid.  Astronomers  ascribe  the  flickering  of  the  stars  to

diffuse  light.  There  was  a  time  when  we  accepted  this  explanation

unquestioningly. However, now that the actual existence of a flickering in the

sky has become a crucial question for us, we must ask ourselves whether the

flickering of stars may be related to the flickering in the sky between the

stars. If so, we have taken the first step toward demonstrating the objective

existence of an unknown something in the atmosphere. The flickering of the

stars is certainly no subjective ocular phenomenon: observatories are built on

high mountains in order to eliminate it. The unknown something that makes

the stars flicker must therefore be moving close to the surface of the earth.

But it is certainly not diffuse light; otherwise the flickering would not vary inintensity as it does. Such “explanations” only obscure facts. Let us defer the

answer.

  The longer and more precisely we observe the flickering in the sky and

across the surface of objects, the more imperative it becomes to delineate a

limited field. We construct a metal tube 1 to 3 feet long and 1 to 2 inches in

diameter, with a dull black interior. We look through it at the walls in the day

time and the sky at night. The tube isolates a circle which appears brighter

than the area around it. Keeping both eyes open and looking through the tube

with one eye, we see a dark-blue night sky within which is a disk of brighter

blue. Within the disk itself we perceive, first of all, a flickering movement,

then,  unmistakably,  delicate  dots  and  streaks  of  light  appearing  and

disappearing.  The  phenomenon  becomes  less  distinct  in  the  immediate

vicinity of the moon; the darker the atmosphere in the background, the clearer

the phenomenon.

  Are we perhaps this time victims of an illusion? To find out we insert a

plano-convex  eyepiece  with  a  magnification  of  approximately  5x  in  the

viewing end of the tube and look through. The bright circular field is now

broader; the dots and streaks of light appear larger and more distinct. It is

impossible  to  magnify  subjective  light  impressions;  therefore,  the

phenomenon must be objective. Moveover, no flickering is perceptible along

the dark interior walls of the tube; the flickering is confined strictly to the

bright section of the disk, and therefore cannot be “subjective” sensation. We

have  isolated  a  limited  area  and  are  now  in  a  position  to  examine  the

phenomenon carefully under conditions that eliminate diffuse light from the

atmosphere as a factor. But first we shall make some improvements in the

primitive orgonoscope we have improvised: 

cellulose disk, exterior surface dull

: wire mesh, on both sides of disk
: metal cylinder, about 4" long, 2" wide

biconvex lens, about 10x, focused on disk
telescopic tube, 1' to 2' long, about 2" wide

: eyepiece, 5x, for additional magnification
FIGURE 8. The orgonoscope


  We point our tube toward the dark night sky in front of the mirror of a

good microscope equipped with apochromatic lenses. We use a 10x object

lens and a 5x eyepiece. Our eyes need to be accustomed to the dark for about

twenty-five minutes. The microscope reflects the light phenomena in the sky

with total clarity. Every single flash of light is clearly discernible. We remove

the eyepiece from the tube. Now the flickering is seen in smaller scale, but it

is more intense; we are no longer able to distinguish individual flashes of

light.

  Can the phenomena be ascribed to the haze in the atmosphere? Let us try

observing the phenomenon on foggy or hazy nights. It does not take long to

see that the phenomena are either very weak or have disappeared completely.

Fog or haze does not cause flickering in the circular field. The movement oflight  particles  in  the  field  of  the  microscope  has  nothing  to  do  with  the

movement of fog.

  By careful observation, we are able to establish that the light and wave

phenomena extend across the entire sky and become weaker only when close

to stars or the moon because of the stronger light. They are at their most

intense  on  clear  nights  and  when  humidity  is  relatively  low.  When  the

humidity  rises  above  50  percent,  the  radiation  phenomena  decrease  in

intensity. In other words, humidity absorbs the radiation in the atmosphere,

just as it absorbs the SAPA radiation.

  At  night  we  direct  our  tube  at  various  places—on  the  ground,  the

pavement, loose earth, a lawn, walls, etc. We see the same movements of

light particles. They are more pronounced on soil than on asphalt. We point

the tube at thick shrubs from a distance of about 10 cm., moving the tube

slowly  away  from  the  foliage  and  then  back  to  it.  Without  doubt,  the

phenomena are more intense at the leaves than in the surroundings. They

seem to come from the leaves themselves. We look at a variety of flower

blossoms. The radiation phenomena are more intense close to the blossom

than at the stalk.

  Earth, walls, bushes, grass, animals, the atmosphere, all show the same

phenomena. The conclusion to be drawn from these findings is inescapable:

The radiation phenomena are present everywhere, with variations only in the

density and intensity of the energy. Perhaps we would have wished to find

them present in some places and not in others. Then, the discovery would not

have been so overwhelming. But we have to stay with the facts, however

strange they now begin to appear.


    3. ENCLOSING THE RADIATION AND MAKING IT

                          OBJECTIVELY VISIBLE


Orgone  radiation  is  everywhere.  This  fact  makes  it  difficult  to  devise

experiments with it. To describe a phenomenon accurately, it is necessary toisolate  it  and  determine  its  meaning  by  comparing  it  with  a  different

phenomenon. We must create an enclosed space in which the energy can be

isolated.

  We  wish  to  ascertain  whether  anything  new  can  be  learned  in  a

completely  darkened  room.  We  allow  about  half  an  hour  for  our  eyes  to

become fully accustomed to the darkness. During this time, all subjective

light impressions disappear and we see nothing but black, that is, nothing. We

look through our tube into the darkness. We see nothing! This experiment

only  confirms  the  fact  that  in  absolute  darkness  blackness  prevails.  The

radiation has disappeared and we are about to give up all concern with this

“stupid problem.” At this point many people would go no further. But that is

not  research.  We  cannot  simply  ignore  the  fact  that  we  had  established,

beyond any doubt, the existence of a strange phenomenon in the open air. It

cannot  have  ceased  to  exist.  Nevertheless,  conviction  and  proof  are  two

different things.

  Since the properties of our atmospheric radiation are unknown to us, we

are  obliged  to  work  with  apparatuses  that  are  used  in  known  realms  of

energies. We might use a Faraday cage, an enclosure that has walls made of

iron or copper wire mesh, whose function is to provide an enclosed space that

cannot be penetrated by electromagnetic waves from the outside. The cage

itself  is  free  of  electromagnetic  fields  because  all  electromagnetic  waves

converging  upon  it  from  the  outside  are  caught  by  the  copper  mesh  and

grounded. (If you drive across a bridge with a metal superstructure, your car

radio  stops  working.  The  principle  is  the  same  as  in  the  Faraday  cage.)

Delicate  experiments  with  the  oscillograph  can  be  conducted  in  the  cage

without risk of interference.

  We now build such a cage, in a corner of the basement. We line the

copper  wire  walls  with  sheet  iron  on  the  inside,  in  order  to  reduce  to  a

minimum the contact between inside and outside air. We leave just a few

cracks or holes to admit enough air for breathing. We then sit down in thecompletely darkened cage and allow our eyes to accustom themselves to the

darkness.

  Over the course of approximately half an hour, the blackness gives way to

an  indefinable  glimmer.  Strange  light  phenomena  irritate  our  eyes.  The

impression is of fog-like vapors of gray-blue color wafting slowly across the

interior of the cage. If we fix our eyes on a single spot on the wall, we see

moving light phenomena. The longer we stay in the cage, the more distinct

the light phenomena become. Within the gray-blue vapors, light dots of a

deep  blue-violet  color  are  observed.  They  are  reminiscent  of  the  familiar

subjective visual phenomena that occur immediately prior to falling asleep.

Again the problem arises: Are the phenomena inside or outside our eyes?

When we close our eyes, the deep-violet dots do not disappear. Are the optic

nerves  irritated,  or  are  the  light  phenomena  not  real?  Theoretically,  the

phenomena should disappear when our eyes are closed and reappear again

when our eyes are reopened. Subjective after-images do exist, of course, but

the matter is not so simple as that. How is it that the optic nerves become

irritated in complete darkness and why are we unable to “free our eyes” of the

phenomena?

  The  more  prolonged  the  observation,  the  more  pronounced  the

phenomena become. For example, on dry, sunny days, lightning-like flashes

can be seen in the metal enclosure. In order to eliminate any doubt about the

existence  of  atmospheric  orgone  energy,  I  urge  my  students  to  acquaint

themselves thoroughly with these phenomena.

  Many  experimental  subjects  developed  a  slight  conjunctivitis  if  they

stayed  in  the  Faraday  cage  for  an  hour  or  more.  Since,  under  normal

conditions, the eyes rest in complete darkness, there must be something in the

cage to irritate the eyes, excite the optic nerves, and render the conjunctivae

hyperemic. We repeat the observations in the dark cage until we find some

means to resolve these important problems. For instance, can the blue-gray

and deep-violet light phenomena be enlarged with a magnifying glass? Wediscover that a good magnifying glass does indeed enlarge the dots and make

them more distinct. They manifest themselves in two ways: they fly either

directly  at  us  or  past  us.  In  the  first  instance,  we  observe  the  following

sequence of light impressions:





    
Every individual light dot seems alternately to expand and contract as though

pulsating. The light dots flying past us follow a trajectory something like this:







 
Because  of  the  shape  its  path  takes,  we  have  called  it  a  spinning  wave

(Kreiselwelle). Its significance will in time become clear. The blue-violet dots

seem to come from the metal walls in rhythmic intervals.

  After two or three hours in the cage, we notice a blue-gray sheen around

our white coat. The contours of another person can be made out, blurred but

plainly visible. Let us not be disconcerted by the mystical and ghost-like

character  of  this  phenomenon.  There  is  nothing  mystical  about  it.  The

radiation seems to adhere to cloth and hair. We put some good fluorescent

material, such as zinc sulfide, on a swab of cotton wool and fasten it to the

wall opposite us. We were not mistaken. The area of the cotton swab appears

lighter  than  its  surroundings.  Through  the  magnifying  glass,  we  see  the

radiation distinctly enlarged; flickering and the fine light rays already familiar

to us can be observed.

  A paper disk of zinc sulfide has been left in the cage for several days. We

now bend it slowly. It emits strong radiation. For control purposes, we expose

a similar zinc sulfide disk to fresh air or bend it for a long time. In either case,

the light phenomena disappear. We now leave the control zinc sulfide disk in

the orgone room for a few days. When we bend it, the light phenomena areagain found to be present. The paper disk soaked in zinc sulfide has absorbed

orgone energy.

  The purpose of our next experiment is to make the orgone energy inside

the cage visible from outside. We cut a window about 5 inches square in the

front wall of the apparatus. On the inside metal wall, across the opening, we

                                                                                  1
place a fluorescing glass plate of the type used to make X-rays visible. In the

outer  wooden  wall  we  attach  a  metal  tube  equipped  with  an  eyepiece

containing a biconvex lens capable of magnification of 5–10x. Tube and lens

are both removable, so the fluorescing disk can be observed with or without

magnification.

  Inside  the  cage,  we  mount  a  green  light  bulb  of  the  type  used  in

developing  highly  sensitive  photographic  plates.  The  bulb,  rheostatically

controlled, provides a constant dim light as background for the radiation. In

this  experimental  arrangement  we  are  following  the  pattern  provided  by

nature: the orgone radiation is clearly visible against the dim light of the night

sky. To reproduce the flickering of the stars, we drill a few holes about 1/8

inch in diameter in the wall. Then we observe the apparatus from outside in

total darkness.

  Through the holes we are able to perceive a strongly flickering light; its

color is blue.

  There is a great deal of movement observable on the fluorescing disk:

rapidly moving streaks of light and single flashes of light in the form of dots

and  lines  may  be  clearly  distinguished.  After  a  while  we  see  deep-violet

vapors that appear to stream from the openings. The area of visible radiation

is a sharply defined square against the black of the cage. The flickering and

the  various  light  phenomena  are  visible  only  within  the  contours  of  this

square. Through the magnifying glass, the light phenomena are much more

distinct. It is possible, in fact, to distinguish the individual rays. In dry, clear

weather the phenomena are more distinct and intense than on damp and rainy

days. The observation of radiation in the Faraday cage is greatly enhanced bythe use of the orgonoscope.

  How does the energy get inside the cage? The wire mesh should ground

all  electromagnetic  energy.  The  interior  of  the  cage  should  be  free  of  all

electrical charges; otherwise, it would be impossible to use it for conducting

delicate  electrical  experiments  without  interference.  A  further  problem

confronts us:

  Can the energy in the cage be electricity? We have now two main tasks

before us:


  1. To comprehend the properties of the radiating energy, “orgone,” now made visible.

  2. To investigate the connection between orgone energy and electricity.


                4. THE ORGONE ACCUMULATOR


Here I have to interrupt the account of the course of the development of the

orgone therapy experiments in order to answer a question that must have

been constantly in the mind of the attentive reader. It concerns the “orgone

accumulator,” which has been discussed without being mentioned by name

and without any explanation of how the accumulation of atmospheric orgone

energy is brought about and how it is measured.

  This  question  cannot  be  answered  as  exhaustively  here  as  it  really

deserves  to  be.  Orgone  energy  is  a  completely  new  form  of  energy

fundamentally  different  from  electricity  and  magnetism.  Investigation  and

definition of its properties is the task of orgone physics in the realm of non-

living nature. This research is as yet only in its earliest stages. The trained

reader will know the concepts applicable to electricity, but these cannot be

applied to orgone energy. The new physical concepts developed during the

course of our orgone experiments need a detailed presentation accompanied

by  a  series  of  definite,  purely  physical  experiments.  However,  such  an

account would exceed the scope of a report on experimental orgone therapy,

and it must therefore be deferred. In the present context, the information of

most immediate interest to the reader is that concerning the mechanism ofaccumulating  and  measuring  orgone  energy.  At  the  risk  of  being

misunderstood and misinterpreted by the electrophysicists, I would like to

discuss the three basic findings that demonstrate the accumulation of orgone

energy in the orgone accumulator and make its measurement possible.


  THE MECHANISM BY WHICH ATMOSPHERIC ORGONE

                      ENERGY IS CONCENTRATED


The orgone accumulator consists of a casing of organic material: wood, or

                                                                                          2
preferably celotex, etc. The inner wall is lined with a thin layer of sheet iron.

This  arrangement  makes  possible  a  concentration  of  atmospheric  orgone

energy much greater than the atmospheric concentration. The mechanism of

this concentration depends upon two facts:


  1. Organic material of every kind attracts orgone energy and absorbs it. Conversely, orgone-

    containing material attracts small organic particles and holds them.

  2. Metallic material, especially iron, attracts orgone energy but then repels it again quickly.

    Conversely, orgone-charged metal repels metallic particles.


  These  two  facts  fundamental  to  orgone  physics  can  be  demonstrated

experimentally and repeated at will in the following way. Under a glass hood,

used to protect the arrangement from air currents, a metal sphere is placed on

a cork or rubber plate. We suspend a small piece of cork on one side of the

equator of the sphere, at a distance of 2–3 mm., and a small piece of tin foil

on the other side, at the same distance. Neither the cork nor the tin foil should

be touching the iron sphere; both should hang freely. The sphere is connected

to an electroscope by a wire.

  We then charge a polysterene rod (a rubber rod produces too weak a

charge) by stroking our hair with it once or twice, without rubbing. After

having been charged with orgone energy in this way, the rod is now brought

close to the glass hood of the experimental apparatus or, better still, to the

metal point of the electroscope connected to the sphere. If the orgone chargeis strong enough and the relative humidity does not exceed 50 percent, the

cork will move toward the metal sphere and adhere to it for a period of time.

This reaction means that the energy transferred from the hair to the rod has

enabled the metal sphere to form around itself a field of energy in which

organic  material  is  attracted  and  held.  Other  experiments  show  that  the

converse of this statement is equally true: organic matter attracts orgone

energy and absorbs it.

  A non-charged polysterene rod will not influence a small piece of tin foil.

An orgone-charged rod, on the other hand, will attract the tin foil and hold it

fast.

  From  this  we  draw  the  conclusion  that orgone  energy  and  organic

substances attract each other, as do orgone-charged organic and metallic

substances.

  On the other side of the sphere, where the tin foil is suspended, the effect

is  different. The  tin  foil  is  first  attracted  to  the  metal  sphere  but  then

immediately repelled and kept at a distance. The effect upon each other of

two metallic substances in the orgone energy field is one of repulsion. A

further conclusion to be drawn is that metal, especially iron, attracts orgone

energy. However, it does not absorb it but repels it. (The experiments I have

outlined can be carried out only with low humidity.)OF:
Is:
Attr.:

 

 

 

 

: organic material
: metallic material

orgone energy field
iron sphere
attraction

: spark to tip of electroscope
: repulsion
: electroscope (orgonometer),

grounded or not grounded

: wire connection
 orgone carrier (polysterene rod)
- direction of deflection
FIGURE 9. Demonstration of the orgonotic attraction of organic material and the repulsion of metallic

material in the orgone energy field of a metal sphere


  These findings are fundamentally new. They do have a relation with the

confused  concept  of  “friction  electricity”  and  with  the  equally  confused

theory of “static electricity.” All this has been explained in detail elsewhere.

The simple experiment I have described demonstrates two basic functions of

orgone  energy:  the attraction  of  organic  substances  and  the repulsion  of

metallic  substances  in  the  orgone  energy  field.  The  application  and

significance  of  these  findings  for  the  orgone  accumulator  will  be  evident

from the following experimental studies.  THERMIC MEASUREMENT OF ATMOSPHERIC ORGONE

                ENERGY (THERMIC ORGONOMETRY)


The metal walls of our orgone accumulator are “cold.” If we hold the palm of

a hand or our tongue at a distance of about 10 cm. from the metal wall long

enough, we will experience a sensation of warmth and a delicate prickling. In

addition, a salty taste is detected on the tongue. If we put a thermometer in

the same place, or better still, above the top of the accumulator, and a second

thermometer outside the accumulator, we notice, to our surprise, a difference

of 0.2° to 0.5° C. compared with the room temperature.

  Neither the subjective feeling of warmth nor the temperature difference as

measured objectively can be due to “heat” radiated from the wall, since the

temperature on the metal wall is lower than the temperature at a distance of

up to 10 cm. from it. And there are no sources of heat on the wall or behind

it, under the accumulator or inside it. We are therefore obliged to risk an

hypothesis and see where it leads.

  We know that radiation in general consists of moving energy particles.

Let us therefore assume for the moment that the cold metallic walls of the

accumulator radiate or reflect energy. We must assume the following: If we

hold the palm of our hand or a thermometer at a distance of 6 to 10 cm. from

the wall, we block the movement of the energy particles. When the kinetic

energy of the particles is blocked, it manifests itself as a sensation of warmth

or as an objective rise in temperature as registered by the thermometer. This

hypothesis  is  completely  in  accord  with  the  physics  of  all  radiation.  The

blocking of electrons flying from the cathode of an X-ray tube toward the

anticathode generates warmth and light phenomena.

  We construct a small orgone accumulator. Six iron plates, each 1 square

foot, are built into a cube. On the outside of the top metal plate we mount a

cylindrical container measuring about 15 cm. in length, into which we can

insert a thermometer. The temperature inside the accumulator can be read

through a hole in the container. To insulate the inside of the cylinder againstthe room temperature, we wrap it with cotton, wood, or some other substance

that conducts heat poorly. In addition, we screen the thermometer container

from the outside with a glass lampshade. No organic substance should be

placed between the thermometer and the upper metal plate.

























T(o)

 

T -T= 0 to 1 C:
Cylinder 0

Nortihpole

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

T£0n rveveee - Lens, focused
on cellulose disk
Cotton__ 0
wool
Cellulose disk
Wood -
Green
frosted -
bulb

 

 

 

 

South “pole

T(0): temperature in cylinder; T(): temperature inside accumulator;
T: control (temperature of air in room)
E: electroscope ---—: direction of radiation Siz

 

cubic foot

 
                                                3
FIGURE 10. Basic design of orgone accumulator (section)


  The basic consideration guiding our construction is the following: The

radiation particles inside the box are being bounced back and forth between

the metal walls. They are blocked on all sides. Since heat rises, the most

favorable spot for temperature change to be registered is above the top metal

plate. A difference in temperature must exist between the enclosed air in the

cylinder  above  the  accumulator  and  the  air  in  the  room.  Let  us  call  the

temperature of the air in the room T, that of the air in the cylinder T(o). If our

hypothesis is correct, the temperature differences, expressed as T(o) – T, must

be positive  and  constantly  present.  We  do  not  yet  know  how  great  it  is.Measurements  taken  over  several  days  indicate  a  constant  difference  in

temperature varying between 0.2° and 1.8° C. The arithmetical mean of the

temperature differences, obtained from measurements taken several times a

day for a number of days or weeks, amounts to approximately 0.5° C. Since

we have introduced no constant source of heat into the box, the temperature

difference must have its origin in the blocking of the radiation particles. Let

us now summarize what we were able to learn thus far about the orgone

energy:


  1. Organic substances absorb the energy.

  2. Metallic substances reflect it.

  3. Blockage of the kinetic energy by any metallic obstacle causes a rise in local temperature.


  At this point we notice a deficiency in our construction. The bare metal

walls, which are exposed to the outside as well as to the inside, radiate the

energy and the heat produced to the outside and to the inside simultaneously.

In order to better separate the air inside the accumulator from the atmospheric

air surrounding it, we wrap the metal box with an organic material such as

cotton  wool.  To  make  the  construction  more  solid  and  to  improve  its

appearance, we build a second box around it out of thin plywood or celotex.

We make the inside accessible through a door in the front wall.

  Thus the outside of the apparatus consists of organic material, the inside

of  metallic  material.  Since  the  former  absorbs  the  energy  and  the  latter

reflects it, an accumulation of energy results. The organic wrapping absorbs

the energy from the atmosphere and transmits it to the metal on the inside.

The metal radiates the energy toward the outside into the cotton and toward

the inside into the open space of the accumulator’s interior. The movement of

the energy toward the inside is unimpeded, while that toward the outside is

blocked. For that reason, the energy can oscillate freely on the inside, but not

to the outside. In addition, a part of the energy given off by the metal toward

the outside is absorbed by the cotton wool and fed back to the metal. How theenergy penetrates the metal, we do not know. We only know that it does,

since the subjective and objective phenomena are significantly more intense

inside the accumulator than they are outside it.




































 

 

 

 

 

 

C ]

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

poom 10 4o} alqer
b. | 29
prroqpiz) e
100m o0
Suses
sojowousay L
podui (219
Teamoua
xajowouzay - fonuo)

 

 

 

 

Dol =o€0 =L~ (0L

 

 
FIGURE 11. Measurement of temperature difference T(o) – T indoors


  After the metal has been covered, the temperature difference T(o) – T is

found to be more constant and, on the average, greater. We have designed anaccumulator which confines and concentrates the orgone.

  As a control of these results, we take measurements inside, outside, and

above a box of the same size but constructed solely of wood or paper. We

establish to our complete satisfaction that with such a box temperatures are

completely  equalized:  all  the  temperatures  are  the  same. Temperature

differences occur only when we line the inside of the box with metal.


Measurement of the Orgone in the Open Air


During the summer of 1940 I buried a small orgone box in the earth in my

garden and subsequently observed a constant temperature difference. But it

was not until February 1941 that I discovered just how much greater this

difference was than that recorded in closed rooms.

  One  sunny  but  cold,  windy  day,  February  15,  1941,  I  buried  an

accumulator in the soil to a depth of two-thirds of its height, and in such a

way that the box thermometer (I) was still above ground level. The box,

along  with  the  thermometer  casing  on  top,  was  set  in  a  second  box  of

cardboard.  I  filled  the  space  in  between  the  boxes  with  cotton  and

woodshavings, then covered the whole apparatus with a wool blanket. (The

space where the temperature is measured must, of course, be well protected

against the low outside temperature in order to hold the heat produced.) I put

a control thermometer (II) through a hole in a glass jar and buried the jar to a

depth of about 4 inches in the soil so that the bulb of the thermometer was

below the ground level. I set a second, uncovered control thermometer (III) 1

inch  into  the  soil.  I  also  used  this  second  control  thermometer  (IIIa)  to

measure the temperature of the air above the soil, at about the height of the

box thermometer, sometimes with and sometimes without protective covering

against  the  wind.  The  three  thermometers  were  constantly  interchanged.

(Figure 12 and the accompanying table here illustrate the arrangement and

the results of this experiment.) 

108 TI08
431000 JO UONENUOLO)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

wonoq
uado ym RGNV 7
el ssepD 100M u0YOD o 810u3 Jo
— poon 10 uoyeIso uondiosqy
W PpIEOGPIE) _ S — 1 12A9]_[10§
I Y I

oo

 

T *III

 

 
FIGURE 12. Measurement of temperature difference T(o) – T in the open air (experiment undertaken

February 16–17, 1941) 

  

  

 

 

a0 a0 0% s
S @0 T ey
D ST ot
2o %o - wan
o W owo- o et
s 5 k- o westm
w0 0 - vornr
o
wok @ e e elawea  dmepSmuendma o
st
wo- e gy SuweyemdN
-z 10 oo e syt sy
e o oo g0t 0 a0 oo wsms ooy L
o 30
sy Sy
aw e w0 w0 wo go- weoy  spmmesdy o
e S w0 wo w0 wawme ooy s
0 e oM 50+ St w0 w0 w0 weer  opmpamedly  p
v St o s 0r ot wogaapews ¢
s S W & b et meguepmms §
s gy o
‘puncstiopun pigronl
o o oy ey
oo poddnin’ 3 et
o qun syenddy SU S0 03 9 DeLOIws  wprepetws o
e wsw  ws  pews  wa e m
ot 2 Supont
  In this arrangement, T(o) – T is much greater than in the closed room,

probably because of the elimination of the effects of secondary orgonotic

radiation from walls and table tops, which would reduce the difference. In the

open air and without sun, T(o) – T varies around +2° C.

  In  order  to  be  certain  of  these  results,  I  continued  the  experiment

overnight and on the following day, February 16 to February 17, 1941. I leftthe apparatus just as it was in the open air but took away the wool blanket;

i.e.,  I  let  the  apparatus  get  as  cool  as  possible  in  the  freezing  nighttime

temperatures. At 9:30 A.M. on February 17, the temperature of the air was −1°

C., the soil temperature, 0° C. I wrapped the apparatus once again in the wool

blanket  and  inserted  the  thermometer,  which  had  just  registered  the

temperature of the air at −1° C., into the cylinder on top. The mercury began

to climb and after a while reached +2.3° C. The air temperature still remained

constant at − 1° C., and the soil temperature at 0° C. The air inside the buried

glass registered +0.9° C.

  This  experiment  was  conducted  for  the  purpose  of  refuting  a  specific

objection by a distinguished physicist. In January 1941, a few months after

the discovery of the remarkable temperature difference, Albert Einstein set up

a  small  orgone  accumulator  in  his  home  in  Princeton,  New  Jersey.  In  a

subsequent  letter  to  me,  he  confirmed  the  existence  of  a  temperature

difference  at  the  accumulator,  but  discovered,  in  addition,  a  temperature

difference  between  the  underside  and  the  top  of  the  table  on  which  the

accumulator  stood.  This  finding  naturally  undermined  the  validity  of  the

reading  at  the  accumulator.  One  of  Einstein’s  assistants,  Leopold  Infeld,

concluded  that  the  temperature  difference  at  the  accumulator  was  to  be

ascribed to the fact that in the basement room, where the observations were

made, there would be an increase in temperature “due to the convection of

heat from the ceiling to the table top.” However, this assistant failed to check

his  interpretation  of  the  previously  confirmed  temperature  difference by

simply taking measurements in the open air and in the soil, where there can

be no question of “convection of heat from the ceiling to the table top.”opeys a ut
siajowouLay) 10 “orenumde
2u0810 Bupuanijul uonepe: NS : §
duatayp amesdw) urou : =Gy
o192 32 305 : aumpesadusa) wooy

 

Tp-08—1 Ww-62-1 w-82-1 w121 =91
FIGURE 13. Temperature difference from measurements taken inside a room with open window


  I believe these findings are unequivocal:


  1. The soil and the atmosphere contain an energy measurable as heat in our apparatus.

  2. This  constant  energy-heat  source  can  attain  high  thermic  values  only  with  a  certain

    arrangement of materials. In order to effect a rise in the temperature difference, there must

    be organic material on the outside and metallic material on the inside.


  This experiment also demonstrates the significance of the arrangement ofmaterial in connection with soil and solar radiation. In the shade, where the

influence of radiation from the sun has vanished, T(o) – T drops, relative to

all control measurements, from about +5° C. to about +2° C. The control

thermometer encased in a glass jar and therefore only minimally exposed to

the  radiation  of  orgone  energy  in  the  soil  registers  a  difference  of  only

approximately 1° C. The accumulator, on the other hand, the most efficient

apparatus  yet  constructed  for  the  absorption  and  accumulation  of  orgone

energy, registers much higher values—greater than +2°C.

  The temperature drop in the open air under freezing weather conditions

affects  the  box  thermometer  in  spite  of  the  insulation.  Nevertheless,  the

temperature difference remains constant within certain lower and upper limits

owing to the fact that the T(o) and T temperatures fall at a parallel rate. The

results of experimental readings taken over a period of approximately three

hours were as follows:











T(o) =114 o 1 _eso
T(nir}=4.6"}n0) Loy

T(0) = 95° e
T(a(i‘:;: 3_5.’}T(o)—T—-6.0
T(0) = 65°

T (air) o,s"} T(o) -T =59
Experimental Conclusions


  1. When the apparatus is constructed and arranged as described, without

a  constant  source  of  heat  of  any  known  kind,  there  exists,  under  all

circumstances,  a  temperature  difference  between  the  thermometer  of  the

apparatus and the control thermometer.

  2. Measurement in the open air demonstrates a radiation from the soil

which  manifests  itself  in  temperature  differences  of  varying  degrees

according to the arrangement of the component materials.

  The  temperature  difference  in  the  open  air  varies  with  increases  and

decreases in the intensity of solar radiation, and also with the time of day. Onsummer days, under a strong sun, differences up to 20° C. are not uncommon.

The org-thermometer is, of course, never exposed directly to the sun’s rays.

  The thermometric measurement of orgone radiation from the soil can also

be accomplished using other arrangements. The one essential ingredient of

such experiments is strict and clear definition of the comparative basis for the

measurements. T(o) can be measured against T of the air or soil. The T(o) of

the air must be distinguished from the T(o) of the soil. In the same way, the

distinction  must  be  made  between  measurements  taken  inside  a  metal

cylinder placed vertically over a metal plate and those taken inside a metal

cylinder without a metal plate. The following diagrams will illustrate a few

principal methods of measuring orgone energy temperatures: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ios —
ay
3& 1 10pur o
mop 7 e
- uopdipey|

 

 
 

   

4 Pue ¢ 12 98e300]q UOEIPEX JUIS © Je poFuELIE Aqn) A~

232Y00[q UONEIPEI JNOY}IA PUE 11 ‘SUONISOd STOLEA UT 59qny [e}our 3¢
B 9y} U1 IojouOWIAY) (010D 1Y)
1105 U} UY Ja1WOUAYY (010D 3§D

 

Tos

 

1o

 

 

v
vo

 

 

 

 

 

ay

 

 
FIGURE 14. Different methods of measuring T(o) – T in soil and the atmosphere


  The results may be summarized as follows: The temperature rise in a

metal tube is greater above a metal cross-plate than without a cross-plate.

  In rainy weather, the temperature differences are either minimal or they

disappear completely.

  With strong sun radiation, the temperature differences reappear and reach

high values.

  To obtain the effect of orgone radiation, we leave the tubes open. Toproduce the temperature difference we close the tubes with metal plates and

take the measurements above the plates.

  The  experienced  theoretical  physicist  will  readily  view  the  constant

orgonotic  temperature  difference  as  a  finding  that  would  invalidate  the

second law of thermodynamics. It is true there is a process in nature in the

direction  of  increasing  entropy,  which  is  to  say  “the  universe  is  running

down.”  However,  there  is  another  energy  process,  an orgonotic  process,

which functions in the opposite direction, toward a restoration of the energy

that  is  being  lost  in  the  process  directed  toward  increasing  entropy.  This

problem will have to be elaborated in a separate context.


  DEMONSTRATION OF ORGONOTIC ATTRACTION IN THE

      ENERGY FIELD OF THE ORGONE ACCUMULATOR


Arrangement: We bring a good magnetic needle close to an orgone energy

accumulator with 1 cubic foot of interior space, in the following manner: 1)

toward the center of the four upper edges; 2) toward the center of the four

lower edges.

  Result:  The  magnetic  north  pole  fixes  itself  consistently  toward  the

middle of the upper edges, while the magnetic south pole fixes itself toward

the middle of the lower edges.

    Conclusion: The reaction of the energy field of the orgone accumulator is

orgonotic and not magnetic in nature.

  Proof: 1) The magnetic attraction emanates only from certain parts of the

iron, namely from the ends rather than from the middle; the middle is not

magnetic.  2)  The  poles  of  magnetic  attraction  (south  or  north)  are  not

interchangeable,  except  by  remagnetizing  a  weak  magnet  by  means  of  a

stronger one. If the attraction effect of the orgone accumulator were iron-

magnetic in nature, then the magnetic needle would always move toward the

center of the edges regardless of how we moved or turned the accumulator.

But the actual reaction of the magnetic needle is different. No matter whichedges are made the lower, side, or upper edges, the magnetic needle always

reacts in the way described, i.e., its north pole fixes itself consistently toward

the center of the four upper edges, its south pole toward the center of its four

lower  edges.  The  attraction  emanating  from  the  orgone  accumulator  is

therefore not bound to specific parts of the material and consequently cannot

be magnetic in nature. The reaction is clearly dependent upon the position of

the orgone accumulator in the field of the orgonotic atmosphere of the earth.

The  conclusion  that  must  be  drawn  from  careful  consideration  of  all

experimental and theoretical facts is that the energy field of the earth is not

magnetic but orgonotic in nature and stands in a well-defined relationship to

the magnetic north and south poles of the earth.

  The  probability  is  that  magnetism  itself  will  prove  to  be  a  particular

function  of  cosmic  orgone  energy.  Many  scientists  already  doubt  the

magnetic nature of so-called earth magnetism.


        USE OF THE STATIC ELECTROSCOPE FOR THE

    DEMONSTRATION AND MEASUREMENT OF ORGONE

        ENERGY: ELECTROSCOPICAL ORGONOMETRY


The  measurements  of  the  temperature  difference T(o)  – T  show  that  a

radiating energy exists inside the accumulator. But they say nothing about the

nature of this energy. Furthermore, the subjective light phenomena yield little

knowledge about the quality of the radiation even though they are extremely

impressive and convincing.

  Over a period of months, several times a day we systematically measure

the discharge of the electroscope, inside the accumulator, in a room, and in

the  open  air.  The  following  premise  underlies  our  experiment  with

electroscopic  measurements:  Charged  leaf  electroscopes  discharge more

rapidly in strongly ionized air than in weak air or air that is not ionized. (By

“ionized air” is meant air containing electronegative units, i.e., “electrons.”)

The air in a room can be “ionized” by X-rays or by the ultraviolet rays from asunlamp. Air at high altitudes is much more strongly ionized than air in the

lowlands. Strongly ionized air causes this rapid discharge because it acts as a

conductor between all the parts of the electroscope, so that the charge of the

metal walls and that of the leaf are more easily equalized than in non-ionized

air which is a poor conductor. The electroscopic measurements in the study

of cosmic rays are based on this principle.

  The  following  possible  results  may  be  expected  from  measuring  the

electroscopic discharges outside and inside the orgone accumulator:

  1. The electroscope discharges with equal speed inside and outside the

orgone accumulator. This would mean that no difference exists between the

charge of the air inside the apparatus and the charge outside of it. Thus, there

is no greater concentration of atmospheric orgone energy inside, in which

case  the  temperature  difference  phenomenon  would  remain

incomprehensible.

  2. The  electroscope  discharges  more  rapidly  inside  than  outside  the

orgone accumulator. This would mean that the air inside the apparatus is

more strongly ionized  than  the  air  outside;  i.e.,  it  contains  more  negative

electric charges (electrons). Our orgone energy would then be identical with

negative electricity. That, too, would make the phenomenon of the absorption

of orgone energy by organic materials incomprehensible.

  3. The  electroscope  discharges  more  slowly  inside  the  orgone

accumulator  than  outside  it.  This  would  imply  that orgone  energy  is

something  other  than  negative  electricity.  It  would  then  be  necessary  to

explain the slower discharge of the electroscope inside the accumulator in

order  to  conclude  that  the  electroscope  is  registering  a concentration  of

orgone energy. Only in this third case would the subjective phenomena, the

temperature difference, and the speed of discharge of the electroscope be

consistent with each other and understandable. Our orgone theory then would

be considerably advanced, since several manifestations of the energy would

now be derived from one single principle.  The  measurements  taken  systematically  inside  and  outside  the

accumulator  do  in  fact  demonstrate  that  the  electroscope  discharges more

slowly inside than outside. Postponing for the moment any discussion of the

why and how of our observation, we simply record it as a fact from which we

conclude:


  1. The energy tension inside the accumulator is different from that outside it. This implies a

    difference in potential between the inside and the outside. What we do not know is whether

    the potential is higher inside than outside or the reverse.

  2. The energy within the apparatus cannot have its origin in a stronger ionization of the air

    inside; otherwise the electroscope would discharge more rapidly inside, not more slowly. If,

    then, the presence of the energy inside the accumulator is unquestionable, but is not due to

    electrons, what is it? It could be another form of energy. In any case, it is not negative

      electricity.


  Although equal or more rapid discharge inside the accumulator would be

easily accounted for within the framework of known theories, it is difficult to

explain the slow discharge which we had not anticipated.

  At this point we are aided by the fact that we charge the electroscope by

drawing off energy from cotton wadding or cellulose. We can also charge it

from our hair (which must be dry) by use of a polysterene rod or a cellulose

disk, both of which absorb this energy from the hair. The energy is present in

the air both inside and outside the apparatus, but in different concentrations,

as  is  demonstrated  by  the  difference  in  the  speed  of  discharge.  The

electroscope has access to the air through the disk at the top and other holes,

and its casing is grounded. The energy transmitted to it by solar radiation or

from  our  body  is  released  back  into  the  surrounding  atmosphere  in  the

process  of  discharge.  We  now  feel  justified  in  considering  the  following

assumption:

  The lower the energy tension of the air is, relative to the charge of the

electroscope, the more rapidly will the electroscope release the energy with

which it was charged. The higher the energy tension of the surrounding air is

(i.e., the smaller the difference between the energy tension of the electroscopeand  that  of  the  surrounding  air),  the  more  slowly  will  the  electroscope

discharge.

  This assumption is in accord with the laws of energy in general. Water

flows faster between two vessels positioned one over the other the greater the

height between the two. The speed of the flow depends on the steepness of

the  drop  or,  in  other  words,  on  the  extent  of  the  difference  in  positional

(potential) energy. The metallic plate of the electroscope can discharge more

rapidly into air of low energy tension than into air of high tension. Here I am

deliberately  trying  to  make  the  difference  in  speed  of  discharge

comprehensible in terms of the traditional theory of potential difference. It

has  been  shown  elsewhere  that  another,  purely  biophysical  interpretation

                                  4
does better justice to the facts.

  This characteristic of our energy is new. It is not explained by ionization:

the electroscope would discharge more rapidly in air with a high electrical

charge.  The  fact  that  this  energy cannot,  therefore,  be  electricity  is

inescapable  but  disquieting,  because  an  energy  that  influences  an

electroscope and is not electromagnetic energy sounds implausible.

  We must consider another possible objection, which would be that the

spontaneous discharge of the electroscope is slower inside than outside the

accumulator because the circulation of air inside the apparatus is slower than

that outside. Hence, the exchange of air ions takes place more slowly inside

the  accumulator  than  outside  of  it,  thus  causing  the  slower  discharge.

According to this viewpoint, the phenomenon could therefore be explained in

the context of the theory of ions, i.e., of electricity.

  This objection is easily tested. We measure exactly the speed of discharge

of  our  electroscope  outside  of  the  accumulator.  Then  we  charge  the

electroscope again to precisely the same level and accelerate the circulation

of the air around it with the aid of an electric fan. Result: The fan does not

affect the speed of discharge. The difference in the speed of discharge cannot

be ascribed to the circulation of air. Our energy behaves differently thanelectricity.  The  speed  of  electroscopic  discharge  depends  solely  upon  the

atmospheric energy tension which, in turn, is determined by the density or

concentration of orgone particles per cubic unit of air.

  As  our  observations  have  shown,  the  energy  in  the  apparatus  is  more

concentrated  than  in  the  open  air.  The  designation  “accumulator  of

atmospheric energy” is therefore accurate.

  In theory, enclosed electroscopes should not lose their charge. The fact is,

however, that they do discharge spontaneously. This phenomenon is called

by physicists “natural leak” and is ascribed to the humidity of the air. Thus,

we  are  in  reality  measuring  the  phenomenon  designated  as  the  “natural

leak” of the electroscope. We do not hermetically seal off the air inside the

electroscope,  but intentionally  allow  access  to  the  outside  air.  We  thus

determine precisely the same phenomenon that the physicist, in measuring

the effect of an electrical radiation source, tries to exclude. Insofar as he is

unsuccessful in doing so, he subtracts the ion effect from the results, because

until  now  the  “natural  leak”  has  not  been  understood. The  spontaneous

discharge of the electroscope “without apparent reason” is nothing other

than the normal effect of atmospheric orgone energy.

  There  is  still  another  possible  objection:  The  electroscope  discharges

more slowly inside the accumulator than outside it only because the inner

metal  walls  insulate  the  interior  of  the  accumulator  against  the  effect  of

radioactive substances. This objection is refuted as follows:


  1. No matter where the accumulator is placed, the phenomenon of the slower discharge in the

    interior of the apparatus is always present, as is the temperature difference. It is improbable

    that “radioactive substances” are ubiquitous.

  2. If the effect were to be ascribed to radioactive substances outside the apparatus, then the

    discharge would have to be more rapid in a simple wooden box than in a wooden box

    protected against radioactivity by metal plates on the outside. In reality, the discharge of the

    electroscope is more rapid when the wooden box is lined on the outside with metal plates.

    This fact refutes the objection and is further confirmation of the accuracy of our finding.


      QUANTITATIVE DETERMINATION OF THE ORGONEOrgone energy manifests itself in temperature differences and in variations in

speeds of electroscopic discharge in the orgone accumulator. These facts can

be  used  as  the  basis  for quantitative  orgone  measurements.  First,  we

determine that a single unit of orgone energy shall be known as 1 org. An org

may be defined as the quantity of orgone energy in a space of 1 cubic foot,

which corresponds to the maintenance of a temperature difference T(o) – T of

1° C. for one hour, according to the formula


                                                      3
                                  1 org = (T(o) – T) · t · f 


T (o) – T being the temperature difference in degrees centigrade, t, the time in

            3
hours, and f , the volume in cubic feet.

  The quantity of orgone energy, i.e., the number of orgone energy particles

per unit of space (org), has to be distinguished from the orgone tension (op).

We define as 1 op that atmospheric orgone charge which in the time unit of

one hour (T, 60t′, and 3600t″) decreases the charge of a static electroscope by

one unit (Eo – Er = 1).

  If 1 op (atm) designates the unit of atmospheric orgone tension, Eo the

charge of the electroscope, Er the remaining electroscope charge after the

reading, (Eo – Er) the amount of discharge, and t the time in hours, then the

following formula represents the atmospheric orgone tension in the open air







op

 

=E0—Er
  The op inside the orgone accumulator can be distinguished from the op of

the atmosphere by adding the designation “accu.” Op can also be expressed

directly in hour-org, minute-org, or second-org, according to whether a unit

of charge of the electroscope discharges in an hour, a minute, a second, or in

fractions or multiples of these time units, as in this table:1 hour op = 60 minute-org (60’ 0)
0.75  op = 45 minute-org (45’ 0)
05  op = 30 minute-org (30 0)
025  op = 15 minute-org (15 0)
016  op = 10 minute-org (10'0)
01  op= 6minute-org ( &0)
005 op= 3minute-org ( 3 0)
0015 op= lminute-org( 1'0)
0.00025 0p = 1 second- Drg ( 170)
  Suppose, for instance, one unit of the electroscope charge discharges in

thirty minutes. The op is then










=05 _,.
P = NEo-Er)

op =30’ org
  If, for example, the total charge of the electroscope Eo = 5 org (equivalent

to 630 volts) is discharged in twenty minutes, then










o

033 (¢)

= = 0066
5—0(5Eo — Er)

 

¢ org (4 minute-org)
  The choice of one or the other method of calculation is entirely a matter

of convenience.

  The orgone charge of the static leaf electroscope can also be expressed in

electrostatic units. One “electrostatic unit” is set internationally at a value of

approximately 300 volts. We charge an electroscope with energy from the

hair until the electroscope leaf is deflected 45° or 90°. The same effect can be

obtained by applying a high voltage to the electroscope. One unit of org-charge  then  corresponds  to  the  voltage  necessary  to  produce  the  same

deflection of the electroscope leaf. By this method, we find that one single

gentle stroke of the hair can draw off energy amounts equivalent to hundreds

of volts.

  The  instrument  used  in  making  these  measurements  is  a  static

electroscope  with  an  aluminum  leaf.  The  voltage  calibration  of  this

electroscope in the laboratory of the Radio Corporation of America showed

the following values:














Scale Divisions Volis
1 135

180 | approximately 45 volts
3 225 per division
4 270,
5 330
6 390
7 450
8 510
9 120 volts {570.
10

m} ‘approximately 100 volts

1 730
T T30/ per divison

approximately 60 volts
‘per division

Standard: 1 org, {
  Using the method of stroking a cellulose disk over the hair, we always

charged the electroscope up to the tenth scale division, that is to an energy

load equivalent to approximately 630 volts, then let it discharge two scale

divisions, i.e., the orgone equivalent of 120 volts, into the surrounding air.

The scale divisions (8–10) thus correspond to 1 org unit charge, i.e., 120

volts. If an electroscope that has been charged to the tenth scale division with

an  orgone  energy  equivalent  of  630  volts  discharges  in  one  hour  (sixty

minutes) 1 org (=120 volts), then the orgone tension (op) of the surrounding

air is 1 hour-op or 60 minute-op. In other words, the electroscope discharged

into the air at the rate of 2 volts per minute.

  The unit 1 org was determined by the constant temperature difference T

(o) – T in one hour in an accumulator of 1 cubic foot. Electroscopically, 1 org

is defined as the equivalent of 120 volts. Whether these two determinations of

the unit 1 org are equivalent is still unknown.  The fact that the curves representing T(o) – T and the atmospheric orgone

tension (op atm) are parallel would appear to indicate this. However, further

investigation will be required to arrive at a definite answer.

  I  would  now  like  to  report  the  results  of  a  few  measurements,  which

reveal  some  extremely  interesting  facts  about  the  orgone  tension  in  the

atmosphere  and  the  relationship  of  this  tension  to  the  tension  in  the

accumulator. Certainly what I am presenting here are only rough outlines;

more intensive work over an extended period of time is needed in order to fill

in all the details. But the essential points are clear. Figure 15 graphs three

superimposed orgone tension curves: op (atm) represents the curve of daily

variations in atmospheric orgone tension, measured regularly at 12 noon; op

(r) depicts the daily variations of orgone tension in the room in which the

orgone accumulator stood at the time of the measurings; op (accu), the third

and  uppermost  curve,  shows  the  variations  in  orgone  tension  inside  the

accumulator, measured between 12 noon and 1 P.M. Curve T(o) – T, drawn as

a  broken  line,  presents  the  variations  in  temperature  difference  at  the

accumulator, measured daily between 12 noon and 1 P.M. from November 29

to  December  22,  1940,  in  an  orgone  accumulator  of  1  cubic  foot,  and

beginning December 24, 1940, in an orgone accumulator of 25 cubic feet (2′

× 2.5′ × 5′), built for human beings. (See also Fig. 16.)o3

25
"o e

 
    

o

os

o0

Decd, DecS De6 Dec? Do Deed Declo Dee il Dec 2
1940 Snow
FIGURE 15. Measurements of the atmospheric orgone in the open air, in the orgone accumulator, and in

the orgone room. Broken line represents T(o) – T. Op 1 corresponds to T(o) – T = 1° C


  The overall pattern of the curves provides the following observations:


  1. The tension curve of the room op (r) is higher than that of the atmosphere in terms of

    minute-org; the tension curve of the accumulator op (accu) is higher than that of the room

    and that of the atmosphere op (atm); i.e., the concentration of energy is at its greatest in the

      accumulator.

  2. The temperature difference curve T (o) – T runs with its ups and downs more or less parallel

    to the tension curve op (atm).

  3. The rise in tension in room and accumulator usually occurs about one day after the rise of

    atmospheric tension.

  4. The atmospheric tension curve is low on rainy and snowy days, high on sunny days. The

    atmospheric  tension  varies  between  close  to  0  and  approximately  1.  The  atmospheric

    tension drops more or less steeply one or two days before snow or rain. The temperature

    difference curve also falls before or during a period of precipitation.


  Thus,  there  is  a  connection  between  the  degree  of  concentration  of

atmospheric  orgone  and  weather  formation.  A  thorough  grasp  of  this

relationship  naturally  is  of  great  importance  to  us  in  our  work  with  the

accumulator in orgone therapy. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B
 

 

 

 

 

 

wersz e | scuns werszane

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

bazowsms  weree o e e e

 
FIGURE 16. Daily variations of the atmospheric orgone tension between July 15 and July 25, 1941


  Let us now dispose of a probable objection to the curves in Figure 15:

The assumption of a special orgone energy is not necessary to account for the

drop in the op (atm) curve, i.e., the more rapid discharge of the electroscope

before the onset of precipitation. This phenomenon can easily be explained

within the context of the theory of “electricity in the air”; quite simply, the

accelerated discharge of the electroscope is due to the fact that the air is more

strongly ionized before rain or thunderstorm. Indeed, this misgiving was in

my mind too, but I was unable to get around the fact of the slower discharge

of the electroscope inside the accumulator.

  Total refutation of this particular objection emerged during experimentalmeasurings  conducted  in  the  months  of  July  and  August  1941  in  my

laboratory at Oquossoc, Maine. Over a number of weeks I measured not only

the daily variations at 12 noon but also the variations in the atmospheric

energy tension during the day from 8 A.M. to approximately 12 midnight,

hourly, in all kinds of weather. These measurements showed unequivocally

that the discharge of the electroscope is dependent, not upon variations in the

“electricity  in  the  air,”  but  upon  variations  of  the  atmospheric  orgone

tension.

  Figure  16  graphs  the  daily  variations  of  atmospheric  tensions  from

measurements taken between July 15 and July 25, 1941. During the early

morning hours the discharge of the electroscope is far more rapid than in the

period between 12 noon and 4 P.M.; it is slowest at midday. This is due, of

course, to the intense solar radiation at midday. Thus, completely in accord

with our other observations, it is due to the higher concentration of orgone

energy  at  that  time  of  day.  It  would  not  be  sensible  to  assume  that  the

atmospheric  air  in  the  early  morning  and  late  evening  is  more  strongly

“ionized” than it is in the noonday sun. The electroscope discharges more

rapidly in the early morning and late evening than at noon. Just the opposite

would be expected if the laws of “air electricity” were being followed. The

highest concentration occurs around 4 P.M. On days when there are no clouds

from early morning to late evening, the curve rises and falls in a more or less

regular pattern. Changing weather, on the other hand, causes considerable

fluctuations  in  the  curves,  as  occurred,  for  instance,  on  July  20,  when,

between 9 A.M. and 8 P.M., there was a repeated rise and fall in the intensity of

concentration not found on days of steady sunshine. We also notice that a

rapid change from high to low concentration of atmospheric energy regularly

occurs about three to ten hours before a rainfall or a thunderstorm. The

electroscope  discharges  very  rapidly  in  the  open  air  and  in  the  orgone

accumulator (slightly less quickly in the accumulator than outside), and the

temperature difference T(o) – T becomes very small or entirely disappears.Measurements taken at regular intervals over an extended period indicate that

the  curve  of  electroscopic  discharge  patterns  itself  in  undulations

approximately parallel to those of the temperature difference curve.

  At two o’clock in the afternoon on July 25 there was thunder with rain.

During the morning, the tension had fallen between 10 and 11 A.M. from 12′

org to 5′ org. A similar drop was registered on July 16, when the tension fell

from 14 minute-org to 10″ org between 4 P.M. and 4:30 P.M.—within the space

of thirty minutes. At midnight there was a heavy downpour.

  The same occurrence was recorded on July 22, when the tension dropped

from 12′ org to 2′ org between 4 P.M. and 7 P.M., and by 10 P.M. was only 30″

org. At 3 A.M. on July 23 a strong, steady rain began.

  On July 19 the weather was windy and very cloudy, and the tension did

not rise above 1 minute-org. At 10 A.M. the electroscope could not be charged

and  at  1 P.M.  a  violent  thunderstorm  started  which  lasted  until  3 P.M. By

contrast, a sunny day can be relied upon to follow days showing a regular

tension curve and relatively high levels of orgone concentration during the

evening hours (1 to 3 minute-org). The daily variations are very important for

orgone therapy. If we expose patients to orgone energy in doses calculated

according to hour-op or minute-org, then the duration of exposure will have

to be different in the early morning hours than at noon or during the late

evening.  This  will  be  necessary  as  long  as  we  are  unable  to  regulate  the

tension of the orgone independent of the weather.

  Control  measurements  taken  at  regular  intervals  since  the  summer  of

1941 confirmed the most important findings: Orgone energy tension varies

with  the  time  of  day;  it  drops  or  disappears  altogether  before  or  during

rainfall or snow; electroscopic reactions occur in direct contravention of the

theory of ionization of the air.

  The reader trained in physics will have posed the question: What relation

does orgone energy have to so-called static electricity? This question was

                      5
discussed elsewhere.5. DEMONSTRATION OF ORGONOTIC PULSATION IN

            THE REALM OF NON-LIVING MATTER


The following observations and experiments were carried out for the purpose

of demonstrating the presence of specifically biological orgone energy in the

purely physical realm. This undertaking succeeded, thereby removing any

possibility of a mystical, otherworldly, philosophical concept of the specific

biological  energy.  The  observations  and  experiments  in  question  are  very

simple and easy to carry out.


THE OSCILLATIONS OF A PENDULUM IN THE PULSATING

        ORGONE ENERGY FIELD OF A METAL SPHERE


Experiment: A metal sphere of iron or steel, about 4 to 6 cm. in diameter, is

                              6
placed on a stable surface, a solid table for instance. A much smaller sphere,

about 1 cm. in diameter, is suspended pendulum-wise at about 0.5 cm. from

the  equator  of  the  larger  sphere.  For  definite  reasons  the  length  of  the

pendulum thread should be exactly 16 cm. My experience is that the best

results are obtained by making the pendulum sphere out of a mixture of soil

and iron filings (i.e., a combination of organic and metallic material) molded

together in water and then put into an extremely thin-walled glass sphere. The

bigger sphere and the pendulum sphere are then covered with a cellulose

cover to protect them against air currents.

    Observation:  In  dry,  sunny  weather  the  pendulum  sphere  oscillates

toward  the  center  of  the  larger  metal  sphere,  spontaneously.  When  the

relative humidity exceeds about 70 percent, or when it rains, the swings of

the  pendulum  grow  smaller  until  they  stop  altogether.  They  resume  their

spontaneous movement with the return of good weather. The swings of the

pendulum will become greater if the observer’s own organism has a strong

and  far-reaching  orgone  energy  field.  The  oscillations  continue  without

stopping, no matter where the apparatus is placed. They are determined onlyby the laws that govern any pendulum, the number of oscillations varying per

unit of time, depending on the length of the pendulum and its height above

sea level.

    Conclusion: This experiment demonstrates the existence of a pulsating

orgone energy field  around  an  ordinary  iron  sphere  capable  of  causing  a

freely suspended pendulum to oscillate. The natural orgone energy field, in

the realm of non-living matter, pulsates.


























MO

i

M: metal sphere
P: pendulum
MO: pendulum sphere (metal and organic matter)
== direction of oscillation
FIGURE 17. Demonstration of orgonotic pulsation in the atmosphere


  THE PULSATION OF ATMOSPHERIC ORGONE ENERGY


Observation  and  Experiment:  My  experiment  was  set  up  as  follows:  A

telescope with an aperture of 3 1/2 inches and a length of 4 feet, capable of a

magnification of 185x (supplied by E. Vion, Paris, France), was so positioned

on the shore of the lake that the opposite shore, about 4 to 8 miles away,could be clearly observed. Observations were made toward all four points of

the compass. They were carried out over two months during the summer of

1944 and four weeks in the summer of 1945, at my cabin on Lake Moose-

lookmeguntic, near Oquossoc, Maine. During these two periods I conducted

observations  at  approximately  half-hourly  intervals  every  day  from  early

morning to late evening. For reasons that will be appreciated, only the daily

mean  and  the  changes  were  actually  recorded.  The  observation  is  the

following:  When  the  telescope  is  pointed  south,  it  is  possible  to  observe

against the background of the opposite shore of the lake, at a magnification of

only 60x, a wavy, pulsating movement traveling, with few exceptions, always

from west to east. The west-east movement is constant, whether the lake is

rough or smooth, whether or not there is wind, and whether the wind is from

west to east or south to north, strong or weak. The further the telescope is

turned toward the west or the east the more difficult it is to see the movement.

It can no longer be seen when the telescope is trained due west or east. The

speed  of  the  wavy  movement  varies  greatly  at  different  times.  It  is

independent of the air temperature. The “something” in the atmosphere is

moving  faster  than  the  earth;  otherwise  its  movement  could  not  be  seen.

Every time a severe thunderstorm formed in the west, the direction of the

undulating movement was reversed, or ceased altogether. I have never seen it

move from south to north or north to south.

  This telescopic observation is supported by an observation that can be

made with the naked eye when there is absolutely no wind or breeze, and the

surface of the lake is completely smooth: a pulsating of an infinite number of

separate sections is perceptible over the water, while the “whole” moves in

more or less rapid pulsations from west to east.

  These observations, simple to make with a little practice and patience, are

in accord with the confirmation of the pulsating orgone energy field around a

metal  sphere,  and  with  the  basic  concept  of  orgone  biophysics  of  the

fundamental pulsatory function of orgone energy. In addition, the rotationand pulsation of atmospheric orgone energy from west to east is in clear and

unequivocal conformity with certain astronomical observations known for a

long  time.  I  intend  to  discuss  elsewhere,  in  detail,  the  implications  for

astronomy  of  the  phenomenon  just  described.  However,  the  preliminary

conclusion is that the earth is surrounded not only by an air atmosphere of a

definite chemical composition but also by an envelope of orgone energy. This

“orgone  envelope”  rotates  from  west  to  east,  faster  than  the  earth.  More

precise research still needs to be done on the relationship of the reversal of

this rotation to local weather formation. The rotating orgone envelope has no

connection  whatsoever  with  waves  of  haze  or  air  movement,  being

independent of these processes.

  This account should be regarded as a preliminary finding which will be

confirmed  and  refined  when  social  and  financial  circumstances  permit.

However,  it  might  be  relevant  here  to  report  that  a  pulsation  in  the

atmosphere has been successfully recorded by oscillograph. I would like to

reserve  the  presentation  of  this  phenomenon,  and  further  research  on  the

subject, for a later time.


6. DEMONSTRATION OF ORGONOTIC LUMINATION AT

            THE ORGONE ENERGY FIELD METER


Experiment:  The  different  pole  of  the  secondary  coil  of  an  induction

apparatus (an old diathermy apparatus, for instance) is connected by ordinary

electric appliance wire to an iron plate, 2 feet long and 1 foot wide. The iron

plate is insulated on the underside with wood. A similar metal plate is then

mounted above and parallel to the first at a distance of 6 to 12 inches and in

such a way that it can slide up and down. The top side of the upper metal

plate is insulated with a piece of plastic celotex, or like material the same size

as the plate and 1/2 inch thick. Electric wire connects the two iron plates to a

simple cylindrical bulb of about 40 watts set between them. The primary

current  of  the  induction  apparatus  is  maintained  at  the  minimum  levelnecessary to make the bulb glow. How this glow is obtained will depend, of

course, on the nature of the induction apparatus used.

    Observation: 1. An argon gas tube (fluorescent tube) held in the hand and

moved toward the upper metal plate luminates. The distance from the plate at

which it starts to glow depends on the strength of the primary current. The

light goes out when we place the gas tube on the upper plate and take away

our hand. The lumination returns as soon as we move our hand close again,

and it becomes particularly strong if we touch the glass of the tube. The

lumination is most intense between the two metal plates, and fades steadily as

the distance from the apparatus is increased. The lumination is intermittent.

By  this  method  we  can  determine  exactly  the  energy  field  of  the  orgone

energy field meter.

  2. The cylindrical bulb between the two metal plates begins to luminate

more intensely when we gradually lower our hands toward the upper plate.

The lumination becomes especially intense if we actually lay our hands on

the upper plate. (To prevent the possibility of electrical shocks there should

be no metal on the surface of the plate.) The more body surface we bring

close to the upper plate, the stronger the lumination becomes. By carefully

adjusting the strength of the primary current, we can even perceive pulsations

of  the  heart,  in  the  form  of  slight  fluctuations  in  the  intensity  of  the

lumination.13)2WOURA[ES 1D

2Ka omoafa 1

QI u2)sBun} EM-09-0F 14

2[eas 010U S

play AB1oua auofio Suneusuny .

LESENEEEN

[eHoIEW SUERI0 1O

910d JuaIayIp :p $3[0d JUAIAIIPUL 1 {WIAISAS [100 AIBPUODDS D)

 
FIGURE 18. Diagram of orgone field meter device


  3. A static leaf electroscope shows no deflection when we approach its

plate with the palm of the hand. But if we put the electroscope in the energy

field of the apparatus, on its upper plate, and then move the palm of the hand

toward  the  plate  of  the  electroscope—without  touching  it,  of  course—the

electroscope leaf will be influenced.

  4.  A  freshly  cut  branch  with  many  leaves  makes  the  bulb  luminate,

although the lumination is weaker than that elicited by the hand. A live or

freshly  killed  fish  placed  upon  the  upper  metal  plate  produces  the  sameeffect. Note that the longer the fish has been dead, the feebler the lumination.

Eventually it fades completely. The same gradual decrease in intensity is also

true for the branch.

  5. There is no lumination when we bring an old piece of wood close to the

upper plate. (We, of course, make sure that the wood is long enough so that

our own orgone energy field does not come into contact with the orgone

energy field of the apparatus.) An iron plate held above and parallel to the

upper plate does make the cylindrical bulb luminate, however.

  6. The argon gas cannot be made to luminate in the energy field of an X-

ray machine of 60–80 kilovolt.


                                  CONCLUSIONS


  1. In contrast with simple, electrical high-tension voltage, the secondary

coil of an induction apparatus develops an orgone energy field that can be

demonstrated by the lumination of an inert gas, such as helium, argon, or

neon, without any direct wire contact being necessary.

  2. The  orgonotic  lumination  is  the  result  of  the  contact  between  two

orgone energy fields.

  3.  The  lumination  effect  can  be  achieved  only  by  contact  between  an

orgone energy field and the field of a living organism, not through contact

with  non-living,  organic  matter.  This  means  that  the  living  organism  is

distinguished from the non-living in that it has an orgone energy field.

  4. By installing a sensitive electric eye opposite the cylindrical bulb, the

luminating energy can be transformed into electrical energy and measured in

electrical units by means of a galvanometer. The orgone field meter can thus

be used for the determination of the intensity and range of the orgone energy

field of a living organism.


          7. A MOTOR FORCE IN ORGONE ENERGY


In the summer of 1947 certain observations were made from which a mostsignificant conclusion has been drawn:

  1. Using several accumulators or a specially built orgone room, a high

concentration  of  atmospheric  orgone  energy  can  be  obtained.  This  is

demonstrated  by  Geiger-Müller  counters  registering  40–80  impulses  per

minute, at a threshold voltage of 700–800 volts.

  2. Geiger counter tubes that have absorbed orgone energy by being kept

in an orgone atmosphere of high concentration for several weeks can produce

25  to  100  impulses  per  second  in  the  impulse  counter,  at  a  “rotation

threshold”  of  900–1000  volts.  This  rate  of  impulses  amounts  to  an  even

rotation of the pointer in the impulse counter. In other words:

  3. Orgone  energy  is  capable  of  developing  a  motor  force.  Upon

completion of control experiments, the relevant details will be published. But

it is evident, at this point, that there is a motor force in orgone energy that

provides an explanation for the locomotion of living organisms.                                        CHAPTER V


          The Carcinomatous Shrinking Biopathy




                  1. DEFINITION OF BIOPATHIES


The  cancer  tumor  is  merely  a  visible  symptom  of  the  disease  we  call

“cancer.” Localized treatment of the cancer tumor by surgery or irradiation

with radium or X-ray therefore constitutes treatment of a symptom only, not

of the disease itself. In this regard, death from cancer is not the result of the

presence of one or more tumors. It is rather the final result of the systemic

biological disease “cancer,” which is caused by a disintegrative process in the

total organism. Medical literature gives no information about the nature of

this  systemic  disease.  So-called cancer  disposition  indicates  merely  that

deadly processes, uninvestigated up to now, are at work behind the cancer

tumor. The typical cancer cachexia, the last stage of the disease, should be

regarded only as the ultimate, visible phase of the unknown systemic process

“cancer.”

  The term “cancer disposition” is meaningless. We would therefore like to

replace it with the term carcinomatous biopathy, or cancer biopathy. The

purpose of the following chapter is to demonstrate the process that is at the

basis of the cancer biopathy.

  The term biopathies  refers  to  all  disease  processes  caused  by  a  basic

dysfunction in the autonomic life apparatus. Once started, this dysfunction

can manifest itself in a variety of symptomatic disease patterns. A biopathy

can result in a carcinoma (carcinomatous biopathy), but it can just as easily

lead  to  angina  pectoris,  asthma,  cardiovascular  hypertension,  epilepsy,

catatonic  or  paranoid  schizophrenia,  anxiety  neurosis,  multiple  sclerosis,chorea,  chronic  alcoholism,  etc.  We  are  still  ignorant  of  the  factors  that

determine  the  direction  in  which  a  biopathy  will  develop.  Of  prime

importance to us, however, is the common denominator of all these diseases:

a  disturbance  in  the  natural  function  of  pulsation  in  the  total  organism.

Fractures, local abscesses, pneumonia, yellow fever, rheumatic pericarditis,

acute  alcoholic  poisoning,  infectious  peritonitis,  syphilis,  etc.,  are,

accordingly, not biopathies. They do not develop from disturbances in the

autonomic pulsation of the total life apparatus; they are circumscribed and

can only secondarily bring about a disturbance of the biological pulsation.

The  results  of  recent  orgone-biophysical  research,  however,  have  raised

questions about the exclusion of pneumonia and some heart diseases from the

realm  of  biopathies.  Further  investigation  will  prove  or  disprove  my

assumption that the disposition to pneumonia, or to valvular heart diseases

caused by “rheumatic fever,” may be due to a chronic extension of the bony

chest structure, resulting from the typical inspiratory fixation of the chest. For

the  present,  however,  we  will  use  the  term  “biopathy”  only  where  it  is

definite that the disease process begins with a disturbance of pulsation, no

matter  what  secondary  disease  pattern  results.  Consequently,  we  can

distinguish  a  schizophrenic  biopathy  from  a  cardiovascular  biopathy,  and

these from an epileptic or carcinomatous biopathy, etc.

  This  addition  to  medical  terminology  is  justified  by  the  fact  that  we

cannot understand any of the many specific diseases of the autonomic life

apparatus unless:


  1. We distinguish them from typical infectious and traumatic surgical diseases.

  2. We look for and discover their common mechanism, the disturbance of biological pulsation.

  3. We learn to understand their differentiations into the various disease patterns.


  Cancer  is  particularly  well  suited  to  a  study  of  the  fundamental

mechanisms  of  biopathies,  because  it  manifests  many  of  the  disturbances

treated  in  everyday  general  medical  practice.  It  reveals  pathological  cellgrowth; it has as one of its essential characteristics bacterial intoxication and

putrefaction; it develops from chemical as well as bio-electric disturbances of

the organism; it is related to emotional and sexual disturbances; it generates a

number of secondary processes, such as anemia, which otherwise develop as

independent diseases; it is a disease decisively influenced by our “civilized”

mode  of  living;  it  is  of  as  much  concern  to  the  nutritionist  as  to  the

endocrinologist or the virus researcher.

  The many manifestations of cancer, like the multiplicities of neuroses and

psychoses, conceal a single common denominator: sexual stasis. This leads

us directly to our thesis: Sexual stasis represents a fundamental disturbance

of biological pulsation. Sexual excitation is a primal function of the living

plasma  system. The  sexual  function  is  demonstrably  the  productive  life

                  1
function per se. A chronic disturbance of this function must of necessity

coincide with a biopathy.

  The stasis of biosexual excitation is manifested in two ways principally:

indirectly,  as  emotional  disturbance  of  the  psychic  apparatus,  i.e.,  as  a

neurosis or psychosis; or directly, as a functional disturbance of the organs, in

which  case  it  appears  as  an  organic  disease.  According  to  our  present

knowledge, it cannot actually generate infectious diseases.

  The central mechanism of a biopathy is a disturbance in the discharge of

biosexual excitation. This statement requires the most detailed substantiation.

But it should come as no surprise that physical and chemical processes as

well  as  emotional  factors  are  at  work  in  biopathies.  The  psychosomatic

harmony of the total biological system is most clearly evident in biosexual

emotion. It is only logical, therefore, that disturbances in the discharge of

biosexual energy, wherever they appear, form the basis for disturbances of

biological functioning, that is, a biopathy.


                      2. BIOPATHIC SHRINKING

                                                                                      2
The living process in man is fundamentally the same as in the amoeba. Itsmain characteristic is biological pulsation, the alternation of contraction and

expansion. This process can be observed in single-celled organisms in the

rhythmical contractions of the vacuoles or the contractions and serpentine

movements of the plasma. In metazoa, its most obvious manifestation is in

the cardiovascular system, where the pulse beat is clear evidence of pulsation.

Its manifestation in the organism as a whole varies according to the structure

of  the  individual  organs.  In  the  intestines,  for  example,  it  appears  as

“peristalsis,” waves of alternating expansion and contraction. In the urinary

bladder,  the  biological  pulsation  functions  in  response  to  the  stimulus  of

mechanical expansion caused by the filling of the bladder with urine. The

process also manifests itself in the muscular functions, namely as contraction

in the striated muscles and as undulating peristalsis in the smooth muscles. It

permeates the entire organism in the orgastic convulsion (the orgasm reflex).

  Neither  the  pulsatory  movements  of  the  body  organs,  nor  their

disturbances,  such  as  blocking,  shrinking,  etc.,  are  compatible  with  the

prevailing notion that the nerves act merely as conductors of impulses, while

they themselves remain rigid and immobile. Autonomic movements can be

comprehended only if the autonomic nervous system is itself mobile. This can

be proven by direct observations. We place a small, sufficiently transparent

worm (e.g., a meal worm) under a good microscope, so arranged that both the

ganglion and its fibers are in focus. Since the worm is constantly in motion

and  reacts  sharply  to  the  stimulus  of  light,  focusing  requires  repeated

movement  of  the  fine  adjustment  screws.  This  experiment  will  provide

convincing  evidence  that the  autonomic  nervous  system  is  not  rigid  but

actually contracts and expands. The movements of the nerves are serpentine,

slowly  undulating,  and  occasionally  jerky.  They  consistently  precede  the

corresponding movements of the total organism by a fraction of a second:

first  the  nerve  and  its  rami  contract,  followed  by  the  contraction  of  the

musculature. Expansion proceeds in the same fashion. As the worm dies, the

nervous  system  gradually  shrinks,  and  there  occurs  a  bending  of  theorganism.  This  process  of  gradual  shrinking  is  interrupted  by  occasional

contractions.  After  a  period  of  complete  immobility,  the  rigid  contraction

(rigor mortis) abates, the organism grows slack, together with the nerves, and

movement fails to return.

    Biopathic shrinking begins with a chronic preponderance of contraction

and an inhibition of expansion in the plasma system. This manifests itself

most clearly in the respiratory disturbances of neurotic and psychotic patients

in whom pulmonary and thoracic pulsation (the alternation of expansion and

contraction) is restricted, and in whom an inspiratory attitude predominates.

The  general  contraction  (sympatheticotonia)  is  not  confined  to  individual

organs. It encompasses entire organ systems, their tissues, the blood system,

the endocrine system, as well as the character structure. It is manifested in a

variety of forms, according to its locality, e.g., as high blood pressure and

tachycardia  in  the  cardiovascular  system,  as  shrinking  of  the  red  blood

corpuscles  (formation  of  T-bacilli,  poikilocytosis,  anemia)  in  the  blood

system, as affect block and character armoring in the realm of emotions, as

spastic constipation in the alimentary canal, as pallor in the skin, as orgastic

impotence in the sexual function, etc.

  Here  the  attentive  reader  will  raise  an  objection:  Can  one  speak  of

“shrinking,” he will ask, if the autonomic life apparatus is merely in a state of

chronic contraction? Is it not possible that the contraction will yield and the

function of complete pulsation be reestablished? Should a distinction not be

made  between  “chronic  contraction”  and  “shrinking”  of  the  autonomic

nervous system? Could not the shrinking very well be a result of the chronic

contraction of the autonomic nerves, that is, a gradual withering of the life

apparatus, a gradual, premature dying?

  The  objection  is  correct. Biopathic  shrinking  in  cancer  is  in  fact  the

consequence  of  a  gradual,  chronic  contraction  of  the  autonomic  life

apparatus.                    3. SEX-ECONOMIC PREMISES


The following facts, familiar to us from our sex-economic clinical practice,

connect the sexual function to cancer:


  1. Poor external respiration which results in a disturbance in internal respiration in the tissues.

  2.  Disturbances  in  the  orgonotic  charge-discharge  functions  of  the  autonomic  organs,

    especially the sexual organs.

  3. Chronic spasms of the musculature.

  4. Chronic orgastic impotence.


  The connection between disturbances in the discharge of sexual energy

and  cancer  has  not  been  carefully  examined.  However,  experienced

gynecologists are aware of the existence of such a connection. Respiratory

disturbances and muscular spasms are direct consequences of an acquired

fear of sexual excitation (orgastic impotence). Poorly charged, spastic organs

or  organs  with  insufficient  respiration  develop  a  biological  weakness  that

renders  them  highly  vulnerable  to  cancer-producing  stimuli  of  all  kinds.

Organs that function in a biologically natural manner resist the same stimuli.

This is an obvious and necessary assumption.

  The  clinically  established  findings  of  deficient  biological  charge,

muscular  spasm,  and  reduced  external  and  internal  respiration  give  the

concept of “cancer disposition” a tangible content. I now want to show how

discoveries  in  sex-economic  clinical  practice  prepare  the  way  to  cancer

research.

  The sex-economic examination of character neuroses revealed again and

again the crucial role of muscular spasms and their devitalizing effect upon

the organism. Muscular spasm and deficiency in orgonotic charge are felt

subjectively as “deadness.” Muscular hypertension, resulting from chronic

sexual stasis, regularly causes a decrease of organ sensations, to the point

where the individual feels dead. This process corresponds to a block of bio-

energetic activity in the affected organ. The blocking of biosexual excitationin  the  genitals,  for  instance,  is  accompanied  by  spasm  of  the  pelvic

musculature, as in the uterine spasms of frigid and neurotic women which

frequently  lead  to  menstrual  disturbances  and  pain,  polypous  tumors,  and

myomata.  Spasm  in  the  uterus  has  no  other  function  than  to  prevent  the

biosexual energy from being felt in the vagina. Spasms inhibiting the free

flow of plasmatic currents affect particularly the annular musculature, e.g., in

the throat, at the entrance and exit of the stomach, in the anus, etc. These are

areas  in  the  organism  where  cancer  occurs  with  particular  frequency.

Disturbance  in  the  biological  charge  in  a  gland,  mucous  membrane,  or  a

particular area of the skin is caused by a muscular block close to the affected

point  which  cuts  off  the  plasmatic  current.  A  woman  I  treated  orgone-

therapeutically had an incipient, carcinomatous lesion, confirmed by X-ray,

of the fourth costal cartilage on the right side. This condition was the result of

spastic contraction, occurring over several decades, of the right pectoralis

muscle  due  to  a  strong  holding-back  in  the  shoulders,  brought  about  by

repressed beating impulses. She had never experienced orgasm and suffered

from compulsive flirting.

  In  the  practice  of  orgone  therapy,  we  see  not  only  character-neurotic

disturbances but also, quite routinely, schizophrenia, epilepsy, Parkinson-like

disease,  rheumatic  and  cancerous  manifestations.  An  organic  disease  may

emerge  during  treatment  or  develop  later,  recalling  early  evidence  that

foreshadowed  it:  for  example,  the  spasms  of  the  pelvic  musculature  that

occur so frequently in women, usually resulting in the development of benign

tumors in the genital organs.

  In our clinical practice, we have been faced with the important question of

what  happens  to  the somatic  sexual  excitation  when  it  is  not  regularly

discharged. We know only that biosexual excitation can be restricted and

bound  up  in  chronic  muscular  tension.  In  female  patients  this  tension

manifests  itself  in  knot-like  inspissations  in  the  uterus  and  can  be  felt  as

lumps above the pubis. The muscular spasm of the uterus usually spreads tothe anal sphincter and the vagina, then to the adductors of the thigh. The

pelvis is regularly retracted and the sacral spine is often stiff and ankylosed.

Lumbago and lordosis are typical of this condition. No organ sensations are

felt  in  the  pelvis.  During  exhalation,  the  wave  of  vegetative  excitation  is

blocked by the rigidly elevated chest or the tense abdomen. The excitation of

the large abdominal ganglia does not penetrate through to the genital organs.

Consequently there is a disturbance of biological functioning. The genitals

are no longer susceptible to biological excitation.

  Many  women  suffering  from  genital  tension  and  vaginal  anesthesia

complain of feeling that “something is not right down there.” They report

having experienced during puberty the familiar signs of biosexual excitation,

itching  and  prickling,  and  having  learned  to  combat  these  excitations  by

holding their breath, with the consequence that they no longer felt anything.

Later, they typically relate, they began to feel a sensation of “deadness” or

“numbness” in the genitals, which worried them. Since the biological state of

the  organs  is  mirrored  in  organ  sensations,  we  must  impute  serious

                                                                                    3
significance to such descriptions for the evaluation of somatic processes.

  The sexual inhibition commonly found in women is responsible for the

prevalence of breast and genital cancer. In countless cases, this inhibition

may be present for decades before it takes the form of cancer.

  The following case illustrates in a particularly simple manner the direct

connection between character armoring, muscular spasm, and the appearance

of a cancer tumor.

  A forty-five-year-old man came to my laboratory for treatment of a total

obstruction of the esophagus caused by a carcinomatous growth. The intake

of solid foods had become impossible for him, and he would immediately

vomit liquids. X-rays showed a shadowy area the size of a small fist and a

complete  obstruction  in  the  middle  of  the  esophagus.  Emaciation  and

weakness  had  already  appeared,  as  had  severe  anemia  and  T-bacilli

intoxication.  The  patient’s  history  revealed  the  following  facts:  Severalmonths before the first occurrence of the cancer symptoms, his son, whom he

especially loved, had been drafted into military service. This worried him and

he  became  deeply  depressed.  (Characterologically,  he  tended  to  be

depressive.)  In  a  few  days,  he  developed  a  spasm  of  the  esophagus.  He

experienced difficulties in swallowing, which, however, disappeared when he

drank water. These complaints, accompanied by a feeling of pressure in the

chest, came and went for some time, until one day they became irreversible.

The difficulties in swallowing increased rapidly. He visited a physician, who

established  the  existence  of  the  constriction  and  a  small  growth.  X-ray

treatment proved ineffective, and after a few months the man was on the

verge of death from starvation. It should be noted that from childhood this

patient had suffered severe rigidity of the jaw musculature; his face bore a

stiff, grim expression. Passive movement of the jaws was markedly curtailed.

His speech was correspondingly restricted; he spoke through his teeth.

  It is not yet possible to gauge the full extent of the somatic devastation

resulting  from  an  inhibition  of  the  natural  biological  rhythm  manifest  in

respiration, and in sexual tension and gratification. Poor breathing must do

severe damage to the internal respiration of the organs, i.e., to the supply of

oxygen and the elimination of carbon dioxide. Several years ago, when I

recognized the significant part played by respiratory deficiencies in emotional

disturbances, I remembered that in cancerous tissue there is a marked oxygen

deficiency.

  The Viennese scientist Warburg discovered that the various cancer stimuli

have  one  common  feature,  namely  the  production  of  a  local  oxygen

deficiency, which in turn causes a respiratory disturbance in the affected

    4
cells. According to his hypothesis the cancer cell is a poorly breathing cell,

deficient  in  tissue  oxidation.  Warburg  sees  this  oxygen  deficiency  which

leads  to  respiratory  disturbance  of  the  cells  as  one  cause  of  cancer.  He

reasoned that in certain affected, localized areas the only cells capable of

survival  and  further  development  will  be  those  which  overcome  therespiratory disturbance caused by the oxygen deficiency, thereby assuming

the metabolism of the cancer cells. The process is, basically, a disturbance of

the energy metabolism. The respiratory disturbance is a property of all known

malignant  tumors,  including  the  Rous  sarcoma. Cancer  metabolism,  is,

therefore, to be viewed as the metabolism of normally growing cells in a

condition of anoxia.

  However, we cannot conclude from Warburg’s correct findings that the

cancer cell is just a normal cell assuming a different kind of growth because

of oxygen deficiency. Biologically, the cancer cell is basically different from

the normal cell; it is nothing but a protozoal formation.

  These  findings  provide  the  factual  link  between  the  autonomic  life

functions and cancer.


4. FROM THE CASE HISTORY OF A CANCER PATIENT:

          AN EXPERIMENT IN ORGONE THERAPY


I  would  now  like  to  submit  the  case  history  of  a  cancer  patient  that  is

particularly revealing of the nature of the shrinking biopathy.

  The patient’s brother stated that the illness had set in three years before,

in the form of excruciating pain in the right hip bone. The pain was incessant

and “pulling.” At this time, the patient weighed 125 lbs. She could not raise

herself from a supine position. Her physician diagnosed a sacroiliac spasm

and gave her injections of morphine and atropine, but without success. The

pain remained acute and the patient could not leave her bed. According to

reports from her relatives, she lay flat on her back, immobile. Three months

later, the patient began to have episodes of vomiting. About this time, pain

spread  from  the  ilio-sacral  region  to  the  fifth  cervical  vertebra.  X-rays

showed  a  collapsed  vertebra.  An  orthopedist  had  the  patient  placed  in  a

plaster cast. This physician was the first to discover an atrophy of the tenth

dorsal  vertebra,  traceable  to  a  cancerous  tumor  in  the  left  breast.  The

diagnosis of cancer was then confirmed by biopsy. The patient underwent X-ray  treatment  of  the  pelvis  and  spine.  She  remained  bedridden.  Another

physician then made her sterile, using X-ray. When she left the clinic, her

weight was down to 90 lbs.

  The  patient’s  hospital  file  provided  the  following  information:  Four

months prior to her admission, she had begun to feel pains in her right hip,

especially when she walked. It was also difficult for her to sit down. We were

struck by the fact that the pains which kept the patient bedridden for more

than two years were not originally felt in the area of the cancer tumor. The

pains were in the right hip, whereas the primary tumor was located in the left

breast, with metastases in the spine.

  The patient also suffered from vomiting. The hospital record stated that

she lay flat in bed and could move only with great pain. Her lymph glands

were not enlarged. Her breast tumor measured roughly 3 x 2 x 6 cm. Even at

this time, her leg movements were restricted. The sacrum was rigid and the

spine was painfully sensitive over most of its length. The hospital diagnosis

was carcinoma of the left breast, with bone metastases, and her physician at

the hospital concluded that the case was hopeless.

    Twenty-six months after the discovery of the breast tumor, the patient

was brought to my experimental cancer laboratory. She was barely able to

stand on her own, and had to be helped along by two relatives. Her skin,

especially on her face, was ashen, and shrunken around the nose. The pains in

her back, sharply localized at the twelfth dorsal vertebra, were extraordinarily

severe. The left breast displayed a tumor the size of a small apple, barely

movable. A blood test undertaken the same day yielded the following results:

hemoglobin content 35%, T-bacilli culture in bouillon strongly positive after

twenty-four hours. Elongated, serpentine rot bacteria were seen, and the red

blood corpuscles for the most part were in a state of bionous disintegration,

with large numbers of T-spikes. Small nucleated round cells and heaps of T-

bacilli were also visible. The autoclavation test yielded predominately blue

bions, but the vesicles were small and radiated only weakly. Inoculation of                                                                                  5
the bouillon culture on agar produced a distinct margin of T-bacilli. These

findings  in  the  blood  indicated  extreme  biological  weakness  of  the  blood

system. Radiographic examination revealed the following:


  X-RAY EXAMINATION OF ENTIRE SPINE

    The  fifth  cervical  vertebra  is  collapsed.  No  significant  findings  at  the  other  cervical

  vertebrae. The dorsal spine shows collapse of the tenth and twelfth vertebrae and a narrowing of

  the joint space between the third and fourth vertebrae. There is also strong suggestion of a

  metastatic lesion at the medial third of the right ninth rib.

    No lesions are present at the lumbar spine but there are three round areas of lesser density at

  the right ilium near the sacroiliac joint which are very suggestive of metastatic lesions, although

  they might be gas shadows of the cecum.

      Conclusion: multiple metastatic bone lesions.


  The  physician  to  whom  I  sent  the  patient  for  a  general  examination

declared the case hopeless on the basis of the X-rays. However, it was the

biological weakness of the blood, and not the X-ray photographs, that made

the greatest impression on me.

  Two physicians who were friends of the patient’s family declared that she

would not survive more than two weeks. Another physician felt, on the basis

of the information received from physicians at the hospital, that the patient

could live a maximum of two months.


                        THE MUSCULAR ARMOR


The biophysical habitus of the patient when I first saw her was as follows:

Her jaw was clamped tight; she spoke through her teeth as if hissing; the

masseters reacted with strong spasm to any attempt to pull down the jaw. The

superficial  and  deep  musculature  of  the  neck,  especially  in  the

supraclavicular region, was extraordinarily rigid. The patient held her head

somewhat  pulled  in  and  tilted  forward,  as  if  she  were  afraid  something

terrible would happen to her neck if she moved her head. At first, this manner

of holding the head and neck seemed to be attributable to the fact that herfifth cervicular vertebra was collapsed. The patient had been wearing a collar

brace for some time, and a fracture of the cervical spine as a consequence of

too rapid or extreme movement was a possibility. As later became clear, the

patient made good use of this fact as a neurotic defense. Her fear of moving

her neck existed long before the collapse of the vertebra. Indeed, her manner

of holding her head and neck was only part of a general biophysical attitude

which we had to understand not as the result but as the biopathic cause of

her cancer.

  All reflexes of the head, trunk, and legs were normal. Respiration was

severely disturbed. The lips were drawn in, the nostrils somewhat distended,

as she labored to inhale air through the nose. The thorax was immobile. It

failed to contract and expand with the rhythm of respiration and remained

chronically fixed in the inspiratory position. When directed to breathe out

fully, the patient was unable to; in fact, she did not seem to understand what

was being asked of her. The attempt to push the thorax manually into the

expiratory position, i.e., to push it down, was thwarted by marked muscular

resistance.  Head,  neck,  and  shoulders  formed  a  unified,  solid  mass,  as  if

independent movement in the individual joints was impossible. The patient

was able to raise her arms only very slowly and with great difficulty. The

handclasp in both hands was exceptionally feeble. The scapular muscles were

extremely taut and knotted. The muscles between the shoulder blades, on

both sides of the cervical spine, were painfully sensitive to the touch.

  The abdominal wall also was tense, and reacted with strong resistance to

the slightest pressure. The musculature of her legs seemed thin, relative to the

rest of the body, as though atrophied. The pelvis was sharply retracted and

immobile.

    Superficial  psychiatric  examination  yielded  the  following  information.

The patient had suffered from insomnia for many years before the discovery

of the cancer tumor. She had been widowed for twelve years. The marriage,

which had lasted two years, had been to all outward appearances stable but inreality  had  been  unhappy.  In  contrast  to  so  many  other  cases  of  marital

unhappiness, where there is no consciousness of suffering, the patient had

always been fully aware that her marriage was a bad one. Her husband was

impotent.  When  coitus  finally  succeeded,  the  husband  suffered  from

premature  ejaculation  and  the  patient  remained  unsatisfied.  In  the  first

months of the marriage, her sexual dissatisfaction caused her much suffering.

She later “got used to it.” She had always been conscious of the need for

sexual gratification but had been unable to find the means. When her husband

died,  she  devoted  herself  to  the  upbringing  of  her  child,  rejecting  any

approaches  from  men  and  avoiding  social  contact.  In  time,  her  sexual

excitation subsided. It was replaced by anxiety states, which she combated

with various phobias. When she came to me, she showed no anxiety; she

seemed emotionally well balanced and reconciled to her fate. To the character

analyst,  she  presented  the  familiar  picture  of  neurotic  resignation;  she  no

longer had any impulse to change her life. I avoided any attempt to probe

deeper into the latent conflict of the patient and focused my attention on the

organic changes that soon appeared.


THE RESULTS OF THE ORGONE THERAPY EXPERIMENT

                                                                                          6
A precise account of the technique of orgone therapy will be presented later.

Here, I shall only convey the essentials.

  Our orgone therapy experiments with cancer patients consist in having

them sit in an orgone accumulator. The orgone energy “accumulated” in the

interior  of  this  enclosure  penetrates  the  naked  body  and,  moreover,  is

breathed in. The length of time the patients are exposed to the radiation in the

accumulator  is  determined  by  the  atmospheric  energy  tension,  which  is

measured in minute-orgs by comparing the speed of electroscopic discharge

inside  the  accumulator  with  the  speed  of  discharge  in  the  air  outside  the

              7
accumulator.

  During the initial sessions of the experiment, I exposed the patient to 30minute-org of radiation, i.e., the patient remained inside the accumulator for

thirty  minutes,  exposed  to  radiation  in  which  the  electroscopic  discharge

occurs at a rate of sixty minutes per unit.

  In the following account, I wish to mention only those reactions of the

patient  that  are  typical  of  all  cancer  patients  undergoing  orgone  therapy.

Individual reactions will be designated as such.

  During the patient’s first exposure to orgone radiation, the skin between

her shoulder blades reddened at a spot that two months later would play a

significant role in her functional disease. From the second exposure on, the

reactions became intenser and more distinct. The pain in the region of the

tenth dorsal vertebra regularly decreased during the radiation. The subsidence

of the pain generally lasted until the next treatment. The pains intensified

acutely in bad weather, especially with humidity or rain. During the patient’s

second exposure, the reddening of the skin spread to the upper part of the

back and the chest. When the irradiation was interrupted for five minutes, the

reddening  disappeared,  returning  as  soon  as  the  patient  reentered  the

accumulator.  From  the  third  irradiation  on,  the  patient  felt  the  air  in  the

accumulator to be “closer and heavier.” “I feel as though I’m filling up”; “I

have  a  buzzing  around  the  ears  from  the  inside”;  “something  makes  me

strong”; “something clears up in my body.” During the third exposure the

patient also began to perspire, especially under the arms. When asked about

this, she reported that during the past years she had never perspired.

  These reactions of the organism to the effects of orgone radiation are

typical of all cancer patients. In some, one particular reaction may be most

prominent;  in  others,  a  different  one  may  predominate.  Reddening  of  the

skin, lowering of the pulse rate, the outbreak of warm perspiration, and the

subjective sensations of something in the body “loosening up,” “filling up,”

or “swelling,” etc., represent a pattern of reactions for which there can be

only  one  interpretation:  the  cancer  habitus  is  determined  by  general

sympatheticotonia, i.e., by vegetative contraction. That is why the symptomsof most cancer patients include accelerated pulse, pallor, blotchy cyanosis

and  dryness  of  skin,  sunken  cheeks,  sluggish  functioning  of  the  organs,

constipation, and the inability to perspire. The effect of the orgone energy

radiation is vagotonic. In other words, it acts as a counter-force resisting the

general sympatheticotonic shrinking of the organism. The pulse of a patient

exposed  to  orgone  radiation  in  the  accumulator  may  drop  within  twenty

minutes from 120 to 90, or from 150 to 110. This is accomplished without

any medication. The reddening of the skin and the outbreak of perspiration

are  corresponding  phenomena;  the  peripheral  blood  vessels  dilate  and  the

blood  pressure  decreases.  In  terms  of  biological  pulsation, the  chronic

contraction  of  the  plasma  system  subsides  and  gives  way  to  vagotonic

expansion. This “plasmatic expansion” is accompanied by a reduction of the

typical cancer pain.

  The  pain  suffered  by  cancer  patients  is  usually  attributed  to  local

mechanical  tissue  damage  caused  by  the  tumor.  In  some  cases,  pain

undoubtedly is caused that way, e.g., if there is pressure on a nerve or if a

sensitive organ is damaged. However, the typical cancer pain to which I am

referring  here  should  be  clearly  distinguished  from  local,  mechanically

produced  pains.  I  will  refer  to  it  specifically  as  “shrinking  pain.”  To

understand it, we have to review a few facts generally overlooked until now.

    Sex-economy  has  to  relinquish  the  view  dominating  contemporary

medicine  that  the  autonomic  nerves  of  multicellular  organisms  merely

transmit impulses and are themselves rigid. “Tearing” and “pulling” pains are

incomprehensible without the realization that the autonomic nervous system

itself expands and contracts, i.e., is mobile. This fact can be confirmed, as I

demonstrated earlier, by microscopic examination of the autonomic nervous

system in, for instance, meal worms. We observed that the nerve fibers of the

autonomic  ganglion  expanded  and  contracted  and  indeed  moved

independently of the movements of the total organism. These movements

actually  preceded  those  of  the  total  body.  The  impulses  manifestedthemselves first in the movements of the autonomic nervous system and were

transmitted secondarily to the mechanical locomotor organs of the organism.

This finding sounds revolutionary and strange, but in actual fact it represents

a banal conclusion, later confirmed by direct observation, that I had to draw

from the pulsatory functions of the organism. The contracting and expanding

of the amoeba continues to exist in the multicellular organism in the form of

the  contractile  and  expansile  autonomic  nervous  system.  This  autonomic

nervous  system  is  nothing  other  than  organized  contractile  plasma.  The

emotional, vegetative, autonomic movement is therefore a direct expression

of the plasma current. The prevailing notion of the rigidity of the autonomic

nerves does not accommodate any of the phenomena observed in biophysical

functioning, such as pleasure, fear, tension, relaxation, sensations of pressure,

pulling,  pain,  etc.  On  the  other  hand,  the  contractility  of  the  autonomic

nervous system, which forms a functional and histological unity (syncytium),

explains in a simple way our subjective plasmatic sensations. What we feel as

pleasure  is  an  expansion  of  our  organism.  In  pleasure  corresponding  to

vagotonic expansion, the autonomic nerves actually stretch out toward the

world. In anxiety, on the other hand, we feel a crawling back into the self: a

shrinking, a hiding, a constriction (angustiae, Angst). In these sensations, we

are experiencing the real process of contraction of the autonomic nervous

system.

  We feel the orgasm as an involuntary convulsion; this again reflects the

objective process of expansion and contraction of the entire plasma system.

The pain felt by cancer patients mirrors the retraction of the autonomic nerves

from the diseased area and the “pull” on the tissues. The expression “pulling

pain” or “tearing pain” conforms completely to the objective process. The

unequivocal and simple fact of the identity of our organ sensations with the

actual processes within the autonomic nervous system can be denied only if

one  assumes  a  mechanistically  inflexible,  unalive,  unbiological,  and

unpsychological attitude. Such a perspective exiles our organ sensations tothe realm of metaphysics and thereby fails to apply to a single fact of the

cancer syndrome.

  We  now  understand  the  seemingly  remarkable  phenomenon  of  cancer

pain  generally  decreasing  or  disappearing  in  the  orgone  accumulator.  If

cancer pain is not the expression of a local mechanical lesion but of a general

contraction  of  the  autonomic  nerves,  a  “pulling  at  the  tissues,”  then  it

becomes understandable that the vagotonic expansion of the nerves reduces

the “pulling” and, thereby, the pain.

  This finding reveals an essential effect of orgone energy: it charges living

tissues and brings about an expansion of the plasmatic system (vagotonia).

  The general revitalization of the organism’s functions by orgone radiation

is manifest also in the blood picture of cancer patients.

  When the patient came to us, the hemoglobin content was 35%. Two days

later, it was 40%; after four days, 51%; after seven days, 55%; after nine

days, 63%; after fourteen days, 75%; and after three weeks it had risen to the

normal level, 85%. The patient was able to leave her sickbed, take her child

back into her own care, and after years of inactivity and confinement in bed,

begin again to work. But she did too much; she went shopping, spending

hours in different department stores. Her pains had gone; she slept well and

felt completely healthy. She did her housework without any help. I had to

warn her that she had an extremely serious illness to overcome and should

not overtax herself. My warning was justified. After about six weeks, the

patient felt tired and the hemoglobin content dropped to 63%. The pains in

her back did not return, but for the first time she complained of difficulty in

breathing, and about a “wandering” pain in the region of the diaphragm. I

ordered bed rest, and the blood picture improved again. The hemoglobin soon

rose to 70% and eight days later was back to normal at 85%. Her weight

remained  constant  at  around  124  lbs.  After  another  four  weeks,  the

hemoglobin was still 85%.

  The patient no longer had to be brought to me in an automobile. She camefor her daily treatment alone, by subway. Her relatives and the doctors who

had  treated  her  were  amazed.  However,  the  subsequent  behavior  of  the

physicians, from any rational standpoint, is incomprehensible. Here was an

apparent reversal of a carcinoma, yet the doctors never once asked how the

improvement had been brought about. At the beginning, I had sent the patient

to a doctor who predicted that she would not live more than a few days. Now

the patient was walking around and X-rays showed complete ossification in

the previously cancerous spine; also, the shadows in the pelvic bones had

disappeared,  only  two  weeks  after  the  beginning  of  the  treatment.  Yet  I

neither saw nor heard from any of those doctors.

  The X-rays clearly showed the healing process. They confirmed what I

had frequently observed in the cancer experiments with mice, namely that

orgone energy arrests the growth of the tumor and replaces it by a hematoma

which,  under  favorable  conditions,  is  reabsorbed  and  eliminated  by

connective tissue, or, if the tumor is in bones, by calcification.


                ORGONE-BIOPHYSICAL BLOOD TESTS


I would like to summarize what is to be presented more fully elsewhere.

  Orgone  energy  charges  the  erythrocytes  biologically.  Each  individual

erythrocyte is an independent, self-contained orgonotic energy vesicle. It is

subject to the same biological function of tension and charge and pulsation as

the total organism and every one of its autonomous organs. The expansion

and contraction of erythrocytes can be observed easily at a magnification of

about  3000x.  The  erythrocytes  shrink  with  the  admixture  of  adrenalin,

whereas potassium chloride makes them swell. They are, therefore, subject to

the antithesis of the pleasure-anxiety function.

  Our blood tests on cancer patients are done as follows:

  1. Culture test. A blood sample is tested for bacterial growth in bouillon

or in a mixture of 50% bouillon plus 50% KCl (0.ln). In cases of advanced

                                                                            8
cancer, the blood consistently shows a strong growth of T-bacilli.  2. Biological resistance test. A few drops of blood are autoclaved for half

an hour in bouillon and KCl at a steam pressure of 15 lbs. per sq. in. Healthy

blood  withstands  the  process  of  autoclavation  better  than  the  biologically

weakened  blood  of  cancer  patients.  Biologically  healthy  blood  corpuscles

disintegrate into large blue bion vesicles. Carcinomatously devitalized blood

disintegrates into T-bodies. The T-body content increases and that of the blue

bions decreases, in proportion to the degree of devitalization.

  Orgone treatment charges the erythrocytes. The effect is demonstrated by

the transformation of the T-reaction into a B-reaction; i.e., the blood becomes

more resistant to high temperatures.

  3. Disintegration in physiological salt solution. A small drop of blood is

placed on a hanging drop slide in 0.9% sodium chloride solution. The blood

corpuscles  disintegrate  slowly  or  quickly  according  to  their  biological

resistance.  The  more  rapid  their  disintegration,  the  shrinking  of  their

membrane, and the formation of bion vesicles inside the cells, the lower their

biological resistance. Erythrocytes that are biologically vigorous retain their

shape  for  twenty  minutes  and  longer.  Disintegration  within  one  to  three

minutes indicates extreme biological weakness. In cases of severe anemia, the

erythrocytes display the typical T-spikes, i.e., shrunken membranes.

  4. Blue orgone margin. Biologically vigorous erythrocytes reveal a broad,

intensely  blue  or  blue-green  margin  when  viewed  at  300–600x,  using

apochromatic  lenses.  Devitalized  erythrocytes,  tending  toward  rapid

disintegration, have an extremely narrow margin, with weak blue coloration.

  Blood  tests  conducted  on  our  patient  showed  a  general  biological

strengthening  of  the  blood.  Initially,  the  patient’s  blood  cultures  were

strongly positive; i.e., they showed an extensive growth of T-bacilli. Three

weeks later, the blood cultures yielded negative results and continued to do

so. The erythrocytes were no longer shrunken. They were full and taut, with

wide,  dark-blue  margins.  The  autoclavation  test  showed  100%  bionous

disintegration and no further T-reaction. Bionous disintegration in the sodiumchloride solution took place very slowly and without the formation of T-

spikes.

  The patient no longer suffered from any pain and was cheerful, but she

felt unwell in rainy weather. She came every day for the orgone irradiation.

Her  blood  pressure  remained  constant  at  130/80.  Her  pulse  rate  never

exceeded the norm, around 80. There was just one symptom that would not

subside, but grew even worse. She was having unexplainable difficulty in

breathing.


THE EMERGENCE OF THE CARCINOMATOUS BIOPATHY


I will now proceed to the description of the carcinomatous biopathy, which

emerged  only  after  elimination  of  the  tumors  and  the  restoration  of  the

normal blood picture. I did not have the slightest presentiment of what I am

about  to  describe,  and  I  experienced  it,  at  first,  with  amazement  and

incomprehension.  It  was  difficult  to  understand  the  connections  between

these  phenomena.  After  the  local  cancer  tumors  had  disappeared,  there

developed  a  general  biopathic  disease  picture  that  formed  the  essential

background of the cancer: biopathic shrinking.

  The  patient  seemed  to  have  recovered  her  physical  health  completely.

This lasted about six weeks and was confirmed objectively by the results of

the blood tests and X-rays. The tumors had vanished. Her blood remained

vigorous; the anemia did not reappear. The tumor in the right breast was no

longer palpable after the eighth exposure to orgone radiation. Those with a

mechanistic view of pathology would have considered this a triumph and

proclaimed the “cure” of the case. However, the simultaneous emergence of

emotional symptoms, which became more and more prominent, restrained me

from drawing premature conclusions.

  When  the  patient  first  came  to  me,  she  was  totally  devoid  of  sexual

feelings. Roughly four weeks after starting orgone therapy, I observed signs

in her of severe sexual stasis. She had been cheerful and gay and full of hopefor the future. Now a depression gradually began to set in and she developed

symptoms of stasis anxiety. Once again, she withdrew from people. I learned

from her that attempts to rectify her sexual situation had failed.

  I succeeded in breaking through the patient’s shyness and learned that she

had recently been suffering from intense sexual excitations, which, as she

said,  were  incomparably  stronger  than  those  she  had  experienced  and

combated fourteen years before, at the beginning of her marriage. Judging by

her descriptions, the sensations she was feeling were quite normal vaginal

excitations. During the first two weeks after her recovery, the patient had

made several attempts to approach men sexually, but she was unsuccessful

and relapsed into despair and a state of physical exhaustion. These attempts,

which  had  continued  for  several  weeks,  were  healthy  and  indicative  of  a

positive  turning  toward  life.  One  day  she  asked  me  whether  sexual

intercourse with a man “once a month” could be harmful to her. The question

seemed to be tinged with fright, in contradiction to her sexual knowledge. It

indicated the presence of an irrational fear, which turned out to be that some

terrible disaster might befall her during sexual intercourse, “since her spine

was collapsed in two places.” She feared the effects of the violent movement

in sexual excitation. It should be noted that this idea appeared suddenly after

the failure of her attempts to find a sexual partner. She had met a man who

proved  to  be  impotent.  She  was  enraged,  but  fought  down  her  hate  and

disappointment. Whenever she felt rage, she “swallowed it.” Now the patient

displayed the picture of a complete stasis neurosis: the depression increased,

she suffered from uncontrollable fits of crying and complained of oppression

in the region of the heart. “There is a dreadful pressure in my chest,” she

complained. “It goes through and through.”

  It  would  seem  possible  to  attribute  this  “pressure  in  the  chest”  to  the

collapsed twelfth dorsal vertebra. But there was one consideration that clearly

conflicted with this possibility. The patient had been free from pain for six

weeks,  had  felt  no  oppression  in  the  chest,  and  had  worked  hard.  It  wasinconceivable that the mechanical pressure of the collapsed vertebra on a

nerve should now suddenly become active after an absence of weeks. The

events that followed confirmed the idea that the patient had developed an

anxiety hysteria for which the spinal lesion served as a rationalization. Any

physician  untrained  in  psychiatry  would  have  tended  to  attribute  all  the

manifestations of the disease to the collapsed vertebra, without regard for the

fact that the same vertebra had been no less collapsed during the weeks when

the patient was moving around without pain.

  After about ten orgone irradiations, the patient felt sexual excitations. She

had been biophysically charged by the orgone energy, but she was unable to

handle  the  resultant  sexual  excitation.  The  anxiety  neurosis  that  now

appeared was only a reactivation of the conflicts she had suffered in puberty.

Now the patient was in the tragic situation of awakening to new life only to

find herself facing a void. As long as she was ill, the cancer tumor and the

suffering  it  caused  absorbed  all  her  interests.  In  the  fight  against  the

cancerous  growth,  her  organism  had  indeed  used  up  great  amounts  of

biological energy. But now these energy resources were free and intensified

by the orgonotic charge. During a period of extremely severe depression, the

patient admitted to me that she felt herself to be ugly, ruined as a woman, and

she did not know how she could go on with her life. She asked me if orgone

energy could cure her anxiety neurosis too. I had to give a negative answer,

and she understood why.

  Let us now summarize the sequence of events.


  1. At the beginning of her marriage, a severe stasis neurosis occurred as a consequence of her

    husband’s impotence.

  2.  Repression  of  sexual  excitation,  resignation,  depression,  and  a  decade  of  abstinence

    followed.

  3. Then, as the cancer developed, the sexual excitations disappeared. As will be shown later,

    the localization of the cancer metastases occurred in precisely those organs affected by the

    muscular armor that blocked the sexual excitations.

  4. With the destruction of the tumors by orgone energy came the physical recovery of the

    patient, and sexual excitability reappeared.  5. Intense sexual excitation ended in disappointment, and the old stasis neurosis returned.


  This overall disease pattern resulted eventually in a general shrinking of

the organism.

  Then one day an unfortunate accident occurred. The patient stepped out

of the orgone accumulator and began to dress. She bent over to pick up a

stocking that had fallen to the floor. We heard a scream and rushed to her.

She was as pale as a corpse, had a thready pulse, and seemed about to faint. It

frightened us because we did not know what had happened and also because

we regarded the collapsed vertebra as the sword of Damocles. Nobody could

be sure when the patient might suffer a fracture of the spine. It was precisely

because  this  possibility  was  so  strong  that  it  so  easily  became  a

rationalization  of  the  patient’s  neurosis.  Once  she  had  calmed  down,  it

became apparent that she had only experienced a severe fright. For a moment

she  had  believed  that,  in  bending  down  too  quickly,  she  had  actually

fractured her spine. In fact, she had merely incurred a muscle strain in the

shoulder, having moved a hypertonic muscle too swiftly. The muscle strain

quickly subsided. During the first few days that followed, the patient felt

well. On the fourth day, however, she complained of severe “pressure in the

chest” and “weakness in the legs.” Examination of the reflexes showed no

damage to the nervous system. For the next few days her legs felt stronger,

but the pressure in her chest persisted. Then, one day, during a conversation

in the examination room, the patient suddenly let out a scream and doubled

up, giving everyone present the impression that she had broken her spine. An

immediate examination showed all reflexes to be functioning perfectly. On

the  other  hand,  there  was  now  a  new  symptom  which  kept  the  patient

bedridden for many months and baffled a number of physicians. She began to

have trouble breathing and had to gasp for air. The impression I had was of a

spastic contraction of the diaphragm—a diaphragmatic block.

  The pain in the lower ribs about which she now complained could be

ascribed  just  as  well  to  this  spasm  as  to  a  mechanical  pressure  of  thecollapsed vertebra on a sensory nerve: the collapsed twelfth thoracic vertebra

corresponded to the costal insertion of the diaphragm. The events of the

following  months  represented  essentially  a  conflict  of  opinions  about  the

validity of these two explanations. I advised the patient’s relatives to take her

to  the  orthopedist  who  had  earlier  prescribed  a  collar  brace  for  her.  The

orthopedist  stated  that  the  spine  and  pelvis  were  free  of  shadows  and

metastases,  and  diagnosed  the  patient’s  condition  as  being  due  to  a

mechanical lesion at the twelfth thoracic vertebra. He did not ask how the

metastases  had  disappeared.  He  prescribed  bed  rest  in  a  plaster  cast.

However, her brother rejected this advice, since he had followed the course of

his sister’s disease with understanding and was convinced that I was correct.

During this period I realized for the first time the connection between the

lesion at the twelfth vertebra and the biopathic contraction of the diaphragm.

There had to be a reason why the diaphragmatic spasm, so familiar to the

orgonomist, happened when it did. There also had to be a reason why one of

the  most  significant  cancer  metastases  had  occurred  exactly  at  the  costal

insertion of the diaphragm. The clinical diagnosis of the patient’s condition

was rendered extraordinarily difficult by this concurrence of diaphragmatic

spasm and lesion of the vertebra; yet it opened the way to an understanding

of the crucial connection between emotionally induced muscle spasm and the

localization of metastases. One of the tasks of this chapter will be to establish

that the  localization  of  a  cancer  tumor  is  determined  by  the  biological

inactivity of the tissues in its immediate vicinity.

  Orgone treatment of the patient had to be interrupted, since she was again

confined to bed. Reexamination at a cancer hospital and by private physicians

showed total absence of cancerous growths and calcification of the defects in

the spinal column. The original tumor in the breast did not reappear. Still, no

one could foresee whether or not new cancer growths might appear. I visited

the patient several times at her home. She complained of violent pain in the

lower ribs. The pain was neither constant nor confined to any specific areas;it appeared here and there along the lower margin of the thorax and could be

regularly eliminated by correcting the breathing. The overall picture was that

of a neuralgia with strong hysterical overtones. The patient lay flat in bed,

giving the impression that the pain made it impossible for her to move at all.

My attempts to move her arms or legs made her cry out, become pale, and

break out in a cold sweat. A few times I managed to get her out of bed and

into an armchair by having her breathe deeply for ten minutes. Her relatives

were astonished that I was able to alleviate her pain with such ease. They had

witnessed  the  disappearance  of  the  tumors  and  had  had  it  confirmed  by

outside  physicians.  Since  I  worked  without  chemicals  and  injections,  my

orgone therapy seemed mysterious. To counteract this impression, I tried to

explain the mechanism of the disease to them. They understood very quickly

that the pain could not originate in the lesion of the vertebra, since it then

would be sharply localized and not susceptible to correction by improved

breathing. As yet, I had no presentiment that the patient did not actually have

any pain, only a panic-stricken fear that pain might start.

  An intercostal injection of an anesthetic was tried at the precise point

where the pain was most violent. The anesthetic had no effect, and shortly

after the injection, the pain appeared at another rib. The attending physician,

who  in  the  beginning  had  been  convinced  that  the  pain  originated  in  the

vertebral  lesion,  finally  had  to  admit  that  the  problem  was  essentially

“functional.” But none of us had any idea what “meaning” the “functional”

symptom had. Moreover, to many doctors “functional” means “not organic,”

which is to say, “not real but imaginary.”

  One day I again found the patient suffering from violent “pain.” She was

gasping for air and uttering peculiar moaning sounds. Her condition seemed

serious, but improved considerably as soon as her breathing was corrected

and the spasm in her jaw muscles was dissolved. I then delegated the work on

her respiration to a colleague, since I had to be away for two months. His

subsequent reports to me confirmed that the establishment of full expirationconsistently relieved the pain.

  The  patient  was  once  again  admitted  to  the  hospital.  The  attending

physician there confirmed the absence of metastases in the bones and stated

his belief that X-ray treatment would not eliminate the pain. He doubted also

whether neurosurgery at the twelfth spinal segment would serve any purpose.

It was now five months since the beginning of orgone therapy, and three and

a half months after its interruption. When told by the patient’s brother about

the successful results obtained through orgone therapy the physician became

very reserved. He would have nothing to say on that subject, he declared,

until it was “accepted by the medical world.” He conveniently overlooked the

fact that he himself was part of this “medical world” upon which he was

pushing the responsibility to acknowledge the significant results achieved in

the treatment of a cancer case by orgone therapy.

  The patient soon returned home, where, as before, she lay flat on her back

in bed, motionless. Her musculature continued to atrophy from disuse and

there was great danger of a recurrence of the tumors. I saw the patient again

one month later. Once more I succeeded in eliminating the pain by correcting

her  respiration.  She  was  able  to  leave  her  bed,  but  felt  extremely  weak.

During  one  of  the  attempts  to  extend  her  stay  out  of  bed,  the  patient

developed severe anxiety. She begged to be allowed to go back to bed. At

that particular moment, she had no pain. I convinced her to stay on her feet

for  a  while  longer.  All  at  once,  she  began  to  tremble  violently,  became

frightened,  broke  out  in  a  cold  sweat,  and  went  pale.  What  she  was

experiencing,  in  fact,  was  a  severe  shock-like  reaction  of  the  autonomic

system  to  the  act  of  standing  up.  I  did  not  let  the  patient  return  to  bed,

because  I  noticed  that  there  was  some  fear  driving  her  to  do  so.  A  few

moments later, there were visible convulsions in the upper abdomen. She

gasped for air and I could see the diaphragmatic spasm dissolving into clonic

convulsions of the abdominal musculature. She then felt relieved and was

able to move freely.  Now I understood for the first time an essential element of the biopathy.

She had reacted to the biological charging of her organism by the orgone and

                                                                                    9
to the ensuing sexual excitations with a contraction of the diaphragm. This

diaphragmatic contraction evidently caused the “pressure in the chest” and

the sensation of pain that the patient attributed to the lesion of the vertebra.

The “painful” pressure in the chest disappeared each time I succeeded in

overcoming  the  inspiratory  spasm  by  extending  her  exhalation,  thereby

restoring  the  pulsatory  movement  of  the  diaphragm.  But  it  was  precisely

these  contractions  and  expansions  of  the  diaphragm  that  aroused  in  the

patient  a  severe  anxiety,  which  she  counteracted  by  reverting  to  the

inspiratory spasm. It was now clear that the “danger” of a clonic dissolution

of the contraction was too great for the patient when she was standing or

walking. The danger lay in the violent convulsions that threatened to dissolve

the diaphragmatic spasm. She did not dare get out of bed because of her

deep-seated fear of these convulsions. It was mainly—though not exclusively

—this fear that kept her confined to her bed.

  There  can  be  no  question  that  the  diaphragmatic  spasms  did  generate

neuralgic pain in the ribs and at the insertion of the diaphragm. But these

spasms  constituted  only  one  part  of  her  enormous  fear  of  moving.  More

important  was  her  fear  that  movement  would  cause  her  to  “collapse”  or

“break  her  back.”  The  involuntary  convulsions  of  the  diaphragm  that

threatened to overwhelm her whenever she stood up seemed to confirm this

danger. Thus, she was not really suffering from acute pain but rather from a

deadly fear of the onset of such pain. Her experience of a few months before,

that “something snapped inside when she moved too swiftly,” intensified her

fear. She was suffering, therefore, from a misinterpretation of the normal

orgonotic  sensations  that  accompany  movements  of  the  diaphragm.

Confining herself to bed was a tremendous defense mechanism designed to

protect her against this fear of “falling apart.” The danger of “falling apart”

made itself felt when the diaphragmatic spasm was on the point of dissolvinginto clonic contractions. She counteracted this danger with intensification of

the spastic diaphragmatic contraction. Understandably, this emotional state

had harmful physical effects, producing a generalized muscular rigidity that

impeded  every  movement.  In  time,  this  lack  of  movement  resulted  in  an

atrophy of the tensed musculature. For instance, she was hardly able to raise

her arms; she could raise her left arm only with the help of her right. She

could not raise her legs at all, and was barely able to bend her knees. The

head was held rigid, as if locked by the tension of the deep neck musculature.

Passive movement of the head met with automatic resistance. The patient was

clearly afraid that her neck “might break.” Every physician she had consulted

had impressed upon her the need to guard against rapid movements since the

fifth cervical vertebra was collapsed.

  On one of the following days, I found the patient in very poor condition.

Although she had a strong urge to defecate, she had not gone to the toilet for

several days, in order to avoid having to leave her bed. As always, however,

when she was made to breathe deeply her “pain” vanished and she was able

to  get  up.  Her  subsequent  bowel  movement  was  copious  and  without

difficulty.

  I told her brother that I wanted to try to treat her for two weeks with

psychiatric orgone therapy, but that I would have to stop if there were no

results. She moved nearby and during the next few weeks I worked with her

every day for roughly two hours (without honorarium). During this treatment,

the phobic background of her biopathic condition revealed itself.


    THE CHARACTEROLOGICAL EXPRESSION OF THE

                          SHRINKING BIOPATHY


Six months after her collapse in my laboratory, a flaccid paralysis of the

rectum and the bladder appeared. Now the most important determination to

be  made  was  whether  the  manifestations  of  paralysis  were  traceable  to  a

localized mehanical lesion or, as I surmised, to a functional shrinking of theautonomic system. In the first instance, an emotional basis would be absent;

the disturbance would be sharply localized and would point to a specific focal

lesion.  In  the  second,  however,  one  would  expect  emotional  and

characterological  disturbances  to  be  paramount  and  the  manifestations  of

paralysis to be inconstant.

  As again and again I pointed out her fear of imminent pain, the patient

was  able  to  move  around  in  bed  independently  and  totally  free  of  pain.

However, before she could accomplish this movement, she always had to

improve  her  breathing  and  relax  the  spasms  in  her  jaw  muscles.  As  she

expressed it, she always had first to rid herself of her “fear of moving.” This

would have been impossible in the case of a mechanical lesion of the twelfth

dorsal segment.

  The effort to lie on her side or her stomach left her in a state of apparent

exhaustion. Together we tried to trace the cause of this exhaustion, finding it

finally  in  an  extraordinarily  severe  tension  of  the  deep  and  surface

musculature  of  the  neck.  The  patient’s  head  had  the  appearance  of  being

pulled down into the thorax. It was the same position involuntarily assumed

by a person defending himself against a blow on the head. This attitude was

completely automatic. The patient could not consciously relax it. When the

musculature of her neck contracted, respiration ceased and she made rattling

sounds as if through a constricted throat, similar to the rattle that occurs in

dying or in severe shock. To relieve the spasm, I had her stick two fingers

deep into her throat. She reacted to this immediately with severe choking and

reflex gagging. The reaction was so violent that she became blue in the face.

After a while she felt “much freer in the throat.”

  In connection with these throat reflexes, she told me spontaneously of her

anxiety dreams. Every night she dreamed, with extreme anxiety, of falling

into an abyss, of sinking to the ground, of choking, of being annihilated by

something  falling  on  her.  Falling  dreams  of  this  kind  are  familiar  to  the

orgone therapist. They appear in a typical manner in the concluding phases ofcharacter-analytical treatment, during the period when preorgastic sensations

begin to emerge in the abdomen and genitals, and are suppressed before they

become  conscious.  These  sensations,  when  charged  with  anxiety,  are

experienced as falling. The following mechanism is at work:

  Preorgastic excitation is the onset of an involuntary convulsion of the

plasma system. If this convulsion is feared, then in the midst of the expansion

that should end in the convulsion, the organism develops a counteracting

contraction, i.e., an inhibition of the expansion. The resulting sensation is

similar to the feeling experienced in a rapidly descending elevator or in an

airplane dropping suddenly. The falling sensation is, thus, the perception of a

contraction of the autonomic system just as it is about to expand. The typical

falling dreams are often accompanied by a sudden contraction of the entire

body.

  The significance of these considerations for the case of our patient is as

follows. Her usual reaction to vagic (expansion) excitations of the organism

consisted in spastic contractions; her organism locked itself into muscular

spasms in the throat and the diaphragm, as though trying somehow to “hang

on.” Fear of the convulsions diminished considerably when I succeeded in

eliminating the spasms by eliciting the gag reflex. The movements she then

accomplished in bed no longer ended in spasms but in a feeling of well-

being; she began to enjoy moving.

  Every plasmatic current originates in a central tension contraction, which

                                      10
dissolves into a vagic expansion; this vagic expansion is connected with the

sensation of pleasure. In the case of orgastic pleasure anxiety, it results in

muscular spasms. It is now clear that the patient was suffering from a spastic

reaction to vagic expansion, as a consequence of orgasm anxiety. Biopathic

shrinking thus begins with a spastic restriction of plasmatic pulsation. It is

differentiated  from  simple  sympatheticotonic  stasis  neurosis  in  that  the

impulses to stretch out, i.e., to expand, cease gradually, whereas in stasis

neurosis they retain their intensity. It is not possible, however, to draw asharp distinction.

  This  mechanism  of  spastic  reaction  of  the  musculature  to  vagotonic

expansion  impulses  functioned  differently  in  each  muscle  system.  For

instance, whenever I tried to move the patient’s arms, she always reacted with

a  contraction  of  the  shoulder  muscles  and  the  flexors  of  the  arms.  The

reaction resembled the muscular negativism and rigidity of catatonics. The

patient gave the impression that she had a flaccid paralysis of the arms. When

I  asked  her  to  hit  my  arm,  she  was  at  first  unable  to  do  so;  but  when  I

suggested that she imagine she was venting her rage, she was able, after only

five minutes, to overcome her paralysis and strike out freely. After a while,

the  movement  and  the  action  felt  pleasurable.  The  paralysis  seemed

considerably  reduced.  It  was  therefore  possible  for  her  to  overcome

temporarily  her  fear  of  expansion  and  plasmatic  pulsation.  This  regularly

improved her general condition.

  The same process could be observed when I sat her up in bed. Her first

reaction was always fear: she gasped for breath, paled, and repeated several

times, in great anxiety, “You shouldn’t have done that.” However, after I had

gone  through  the  procedure  several  times  until  the  patient  had  become

convinced that nothing would happen to her, she was able to sit up by herself.

She was astonished and told me, “It’s a miracle I’ve been able to do that.”

    Thereafter,  I  had  the  patient  repeatedly  elicit  the  gag  reflex,  bite  the

pillow, hit my arm, in order to release clonic contractions in the shoulder and

throat musculature. Experience had taught me that biological energy can be

released from tonically contracted muscles only in the form of clonisms. This

finding  was  again  confirmed  in  the  patient.  After  about  half  an  hour  of

voluntary  movements,  involuntary  contractions  began  in  the  arm  and

shoulder  muscles.  The  patient’s  legs  also  started  to  tremble  involuntarily.

Gentle  bending  and  straightening  of  the  legs  regularly  intensified  this

trembling.

  The  first  time  the  clonic  contractions  occurred,  the  patient  was  veryfrightened. She did not know what was happening to her. It was the same fear

of the involuntary clonisms of her musculature that she had avoided by her

tonic  contractions.  But,  after  a  few  minutes,  the  clonic  movements  felt

pleasurable to her. Gradually the deep throat musculature was drawn into the

clonus and the patient was afraid she would have to vomit. At one point she

seemed on the verge of fainting. I urged her not to resist the involuntary

contractions, to give in to them. After a time, they became less violent; the

dammed-up biological energy had been discharged. She sank back exhausted,

her face flushed, her breathing calm, deep, and full. The gag reflex could not

be elicited any more and she told me, “My throat is strangely free, as if a

pressure had been removed.” The pressure in her chest was also gone.

  The next day her respiration was normal and I attempted to relieve the

paralysis in the legs by inducing a clonus in the musculature of the legs. I

succeeded to a certain extent by moving her legs, which were bent at the

knees, slowly apart, then together again. I had not forewarned the patient

about the preorgastic sensations in the genitals that usually appear when the

contractions  in  the  leg  musculature  are  relaxed.  All  at  once,  the  patient

inhibited her breathing, locked her jaw, paled, and assumed an expression in

her face that I can only describe with one word: “dying.” The reaction was so

violent that it frightened me. But since I had moved the legs quite slowly,

there  could  be  no  question  of  mechanical  damage  having  occurred.  The

patient expelled sounds similar to those resulting from severe pains in the

chest;  they  were  a  mixture  of  groaning  and  rattling.  From  my  clinical

experiences,  I  knew  that  all  this  was  the  patient’s  reaction  to  plasmatic

currents in the genitals. Vegeto-therapy has taught us that under the pressure

of orgasm anxiety, orgastic sensations manifest themselves as a fear of dying

—“dying”  in  the  sense  of  total  disintegration,  dissolving,  losing

consciousness, “not being.”

  The patient groaned loudly, became pale and blue, rolled her eyes, and

seemed  in  a  state  of  utter  exhaustion.  I  had  never  witnessed  the  neuroticattitude of dying so realistically expressed. In spite of having worked for

twenty  years  on  orgasm  dysfunctions,  I  had  still  underestimated  the  deep

significance of disturbances of biological pulsation. To be sure, I had always

maintained that the orgasm is a function basic to all living activity and that

“the orgasm formula is identical with the life formula per se.” But I had never

before seen an organism “die” so realistically as a consequence of orgasm

anxiety. I told her relatives that the patient might well not live more than

another few days. It was clear to me that the shrinking of her life apparatus

could lead to actual death. Had the patient not been dying at the time she

came to me seven months before, I would have stopped the treatment in such

a situation. In this case, however, there was nothing to lose by continuing,

and much insight to be gained about the nature of the shrinking biopathy.

  The  following  day,  I  received  a  telephone  call  from  the  relatives:  the

patient was in fact dying; her respiration was poor, there was a severe rattle in

the throat, and she was unable to defecate. I went to her at once. At first

glance, she seemed actually on the point of death. Her face had a blue color

and was sunken; rattling sounds came from her throat, and there was a forlorn

look in her eyes as she whispered to me, “This is the beginning of the end.”

Her pulse was rapid but strong.

  In the space of fifteen minutes I was able to establish good contact with

the patient. I asked whether, before she had become ill and developed tumors,

she had ever felt that she was about to die. She told me, without hesitation,

that as a child she had often rolled up her eyes and played “dying.” The

groaning and rattling sounds were also familiar to her from childhood. She

had been in the habit of making them whenever she felt a constriction in her

throat or, as she put it, when she felt “something tightening in her throat.”

The appearance of one of the cancer metastases at the fifth cervical vertebra

I  now  knew  was  attributable  to  a  decades-old  spasm  of  the  deep  throat

musculature. The patient went on to report that the constricted sensation in

the throat was accompanied by a drawing-in of the shoulders and a tightening“between the shoulder blades” at precisely the same spot where the pain later

started.

  Now that the patient was talking to me in a completely wide-awake and

lively manner, I had her “play dying.” It took her only a few seconds to

reproduce consciously the very “condition” that so recently had overwhelmed

her involuntarily. She rolled her eyes upward, closing the lids except for a

small slit that left just a sliver of white visible, clamped her chest into the

inspiratory position, and started to utter groaning and rattling sounds. It was

by no means easy to bring her out of this dying pose; but the more frequently

she adopted it consciously, the easier it became for her to come out of it. This

was  completely  in  accord  with  my  experiences  in  orgone  therapy: an

autonomic function can be objectivized by practice and in the end be made

subject to conscious control.

  I  asked  the  patient  whether  she  believed  she  was  unconsciously

attempting to commit suicide. The patient broke into tears and declared that

she no longer felt any reason for living. Her illness had destroyed her sexual

charms; she would never again be happy, and she could not imagine living

without happiness.

  I had the patient elicit the gag reflex. The clonic trembling in the upper

extremities  and  the  throat  musculature  immediately  set  in,  though  not  so

strongly as on the day before. She even succeeded in sitting up in bed without

help, but as she did so, her legs gave out. My impression was that the upper

part of her body was functioning whereas the lower part, from the hips down,

was not

  For a few days the patient enjoyed a hearty appetite, felt well, and was

cheerful. Then, suddenly, she relapsed into the dying attitude. It was clear to

me that she was not acting but had been completely overcome by her own

biopathic reaction. Her breathing was labored and shallow, she became weak

and pale, her nostrils were pinched, her cheeks sunken, and her throat rattled

severely. I did not understand why her relapse had occurred at precisely thismoment. She complained of extremely violent pains and was unable to move

at all. Once again I succeeded in restoring normal respiration, and she fought

bravely.  Violent  clonisms  appeared  in  her  neck  and  trunk,  but  the  lower

extremities remained “dead.” I had the patient stick her fingers down her

throat once more; the reaction was intensification of the spasms.

  I  noticed  that  the  pelvis  began  to  be  included  in  the  spasms,  but  the

patient clearly held back. The spasms lasted approximately ten minutes, then

subsided. Previously, she had given the impression that she was suffocating;

this  time,  distinct  vagotonic  reactions  were  noticeable.  The  patient’s  face

flushed,  the  pallor  of  her  skin  disappeared.  The  pains  caused  by  the

diaphragmatic spasm subsided. After a while the patient began to talk. She

was afraid that something could “happen” to her “down there.” She told me

that  up  to  the  time  when  she  entered  into  treatment  with  me  she  had

occasionally  masturbated.  This  statement  was  an  extremely  belated

qualification of her original contention that she had lived in total abstinence

for the past decade. Within the first week of the orgone treatment, she had

suppressed impulses to masturbate in response to fantasies of having sexual

intercourse with me. Since that time, she had not dared to touch her genitals.

The inhibition of masturbation, together with the fantasy, had resulted in a

stasis of excitation which was intensified by the biological charge received in

the  orgone  accumulator.  The  increase  of  her  sexual  needs  intensified  her

fears. In this way, the phobia that her spine might break developed. Straining

her shoulder muscle by suddenly bending over seemed only to confirm her

fear, as though she were saying to herself, “See, I said it would happen.”

  The day after she had told me about her masturbation fantasies, I found

her in good spirits, free of complaints, and full of hope. Her confessions of

the previous day had enabled her to masturbate again for the first time in

several months. She claimed to have experienced great satisfaction. On this

particular day, she was able to control the diaphragmatic spasm very easily.

She  was  constipated  but  had  the  urge  to  defecate.  However,  her  fear  ofmovement prevented her from making the trip to the bathroom. Turning over

in bed had become much easier for her. She even succeeded in sitting upright

in bed without any help, an achievement that amazed and pleased her. And

for the first time she was conscious of the chain of causes: fear of spinal

fracture  →  inordinate  fear  of  pain  →  inhibition  of  respiration  by

diaphragmatic block → actual pain in the chest → fear of spinal fracture. But

this time the inhibition of movement by the fear of pain did not occur so

quickly. The fear only appeared when the movement required great effort.

The connection between her fear of spinal fracture and her fear of moving

now became understandable.

  The following day the patient was again breathing poorly, complaining,

groaning, and displaying the dying attitude. She was unable to say what had

happened.  Her  relatives  told  me  that  she  had  felt  well  until  late  in  the

evening,  when  her  condition  deteriorated  rapidly  after  the  following

occurrence. Her boy was in the bathroom next to her room. She heard a noise

and became very frightened. Suddenly she had the idea that her son was

closed into a very small space, could not breathe, and was going to suffocate.

During  the  night  she  slept  very  little  and  suffered  from  severe  anxiety

dreams, some of them concerned with falling. There was nothing I could do

for her on this particular day except correct her respiration once again, which

did have the effect of reducing her complaints about her “pains.”

    Subsequently, the patient improved considerably. She was able to move

around in bed without pain, and to lift her legs. The weakness in her arms had

subsided, her appetite was good, and she was optimistic. Then, during one of

my visits, a movement she made happened to bring her near the edge of the

bed. She paled, gasped, and then screamed. She was afraid of falling out of

bed. Her reaction was unquestionably excessive and did not correspond to the

reality of the situation. She now told me quite spontaneously that while in the

hospital during the summer, she had asked to have beds placed on either side

of her bed because of her fear of falling out of it. I lifted her toward the edgeof the bed. Even though I was holding her firmly, she still cried out in fright.

Her fear of falling, which was at the root of her fear of moving, was now

obvious.

  The next day, I sat her up in bed. She felt no pains but was mortally afraid

and broke into a sweat and a hysterical fit of crying. She had to die now, she

proclaimed. She had kept up the fight against dying for a long time, but now

she would certainly die. She cried for her child. She asked me to give her a

fatal injection to put her out of her misery. “I don’t want to leave this bed, I

want to remain lying here.” After a while she calmed down and realized, to

her astonishment, that she was able to sit up without any effort. Gradually,

however, violent clonic spasms set in throughout her whole body; they were

especially severe in the shoulders. She was deathly afraid of these spasms

and, therefore, would not get out of bed. Each time she was forced to sit up

she felt the clonisms setting in. Her fear of falling had subsided, but the

connection  was  clear.  The  intense  clonic  convulsions  of  her  musculature

formed  the  physiological  basis  of  her  neurotic  fear  of  falling.  As  I  have

mentioned,  the  patient  regularly  suffered  from  nightmares:  she  fell  into

cavernous depths, heavy objects tumbled down upon her, and men attacked

her and wanted to choke her. She now remembered having suffered from

exactly the same kind of anxiety for a long time during adolescence. She also

remembered a phobia: whenever she was walking along a street and heard

footsteps behind her, she used to run, for fear that “someone was after her.”

Usually her fear was so strong that “her legs failed her,” and she had the

constant feeling that she was about to collapse. She now recognized in this

the identical physical sensation that overcame her whenever she had to sit

herself up in bed. Her legs would fail and she would feel on the verge of

collapse.  With  it,  she  would  experience  a  spasm  of  the  diaphragm  and

become afraid that she was about to die.

  It is thus clear that the motor weakness of the legs was caused by a phobia

that had dominated her since adolescence, long before the cancer appeared.The paresis she now developed was nothing other than the intensification of

the old weakness in the legs, which was associated with her falling phobia.

By this time she was able to associate this fear of falling with the idea of

fracturing her spine.

  The  previous  day  she  had  had  to  go  to  the  bathroom  repeatedly.  The

movements  of  her  intestines  and  bladder  were  “extraordinarily  vigorous.”

That  night  she  had  been  restless.  Then,  during  the  late  morning  she  was

unable to urinate. Her legs were without sensation. I examined her and found

sensitivity to pinpricks reduced up to about the tenth dorsal segment. The

patellar,  Achilles,  and  the  abdominal  reflexes  were  all  normal.  Over  the

telephone I had been told that she was unable to move her legs. It turned out,

however, that she could in fact move her legs, although their movement was

restricted. Deep sensitivity in the toe joints was reduced. The picture was that

of a functional paresis. From the symptoms, it was not possible to diagnose

either spastic or flaccid paralysis. There was just one basis for conjecture that

the  lesion  at  the  twelfth  vertebra  was  playing  some  part:  the  sensory

disturbance  in  the  upper  abdomen  had  a  relatively  sharp  upper  line  of

demarcation.

  On the next day the patient was able to urinate, but three days later the

anal sphincter weakened and she could no longer control her bowels. Her

reflexes were all normal, but she again became extremely fearful of sitting up

in bed.

  She was once more admitted to a hospital for a general examination. The

X-rays showed the spine, pelvis, and upper thighs to be free of metastases,

but new metastases had appeared in the cranium and in the right humerus.

The new tumors had therefore appeared at a considerable distance from the

regions of the body that showed evidence of paresis. The functional biopathy

and carcinomatous growth were separated from each other; they had nothing

to do with each other.

  The patient remained in the hospital for fourteen days. She was not givena neurological examination. The paresis of the legs was presumably regarded

as a logical consequence of the mechanical vertebral lesions. The functional

character  of  the  paralysis  escaped  the  attention  of  the  physicians,  who

informed the relatives that the patient at most had two weeks to live.

  The  relatives  took  the  patient  home  again,  since  she  was  receiving

nothing at the hospital except morphine injections. I saw the patient on the

day she returned. In a decidedly apprehensive manner, she emphasized that

she  would  have  to  be  especially  careful  in  her  movements,  since  the

physicians in the hospital had impressed upon her that “her spinal column

was pressing on a nerve and might break.” This warning from the hospital

physicians naturally confirmed and strengthened the patient’s phobia. Her

relatives wanted me to undertake a new experiment with orgone radiation in

order to eliminate the tumors in the cranium. But on that particular day I was

unable to feel any swellings on the cranium.

  I continued to see the patient at her home for another four weeks. Her leg

reflexes were entirely normal, and bowel and bladder functions were again in

order.

  However,  the  atrophy  of  the  musculature  and  the  bones  progressed

rapidly. In addition, she had developed a putrid bedsore on the buttocks. The

legs moved in response to painful stimuli, but seldom spontaneously. Her

nightmares continued: men threw themselves into deep ravines and broke

their necks; an elephant charged at her while she remained “as if paralyzed,”

unable to move. During the day, there was a look of terror in her eyes and she

felt constricted in her chest. The pain had disappeared completely, but the

fear of moving, and of spinal fracture, was as strong as ever.

  We had a special accumulator built for her bed. The effect of the orgone

was manifested in reddening of the skin and reduction of the pulse rate from

130  to  between  90  and  84.  While  in  the  orgone  accumulator,  she  had  a

feeling of well-being, often developed rosy cheeks, and was free of anxiety.

  Her blood picture, which had deteriorated over the past months (50% Ton  autoclavation),  improved  demonstrably,  and  spontaneous  impulses  to

move  her  legs  increased  in  frequency  and  intensity.  Then  an  unforeseen

catastrophe  occurred  which  sealed  the  fate  of  the  patient.  One  evening,

turning  over  in  bed,  she  fractured  her  left  femur.  She  had  to  be  taken

immediately to a hospital, where the doctors were astonished at the thinness

of the femur. The absence of a tumor in the region of the fracture and the

disappearance  of  the  breast  tumor  were  incomprehensible  to  them.  The

patient received morphine, deteriorated during the following four weeks, and

finally died.

  The orgone therapy had prolonged her life for approximately ten months,

had kept her free from tumors and pains for months, and had restored her

blood function to normal. The interruption of the orgone treatment by the

biopathic paralysis eliminated the possibility of a favorable outcome in the

case.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  the  cause  of  death  was  the  biopathic

shrinking, and not the local tumors.

  This  case  provided  us  with  important  insights  into  the  vegetative-

emotional background of cancer. The important question that confronts us

now  is, What  happens  in  the  tissues  and  the  blood  as  a  consequence  of

biopathic shrinking? In other words, in what way does the general shrinking

of the autonomic system produce the local growth? I venture to anticipate:

The general consequence of biopathic shrinking is putrefaction of the tissues

and the blood. The growth of cancer tumors is only one of its symptoms. This

finding needs detailed clinical and experimental documentation, which will

be provided elsewhere.


5. THE NATURE OF FUNCTIONAL DISEASE: SUMMARY


Let us now review our findings. The “dying” of the patient in the biopathic

attack did not convey the slightest impression of hysteria or simulation. The

autonomic system reacted in such a way that death could in fact easily have

followed:  the  sunken  cheeks,  pinched  nostrils,  the  rattling  sounds,  thecyanotic coloration of the skin, the accelerated feeble pulse, the spasm of the

throat  musculature,  the  marked  limitation  in  movement,  and  the  general

physical weakness were dangerous realities.

  I would hazard the opinion that every one of these attacks represented the

beginning of a real cessation of the vital functions. The act of dying, set in

motion by extreme intensification of the shrinking of the life apparatus, could

be interrupted again and again by the dissolution of the spasms and correction

of the respiratory-diaphragmatic block. The vagotonic expansion again and

again counteracted the dying process. This counteraction could not have been

a matter of suggestion. Suggestion, in the usual sense, could not affect the

biological apparatus at such a deep level. However, the release of biological

expansion impulses in various body systems did arrest the shrinking process

repeatedly for months. Good emotional contact with the patient was also, of

course, an indispensable part of the orgone-therapeutic process; only in this

respect might suggestion be said to have played a role.

  Let us use our familiar schema of psychosomatic functioning to clarify

which part of the vital apparatus is affected by the biopathy—in contrast to

anxiety  neurosis  or  a  mechanical  lesion—and  by  the  orgone-therapeutic

experiment.















PSYCHE SOMA

Neurosis w v Mechanical lesion
Psychotherapy Chemical-physical
therapy
a
BIOSYSTEM
Biopathy

Orgone therapy
  Every prolonged energy stasis in the biological plasma system (autonomic

system, a) inevitably manifests itself in somatic as well as psychic symptoms(b and b). Psychotherapy is directed at the psychic symptoms, chemical-
12

physical therapy at the somatic symptoms. Orgone therapy proceeds from the

fact that soma and psyche are both rooted bio-energetically in the pulsating

plasma  system  (blood  and  autonomic  system).  Thus  orgone  therapy

influences not the psychophysical function itself but rather the common root

of  psychic  and  somatic  functions.  It  accomplishes  this  by  relieving  the

respiratory block, the inhibition of the orgasm reflex, and other inhibitions of

biological functioning. Orgone therapy is, therefore, neither a psychic nor a

physiological-chemical therapy but rather a biological therapy dealing with

disturbances of pulsation in the autonomic system. Since these disturbances

reveal themselves in the superficial layer of the psychosomatic apparatus,

e.g., as hypertension and cardiac neurosis in the somatic realm and as phobia

in the psychic realm, orgone therapy necessarily affects the symptoms arising

from  the  superficial  biological  layers.  Therefore,  we  can  claim  orgone

therapy  to  be  the  most  advanced  method  for  the  influencing  of  biopathic

disturbances.  At  present,  it  remains  limited  to  biopathies.  In  the

carcinomatous biopathy, treatment of the respiratory and orgasm disturbances

is combined with physical orgone therapy, which is directed against anemias,

T-bacilli in the blood, and local tumors. As will become evident later, we, in

the laboratory of our institute, are fully conscious of the complexity and of

the still predominantly experimental nature of this new cancer therapy.

  The prevailing view knows only the antithesis of mechanical-chemical

lesions  of  the  somatic  system  and  functional  disturbances  of  the  psychic

system. The orgone-biophysical investigation of the carcinomatous shrinking

biopathy  reveals  a  third,  deeper  factor:  the  disturbance  of  plasmatic

pulsation  operating  at  the  common  biological  basis  of  soma  and  psyche.

What is basically new here is the fact, experimentally established, that an

inhibition of the autonomic sexual function can induce a biopathic shrinking

of the autonomic nervous system. What remains problematic is the question

whether this etiology is valid for all forms of cancer.  There  is  a  tendency  to  accept  the  misconception  that  the  organism  is

divided into two independent parts: the somatic, physical-chemical system,

which is destroyed by cancer tumors and cachexia; and the psyche, which

produces  hysterical  phenomena  (the  so-called  conversion  symptoms)  and

“wants”  or  “fears”  this  or  that,  but  has  nothing  to  do  with  cancer.  This

artificial cleavage of the organism is deceiving. The notion that a psychic

apparatus “makes use of somatic phenomena” is incorrect, and it is equally

incorrect to think that the somatic apparatus responds only to chemical and

physical reactions but neither “wants” nor “fears.” In reality, the expansion

and  contraction  functions  of  the  autonomic  plasma  system  represent  the

unitary apparatus responsible for “wishes” and “fears” in the psyche and

“life” and “death” in the soma. Our patient clearly showed the functional

unity of psychic resignation and biopathic shrinking. The life process in the

patient  gradually  declined;  the  expansion  function  failed.  Expressed  in

psychological terms, movement, action, resolve, and struggle were devoid of

impulse.  The  vital  apparatus  was  locked  in  an  anxiety  reaction  that

manifested itself psychically in the patient’s fixed idea that movement could

cause  something  in  her  body  to  break.  Movement,  action,  pleasure,  and

expansion now seemed dangerous to life. The characterological resignation

preceded the shrinking of the vital apparatus.

  The  motility  of  the  biological  plasma  system  is  itself  damaged  by  the

biopathic shrinking. The real basis of the fear of movement is to be found

precisely in this vegetative shrinking. The plasma system contracts, and the

organism loses its autonomic stability and the self-regulation of its locomotor

function. The final stage of the process is a gradual wasting away of the body

substance.

  The  inhibition  of  plasma  motility,  by  the  process  of  shrinking,

satisfactorily  accounts  for  all  aspects  of  the  disease  picture.  It  explains

neurotic anxiety as well as functional paralysis, the falling anxiety as well as

the atrophy of the muscles, the spasms as well as the biological disturbancethat  breaks  through  as  “cancer”  and  ends  in  general  cachexia.  I  was

repeatedly able to help the patient develop new living impulses by correcting

the diaphragmatic spasm, which is central to the biopathic disturbance of

motility, to the defense against sexuality, and, indeed, to the defense against

the expansive life function. The respiration of the patient was actually poor;

the ventilation of the tissues was in fact insufficient; the plasmatic locomotor

impulses in the limbs were, in fact, insufficient for coordinated movement;

her fear of falling and of ensuing injury had a basis in fact and was not

merely neurotic fantasy; indeed, her “fantasy” of a disaster caused by falling

had a very real basis in the restriction of biological motility. The hysterical,

functional character of the paralysis acquired a real, biopathological basis.

Only differences of degree separate paralysis of motility and paralysis caused

by biopathic shrinking.

  In  medical  circles,  functional  paralyses  tend  to  be  regarded  somewhat

skeptically. The predominant view, even today, is that a functional paralysis

must  be  more  or  less  “simulated.”  My  contention  is  that  functional

disturbances of motility attributable to biopathic disturbances of the plasmatic

pulsation are much more serious, and can affect wider areas, than a paralysis

resulting from a mechanical segmental lesion. Biological functioning of the

total organism is not impaired by a local mechanical lesion. But a functional

paralysis is a manifestation of a total biological disturbance. The function of

plasmatic impulse formation in the biological core of the organism is itself

disturbed  and  may  cause  an  extensive  loss  of  substance  in  the  tissues

(muscular atrophy, general cachexia, anemia, etc.). It is not relevant to argue

that a mechanical disturbance cannot be influenced by suggestion, whereas

the functional disturbance can. The “suggestion” capable of bringing about an

improvement of functional paralysis is in reality a pleasure stimulus for the

biological  plasma  system  impelling  it  toward  new  living  possibilities  and

renewed biological functioning.

  The  fundamental  disturbance  in  the  functioning  of  the  body  plasma,represented and caused by chronic sexual stasis, by character rigidity and

resignation, and by chronic sympatheticotonia, should be taken much more

seriously  than  local  mechanical  lesions.  The  functional  standpoint  must

partially  supplement  and  partly  prevail  over  the  mechanistic  and  purely

materialistic viewpoints of medicine today. It was this functional perspective

which  opened  a  breach  in  the  wall  that  had  kept  the  cancer  problem

inaccessible. In the following discussion, it will be shown how far this is in

fact already practicable. We now turn our attention to the changes in the

blood and tissues that are brought about by biopathic shrinking.


    6. SEXUAL STARVATION OF THE ORGANISM IN

CHRONIC ABSTINENCE, ILLUSTRATED BY A CASE OF

    CARCINOMATOUS SHRINKING WITHOUT TUMORS


In the foregoing, I tried to show that the local tumor is not itself the cancer.

Behind the tumor, a shrinking of the autonomic system is actually taking

place. In the cancer patient whose illness I described, the local cancer tumors

were eliminated by orgone therapy, but she then perished because of a deep-

seated  sexual  disturbance  that  caused  the  continued  shrinking  of  the  vital

apparatus.  By  chance,  I  encountered  a  second  case  that  confirmed  and

amplified the conclusions I had drawn from the first case. Like the first one,

this case clearly reveals the social and sexual background of the shrinking

biopathy. At the same time, it demonstrates the potential of orgone therapy

for  treatment  of  the  cancer  biopathy.  The  responsibility  that  the  sex-

economist  and  psychiatrist  must  face  in  the  struggle  against  the  sexual

biopathies is immeasurable. There is no way to accumulate insights into the

nature of biopathies except bit by bit through the study of many cases. One

case will raise questions that the next case will answer, though not without

introducing  new  questions.  These  questions  are  evident  only  to  the

psychiatrist  whose  orientation  is  sex-economic.  For  the  mechanistic

pathologist they remain unasked.  A sex-economist who was a distinguished colleague at the Institute had

succeeded  within  a  few  months  in  effecting  a  remarkable  change  in  the

condition of a woman suffering from a severe character neurosis. One of the

woman’s acquaintances noticed the change. She, in turn, knew of a thirty-

year-old woman who, for two years, had appeared to be succumbing to a

malady  that  no  physician  was  able  to  explain.  That  is  how  the  patient

happened to come to my laboratory.

  My immediate, superficial impression of the patient was that her face

called to mind a death mask. The skin of her face was pale and somewhat

bluish. Her cheeks were sunken, so that the jawbones protruded sharply. Her

eyes looked tired and veiled, hopeless. Her mouth was drawn down at the

corners, expressing deep resignation and depression. Her body was thin; ribs

and  vertebrae  were  abnormally  prominent.  The  musculature  in  the  entire

body  was  so  thin  that  an  atrophic  process  could  hardly  be  doubted.  Her

movements were lethargic, somewhat shuffling. The patient spoke slowly, as

if with great effort, and without changes of facial expression. It seemed that

all activity was arrested and that there was insufficient energy behind the

impulses. The pelvic bones were extremely prominent. Feet and hands were

clammy, cold, and pale. Her voice was monotonous and feeble. The patient

seemed to want to make contact with me, but was unable to do so.

  She weighed 90 lbs., having lost 10 lbs. in the last four weeks. Two years

before, she had weighed 120 lbs. From the age of five on, she grew rapidly

and became thin; since then, she had always been underweight for her age.

As a child she had had measles and whooping cough. She frequently suffered

from colds, and had undergone a tonsillectomy. Menstruation had begun at

the age of fourteen and was regular every four weeks. However, it always

lasted a week or more and was extremely painful.

  Five years before, she had consulted a psychiatrist in an effort to deal

with her sexual difficulties. Ever since puberty she had been convinced that

she was not in order sexually. She often had to stay out of school to “build upher health,” as she put it. On closer questioning, she admitted that she had

often  felt  tired  and  weak  and  had  been  unable  to  keep  up  with  the

schoolwork. Even the simplest tasks represented major undertakings to her.

She suffered from severe depressions and felt totally unable to cope with life.

Gradually her resignation turned into complete inactivity.

  Her mother had undergone a total hysterectomy for cancer, but died later

from metastases to the bones. The patient described her mother as a very

quiet person, devoted to her children. She had died as uncomplainingly as she

had lived.

  The patient’s education in sexual matters had been very strict and ascetic.

She had never experienced sexual intercourse. She had rarely been permitted

to attend dances. For a time, during puberty, the desire for companionship

with men had stirred in her, but her attempts failed. Her strict religious family

tolerated  no  situation  that  could  have  become  “dangerous.”  She  failed

miserably  in  her  attempts  to  break  through  these  external  inhibitions  and

realized that she had become inwardly incapable of an intimate friendship

with a man. This condition had taken hold of her during late puberty and

persisted until the present time. It was a major contributory element in her

depressions  and  her  secluded  way  of  life.  She  was  pretty,  but  men

nevertheless seemed to shy away from her. Several times, a friendship had

begun  to  develop.  But  it  always  failed  because  at  the  mere  thought  of

physical intimacy a spasm of the genitals would inevitably set in. In time,

fear of these painful spasms developed and she avoided every occasion that

might  lead  to  sexual  involvement.  Though  aware  that  her  behavior  was

pathological, she did not know what to do about it. She was afraid of asking

doctors for advice or consulting with friends about her problem. In short, she

gave  up.  She  had  never  masturbated,  despite  the  suffering  that  sexual

excitation caused her, but she tended to hold her hands over her genitals at

night. In contrast to other patients suffering similarly from sexual abstinence,

she  had  a  clear  insight  into  the  nature  of  her  disturbance.  She  made  noattempt to disguise it with ascetic ideals; her suffering was, consequently, all

the more intense. During our very first conversations, she talked about it

almost uninhibitedly. Here, however, I would like to interrupt the description

of her abstinence, and return to it later.

  The  seriousness  of  the  patient’s  condition  necessitated  a  complete

physical  examination.  The  outcome  was  surprising.  The  doctor  who

examined her prescribed a diet but found no physical disturbances. His report

was worded as follows: “This is to certify that I have given Miss —— a

complete physical examination, including blood and urine tests, and find her

to be in good health.” This finding was in such sharp contradiction to the

impression I had received of the patient that, at first, I did not understand it.

As noted, she had recently lost 10 lbs. For two years she had been incapable

of working and had been lying around at home, feeling weak and unable to

make  any  social  contact.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  physician  failed  to

recognize a biopathy caused by abstinence, but the loss of weight should have

made a strong impression. Also, the general appearance of the patient could

not easily have been overlooked. I reflected that the medical profession is

trained  for  mechanical  and  chemical  examinations  only.  It  happens

frequently, therefore, that a severe biopathic habitus is overlooked simply

because the physician has not learned to take into consideration the patient’s

bodily expression and the character of his sexual life.

  The patient had a small tumor, approximately the size of a bean, on the

outer margin of her right breast. I asked whether the examining physician had

seen it. She affirmed that he had. But since this small tumor grew alternately

larger and smaller, the doctor had diagnosed a harmless glandular swelling,

apparently in the belief that a malignant tumor could not become smaller

spontaneously  and  would  grow  steadily.  The  small  tumor  had  existed  for

about  a  year  without  becoming  larger.  Not  wishing  to  alarm  the  patient

unnecessarily, I did not have a biopsy performed. Since the patient wanted to

undergo  the  experiment  with  orgone  therapy,  I  could  wait  to  ascertainwhether the tumor would vanish after a few irradiations. Rapid disappearance

would be an indication that the tumor had been malignant; whereas if the

growth took many weeks or months to disappear, or else would not go away

at all, or showed no signs of growing larger, then the diagnosis of a harmless

glandular swelling could be correct. In addition, we had our cancer tests to

confirm our findings.

  The  tests  were  all  positive;  the  diagnosis  was  certain  to  be  cancer.

Examination of the rate of disintegration of the erythrocytes in physiological

salt solution showed bionous disintegration and T-spike formation in about

one minute. The orgone margins of the erythrocytes were narrow with only

faint blue coloration. Hemoglobin content was normal at 80%. In the culture

test,  bouillon  became  cloudy  after  twenty-four  hours.  Inoculation  on  agar

showed the typical growth of T-bacilli, which was confirmed by Gram stain.

Autoclavation of the blood in bouillon and KCl yielded a strong T-reaction of

the red blood corpuscles (about 60%).

  These results, together with the biophysical condition of the patient, made

the  diagnosis  of  an advanced  carcinomatous  shrinking  biopathy  almost

inevitable. It was unimportant whether or not the small tumor on the right

breast was, itself, carcinomatous. My impression was that the patient had no

more than a year to live.

  I notified a close relative of the patient and had him confirm in writing

that I had diagnosed cancer but had offered no promise of a cure. I warned

him that the patient must be expected to die within a very short period if the

experiment  with  the  orgone  irradiation  did  not  succeed.  I  knew  that  no

physician,  on  the  basis  of  the  present  disease  picture,  could  arrive  at  a

diagnosis of cancer. Furthermore, even if another physician had suspected

cancer because of the patient’s general condition, there would still have been

no alternative treatment to orgone therapy available, since there were no local

tumors that were considered to be cancerous.

  The patient began daily orgone irradiations in my laboratory. Later sheacquired an orgone accumulator and took two daily irradiations in her own

home, one in the morning after her bath and one in the evening before going

to  bed,  for  half  an  hour  on  each  occasion.  In  the  first  twelve  weeks  this

treatment produced the following results:


  Weight: After one week still 90 lbs., no increase but also no further weight loss; after two

    weeks, 91 lbs.; after three weeks, 91.75 lbs.; after four weeks, 92.25 lbs.; after six weeks,

    95.75 lbs.; after twelve weeks, 100 lbs. Thus, not only had the process of shrinking been

    stopped, but the patient was gaining weight at an accelerating rate.

  Growth of T-bacilli in blood culture: After five weeks, bouillon, as well as the agar culture,

    was negative, and remained so during the following weeks.

  Autoclavation test: After three weeks no improvement; T-reaction still approximately 60%.

    The blood bion solution did not have the character of a pure colloid but showed the blue-

    green discoloration typical in advanced cancer.

  Breast tumor: After ten days of orgone treatment, the small tumor in the right breast was no

    longer palpable. Two to three weeks is the usual time span needed for the elimination of

      medium-sized breast tumors by orgone therapy.


  These  findings  had  the  greatest  significance  for  the  orgone  therapy

experiment. They showed that symptoms of an advanced cancerous state can

exist  in  the  organism  without  conspicuous  local  manifestation.  This

confirmed  my  earlier  view  that  cancer  consists  essentially  in  a  general

shrinking of the life apparatus; the local tumor is therefore only one of the

symptoms of the disease and not the disease itself. These findings also proved

that standard medical training does not enable the practicing physician to

diagnose cancer prior to the appearance of conspicuous local phenomena.

Finally, they proved the usefulness of our laboratory’s biological blood bion

tests in cases where traditional methods cannot verify the diagnosis of cancer.

Even  if  a  surgeon  had  suspected  that  the  small  tumor  on  the  breast  was

cancerous  and  had  removed  it  surgically,  the  general  shrinking  biopathy

would  have  remained  untouched  and  the  patient  would  have  died.  It  is

absolutely  inconceivable  that  this  small  tumor,  without  metastases  in  the

axillary glands, was the cause of the patient’s poor general condition. The

tumor was a much later development than the general shrinking condition.Thus, there is ample justification for speaking of a “carcinomatous shrinking

biopathy, without tumors.” It is important to establish how frequently such

cases occur. In any event, the availability of orgone therapy greatly reduces

the fear of the disease, even if many questions still remain unanswered. In

this particular case, the orgone therapy experiment was successful, and this

success validates its claim to be tested and developed on a wider scale. I will

                                                                  11
address myself further to this problem in a later chapter.

  Before  proceeding  to  the  main  theme  of  this  discussion—namely,  the

principles of the orgone therapy experiment, the problem of the development

of cancer cells, and the processes in the tissues—a few more points about this

case should be considered. When the International Journal of Sex Economy

and Orgone Research first appeared, a physician clearly sympathetic to our

viewpoint made the comment that sex-economy was certainly important and

correct, but insisted, “What does it have to do with cancer?” The discussion

of cancer and orgone research would, he felt, have the effect of impeding the

acceptance of sex-economy. Astonishment and incredulity were the reactions

I  had  from  many  other  circles  whenever  I  referred  to  cancer  as  a  sexual

biopathy or a sex-starvation scourge. These reactions were a clear sign that

the cardinal point of our work had not been understood, namely, that diseases

generated by sexual stasis are severe biopathic diseases of the organism. The

cancer  biopathy  is  one  of  the  diseases  in  which  chronic  disturbances  of

human sexual economy are manifested. Cancer is a sexual biopathy (sex-

starvation  disease). Sex-economy  and  cancer  research  are,  therefore,

inseparable.  Character  analysis,  vegetotherapy,  and  orgone  therapy  may

appear to be different methods of treatment, but basically they are one and

the same biotherapy at work in a unitary organism. They complement each

other  and  have  a  common  root  in  the  biosystem.  Their  superficial

differentiation  corresponds  to  the  artificial  differentiation  of  the  total

organism into biophysical, characterological, and physiological functions.

  I  had  the  patient  examined  gynecologically.  The  examination  fullyconfirmed my diagnosis of plasmatic shrinking. The body of the uterus was

very small in relation to the cervix, and the ovaries were not palpable rectally

—an  indication,  in  the  opinion  of  the  gynecologist,  that  they  were

extraordinarily underdeveloped. The glandular tissue of the breasts seemed

totally undeveloped. It was of course difficult to come to any conclusion

about  whether  the  case  was  one  of  atrophy  or  of primary  inhibition  of

development of the sexual organs. The gynecologist was of the opinion that it

was a primary underdevelopment of the ovaries. However, the assumption of

such an isolated, primary ovarian disturbance would not be in accord with our

theoretical position. The ovaries are not independently functioning organs but

are an integral part of the total autonomic life apparatus, upon which they

depend. On the basis of the sexual history of the patient, I am inclined to

view the underdevelopment of her breasts and genital organs as an atrophy of

disuse of the sexual apparatus. The question as to what extent the endocrine

glands play a primary role, and to what extent they should be regarded as the

executive  organs  of  the  general  plasma  function,  cannot  be  answered

conclusively at this time.

  I decided to treat the patient, without remuneration, by simultaneously

utilizing  physical  orgone  therapy  and  the  technique  of  psychiatric  orgone

therapy. It was not long before the patient began asking questions: “Does

sexual intercourse hurt?” “When are you going to rape me?” (This patient,

like so many others who suffer from chronic sexual starvation, was beset by

severe rape fantasies. She really believed that a woman could not be alone in

a room with a man without being raped.) “Does the man move his penis in

the vagina? That really must hurt!” “What do you do if you get too many

children?” (She knew nothing about contraception.) “Does a woman have to

give in to a man if he wants satisfaction? I’m frightened of it.” The patient

was totally ignorant about even the most elementary questions of sexual life.

As a child, she had pressed her mother with questions about it but had been

rebuffed  and  had  stopped  asking  those  questions  of  anybody.  She  nowbelieved  that  “such  things”  were  not  supposed  to  be  known.  She  had

developed a strong attachment to her father, an authoritarian educator and

strict  moralist  who  had  immediately  suppressed  the  girl’s  first  pubescent

impulses. Soon afterward she began to suffer from perverse fantasies, the

principal content of which was brutal rape. This led to the development of a

feeling of panic whenever a boy came near her. Even in puberty, this fear was

accompanied by spasms of the genital apparatus. These spasms persisted as a

chronic complaint. She withdrew more and more from contact with men and

became increasingly lonely.

  Gradually  the  traditional  distortions  of  sexuality  were  absorbed  and

anchored characterologically: sex is evil, devilish, a monstrous sin against

God’s commandments. Sexual intercourse is an activity reserved for marriage

and  then  only  to  beget  children.  (Everything  she  observed  around  her

completely contradicted these ideas.) The man is an evil sexual animal who

violates  girls  “to  still  his  lust.”  Women  have  no  sexuality  and  only  bear

children. They have sexual intercourse with a man only because he “needs

it.” Masturbation makes you a cripple or an idiot, and “makes you lose life-

juice from the marrow.” (As a consequence of these beliefs, she had never

actually masturbated, but since childhood had kept her hands on her genitals

at night, clenched and motionless.) The difference between man and animal is

that man is not sexual. What is animal is base and must be fought. Everything

sexual is animal. “Ideal values” are what should be cultivated, “bad thoughts”

should be kept out of one’s mind. Of course, she had “bad thoughts.” In

consequence,  she  felt  guilty,  became  still  more  tense,  and  still  developed

“bad  thoughts.”  Even  during  her  childhood,  she  had  brutal  and  sadistic

fantasies that she fearfully suppressed. She felt the urge to bite or tear off the

penis of the men around her. During her puberty, whenever she was about to

dance with a boy, an impulse to choke him broke through, accompanied by

intense sexual excitation. This feeling made her withdraw even more into

herself.  Her  father  warned  her  about  venereal  diseases,  giving  her  theimpression that sexual intercourse inevitably leads to them. But he did not tell

her  how  to  protect  herself  against  such  infection.  And  so  she  remained

helpless, torn between longing for love and fear of it. This impelled her into

situations  that  really were  dangerous.  Curiosity  drove  her  to  approach

completely strange men and indulge in various sexual practices only to flee in

fright, and then completely isolate herself for months. Understandably, it was

her very fear that exposed her to dangerous situations. She wanted to find out

if what she had been told was actually true. The fear was an expression of her

vital  urge  for  sexual  gratification.  This  confirmed  what  sex-economy  has

always  maintained: Compulsive  morality  and  asceticism  generate  sexual

criminality and perversion, the precise opposite of what they intend.

  The  patient  was  totally  ignorant  of  the  anatomy  of  her  genitalia.  Yet,

since her genitals caused her so much suffering, she was obsessed by the

thought  that  she  really  had  to  know  about  them.  Sexual  curiosity  would

suddenly seize her during harmless conversations with both male and female

acquaintances; her instinctive reaction was immediate flight and withdrawal.

Just once, when she was twenty, she felt she was really in love with a boy

and tried to break through. Instead, she sank back, helpless; she “went to

pieces.”  The  sexual  excitation  became  so  intense  and  the  genital  spasm

momentarily so violent that she wanted to commit suicide. It was impossible

for her to conceive of the sexual act as anything but a brutal violation.

  Even during puberty her capacity to work was disturbed as a consequence

of her tremendous sexual stasis. Compulsive sexual thoughts always intruded

when  her  interest  in  work  was  aroused.  Clearly,  the  emotional  stimulus

provided by her work simultaneously triggered the sexual excitation that she

feared  so  much. Sexual  stasis  is  the  most  important  cause  of  work

disturbance in puberty. With the years, the patient’s work capacity declined

more and more; she became dull, until finally she reached a state of complete

emotional emptiness, which she had displayed for the last two years. During

those two years, the characterological and emotional emptiness proceededinto somatic shrinking.

  In  these  first  attempts  to  treat  a  shrinking  biopathy  I  started  with  the

following assumptions: Sexual stasis, which produces “the stasis neurosis,” is

at the basis of both the carcinomatous and the cardiovascular biopathy. But

there  must  be  an  essential  difference  between  the  cancer  and  the

cardiovascular  biopathies.  Cancer  victims  predominantly  show  emotional

mildness  and  characterological  resignation.  People  who  suffer  from

cardiovascular hypertension, i.e., from chronic vascular contraction, are, in

contrast to the cancer sufferer, for the most part easily excitable, “emotionally

labile,”  explosive  personalities.  This  is  clearly  expressed  in  acute  anxiety

attacks. On the other hand, I have never seen cancer patients with violent

emotions, outbreaks of rage, etc. We are therefore justified in concluding the

existence of specific differences between the two forms of biopathy, in spite

of their common etiology in sexual stasis. The essential factor is how the

organism reacts to the dammed-up sexual excitation once it has occurred.

  When investigating new connections, we are compelled again and again

to make assumptions suggested by the disease patterns, without being able to

state with certainty that these assumptions are correct. We have no alternative

but  to  leave  the  confirmation  or  refutation  of  our  hypotheses  to  future

experience. In such matters, one can never be flexible, careful, or self-critical

enough.  Briefly,  the  clinical  comparison  of  the  cancer  biopathy  with

cardiovascular hypertension forced us to assume a basically different view of

the  dammed-up  sexual  excitation  in  the  biosystem. In  the  cardiovascular

biopathy  (anxiety  neuroses  as  a  consequence  of  abstinence), the  sexual

excitation remains lively biologically, i.e., physiologically and emotionally.

In  other  words,  the  biological  core  of  the  organism,  the  autonomic  life

apparatus,  continues  to  generate  energy  to  the  fullest  extent.  When  it  is

contracted, however, the organism reacts with outbreaks of anxiety or rage

and  with  somatic  symptoms  such  as  hyperthyroidism,  diarrhea,  etc. In

cancer, on the other hand, the biological core lowers its energy production.With  this  diminution  of  energy  production,  the  emotions  and  excitations

become  gradually  weaker  and  weaker.  The  energy  metabolism  is  thus

disturbed  far  more  profoundly  than  in  the  more  conspicuous  symptom-

producing disorders, such as hysteria. Seen functionally, an outbreak of anger

is still an energy discharge, even though it may be pathological. Chronic

emotional  calm,  on  the  other  hand,  must  coincide  with  a  bio-energetic

stagnation in the cell and plasma system.

  With some hesitation, I feel obliged to speak here of “suffocation of the

cell energy system.” It seems conceivable, although at present this contention

cannot be stated with any certainty, that characterological resignation is the

surface expression of an inner process of gradual cessation of the energy

functions of the life apparatus. Let us illustrate it in this way:

  In a flowing brook, the continuous movement of the water purifies it. Dirt

is dissolved very quickly, by a process not yet completely understood. In a

stagnant  pond,  however,  not  only  are  the  processes  of  putrefaction  not

eliminated, they are accelerated. Amoebae and other protozoa grow poorly,

or not at all, in moving waters but develop profusely in stagnant water. We

still do not know much about this “suffocation” in stagnant water or in the

stagnant energy system of the organism, but we have every reason to assume

the existence of such a process and state. It cannot be mere coincidence that

cancer develops so seldom in a bio-energetically alive organism and so easily

in  the  bio-energetically  stagnant  organism.  It  is  clear  that  the  shrinking

biopathy, in contrast to other biopathic forms, begins with this abnormal calm

in the person’s sexual and emotional life. Symptoms of stasis anxiety, which

are often numerous in the previous history of cancer patients, are rare once

the cancer reaches a mature stage. The impression is of a sharp reduction in

the  biological  energy  metabolism,  which  in  healthy  persons  is  vividly

reflected in the function of the orgasm. These assumptions are, I believe, of

great significance and I hope they will be thoroughly investigated.

  It  is  not  to  be  assumed  that  the  cells  of  the  organism  submit  to  theextinction of the energy system without a struggle. When the functioning of

the bio-energetic (orgonotic) excitation of the total system is reduced, the

orgonotic  excitation  in  individual  cells  or  cell  systems  can  still  continue

intensely, just as a suffocating organism resists final subsidence in clonisms.

Thus,  individual  cells  can  still  demonstrate  orgonotic  overexcitation  even

when  the  total  organism  has  already  lost  the  capacity  for  excitation  and

energy  metabolism.  However,  such  isolated  excitations,  occurring  without

connection with orgonotic excitations of the entire organism, can no longer

be  physiologically  normal.  They  must  have  damaging  effects  on  the  cell

structure.

  Further discussion of this subject will have to be deferred. Orgone physics

will provide important clarifications about the affective function of the body

cells and its relationship to orgone energy metabolism. (There is, for instance,

the phenomenon of orgonotic lumination in bions, which discloses important

connections with cell lumination and cell excitation in the organism.) But

now let us return to the patient.

  Her emotional and bio-energetic behavior conformed completely to the

assumptions just described. She constantly asked about sexual processes, but

the  questions  lacked  urgency  and  excitation.  By  contrast,  a  patient  with

anxiety hysteria would have asked the same questions with intense excitation,

or  she  would  have  repressed  them  and  developed  severe  anxiety.  The

emotional import of the questions would have stood out immediately. With

our patient, it was different. She asked everything in a flat voice, as if without

interest,  even  though  these  matters  filled  her  life.  Her  fantasies  were

gruesome but she seemed unmoved, and only superficially interested. Very

soon she began complaining about the superficial and corpse-like way she

experienced things. She had suffered from this problem since puberty. It gave

her the feeling of being unable to establish close contact with anything or

anyone. This emotional calm of the cancer victim is in sharp contrast to the

coldness and contactlessness of the affect-blocked, compulsive character. Inthe compulsive character, powerful energy impulses are bound in the block;

in cancer, the energy is lacking.

  Careful observation of the patient’s behavior contradicted the assumption

that  there  were  repressed  affects  in  the  biological  depths.  There  were  no

affects  at  all.  The  orgasm  reflex  appeared  with  surprising  ease,  yet  with

scarcely  any  affective  strength.  Affects  are  the  manifestations  of  bio-

energetic  cell  excitation.  If  we  overcome  the  respiratory  inhibition  of  a

patient suffering from stasis neurosis with cardiac anxiety, strong excitations

will be the immediate and inevitable consequence. But in the case of our

patient this did not happen. The correction of her respiration over a period of

two months did bring about spontaneous vegetative actions, but no lively

movements.  Since  the  orgasm  reflex  was  weak,  she  had  no  fear  of  it,  in

contrast to a person with stasis neurosis who experiences severe anxiety in

connection  with  it.  This  poverty  of  affect  thus  reached  deep  into  the

biological system.

  The  question  confronting  me  was  whether  the  spasms  of  the  genital

apparatus could be dissolved without the presence of strong excitations. It

was  clear  that  she  would  recover  only  if  her  sexuality  began  to  function

vigorously. After two weeks of treatment, she developed weak vegetative

currents in the genitals. Thereupon the genital spasms were alleviated and the

pains disappeared. But because the excitations were so weak and failed to

intensify,  the  patient  did  not  develop  the  usual  anxiety.  This  finding  was

extraordinary and confirmed the assumption that in the shrinking biopathy

the sources of excitation in the autonomic system slowly die out. Whether

fading energy functions can be fully revived by orgone therapy remains to be

established.

    Resignation without open or concealed protest against the denial of joy in

life must be regarded as one of the essential causes of the shrinking biopathy.

Biopathic  shrinking,  therefore,  represents  a  continuation  of  chronic

characterological resignation in the realm of cell functioning.  Let  us  visualize  the  fundamental  biological  (the  physiological  and

emotional) functions diagrammatically. Imagine a wide circle with a center

(“core”). The shrinking of the circle periphery would represent the onset of

characterological  and  emotional  resignation.  The  core,  the  center  of  the

circle, is still unaffected. The shrinking process advances toward the center,

i.e., the “biological core.” The biological core is nothing but the sum of all

plasmatic cell functions. Once the shrinking process has reached this core, the

plasma itself shrinks. This coincides with the process of weight loss. But long

before the plasma function is directly damaged, the peripheral physiological

and characterological functions are disturbed: the loss of ability to establish

social contact, the loss of joie de vivre, the loss of capacity for work, and,

finally, the disturbances of pulsation and of vegetative excitation.

  The  vital  apparatus  envelops  the  biological  core  in  layers  of  varying

                                                                    12
depth.  The  biosystem  has  superficial  and  deeper  layers.  Disturbances  of

bodily functioning are accordingly superficial or deep. An acute respiratory

disturbance will not affect the core of the biosystem. A chronic respiratory

disturbance,  due  to  a  chronic  inspiratory  attitude,  will  generate  chronic

anxiety but will not influence the biological cell plasma function, so long as

the bio-energetic functions in the cells themselves continue, that is, so long as

the  organism  continues  to  produce  vigorous  impulses.  The  impairment  of

impulse  production  in  the  cells  is  an  indication  that  peripheral

characterological resignation has seized the cell plasma system. We are then

dealing with the process of biopathic shrinking. We shall have to study this

process also in chronic schizophrenics (especially in hebephrenia).

  It now appears certain that biopathic shrinking is specific for cancer. The

actual cancer process resembles, in its essentials, protozoal life in a pond, in

which there is no longer any movement of water but a flourishing growth of

protozoa. Unfortunately, these processes in the background of the shrinking

biopathy  cannot  be  directly  observed  microscopically;  they  can  only  be

deduced.  There  remains  a  gap,  so  far  as  the  completeness  of  directobservation  is  concerned,  between  characterological-biological  affect-

stillness and the process in the cell plasma that, in the cancer process, is

microscopically visible in the form of vesicular, bionous disintegration.

  We now want to consider these cell and tissue disturbances. What is clear

is  that  cancer  cannot  develop  from  a  simple  scar,  a  wart,  a  wound,  or  a

chronic irritation unless there already exists a fundamental disturbance of the

life function, in the core of the biological system, that ultimately seizes upon

the local damage. The question is: In what way does this happen?                                      CHAPTER VI


                              The Cancer Cell




1. THE RIDDLE OF THE ORIGIN OF THE CANCER CELL


The cancer scourge is surrounded by a plethora of unsolved problems, of

which none has fascinated physicians and laymen more than the question of

the origin of the cancer cell. Healthy tissue is “at rest,” i.e., the numerous

individual cells of the organism live with each other in harmony and mutually

fulfill the respective organ functions, such as absorption of food, excretion,

respiration,  sexual  excitation  and  gratification,  etc.  In  short,  they  are

subordinated  to  the  organ  functions,  which  are  responsible  for  the  vital

functions  of  the  total  organism.  Cancer  tissue  develops  from  tissues  that

previously seemed healthy. According to the traditional viewpoint, cancer is

chiefly  characterized  by  the  fact  that  cells  that  were  “at  rest”  become

“agitated.”  These  cells  divide  rapidly,  proliferate  wildly,  grow  into  large

heaps, and so form the “cancer tumor.” The cancer cells, unlike healthy cells,

are mobile. By a process of rapid division, they grow into the surrounding

tissues, ceaselessly penetrating and destroying everything in their path. It is

accurate to describe them as infiltrating and devitalizing.

  Let us concentrate for a moment on the most essential question: How is it

possible that an immobile cell, living and functioning in harmonious union

with other cells, is transformed into a mobile, “wild” cell that emerges from

the local tissue and destroys everything in its path? This fact is all the more

peculiar inasmuch as the cancer cell itself is an extremely weak structure that

disintegrates easily.

  The sudden transition from a healthy to a cancerous cell has not beenunderstood until now. The properties of healthy cells are well known. The

form and many characteristics of cancer cells are moderately well known. But

nothing at all is known about what happens in between, i.e., how the one is

transformed into the other.

  Several years ago bion research successfully led—although by a strangely

roundabout  course—to  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  this  riddle.  With  the

solution  of  this  crucial  problem,  many  gates  were  opened  to  the

understanding and control of cancer. I will state at once the most essential

finding: It was erroneous to believe that the cancer cell develops directly

from healthy cells. An immobile, healthy cell does not suddenly change into

an agitated, motile, proliferating cell. A series of pathological changes occurs

in the tissue and its immediate surroundings long before the development of

the first cancer cell. These local changes are themselves brought about by a

general disease of the vital apparatus. The development of the cancer cell in a

specific place is, in reality, only one phase in the development of the general

disease called “cancer.” We designate this systemic disease carcinomatous

shrinking biopathy. The cancer tumor is not even the most important part of

the disease; it is only the most apparent and was, until now, the only visible

and palpable factor of the cancer biopathy. Therefore the discovery that the

shrinking  biopathy  is  the  actual  disease  was  of  major  significance,  for  it

directed our attention to the essential factors. If the systemic disease, and not

the local tumor, is the critical element, it follows logically that the treatment

of cancer must be a general one; it can no longer be restricted to the small

spot in the body where a tumor suddenly develops. Ignorance of the systemic

disease  “cancer,”  in  conjunction  with  the  traditional  belief  that  the  local

tumor is the actual disease, has been responsible for the lack of progress in

the fight against cancer.

  Let us now return to the question of what happens in the tissue before the

appearance of the first fully developed cancer cell. To answer this question,

we must first eliminate certain procedures that hinder cancer research:  1. Neither healthy tissue nor tissue suspected of being cancerous should be examined, as is

      customary, in the dead state, fixed and stained. We must accustom ourselves to the practice

    of examining them in the living state. The fixed, stained preparation can be used as a

    control, but living preparations yield findings that are not revealed in dead preparations.

  2. Microscopic observations cannot be reliably made using a magnification of less than 2000x.

    At less than 2000x, it is not possible to follow the development of the cancer cell.

  3. We must make repeated observations, at high magnification, of all available cells in the

    organism: excreta (sputum, feces, urine), viable blood, skin and mucous membrane cells,

    etc.


  UNUSUAL FORMS IN CANCER TISSUE AND THE BLOOD

                          OF CANCER PATIENTS


Healthy  living  tissues  and  blood,  examined  at  2000x,  show  the  cells  and

formations that are described in any good biology or physiology textbook as

constituents of the organism. Let us now observe blood, excreta, and tissues

from a cancer patient, from one suffering, say, with lung cancer. We discover

formed cells and unformed shapes that are never found in healthy mice or in

the tissues and excreta of healthy humans. Most striking is the presence of

striated, vesicular structures showing an intense blue color, which resemble

neither  cells  nor  bacteria.  Some  have  irregular,  formless  contours,  while

others  have  an  elongated, club-like,  or  caudate,  shape.  The  presence  of

caudate, rapidly moving, pulsating amoebae in lung sputum is an unexpected

finding. How  do  amoeba-like  formations  get  into  the  lung?  It  cannot  be

through “air infection,” for there are no amoebae in the air. Therefore they

must have developed in the lung itself. From what? Certainly not from germs

that had accidentally strayed into the lungs. We have learned that amoebae

develop  in  infusions  from  vesicularly  disintegrating  moss,  which  passes

through many intermediate phases. We have also learned that there are no

“germs”  in  the  sense  of  traditional  protozoology.  Is  it  possible  that  the

amoebae and the other formations in the lung sputum have developed from

disintegrating lung tissue in precisely the same way that amoebae in moss

infusions develop from disintegrating moss tissue? This sudden idea gives usmuch to think about, since at one stroke it explains the origin of cancer cells.

However,  such  ideas  should,  for  the  moment,  be  held  in  reserve  and

translated into definite statements only after the necessary objective proofs of

their accuracy have been assembled.

  We are somewhat unsure of our undertaking. After all, why did it never

occur  to  anyone  before  that  one  could  simply  examine  the  sputum  of

suspected or confirmed cancer patients to establish the presence of unusual

formations?  Without  question,  amoebae  from  the  lungs  would  have  been

found.  If  it  is  that  simple,  we  must  be  doubly  careful  and  try  first  to

understand the reason for such negligence in cancer research. An examination

of cancer literature reveals that in not a single work is there so much as a

mention of the form, variety, or even the existence of living, mobile, cancer

cells in excreta and living tissues. Nevertheless, without further evidence, we

cannot automatically assume that several generations of cancer researchers

have so seriously erred. Either our idea is nonsense and the amoebae in the

lung  sputum  have  nothing  to  do  with  cancer,  or  generations  of  cancer

researchers actually have made a stupendous error. We do not want to exult

in this and intend rather to seriously consider all aspects of the problem. To

begin with, it is obvious that such errors and omissions do occur in science.

Moreover, they always occur immediately prior to the birth of important new

knowledge.  Countless  women  died  of  puerperal  fever  in  the  days  before

Pasteur and Lister, when nothing was known about infection and sterilization.

Yet  it  would  have  been  very  simple  to  refine  the  old  discovery  of

Leeuwenhoek and look into microscopes. Nothing but chronic, deeply rooted

prejudice  kept  the  physicians  of  Pasteur’s  time  from  making  use  of  the

microscope  and  it  cost  an  incalculable  number  of  lives.  Before  Sigmund

Freud discovered infantile sexual activity, which is now familiar to every

physician and educator, it did not exist in the eyes of science. Yet, today, how

simple it is to see that the foremost interest of small children is their own

sexuality.  We begin, therefore, to feel more confidence in the belief that a similar

catastrophic error has been committed by the cancer researchers. But we must

identify the error, understand its nature, and prove positively that our view is

correct. Once we have acknowledged the possibility of a gigantic error, there

is no turning back. If our concept is erroneous, we must admit it; if traditional

cancer research has proceeded from false premises and is now on the wrong

track, we must prove it. But let me anticipate my conclusion: Traditional

cancer  research  does  start  with  incorrect  premises  and  is,  indeed,  on  the

wrong  track.  This  accounts  for  its  negligence  in  failing  to  examine

microscopically the sputum of lung cancer patients.

  The consistent study of excreta and blood from cancer patients eventually

will  give  us  reliable  methods  for  making  an  early  diagnosis  of  cancer.

Someday, it will no longer be necessary to wait until the cancer tumor has

become so large it can be diagnosed by X-ray or biopsy. We will ultimately

gain a firm foothold regarding the origin of cancer and the way to its cure

will be opened.

  The demonstration of the basic error of traditional cancer research goes

together with the proof of the accuracy of our own concept of the origin of

the  cancer  cell.  Once  we  understand  how  the  cancer  cell  develops  from

healthy tissue, we will also understand where traditional cancer research went

wrong.

  First, let us subject the lung sputum of our cancer patient to even closer

examination by increasing the magnification from 2000x to 3000x, and even

4000x. We discover a profuse number of very small, lancet-shaped bodies

which  were  overlooked  at  magnifications  below  2000x.  Their  shape  and

motility  are  identical  with  that  of T-bacilli,  which  we  can  cultivate  from

degenerating tissue, disintegrating blood, or from putrescent protein. They

are the same minute bodies we see in charcoal bion preparations, and can be

obtained from any kind of cancer tissue by simple culture inoculation.

  Since T-bacilli result from tissue degeneration and putrid disintegration(cf. Fig. 32, Appendix), we must conclude that a process of disintegration and

putrefaction is taking place in the lung tissue. What we do not yet know, but

must determine, is whether the T-bacilli are a result or a cause of the tissue

disintegration. The point is certain, however, that the T-bacilli did not enter

the lungs as infection from the air. This can easily be proved. It has not been

possible to cultivate T-bacilli directly from the air no matter what culture

media are used (cf. Fig. 33, Appendix). T-bacilli can be obtained only when

cultivated  air  bacteria  (rot  bacteria,  B-subtilis,  staphylococci,  etc.)

degenerate. The T-bacilli growth on the culture can be recognized by the fine,

green-blue shimmering margin that forms around every kind of degenerating

culture. It gives off a strong, acrid, ammonia-like odor. From this margin,

pure T-bacilli cultures can be grown. The question as to whether the T-bacilli

precede  the  formation  of  cancer,  or  result  from  it  (perhaps  both),  can  be

answered experimentally. We shall say more on this matter later.

  We also find, in the sputum of our lung cancer patient, blue, contractile

forms of varying shapes, which are not present in healthy lung tissue. They

are the familiar PA bions. Since we did not put them into the lung, they must

have developed there. Like the T-bacilli, they cannot be cultivated directly

from the air. We know they are PA bions because they exercise the identical

paralyzing effect on the T-bacilli as do the PA bions produced experimentally

from  earth  and  coal.  The  question  now  arises:  What  connection  exists

between these large blue bions and cancer? The problem becomes all the

more complicated the longer we continue our observations. We shall find,

however, that the solution is a simple one.


    AUTOINFECTION OF THE ORGANISM DUE TO TISSUE

                                DISINTEGRATION


The structures found in the lung sputum are not present in the air. They must

therefore have their origin within the organism. Our task is to establish how

they develop. We conjecture that they are products of tissue degeneration andact  as  an autoinfection  of  the  organism.  For  confirmation,  we  examine

excretions and secretions from the cancer patient’s other organs: the vaginal

and uterine secretions, urine, feces. We also examine skin cancer epithelium,

or tissue from spontaneous cancer tumors in physiological saline. The more

cancer tissue of various origins we examine, the more secure our conclusions

become:


  1.  The  fully  developed  cancer  cell  is  merely  the  final  product  in  a  long  sequence  of

    pathological processes in the affected tissues. These processes have never been investigated.

  2. There are a number of typical phases of tissue disintegration and certain cell forms that are

    found only in unhealthy tissue.

  3. The first phase of cancerous tissue degeneration is the loss of normal structure through the

    formation of vesicles.

  4. The vesicularly disintegrating tissue yields two basic types of bions: blue PA bions and the

    small, black, lancet-shaped T-bacilli.

  5. Cancer  cells  are  organized  from  these  bionous  energy  vesicles,  developing  through  a

    number of intermediate phases to the motile, amoeboid protozoan.


  In  every  type  of  cancer  tissue  examined  we  find  the  same  initial  and

transitional forms (cf. Fig. 20).

  Healthy muscle tissue shows a regular, striated structure without vesicles

(cf. Fig. 51, Appendix). Cancerous muscle tissue regularly shows vesicular

disintegration (cf. Fig. 52, Appendix). Healthy living cells show a bluish,

finely striated or unstructured protoplasm. The same cells in cancer tissue

show deep-blue bionous vesicles or extremely small black bodies. Healthy

cells (muscle, skin epithelium, tongue epithelium, etc.) disintegrate into large

blue bions when boiled in KCl solution. Cancer cells, however, disintegrate

into T-bodies when boiled. Therefore, the fully developed cancer cell can be

distinguished from the normal tissue cell by the fact that it disintegrates not

into blue PA bions but into T-bacilli.

  The type of cancer tissue (sarcoma, adenocarcinoma, epithelioma) and its

location in the body are a matter of indifference. What characterizes cancer is

the vesicular structure of the surrounding tissue and the various formationsthat  either  evolve  into  the  fully  developed  cancer  cell  or  result  from  its

disintegration. The first phase in the development of a cancer tumor is always

vesicular disintegration of the tissue. The assumption can therefore be made

that  the  proliferation  of  cancer  cells  into  the  surrounding  areas  is  to  be

ascribed not only to the advance of already formed cancer tissue but also, and

perhaps even more, to the disintegration of the softened surrounding tissue.

The surrounding healthy tissue must itself undergo vesicular disintegration

before it can allow infiltration of the tumor into the surroundings. It is a

question of reciprocal action between formed cancer tissue and the healthy

tissue  that  surrounds  it.  The  first  vesicularly  disintegrated  cell  group

organizes into cancer cell tissue. This formed cancer cell tissue damages the

healthy  tissue  surrounding  it  and  brings  about  its  vesicular  disintegration.

This  surrounding  tissue,  which  is  itself  now  disintegrating,  offers  no

resistance to the infiltration, increasingly recedes, and progressively develops

into cancer cells. In this way we are able to explain the typical destructive,

infiltrating growth of the cancer tumor. The microphotos of living, unstained

cancer  tissue  (cf. Fig.  53,  Appendix)  show  that  parts  of  the  tissue  are

gradually transformed into darkly colored cancer formations.

  The  shape  of  fully  developed  cancer  cells  is  the  same  for  all  cancer,

wherever  localized  (bone,  gland,  muscle,  etc.)  (cf. Figs.  49  and 54,

Appendix).  To  the  trained  eye,  it  is  instantly  recognizable  by  its  caudate

form. The cell takes on this shape long before it acquires motility. Therefore,

if elongated, vesicular (bionous) formations shaped like a club and having an

intense blue glimmer were found in vaginal secretion, a diagnosis of incipient

cancer would be confirmed. However, it would not be possible at this point to

predict  the  progress  of  the  disease.  That  depends  on  a  number  of  other

circumstances which will be discussed shortly.

  The club-shaped forms cannot be mistaken for any healthy cell. There are

cylindrical cells in the gastric mucosa that could conceivably be confused

with cancer cells, but the experienced observer will not fail to recognize thedifference.

  Alongside the typical club-shaped formations, there are masses of large

round cells that have a smooth, structureless plasm or contain bions of an

intense dark blue. (The question of whether this structure has anything to do

with typical chromatolysis and nuclear chromatin—a problem most familiar

to the cancer specialist working with dead tissue—is of interest only to the

specialist and will therefore be discussed later in its particular context.)

  The  typical  stages  in  the  development  of  cancer  cells  in  mice  and  in

humans are the following:


  1. Swelling and vesicular disintegration of the tissue. This disintegration originates in local

    spasms and chronic systemic energy stasis.

  2. Organization of the bionous vesicles into heaps of energy vesicles or bions (“bion heaps”).

  3. Formation of a membrane around the bion heap.

  4. Dissolution of the bions into structureless or striated blue plasma. (Note, however, that bions

    sometimes retain their original form.)

  5. Formation of club-shaped bodies.

  6. Appearance of motility in the fully developed club-shaped bodies. This cannot be observed

    at magnifications of less than 3000–4000x. The movements are slow and jerky, and from

    place to place.

  7. Liquefaction of the plasm and with it the development of flowing amoeboid protozoa. This

    stage  is  rarely  reached  in  human  cancer,  since  the  organism  generally  succumbs  much

    earlier to the tissue disintegration and the process of putrefaction. (More later about the

    process of putrefaction.) These amoeboid formations occur much more frequently in mice,

    especially  mice  that  have  been  injected  with  T-bacilli  and,  as  a  consequence,  have

    developed an artificial cancer. The cancer cells move by means of rhythmic contractions or

    by flowing from place to place. Many of them are caudate and move like fish in water (this

    is recorded on film). Of fully developed cancer cells there is a great variety. There are both

    small-celled and large-celled formations. For reasons not yet understood, the small-celled

    ones are much more malignant than the large-celled ones; i.e., they lead more rapidly to

    death. The most virulent form is the small-celled sarcoma in young people.


  The development of a cancer tumor simply corresponds to protozoal self-

disintegration  and  autoinfection  of  the  organism.  Or,  in  other  words,

individual  tissues  of  the  metazoal  organism  are  transformed  into  single-

celled  organisms  of  varying  size  and  shape.  If  this  process  were  notinterrupted  by  death,  the  affected  person  or  the  cancer  mouse  would

eventually be completely transformed into protozoa. The most destructive

concomitant  phenomenon  of  this  transformation  is  the  typical  cancerous

process of putrefaction. For bion research, it is irrelevant whether the cancer

cells develop from epithelial tissue, glandular tissue, connective tissue, or

bone; the basic process is always the same. The traditional differentiation

between various forms of cancer (epithelioma, adenocarcinoma, glioma, etc.)

thus  loses  in  importance.  For  the  patient,  the  significant  factor  is  not  the

histological type of the tumor, but its location.


    THE FUNCTION OF THE ORGASM IN THE ORGONE

      ENERGY METABOLISM OF THE CELL: NUCLEAR

          SUFFOCATION IN THE PRECANCEROUS CELL


Conclusions drawn from observations in orgone therapy indicate that local

spasms  and disturbances  of  tissue  charge  are  the  basic  causes  of  tumor

formation. On the other hand, respiratory inhibition is the primary cause of

the systemic shrinking and therefore it influences tumor formation as well.

These  processes  explain  the  disturbances  in  the  organism  and  in  the

individual organ. But they do not make comprehensible the disturbance of the

cell functions in the affected organs. In a roundabout way, this problem leads

back to the old questions: What is the function of the sexual orgasm in the

energy  metabolism  of  the  cell?  Why  has  this  cardinal  function  been

developed,  and  on  what  biophysical  processes  in  the  cells  is  it  based?

Scientists often tend to ask questions that appear to the layman superfluous or

naïve. They are nevertheless of crucial importance.

  Until now, no answer has ever been provided to this question, neither by

the  sexological  research  that  preceded  sex-economy  nor  by  sex-economic

research. Nor is it possible to withdraw to the comfortable position of the

mystic  that man  in  contrast  to  the  beast  can  exist  without  the  orgastic

function. The damages inflicted on mankind by orgastic impotence have beentoo devastating to be denied any longer. The significance of the orgasm for

the bio-energetic equilibrium of the organism was accepted as a fact in sex-

economy, but not understood. We knew only that the orgasm regulates the

energy household and that its absence causes biopathies. What we did not

know  was how  the  orgasm  fulfills  its  function, what  causes  the  orgastic

(orgonotic)  discharge  in  the  cells.  Unexpectedly,  sex-economic  cancer

research led to the solution of this crucial question in the following way:

  The local cancer tumor develops in spastic and poorly charged, i.e., in

suffocating, organs. The individual cells are severely affected by this process.

We must assume that the development of a cancer cell from a normal resting

cell corresponds to a change in the “bio-energetic,” i.e., orgone-physical, cell

function. Chemical investigations have revealed many important factors, for

instance, the production of lactic acid in the cancer tissue, or the excess of

carbon dioxide, which indicates a suffocating metabolism in the cells, etc.

Bion research now adds the orgone-physical, i.e., the energetic, viewpoint to

the  chemical  one.  It  maintains  that  an  energy  stasis  leads  to  bionous

disintegration of the cell substance and that the cancer cell develops from

these bions. But we must learn more about it: How does the energy stasis in a

tissue lead to bionous disintegration of the cells?

  In the organism, every cell, with its nucleus, its plasm, and its orgone

energy field, forms a complete “orgonotic system.” Since every cell contains

orgone energy, its structure must be connected to its orgone charge. It is not

difficult to guess what this connection is: The nucleus is the most important

component of the cell and contains the most energy. Cell plasm without a

nucleus is not capable of life; but cells can live very well with only minimal

cell plasm, as do sperm cells, for example. The nucleus must therefore be

regarded  as  the  “vegetative  center”  of  the  individual  cell,  just  as  the

autonomic nervous system forms the “biological core,” or the “vegetative

center,” of the total organism. The cell nucleus, and the autonomic nervous

system, represent the most concentrated and substantial energy apparatus intheir respective orgonotic systems, the cell and the total organism.

  The nucleus is energetically stronger than the cell plasm. All essential

biological processes and functions begin in the nucleus and then spread to the

plasm. For instance, cell division begins with the division of the nucleus,

which  is  followed  by  division  of  the  plasm.  Amoebae,  in  the  process  of

division, often live for several hours with a divided nucleus, i.e., with two

nuclei, before the body divides into two amoebae.

  Great credit must be given to the German biologist Richard Hertwig for

having been the first scientist to investigate and formulate the relation of the

                                                                          1
nucleus  to  plasm  in  his  famous  “nucleus-plasma  relation.”  It  had  been

known for some time that most cells are a certain size when they divide,

varying  only  within  narrow  limits.  Following  division,  the  daughter  cell

grows to the same size as the parent cell just before it divides. The relation of

the nucleus to the plasm immediately after division is regarded in classical

biology as the normal nucleus-plasma relation. According to Popoff, a young

cell just produced by division grows at a fixed rate, the nucleus growing less

rapidly  than  the  plasm.  Then  suddenly,  immediately  before  division,  the

growth of the nucleus accelerates rapidly (“growth of division”) until, like the

plasm, it has nearly doubled its original size. The retardation in the speed of

growth of the nucleus after division of a cell results in a shift in the nucleus-

plasm relation in favor of the plasm: there is more plasm than nucleus. This

disproportion creates a tension in the cell that causes the nucleus to grow and

overcome  the  gap  created  by  the  growth  of  the  plasm,  thus  restoring  the

normal nucleus-plasma relation. Hertwig assumed that this tension in the cell

not  only  initiates  the  growth  of  the  nucleus  but  also  stimulates  the  cell

division.  On  the  basis  of  our  orgasm  formula  we  can  say  further  that

immediately preceding division, the cell is under more mechanical tension

and is more charged energetically than immediately after division, when it is

        2
smaller. Before division, the nucleus-plasm relation shifts in favor of the

more highly charged nucleus because the nucleus is stronger orgonoticallythan the plasm. Because the relation of the mass of the nucleus to the mass of

the plasm remains the same, orgonotic nucleus-plasma relation must shift

considerably in favor of the nucleus. The relatively high tension and charge

of the nucleus at the peak of its size now induces division. As we know,

division itself follows the tension-charge formula and leads to the discharge

by way of division, and relaxation in the form of the daughter cells. What has

this process to do with the problem of the cancer cell? A great deal.

  Cancer cells are usually recognized in the dead, stained section by the

following  characteristics:  The  nuclei  are  grouped  irregularly.  There  are

numerous divisions of these nuclei (mitoses); they are large, extraordinarily

rich in chromatin, and bunched together, as if the nuclear mass were greater

than  the  plasm  mass.  One  is  impressed  with  the  rich  nucleation  of  the

degenerating  tissue.  If  we  now  fit  this  finding  into  our  orgone-physical

description of the process of cancer cell formation, the next question is: Can

Hertwig’s  nucleus-plasma  relation  be  expressed  in  terms  of  orgone

biophysics?

  It  is  possible.  The  nucleus  is  the  strongest,  i.e.,  the  most  orgone-rich,

system in the cell. The cell plasm is orgonotically the weaker system. This

means that there is a difference between the orgone charge of the nucleus and

that of the plasm, a fact that can be confirmed microscopically. The nucleus

shows all the orgonotic characteristics more intensely than does the plasm. It

radiates  more  strongly  than  the  plasm  and  has  an  intense  blue  color.

Surrounding the cell is an orgone energy field which may be designated as

the orgone-weakest part in the total orgonotic system of the cell. It is a basic

law of orgone physics (in contrast to electrophysics and mechanics) that the

stronger orgone system draws off energy from the weaker system and attracts

it. This finding is crucial; it illuminates at once important questions that have

been hitherto unsolved:


  1. What holds the cell together?

  2. How is it possible that the nucleus-plasma relation always remains approximately the same    (except during the period of division), i.e., that the nucleus is always orgonotically stronger

    than the plasm? Every organism continually radiates orgone and thus, in time, should lose

    its orgone charge completely.


  The answer is that the nucleus is functionally the energy center and the

energy source of the cell, its “autonomic nervous system,” so to speak. The

cell plasm is the storehouse for foodstuffs and the executory organ of the

impulses from the nucleus, just as the digestive and locomotor organs of the

metazoan are the executory organs of the autonomic system. The nucleus

constantly draws orgone energy from the cell plasm which has assimilated it

by way of nutritional absorption and respiration. In this way, the nucleus

maintains  its  orgone  energy  preponderance  in  relation  to  the  plasm.  The

nucleus-plasma relation has to be determined not only in terms of material,

i.e., according to mass, but also, and more importantly, in terms of energy,

according to the difference in orgone charge. If the plasm grows in the period

between two cell divisions, orgone energy is accumulated in the plasm. At a

certain point, the nucleus grows rapidly; i.e., it corrects the relation in orgone

charge. It follows that during the phase between two divisions (two orgonotic

convulsions), the absorption of orgone energy into the cell exceeds by far the

discharge of orgone energy into the surroundings. This (and not chemical-

material processes) explains the growth of the total cell up to the time of its

division. The preponderance of the energy flow from the outside into the

nucleus leads inevitably to an excess of orgone energy and with it to the

reversal  of  the  energy  flow  from  the  nucleus  toward  the  outside. The

discharge of the excess of biological energy occurs in the entire living realm

—in  plants  as  well  as  animals,  in  metazoa  as  well  as  protozoa—by  the

convulsion of the total plasma, in other words, through the orgasm. Thus it is

not a matter of speculation but an orgone-physical fact when we say that the

orgasm, either in a single cell or in a mass of cells (the organism), is a basic

“cell function,” the “regulator of the energy household of the organism.” The

four-beat tension  → charge  → discharge  → relaxation  characterizes  thesexual  orgasm  of  the  metazoan  as  well  as  individual  cell  division.  The

“orgasm  formula”  must  therefore  be  regarded  as  identical  with  the  “life

formula,”  and  cell  division  as  an  orgastic  process  in  the  strict  sense  of

equalization of excessive biological energy. The orgasm is not a luxury of

life, not a caprice of nature, not the troublesome function that it seems to

those  individuals  who  suffer  from  sexual  dissatisfaction  and  biological

rigidity (orgastic impotence), but the regulator of the household of biological

energy. The orgasm discharges the surplus of orgone energy that periodically

accumulates in the cell nuclei.

  Our orgasm theory is thus strongly supported by this penetration of the

secrets  of  cell  function,  and  is  now  capable  of  explaining  cell  functions

hitherto  not  understood:  The  orgasm  (orgone  energy  discharge  through

convulsions) releases the excess accumulation of orgone energy that occurs

in every growth process. Once the growth process stops—in other words,

when  the  production  of excess  orgone  energy  in  the  biological  nucleus

gradually  diminishes—the  orgasm  function  also  begins  to  lose  its

significance.  It  occurs  less  often,  and  finally  ceases.  This  phase,  i.e.,  the

involution  of  the  organism,  is  the  most  essential  characteristic  of  normal

aging. On this basis, life in its ascending phase is sexually vigorous; in its

descending phase it becomes progressively weakened sexually. This principle

is just as true for individuals as for cell generations. There are periods of

flourishing  and  periods  of  dying  in  cell  generations,  e.g.,  the  “generation

death” of protozoa. Here, much is still obscure. To clarify matters we will

return to our discussion of the energy process of cancer cell formation.

  I would like to offer an analogy in order to illustrate precancerous cell

suffocation.  Imagine  a  group  of  people  working  together  under  favorable

conditions. They all have enough space to move in; they support each other,

are at ease, and function to capacity. Now imagine the same group squeezed

into a small room. Fire breaks out; peace and order vanish; wild disorder

reigns; people are trampled. This reaction is nothing other than a revolt of thelife impulses against the threatening danger. The fear has not only brought an

end  to  orderly  functioning  but,  in  addition,  has  created  a  new  kind  of

functioning—panic, which is deadly. The sequence is comparable to what

must be imagined to occur when wild cancer cells develop in suffocating

tissue.

  The chronic contraction of the organism prevents orderly respiration and

charge and discharge of orgone energy in the cell plasm, which first contracts

and  then  begins  to  shrink.  The  chemical  processes  of  metabolism  are

disturbed.  The  excess  of  carbon  dioxide  causes  a  condition  similar  to

suffocation  in  animals.  The  autonomic  system  reacts  to  suffocation,  i.e.,

threatened extinction, with violent convulsions, i.e., completely uncontrolled

hyperactivity.

  The conclusion can logically be drawn that the cell nuclei develop this

overexcitation and wild activity when plasm functioning is reduced and the

plasm begins to shrink. Specific basic laws govern the total organism as well

as the individual cell, a fact that must be emphasized repeatedly. Here the

principle of functional unity and antithesis is confirmed. The nucleus and the

plasm  normally  form  a  functional  unity.  In  the  suffocation  of  the  plasm,

however, the nucleus reacts in sharp opposition to the disease process in the

plasm. The nucleus, as the stronger orgonotic system, can still “defend” itself

when the orgonotically weaker plasm begins to succumb. In respect to energy

functions,  the  Hertwig  nucleus-plasma  relation  thereby  shifts  rapidly  and

dangerously  in  favor  of  the  nucleus.  The  energy  excess  in  the  nucleus

becomes  too  great  in  relation  to  the  suffocating  plasm.  In  a  condition  of

excessive  charge,  the  nucleus  is  capable  of  functioning  in  only one  way,

through lumination  and  division.  Whereas  the  biological  orgone  radiation

declines during the process of the shrinking of the plasm and blood systems,

the mitogenetic radiation of the suffocating cell nuclei intensifies greatly.

This was confirmed by Klenitzky, in the case of carcinoma of the uterus.

Gurwitsch established the presence of heightened radiation in tumor pulp.The affected cell nuclei attempt to compensate for the failure of the total

organism by taking over the function of orgone energy discharge, which the

total organism is no longer able to carry out due to orgastic impotence and

contraction  of  the  plasm  system. At  the  deepest  biological  level,  energy

discharge, in the form of lumination and division of the nuclei, replaces the

natural orgastic convulsions of the total plasm system.

  The profusion of cell divisions (mitoses) in cancer tissue thus becomes

easily  understandable.  Since  these  divisions  can  no  longer  proceed  in  a

normal, physiological manner, the nuclei vary in size. And since the plasm is

severely disturbed, the formation of the nucleus must also ultimately suffer. It

disintegrates  into  individual,  strongly  radiating  bions.  This  bionous

disintegration affects the total cell, and even extends to neighboring cells,

reducing them to a formless mass of bionous vesicles which, in the dead stain

preparation,  appear  “richly  nucleated,”  “dense”  and  “chromophilic.”  It  is

from this bion mass, which is spurred by the orgone energy that no longer

functions harmoniously within the organism, that the protozoa called “cancer

cells” now develop. The metazoan ceases to function, while the protozoan

flourishes, as in a stagnant pond where energy metabolism no longer exists.

Life sinks back and functions at the lowest biological level, for, where a

metazoal organism can no longer survive, a protozoan and certainly a bion

can still function.

  The cancer tumor thus is merely a late, palpable manifestation of a severe

disturbance  of  the  orgonotic  equilibrium  and  unitary  function  of  the

organism. It is the result of a rebellion of the affected cell nuclei against the

processes of suffocation and shrinking in the plasm. It is this rebellion that

generates the “wild cell growth.” This process in the cell nuclei corresponds

to the disturbance in the autonomic system in an acute anxiety attack, as for

example in anxiety neurosis. It would be perfectly appropriate to speak of an

anxiety  attack  among  the  nuclei  of  the  cells  in  the  suffocating  tissue.  In

anxiety neurosis, the anxiety attack affects both the biological core and thebiological  periphery;  the  anxiety  attack  in  cancer  affects  only  the  nuclei,

while  the  periphery  of  the  orgonotic  system  and  its  cells  remains

“emotionally”  calm.  In  anxiety  neurosis,  the  anxiety  seizes  the  total

organism; in local tumor formation, the anxiety attack is confined to a tissue,

and, even there, only to the cell nuclei. In anxiety neurosis, the total organism

retains  its  full  capacity  to  function;  in  local  tumor  formation,  the  whole

organism is in the process of dying and only the nuclei are still strong and

capable of developing “anxiety.” The mechanism of biopathies that result

from  sexual  stasis  is  therefore,  in  the  final  analysis,  a  pathological  cell

mechanism.

  The  local  process  is  concomitant  with  and  a  result  of  the  systemic

shrinking  biopathy  of  the  organism.  The  shrinking  process  itself  passes

through three typical phases:


  1. Phase  of  Contraction:  It  begins  with  chronic  incapacity  for  vagotonic  expansion  and

    manifests  itself  characterologically  in  resignation.  Its  physiological  characteristics  are

    muscular spasm, pallor of the skin, weakened biological charge of the tissues, orgastic

      impotence, and anemia. This first phase occurs in all biopathies and is not unique to cancer.

  2. Phase  of  Shrinking:  It  is  characterized  by  loss  of  body  substance,  shrinking  of  the

    erythrocytes, physical weakness, loss of biological resistance in the total organism, loss of

    weight, and finally general cachexia.

  3. Phase of Putrefaction:  It  is  characterized  by  loss  of  orgone  energy  in  the  tissue  cells,

      transformation of the cancer material into putrid matter, rapid formation of rot bacteria

    (putrid  disintegration),  disintegration  of  the  rot  bacteria  into  T-bacilli,  general  T-bacilli

      intoxication, putrid bedsores, putrid body odor, death.


  The manifestations of the shrinking biopathy coincide with the regression

phenomena of old age, i.e., with the gradual, natural dying of the organism

(“involution”). In old age, the organism shrinks slowly and putrifies after

death. In  the  cancer  biopathy,  this  general  process  of  dying  occurs

prematurely and in accelerated form. Death from cancer is a premature but

regular  death.  The  pathological  element  in  it  lies  in  its  prematurity  and

acceleration, and also in the fact that putrefaction occurs while the organismis still alive. The processes of death begin in an organ that has been in a state

of contraction for years and that exhibits poor respiration and deficient bio-

energetic (orgonotic) functioning: loss of orgone energy in the tissues and

their cells, vesicular disintegration, formation of rot bacteria and T-bacilli.

This disturbance primarily affects the blood system and with it the organism

as  a  whole.  As  a  result,  the  autonomic  apparatus  gradually  shrinks.  This

process  is  a  consequence  of  a  disturbance  in  the  sex-economy  of  the

organism.

  The disturbance starts in the organism long before it manifests itself in

tangible symptoms that would be comprehensible to mechanistic pathology.

The diagnosis of the local tumor is therefore invariably too late. On the same

basis, the usual local treatment of the tumor by means of surgery, X-ray, or

radium does not influence the disease itself. No matter how thoroughly a

cancerous breast tumor is surgically extirpated, the process of putrefaction

would  not  be  affected.  These  facts  are  of  supreme  importance  if  the

prophylaxis  of  cancer  by  the  use  of  concentrated  orgone  energy  is  to  be

undertaken.  The  term  “cancer  therapy”  will  only  be  justifiably  applicable

when we are in a position to combat the systemic process of shrinking and

putrefaction. This principle derives from bion experiments in cancer mice and

guides the orgone therapy experiments in relation to cancer at our Institute.

  It is a known fact that, biologically, cancer cells are extraordinarily weak

formations and disintegrate easily. The cancer tumor itself is harmless unless

it appears in the vital organs (brain, liver, etc.). That is the reason why cancer

patients with small, solid tumors frequently continue to lead a normal life

without  feeling  ill.  Many  older  people  have  cancer  tumors  that  cause  no

difficulty and are not even discovered until the post-mortem examination.

The typical cancer pains and the general weakness set in only after the total

organism has been extensively affected. Then the organism declines rapidly.

    Disintegrating cancer tissue is always putrid and smells of putrefaction.

The end product of this disintegration is vast quantities of T-bacilli. Since theT-intoxication spreads in proportion to the number of decaying cancer cells,

the greatest danger for the patient is the biological weakness of the cancer

tumor cells. This fact is a great advantage in orgone therapy wherein the

tumor may be readily destroyed. The difficulties of orgone therapy today are

not with the destruction of the tumor but rather with the elimination of the

products  of  disintegration  from  the  body.  To  overcome  this  particular

problem, we must clearly understand the nature of those products. Let us

undertake  an  experiment  that  should  help  to  clarify  this  matter.  We  boil

cancer cells from a surgically removed tumor and examine the results. There

are no more formed cancer cells. Instead, we find masses of the T-bacilli that

are  so  familiar  to  us  (cf. Fig. 32, Appendix). When  healthy  cell  tissue  is

boiled it disintegrates into blue bions. Cancer tissue disintegrates into T-

bacilli. Blue bions are beneficial to the organism, T-bacilli are damaging.

Orgone therapy for cancer therefore shifts the emphasis from the destruction

of  the  tumor  to  the  neutralization  and  elimination  of  the  products  of  the

disintegration.

  Of  course,  the  organs  themselves  cannot  be  examined  directly  for

evidence  of  the  putrefaction  of  the  organism.  It  can  be  established  and

evaluated only by examination of the blood and excreta. Since shrinking and

bionous disintegration always precede putrefaction, it is essential to observe

the form and function of the erythrocytes in particular. Healthy erythrocytes

are full and taut, and at 2000x can be seen to pulsate. Erythrocytes in the

process of shrinking are smaller, often not oval but round, and their pulsation

is either restricted or lacking altogether. Healthy blood corpuscles have a

wide,  strongly  glowing  blue  orgone  margin.  In  contrast,  shrinking

erythrocytes have a narrow, faint orgone margin. Instead of being taut, they

often  have  a  shriveled  membrane.  If  the  process  of  shrinking  has  not

advanced far enough for the shrunken membranes to be immediately visible

(T-spike formation: “poikilocytosis”), we observe how rapidly the red blood

cells decay, i.e., shrink in physiological salt solution. Healthy erythrocytesretain their normal form for up to a half hour and even longer. Shrinking

erythrocytes, or those with a tendency to shrink, often disintegrate in seconds

or after just a few minutes, showing a serrated membrane and forming the so-

called T-spikes (cf. Fig. 19). The T-spikes are an indication of an advanced

cancerous  degeneration.  The  term  “cancerous”  is  here  synonymous  with

shrinking (the “sympatheticotonia” of the erythrocytes). Healthy erythrocytes

disintegrate into blue bions—slowly in salt solution, rapidly on autoclavation

—whereas  cancerous  erythrocytes  disintegrate  almost  completely  into  T-

bodies (the cancerous “T-reaction” in contrast to the normal “B-reaction”).











FIGURE 19. Deformed erythrocytes as seen in the blood of advanced cancer patients. Bion formation in

the center, T-spike formation at the membrane (“sympatheticotonia” of the erythrocytes)


  Healthy blood yields no cultures of bacteria in bouillon. Cancerous blood

on the other hand yields cultures of rot bacteria and T-bacilli. Rot bacteria

and T-bacilli can also be observed microscopically in the blood of cancer

patients (though not at magnifications less than 2000x).

    Examination  of  the  blood  is  therefore  particularly  useful  for  the  early

detection of cancer. In fact, I would like to venture the assumption that the

blood  is  the  first  system  to  be  affected  by  systemic  contraction  and

subsequent shrinking of the organism. Blood is, after all, the “sap of life”

which  binds  all  the  organs  into one  whole  and  provides  them  with

nourishment.  Blood  therefore  plays  the  major  role  in  orgone  therapy  for

cancer. For that reason the orgonotic function of the blood must be fully

understood.  At  this  point  I  would  like  to  call  attention  to  the  accepted  theory

concerning the spread of cancer tumors. According to this theory, cancer cells

from the primary tumor enter the bloodstream and are then carried to distant

organs,  where  they  settle  and  grow  into  new  tumors,  the  so-called

“metastases.” This process has never been directly observed, however, and

the question remains: Is this hypothesis correct? Our interpretation suggests

another and more plausible explanation: It is not necessary to assume that

cancer cells are transported in the blood. Since the processes of shrinking and

putrefaction are general, local tumors can form here or there, sooner or later,

at any place in the organism. The case I described earlier, in Chapter V,

disclosed  the  fact  that  the  location  of  metastases  is  determined  by  local

spasms and disturbances of biological functioning. A cancer tumor may first

appear in the breast as a result of a chronic spasm of the pectoralis muscle,

and be followed somewhat later by a second tumor in the ribs or the spine as

a result of local spasms in the diaphragm. Muscle contractions are evidence

of a biopathic dysfunction and represent the general tendency of the organism

toward contraction and shrinking. The formation of metastases in parts of the

body  or  organs  distant  from  the  primary  tumor  must  of  course  be

distinguished from the growth of the tumor into the surrounding tissue, e.g.,

when a cancer of the rectum grows through the bladder wall.

  We might now make an assumption about the nature of cancer of the

blood system, so-called leukemia, though more extensive observations are

required  for  its  confirmation.  If  the  shrinking  and  disintegrating  of  the

erythrocytes  represent  the  earliest  and  most  general  phase  in  the  cancer

disease,  then  the  rampant  proliferation  of  leucocytes  becomes  easy  to

comprehend. The function of the white blood cells is not, like that of the

erythrocytes,  to  provide  for  tissue  respiration  and  the  supply  of  orgone

energy. Instead, they defend the organism against bacteria or other “foreign

bodies.” White blood corpuscles, leucocytes, lymphocytes, and phagocytes

always accumulate where foreign bodies (bacteria, dirt, etc.) enter the bodysubstance. The formation of abscesses is the result of such an accumulation

of  white  blood  corpuscles,  as  is  purulent  secretion  in  wounds.  When  the

erythrocytes begin to disintegrate, they are transformed into substances alien

to the organism. The defensive power of the white corpuscles must increase

enormously  in  order  to  cope  with  the  disintegrating  erythrocytes.

Accordingly, leukemia—the most prominent symptom of blood cancer—is

nothing but a reaction of the organism to the shrinking and T-disintegration

of the erythrocytes. Therefore, leucocytosis is also found in other diseases

involving shrinking of the blood system. Once white corpuscles predominate

over red corpuscles and the organism has become too weak to supply fully

developed red cells, death must follow inevitably.

  The  question  that  remains  in  relation  to  orgone  therapy  for  cancer  is

therefore: Is it possible to arrest or impede the process of disintegration of

the erythrocytes? A positive, practicable answer to this question would open

the gates to the prevention of cancer.

  In  another  context,  we  will  find  that  the  cells  of  a  cancer  tumor

themselves originate not as symptoms of the disease but as a defense against

the  pathological  processes.  Although  this  statement  may  sound  very

revolutionary, it is not.

  Before  discussing  the  healing  functions  of  the  blood,  I  would  like  to

answer two questions that must be uppermost in the reader’s mind:


  1. How is it possible to know that the cancer cell develops in the way I have described here?

    After  all,  one  cannot  repeatedly  cut  up  the  human  organism  in  order  to  follow  the

    development of cancer cells from vesicularly disintegrating tissue! The question is justified

    and important, and there is an answer. (See the detailed discussion of this subject, here.)

  2. What is the fundamental error of traditional cancer research? How is it possible that the

    processes  I  have  described  were  overlooked  so  completely?  This  question  is  equally

    justified.


  Both questions are answered by one and the same fact: The very omission

that  constitutes  the  basic  error  of  traditional  cancer  research  is  alsoresponsible for the overlooking of the developmental stages of the cancer

cell. We will now address ourselves to this.


        THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTOZOA IN GRASS

    INFUSIONS: THE KEY TO THE UNDERSTANDING OF

                                      CANCER


Mechanistic natural science, including mechanistic biology, is fraught with

mysticism. As I have often said before, mysticism is supposed to fill the gaps

that  exist  in  the  mechanistic’s  understanding  of  living  functioning.  For

example, mechanistic natural science is trapped by the erroneous notion that

“cell comes only from cell” and “egg only from egg.” The pertinent question

as to where the first cell and the first egg originated is eliminated a priori.

However, the exclusion of this basic question of biology simultaneously bars

the mechanist from the perception of certain facts. He assumes that for every

single one of the billions of different forms of single-celled organisms there

exists a “ready-made” germ “in the air.” Such germs have never been seen by

anyone. Nevertheless, they were taken to explain everything: tuberculosis,

syphilis, pneumonia, etc. But then diseases were encountered that were not so

simply  explained  by  “air  germs,”  diseases  that  must  be  attributed  to  tiny

invisible particles on the borderline between living and non-living matter.

Infantile  paralysis  (poliomyelitis),  foot-and-mouth  disease,  etc.,  are  not

understood even today. For viruses cannot be cultivated from the air. The

origin of bacteria and protozoa from the bionous disintegration of living and

dead  matter  was  unknown.  The  presence  of  living  organisms  in  moss

infusions was simply taken for granted, as was the presence of cancer cells in

the body. Certainly questions have been asked about the origin of the cancer

cells. However, in spite of the fact that they are not found in the air and their

origin  in  the  body  cannot  be  doubted,  it  nevertheless  has  been  strictly

forbidden  to  assume  that  the  organization  of  cells  could  develop  from

disintegrating tissues. Consequently the following steps have been neglected:1) careful examination of human excretions in their natural state; 2) careful

observation of the changes of grass tissues in infusions.

  The  assertion  that  there  is  an  endogenous  infection  or  even  an

organization of protozoa in the body sounds absurd to every mechanistic

pathologist. He will not even listen to such a thing. And yet the processes at

work in the development of bacteria and protozoa from disintegrating moss

and grass are the key to the understanding of the development of cancer cells

and rot bacteria from disintegrating animal tissues.

  The question of how it is possible to describe the development of cancer

cells in the organism can now be answered. We follow, in actuality, the many

stages of the development of protozoa and bacteria in disintegrating grass

tissue. Our assumption is that the amoebae in the grass infusion are nothing

other than the “cancer cells” of the grass; if correct, then the corresponding

processes  in  animal  tissue  can  be  inferred.  This  procedure  would  not  be

sufficient in itself to justify any definitive conclusions. For that reason many

other observations conducted on the excreta of seemingly healthy patients

and  the  excreta  of  confirmed  cancer  patients,  sporadic  and  unconnected

though such observations may seem at first, are of great significance. If forms

and processes are discovered in the cancer tissue and its environs that are

identical  with  those  observed  in  the  disintegrating  grass  or  moss,  the

combined  observations  and  experiments  are  corroborated.  They  become

established fact when artificial cancer is produced in healthy mice and serial

examinations  are  made  during  the  various  phases  of  the  disease.  The

following simple and conclusive picture emerges from the observations of the

processes in disintegrating grass tissue, in the excreta of cancer patients, and

in the tissue of mice with artificial cancer:


  1. The cancer cells are the protozoa in bionously disintegrating animal tissue.

  2. The amoebae and other protozoa in grass infusions are the cancer cells of the disintegrating

    grass.

  3. The origin of cancer cells is identical with the problem of biogenesis.  These three conclusions are enough to make one hesitate. They seem too

simple. But great facts are always very simple. Once these conclusions have

been  reached,  almost  every  gap  created  by  the  impossibility  of  direct

observation  in  cancer  can  be  filled  with  the  observations  made  of  the

development of protozoa in disintegrating grass.

  While preparing infusions from 1936 to 1942, by the simple method of

placing dried grass or moss in water at various times of the year, I observed

that it is impossible or very difficult to obtain protozoa from infusions of

fresh, young spring grass. On the other hand, autumnal grass or moss yielded

every kind of protozoan easily and abundantly. Such a finding would not be

striking to those who believe in the hypothesis of air germs. For us, however,

it has great significance. It confirms the identity of the protozoan in the grass

infusion  and  the  cancer  cell  in  the  organism,  for the  cancer  cell  never

develops  in  fresh,  young  tissue,  only  in  biologically  impaired,  aging,

“autumnal” animal tissue.

  I would like to emphasize that I had never even thought of occupying

myself  with  the  cancer  problem.  I  was  forced  into  it,  as  it  were,  when  I

discovered, during the bion experiments, the development of protozoa from

bions in moss infusions and confirmed it photographically. In addition to

normal grass tissue and the fully developed protozoa, there were an infinite

number of forms which, from the standpoint of mechanistic biology, were

indefinable, e.g., individual blue vesicles that were not air bacteria, irregular

heaps of such vesicles, heaps showing a membrane at only one place, other

heaps already showing a taut form only partly encircled by a membrane. In

addition,  a  vast  quantity  of  structured  formations  at  the  margins  of  the

disintegrating tissue could not be defined as either “moss” or “protozoa” (cf.

Figs. 39, 40, 41-a, b, c, Appendix).

  Here I would like to report a small but interesting event. In 1936 my

laboratory was associated with the botanical laboratory of the University of

Oslo.  I  needed  a  culture  of  amoebae.  The  laboratory  assistant  searchedaround in an infusion and showed me the amoebae. It was at that moment the

naïve question slipped out: “Can you tell me how these protozoa got into that

infusion?”  I  had  forgotten  that  there  was  a  “germ  theory.”  The  assistant

looked at me in astonishment, then, after a moment, finally replied, his voice

revealing a trace of contempt for my biological ignorance: “From the germs

in  the  air,  of  course.  They  settle  in  the  moss.”  I  subsequently  prepared

hundreds of air-germ cultures on a variety of media without ever seeing the

germ of an amoeba or an actual amoeba. In time, I felt less bothered by my

biological ignorance.

  Another  occurrence  may  serve  to  convince  the  reader  that  the  human

organism sometimes has accurate knowledge even though authorities may

deem  it  a  misconception.  I  prepared  the  first  publication  on  bions,  the

vesicular disintegration of matter, and the development of protozoa during

the  fall  of  1937,  about  one  and  a  half  years  after  the  first  conclusive

observations. At that time I still had no presentiment of the two basic types of

energy vesicles, the blue PA bions and the black T-bacilli, nor did I know

that the blue, orgone-containing energy vesicles kill the T-bacilli. In other

words, I really had no idea that I would ever find myself in the position of

undertaking orgone therapy experiments on cancer.

  Then, in the fall of 1937, the Norwegian mechanists and mystics began

their smear campaign against my bion research. In spite of my appeals that I

be allowed to work in peace, the newspapers published long articles alleging

to “unveil the secrets of my laboratory.” I was publicly accused of claiming I

“could cure cancer.” The accusation perplexed me; I had never made such a

claim and had never even thought of it. How could such an accusation be

leveled at me, if indeed it could be called an accusation? I understood it only

much later, after the discovery of the killing effect of the blue PA bions. My

hostile critics had obviously sensed better than I that the verification of the

biogenesis of protozoa would throw open the door to an understanding of

cancer.  After decades of enormous effort, cancer research was hopelessly stuck in

a dead-end, precisely because of the taboo that blocked the comprehension of

the development of protozoa. Protozoa were not supposed to develop from

bionous moss; they had to develop, by the will of God, from “germs” that

nobody had ever seen but that were simply “there,” existing in “ready-made”

form from the very beginning.

  When I realized the error that had been made, I gropingly resumed my

observation of cancer tissue, which the cancer hospital had sent to me many

months before. For some time I had been in the habit of simply letting all my

preparations stand in order to observe what would become of them with the

passage of time. Among my cultures there were a few old bouillon solutions

to which I had added sterile cancer tissue. To my astonishment, all these

cultures  showed  a  green-blue  coloration.  They  emitted  a  strongly  acrid,

ammonia-like,  and  putrid  odor.  Inoculation  on  agar  produced  a  smooth

growth of intense green-blue. Taking material from the margin, I inoculated a

new agar plate and saw, for the first time, the T-bacilli, the discovery of

which would help break down the mystery surrounding the cancer problem.

  I beg the reader to understand my great fear of proceeding further into the

new areas of research. I waited many years before publishing these findings.

It was not simply a matter of the discovery of a hitherto unknown bacillus.

This discovery had raised, at one stroke, awesome questions that had to be

answered before we could proceed.

  The T-bacilli have their origin in the disintegration of tissue. That means

we are confronted with the question of biogenesis, the social ordering of the

biological energy. Disintegration of tissue in the living organism is the result

of chronic social impairment of vital functioning. We are also confronted

with the question of the disposition of life itself in the universe, since bions

revealed the existence of a specific biological energy. It seemed inevitable

that  the  discovery  of  the  T-bacilli  would  be  a  threat  to  my  opposition,

bringing into dispute the notion of divine procreation as well as the divinedestiny of man. Behind me lay bad experiences with physicians, scientists,

and people generally; still before me lay the Oslo smear campaign. I was not

a citizen of the country in which I made the discoveries. I was a guest in a

foreign  land,  an  “alien,”  an  “intruder.”  Malicious  persons  were  more

interested in my statelessness than my discoveries. Then, one beautiful spring

morning a simple thought removed all my anxieties: I am a citizen of this

planet. As such, I now felt proud to have come into contact with one of the

greatest scientific problems of this century, indeed of the centuries. The fact

that  bion  research  had  spontaneously  found  the  common  denominator  of

many questions, hitherto regarded as unrelated, gave me courage. It was not a

disgrace but, on the contrary, a triumph that these problems were beginning

to  be  resolved  despite  all  kinds  of  difficulties  and  harassments  from

colleagues and bureaucracies and despite the fact that I was compelled to

move from country to country six times. When, finally, in January 1939,

biological  energy  radiated  from  SAPA  bions  into  the  atmosphere  of  my

laboratory and when, in 1940, I began to concentrate this energy inside the

orgone  accumulator,  my  anxieties  dwindled  and  the  indecencies  I  had

suffered paled in comparison to my discoveries. From that time forward, I

felt only a sense of obligation to carry out, to the best of my ability, the

responsibility I now had.

  The problem of cancer seemed to touch upon the nature of life and death.

The problem is not solved, but the way to its solution is now open.

  I have already described the T-bacilli and can therefore limit myself here

to an account of the development of the cancer research. This description is

essential, for the simple statement “cancer is fundamentally a putrefaction of

the  tissues  and  the  blood,  a  slow  dying  in  the  living  body”  becomes

understandable only through the interrelated discoveries made in the course

of experiments and observations. It will become clear in this presentation

why the basically simple nature of cancer has been overlooked until now.

Discovering  a  lump  of  gold  in  the  Colorado  mountains  is  a  very  simple,desirable goal, but finding the way to it is tortuous and even dangerous.

  The  discovery  of  the  existence  of  T-bacilli  in  old  sarcoma  tissue

immediately raised several questions that took many years of intensive work

to answer:


  1. Can T-bacilli injected into healthy mice produce cancer?

  2. What connection has the T-bacillus to the cancer cell? Is it its cause or the product of its

    degeneration?

  3. If  the  T-bacilli  are  the  cause  of  the  cancer  growth,  how  do  they  get  into  the  healthy

    organism initially?


  At the time I discovered the T-bacilli, I naturally had no idea that these

tiny bodies would be designated T-bacilli, or that they are the result of the

putrid disintegration of living tissues. However, every step in the course of

my experiments with T-bacilli led to new secrets of the cancer scourge. The

description of this path is therefore identical with a description of the nature

of cancer, so far as it has been revealed to date.

  Before  proceeding  to  this  description,  however,  I  would  like  to  now

answer  the  question  concerning  the  error  of  traditional  cancer  research.

Summarized, it is as follows:

  1. Neither the blue energy vesicles from which the cancer cells organize

nor the much smaller T-bacilli into which they disintegrate are visible in the

stained  tissue  sections.  They  can  be  seen  only  in  the  living  preparation.

Traditional cancer research, however, works almost exclusively with dead

tissue.

  2. For the same reason, traditional cancer research was unable to discover

the intermediary stages in the development of cancer.

  3.  Accurate  observations  cannot  be  made  at  magnifications  less  than

2000x. Traditional cancer research seldom uses magnifications greater than

approximately 1000x.

  4. The fundamental disavowal and rejection of the natural organization of

protozoa from non-living and living matter completely blocked access to anunderstanding of the cancer cell.

  5. The “air germ” prejudice diverted the attention of the researchers in a

false direction.

  6. Cancer is a general disturbance in the functioning of the biosystem and

therefore can be comprehended only functionally. Medicine and biology have

a purely mechanistic, physical-chemical orientation. They look for causes in

individual  cells, individual  dead  organs, individual  chemical  substances.

Thus, the total function, which determines the character of every particular

function, remains unnoticed. (A clear understanding of sexual function has

also suffered from this orientation.) The functioning of a radio can never be

understood by a description of the chemical composition of the glass or metal

of  the  tubes  or  a  description  of  the  mechanical  disposition  of  the  parts.

Similarly,  the  biopathic  function  of  cancer  cannot  be  understood  by  a

description  of  the  form  and  stain  reaction  of  the  cancer  cells  or  of  their

position  in  relation  to  the  cells  of  healthy  tissue.  Nor  can  the  chemical

composition  of  living  protein,  however  sophisticated  and  complex,  ever

reveal anything about living pulsation.

  Let us now follow the path along which the T-bacilli have led us.


2. DEATH IN THE LIVING BODY: ORGONE LOSS IN THE

      TISSUES AND ANTE-MORTEM PUTREFACTION


I  must  summarize  the  widely  divergent  findings  offered  so  far.  T-bacilli

reveal a deadly process in the living organism, “death in the living body.”

The letter T is taken from the first letter of the German word Tod, meaning

death. Calling them T-bacilli  conveys  two  facts:  T-bacilli  result  from  the

dying process in tissue and they can cause death in mice if injected in large

doses.

  After I had obtained the first T-bacilli culture, I injected a sample of it

into healthy mice. Many of these mice died within eight days; others became

ill, improved for a while, but then died a few months later. Over the course oftwo  years  (1937–1939),  several  hundred  healthy  white  mice,  always  in

groups of six, were injected in the T-bacilli experiment. Two in each group,

the control mice, were injected only with PA bions; two other mice in the

same group were injected with T-bacilli (the amount of the dosage varying

from group to group). The last two mice were injected with T-bacilli and blue

PA bions. (This mouse experiment is summarized in the section “The Natural

Organization of Protozoa” in Chapter II.)

  The combined injection of blue PA bions and T-bacilli followed logically

from my microscopic observation that the PA bions paralyzed the T-bacilli

and caused their agglutination. As already reported, the final result, after two

years, was that all the mice injected with PA bions alone remained healthy;

all  the  (initially  healthy)  mice  injected  with  T-bacilli  alone  either  died

immediately or developed, during the next fifteen months, various phases of

disintegration  and  cell  proliferation,  i.e.,  cancer;  lastly,  most  of  the  mice

injected with both PA bions and T-bacilli remained healthy. This effect of the

blue PA bions was our point of departure for the orgone therapy experiments

in cancer.

  I could now confine myself to the purely empirical results and be satisfied

with the practical successes obtained thus far. That would spare the reader

from having to be concerned with complicated processes. I cannot do this,

however, because although a major inroad has been made into the cancer

problem, a great deal of intensive work remains to be done if cancer is to be

completely eliminated.

  The conclusion I have drawn from my orgone therapy experiments in

cancer is that it will be far easier to prevent cancer than to cure it once it is

fully  developed,  for  the  very  reason  that cancer  is  nothing  other  than  a

premature  and  accelerated  but  “normal”  dying-off  of  the  organism.  The

processes  in  the  organism  that  lead  to  premature  death  from  cancer  are

precisely the same as those that cause natural death. The cancer problem is

inseparable from the whole question of the relation between life and death.  I  assure  the  reader  that  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  implications  of  these

statements, and that I do not make them lightly. I did not start out with the

cancer problem in mind, but was led to it by my bion experiments; I then had

the choice of either confronting it head-on or abandoning my bion research

entirely.  My  decision  to  delay  the  publication  of  the  results  of  the  first

successful  bion  experiments  on  cancer  and  not  to  report  them  to  any

responsible authority was based on the realization that the cancer problem is

identical with the life-death process itself. On closer examination, this fact is

not  so  surprising  as  it  may  at  first  seem.  Even  the  very  earliest  bion

experiments  and  the  observations  of  the  natural  organization  of  protozoa

brought us face to face, again quite unintentionally, with biogenesis. The bion

experiments then led by way of the PA bions and T-bacilli straight to the

cancer disease. Since life and death are inextricably intertwined, the question

of the origin of protozoa necessarily led to the question of the cancer death

and, with it, death in general.

  I think that for a long time I had been unconsciously preparing myself for

just these questions. I became involved with certain theoretical considerations

of  death  as  early  as  1926,  when  I  began  to  clinically  refute  Freud’s

hypothesis of the death instinct, and to affirm the existence of an objective

process of dying that starts long before the heart ceases to function. After this

                                              3
successful refutation of the death instinct my interest in the objective process

of dying still remained. It was a process unwished for and feared by the living

organism, yet to which the organism must succumb sooner or later. The T-

bacilli are tangible evidence of the death process. I will now prove this.

  Orgone  biophysics  reduces  all  manifestations  of  life  to  the  basic

biophysical function of pulsation. The life process fundamentally consists of

a  continuous  oscillation,  in  the  organism  as  a  whole  and  in  each  of  its

individual  organs,  between expansion  and contraction.  “Health”  is

distinguished  by  a  sex-economic  regulation  of  energy  and  by  the

completeness of these pulsations in all the organs. If expansion constantlypredominates over contraction, we speak of chronic vagotonia. If contraction

constantly  predominates  over  expansion,  we  speak  of  chronic

sympatheticotonia. The chronically maintained contraction leads, as we have

seen,  to  muscular  spasms  and  chronic  preponderance  of  the  inspiratory

attitude. As a consequence, there is an excess of carbon dioxide in the tissues

(see Warburg), a shrinking process, and loss of body substance culminating

in cachexia.

  The life process is thus expressed as a constant pulsation in each organ,

according  to  its  own  rhythm  and,  in  the  total  organism,  according  to  a

pleasure-anxiety  rhythm  characteristic  of  each  individual.  In  the  sexual

orgasm, the excess of energy is periodically equalized by extreme pulsations

(convulsions). However, expansion and contraction also govern the total life

span in one extended pulsation. The expansion of the biosystem sets in with

the fertilization of the egg and continues (with predominance of expansion

over  contraction)  until  middle  age.  Growth,  sexuality,  happiness  in  life,

expansive activity, intellectual development, etc., are normally predominant

until well into the forties. But from then on, with the beginning of the “aging”

process—so-called  involution—the  contraction  of  the  autonomic  system

gradually takes the upper hand. Growth stops and gives way to a very slow

process  of  shrinking  which  affects  all  the  living  functions  and  finally

culminates,  during  old  age,  in  an  involution  of  the  tissues.  The  natural

involution of the aged is accompanied by cessation of the sexual function.

The  urge  for  sexual  pleasure,  for  activity  and  development,  likewise

diminishes.  The  character  becomes  “conservative,”  the  need  for  rest

predominates.

  In old age, this natural contraction of the autonomic system can lead to

“physiological cancer death.” Cancer is far less dangerous in advanced age

than in youth. There are many cases of death from old age in which cancer is

accidentally discovered on autopsy, the disease apparently having produced

no  noticeable  symptoms  during  the  person’s  lifetime.  The  death  of  theorganism itself is accompanied by an intense muscular contraction, the so-

called  rigor  mortis,  which  clearly  reveals  the  contraction  of  the  vital

apparatus.  Finally  the  body  decomposes  in  putrefaction.  In  contrast  with

living tissue, dead tissue shows no gradations in bio-electric skin potential.

Dying  tissue  registers  only  a  negative  reaction.  The  source  of  biological

energy  is  extinguished.  For  example,  a  dead  fish  registers  an  orgonotic

radiation effect at the orgone energy field meter for a short time after death,

but it is weak and soon fades altogether. Dead branches, in contrast to alive

ones,  show  no  orgone  energy  field  action.  This  means  that  the  dying

organism  loses  its  biological  energy.  First,  the  orgone  energy  field

surrounding the organism shrinks, then there is loss of orgone energy in the

tissues. The popular belief that “the soul leaves the body” at death is thus not

without basis. Contrary to mystical belief, of course, the “soul” is not to be

understood here as some structured form which, after its departure from the

body,  hovers  in  space  as  a  “spirit”  awaiting  rebirth  in  a  new  body.  The

orgone charge of the organism forms the basis for living perceptions and

these  perceptions  become  weaker  as  the  orgone  charge  diminishes.  This

process of dying does not take place in the last few hours only, but extends,

under  normal  circumstances,  over  decades. Acute  dying,  characterized  by

stoppage  of  the  heart,  is  only one  phase  in  this  long  process,  though

obviously  the  decisive  phase.  But  even  when  the  heart  stops  beating

everything is not suddenly “dead”; individual life functions continue for a

short time, gradually ceasing for lack of oxygen. Sudden death resulting from

“shock” is nothing more than a rapid total contraction of the vital apparatus to

a degree that precludes a renewal of expansion.

  The  putrefaction  that  sets  in  after  death  is  the  result  of  the  bionous

disintegration  of  the  tissues.  It  is  totally  unnecessary  to  believe  that  “rot

bacteria from the air” invade the organism at this point. One would have to

ask why the rot bacteria present in the air do not settle in the healthy living

organism and cause it to rot. This question is of much greater significancethan might appear at first glance, because it demonstrates the necessity of a

natural defense maintained by the healthy organism as long as it is alive, a

defense against the putrefying process that occurs after death. Bion research

succeeded in providing a conclusive answer to these questions.

  At the most primitive stages of life, the expansion, energy metabolism,

etc., of living substance are represented by the blue PA bions; the contraction

and degeneration of living substance—its disintegration and putrefaction—

are represented, on the other hand, by the T-bacilli. Is this also true for highly

developed organisms? The PA bions are carriers of orgone energy, “orgone

energy vesicles.” T-bacilli are characterized by the lack of orgone charge.

The cells of the body are made up of blue energy vesicles highly charged

with orgone energy. The intake of food provides a constant source of orgone

energy in the form of the PA bions contained in the food. The PA bions kill

the T-bacilli with their stronger orgone charge, preventing putrefaction in the

organism. Orgone energy in the radiation of the sun kills rot bacteria in the

same way. The functioning of the life process can therefore be ascribed to the

constant  disinfecting  and  charging  effect  of  the  body  orgone,  i.e.,  the

expansion  function.  It  prevents  the  contraction  function  from  getting  the

upper hand, which would result in the formation of T-bacilli and putrefaction.

  If  the  orgonotic  function  of  charge  and  expansion  declines,  the

contraction function predominates and can lead to the processes of death. The

T-bacilli are an expression of these processes, as exemplified in the cancer

biopathy.  The  fostering  of  positive  life  functions,  such  as  pleasure,

development, activity, etc., is decisive in the prevention of premature death

processes. The extension of average life expectancy in many cultures during

the  last  decades  must  be  ascribed  to  the  breakthrough  of  natural  sexual

functions.

  These  assumptions  are  not  only  justified,  they  are  inescapable  if  the

various observations are to be reduced to a common denominator. This is

precisely the task of natural science. The carcinomatous shrinking biopathy(it could also be called the “sex-starvation disease”) can be understood only

in the context of concrete life and death processes.

  In 1937–1938, when I succeeded for the first time in producing cancerous

growths in healthy mice by the injection of T-bacilli, I thought I had found

the “specific cancer agent.” The T-bacilli had been cultivated from cancer

tissue;  injected  into  healthy  mice,  they  produced  cancer;  the  cancer  cells

themselves  then  disintegrated  into  T-bacilli.  These  facts  are  easily

demonstrable and traditional cancer research is aware of them. Traditional

research has pursued what I call the T-bacillus for a long time, but its air-

infection prejudice and its resistance to the idea of endogenous infection have

created an insurmountable obstacle to progress.


  3. RIDDLES IN TRADITIONAL CANCER RESEARCH


I would now like to discuss briefly those riddles in traditional cancer research

that seem in some way to presage the discovery of the T-bacillus. In this

summary I am indebted to the extraordinarily lucid survey of the subject by

            45
Blumenthal and to the omnibus volume edited by Adam and Auler. At one

time  I  was  able  to  study  a  number  of  articles  on  the  subject  but,

unfortunately, wartime conditions made it impossible for me to read all of the

literature in the original. That has not damaged my summary, however, since

the surveys to which I refer were excellent.

  The basic question of traditional cancer research, as well as of orgone

biophysics, is this: Is cancer essentially represented only by the tumor and its

metastases or is it already present in the organism before the emergence of a

tumor? If it is already present, how is this so? In the first case, the cancer cell

would be the real disease; in the second case, there would be a “something”

which is not the cancer cell itself but which has a definite relationship to it.

How this question is answered is of crucial importance, since the decisions

concerning  tumor  operations  depend  upon  it,  as  do  the  question  of  early

diagnosis  of  cancer  and,  most  important,  the  possibility  of  preventing  ordestroying the cause of the disease.

    Experiments to produce tumors in animals by the transplantation of tumor

pulp led cancer researchers to the unanimous conclusion that very substantial

amounts of tumor pulp have to be transplanted if positive results are to be

obtained.  Experiments  with  centrifuged  substances  and  filtrates  were

negative. The sought-for tumor agent is always connected with the residue of

the centrifuged substances. In relation to the T-bacilli, an hypothesis by R.

Kraus—based on experiments conducted by Swarzoff, who had observed the

development of tumor cells from tissue particles and partial cells—is very

important. Kraus concluded: “Omnis cellula ex granula,” and not, as had

hitherto been the theory, “ex cellula.” The idea that cancer cells develop from

tiny “granules” corresponds splendidly with the orgonological concept that

they develop from bions.

  Here the question shifts from the cancer cell to the development of bions

in the organism. From this perspective the cancer cell would be not so much

the cause of the disease as a symptom. The disease would be the result of

some third more general factor present in the organism before the tumor.

  Ernst  Fränkel  found  that  the  agent  of  the  Rous  chicken  sarcoma  was

bound  up  with  the erythrocytes  and  the  globulin.  Certain  experiments

produced evidence of the presence of a carcinogenic principle in the spleen,

either free or in the spleen cells. Experiments conducted on animals indicate a

curious connection between spleen function and tumor function. If the spleen

is removed from healthy rats, they develop severe anemia (Lauda). If the

spleen is removed from tumorous rats, anemia does not develop except after

elimination of the tumor. Thus, the tumor can assume certain functions of the

spleen. This  seems  very  strange,  but  it  again  points  to  the  blood  and  its

corpuscles. It is well known that the spleen is the reservoir for erythrocytes. It

is said that what becomes of the disintegrating erythrocytes is completely

obscure.  They  are  known  to  have  some  connection  with  cancer,  but  the

precise nature of the relationship remains a mystery. Using blood drawn froma tumor vein, Blumenthal’s laboratory assistant Lindner produced tumors in

animals of the same species; and, with one exception, the tumors were always

of the same kind. Similar experiments with blood from the heart and axillary

vein also succeeded. It was shown thereby that the cancer agent is connected

with the solid components of the blood. The experiments were particularly

successful with clotted blood and washed erythrocytes. The T-bacillus does in

fact  originate  in  degenerating  erythrocytes.  Venous  blood  proved  to  be

significantly  more  effective  than  arterial  blood.  (Cancer  tissue  shows

evidence  of  a  suffocation  metabolism,  i.e.,  excess  of  CO.)  Laser  once
                                                                        2

produced cancer in a chicken in the following way: He injected a chicken

with  tar  solution  and  then,  while  it  was  still  free  of  tumors,  cultivated

macrophages  from  its  blood.  These  macrophages,  injected  into  a  second

chicken, produced a tumor. This experiment suggests the interpretation that

the macrophages had absorbed the agent circulating in the blood and had

transmitted it to the second chicken. Many researchers have conjectured that

this agent is a component of the cancer cells that enters the circulation only

when the cancer cells disintegrate. Leucocytes cultivated from the blood of

sarcoma rats caused sarcoma in healthy rats after injection. We are initially

confused by the fact that the undoubted “something” that produces cancer is

present in the blood prior to the existence of cancer cells and also develops

through the disintegration of the cancer cells.

  This “something,” so it is said, can be present in an organ without the

formation of a tumor. Numerous inventive experiments have shown that the

blood cells are closely related to the malignant cells. “The normal blood

cells,” writes Blumenthal,


  must contain substances indispensable for the preservation of the activity of the etiological

  cancer  principle.  Blood  cells  are  particularly  rich  in  coagulable  albumin.…  This  fibrinogen

  evidently joins with the etiological factor of the cancer cell and transfers it to the cells of the

  organism … transforming normal cells of the organism into cancer cells.… In all … cases there

is proof that something emanates from the cancer cells that transforms previously normal cells

  into cancer cells. [Italics mine.]The “something” being sought is bound to the blood corpuscles as well as to

the cancer cells and produces cancer cells from normal cells.

  These  conclusions  confront  classical  pathology  with  a  number  of

questions. The most important include the following:

  Is this carcinogenic “something” an enzymatic substance, i.e., not a living

organism? As long as there is no proof that this substance can multiply, it

cannot be compared with a living organism.

  Is this “something” a chemical in the body that stimulates the healthy

mesenchyme cells of the animal to form the same substance and transforms

them  into  tumor  cells?  Is  it  a  chemical  poison?  a  lytic  substance?  an

autocatalyst?

  Is it cellular? If it is, then the fundamental question arises, Can something

be cellular and infectious yet not “parasitic,” i.e., not “foreign to the body”?

One thing to bear in mind is that in the case of the carcinogenic stimulus, it is

not a question of transferred cancer cells but a disease of previously healthy

cells.

  This remarkable “something” that so many people have tried to define

begins therefore to take on the following outlines:

  It is present in the organism before the cancer cell and is bound to the

blood  solids.  Yet  it  develops  also  from  the  cancer  cell.  It  behaves

simultaneously  like  a  parasite  and  a  poisonous  chemical  substance.  It  is

“infectious” without the disease itself being infectious. It produces the cancer

cell from the healthy tissue cell and itself derives from the cancer cell. It acts

like a parasite, yet does not originate outside the body.

    Blumenthal says correctly: “It is clear that the cancer problem exists on

the border between the living and the non-living, posing the question whether

                                                                              6
animal cells can produce something showing parasitic properties.”

  Our T-bacilli are the bridge between the two.

  The T-bacilli experiment confirms a concept that has gained vogue in

modern cancer research and which Blumenthal summarizes as follows:In the case of the Rous sarcoma it has been proved that something is present inside and outside

  the tumors with which tumors can be produced, that, in other words, the tumor agent or tumor

  principle need not be a tumor cell. The essential difference between the tumor cell and the tumor

  agent in respect to cancer formation is that while the tumor cell produces only tumor cells of the

  same kind, the cancer agent does not itself multiply but affects previously healthy cells so that

  they are transformed into cancer cells.


  Our T-bacilli conform to Blumenthal’s description exactly:


  1. They are present in the blood and tissues before the tumor.

  2. They lead to the development of cancer cells and are simultaneously the product of cancer

    cell disintegration.

  3. They are produced by the disintegration of red blood corpuscles.

  4.  They  are genuine  bacilli  with parasitic  properties,  yet  at  the  same  time  cancer  is  not

    infectious.

  5. The T-bacilli actually form a bridge from the non-living to the living insofar as they arise

    from coal bions through early degeneration and they are able to propagate.

  6. They are in fact the products of animal cells that show parasitic properties.

  7. They are in fact poisonous and possess a still-obscure relation to cyanide. They exercise an

    effect similar to suffocation and respiratory paralysis.


  If the T-bacillus is the specific cancer agent that has been sought, then the

animal experiment must yield the following results:


  1. The injection of T-bacilli into healthy mice must result in destructive and infiltrating cell

      proliferation.

  2. The T-bacilli must be capable of recultivation.

  3. The tumors created experimentally must contain T-bacilli.


  All three conditions are fulfilled in the T-mice experiments.


THE T-BACILLI EXPERIMENT ON HEALTHY MICE (1937–

                                        1939)


The T-mice experiments were carried out customarily in groups of six. Each

type of the packet-amoeboid bions was injected into four mice as a control of

the  pathogenicity.  Two  days  after  this  first  injection  with  PA  bions—andsometimes  after  a  second  PA  bion  injection—two  of  the  four  mice  were

injected with one of the different strains of T-bacilli. Simultaneously, a third

pair was injected with T-bacilli only. The dosage of the injection was as

follows: a full loop of PA bions was dissolved in 3 cc. of sterile physiological

NaCl solution or in a potassium chloride solution. We injected 0.5 cc. of this

solution subcutaneously into the back. In the T-bacilli experiment, one loop

was dissolved in 5 cc., and of this solution 0.5 cc. or 0.25 cc. was injected

subcutaneously into the back. Until the end of January 1939, a total of 178

mice were injected in series in this way. Of that total, 84 mice were injected

solely with T-bacilli. Of these 84 T-bacilli–injected mice, 30 died within the

first eight days following the injection and 30 more died in the next fifteen

months. At the time this protocol was concluded, the surviving mice were all

ill.  Of  the  30  mice  that  died  over  the  span  of  fifteen  months,  25  were

examined for carcinomatous growths. Seven of the mice examined contained

cancer cells with amoeboid movement in the epithelium of the intestines and

the stomach, the cervical glands, the genitals, etc. Thirteen of these mice

showed the characteristic spindle- and club-shaped elongated-cell formations

and infiltrations in various organs, predominantly in the peritoneum, cervical

glands, genitals, stomach, and duodenum. The remaining 5 mice displayed no

clear findings.

  Of the 45 mice that were injected first with PA bions and subsequently

with T-bacilli, 36 remained healthy and 9 died during the following fifteen

months. Among the 39 mice injected only with packet-amoeboid bions, not

one showed any signs of disease in the same period of time. Of 10 mice

injected first with T-bacilli and subsequently with packet-amoeboid bions, 8

died within fifteen months and 2 were killed because of abscesses.

    Regardless of their origin, the T-bacilli led regularly to the development

of caudate, or club-shaped, cells in various organs. Likewise, the effect of the

blue PA bions was the same in all types. In two cases a packet-amoeboid type

(SAPA 1), injected after the application of T-bacilli, produced dry, “clean”ulcers in the mice, resembling “X-ray ulcers,” precisely where the T-bacilli

had infiltrated the tissue after injection.

  For  this  experiment  the  T-bacilli  were  obtained  from  the  following

sources: cultivated directly from sarcomatous and carcinomatous tissues (T

1), from the blood of cancer patients (T Ca 10), from the cardiac blood of

mice that died after tar application experiments (T II 6), from the blood of

healthy humans cultivated by degeneration (T 10), from the blood of persons

suspected of having cancer but in whom the usual clinical examination was

negative (T 10), from degenerated bion cultures (6 d TT and 10e 41 T), from

the cardiac blood of mice that had died from Bluko tumors (Bluko-T), and

finally T-bacilli recultivated from the cardiac blood of the affected mice (10

Ge Tr, 10 Ta Tr, 6 dT Tr, etc.). Every kind of T-bacilli yielded all the phases

of carcinomatous growths in healthy white mice.


                                    SUMMARY

  1. The T-bacilli behave parasitically, yet have their origin in body substance.

  2. They originate through the degeneration of tissues and organisms.

  3. They are formed when carbon changes into bions.

  4. They show a relationship to cyanide.

  5. They effect bion formation.

  6.  They  are  always  an  indication  of  sympatheticotonic  contraction  and  shrinking  of  the

    organism.


  The typical syndrome of T-bacilli intoxication is the following: A few

hours  after  the  injection  of  T-bacilli  the  mouse’s  movements  become

sluggish, its body bends, it drags its legs and loses appetite. Conjunctivitis

and local abscesses appear occasionally but are not typical. If the T-mouse

does not perish within about eight days, it usually gives the impression of

recuperating. However, after two to five months, a new process of contraction

and  shrinking  begins  in  the  organism.  The  pattern  of  the  first  few  days

following the injection of the T-bacilli returns, but this time more slowly; the

process has a chronic character. The organism gradually shrinks until it dies.Although  I  was  unaware  of  it  at  the  time,  these  animal  experiments,

conducted between 1937 and 1941, revealed the “carcinomatous shrinking

biopathy” that, in 1941, I discovered in human cancer. Autopsies conducted

on T-mice killed at various stages of the disease or after their spontaneous

death regularly showed T-bacilli in all the organs and in the blood (cultivable

in bouillon); atrophic and necrotic processes in the epithelium of the mucous

membranes,  especially  of  the  alimentary  tract;  cancerous  blood  picture,

anemic blood corpuscles, shrunken membranes with T-spikes; enlargement of

the liver and atrophy of the cells, nuclei, and lobules; accumulation of T-

bacilli in the renal glomeruli with atrophy of the renal epithelial cells.

  The  longer  a  mouse  lives  after  its  injection  with  T-bacilli,  the  more

numerous and more highly developed are the spindle- and club-shaped cell

formations in the various organs. The diagnosis of fully developed cancer is

confirmed by the presence of amoeboid cells in the submaxillary gland, in the

urinary bladder, or in the kidney. The formation of polypous growths of the

intestinal mucous membrane is accompanied by total atrophy of the adjacent

mucous  membrane.  In  male  mice,  numerous  cancer  formations,  including

amoeboid forms, are found in the testicles.

  The general conclusion regarding the autonomic life apparatus is that the

flooding  of  the  organism  with  T-bacilli  leads  to  gradual  contraction  and

shrinking of the tissues as well as of the individual cells. Then follows loss of

weight,  atrophy  and  degeneration  of  the  cells,  culminating  in  putrid

degeneration, i.e., putrefaction. It is exactly the same process that occurs in

human cancer. In experimental T-mice, this process of shrinking is generally

caused by the injection; in the human cancer patient, biophysical shrinking,

as a consequence of characterological resignation, precedes the formation of

T-bacilli. As the T-bacilli develop and proliferate, they hasten the general

shrinking process and provoke local defense efforts, i.e., tumor formation.

Further observations will determine whether or not the local tumor always

represents a defense reaction and in how many cases it is formed from localtissue damage, which leads secondarily to the general shrinking of the vital

apparatus.


  STAGES OF CANCER CELL DEVELOPMENT IN THE T-

            BACILLI–MOUSE EXPERIMENT (1937–1941)


Comparative observations of the tissues of mice that had either died or been

killed in the course of four years yielded the following picture of the T-effect

upon the tissues of the organism. The observations were directed principally

at examining the degree of maturation attained by the club- and spindle-

shaped cells in the tissues, forms that are never found in healthy mice or in

mice with other diseases. Examined at a magnification of 3000–4000x these

forms  are  so  clearly  typical  that  they  cannot  possibly  be  confused  with

another kind of cell. The one exception might be the cylindrical epithelial cell

of the gastrointestinal tract which, at low magnification, can be mistaken for a

maturing cancer cell. The distinction between the two is, however, so marked

to anyone familiar with the forms that the risk of confusing them is minimal.

  I will now describe the autopsy findings in various stages of the T-bacilli

effect. It was found that cancer needs a very long time for maturation. The

amoeboid cancer cells represent its most mature state. However, the mice

frequently died before reaching this condition if there was advanced tissue

infiltration  and  destruction  of  the  physiological  functioning  of  the  organs

(septicemia, nephritis, atrophy of the liver, etc.).


1. Tissue Damage Through Swelling and Vesicular Disintegration (Ca I)


The T-bacilli–albumin experiment showed that the damage either is caused

directly by the action of the T-bacilli on the tissues, or is brought about by

chemical  or  mechanical  trauma,  such  as  by  tar  or  a  blow,  which  creates

secondarily a field of action for the already present T-bacilli. In the latter

case,  it  is  necessary  to  assume  that  the  cancer  stimulus  originates  in the

formation  of  T-bacilli  from  disintegrating  tissue.  This  could  explain  theformation of cancer following injuries from scars, burns, etc.




















 

1. Healthy epithelial cell (no structure)

2. Epithelial cell disintegrating into blue bions;
spindle formation with intense blue glimmer at the
right margin: precancerous stage (Ca I)

3. Epithelial cell disintegrating into T-bacilli,
which are also seen outside of the cell (Ca I)
FIGURE 20. Healthy and precancerous epithelial cells


  The tendency toward rapid vesicular disintegration with swelling and T-

bacilli formation is one of the most important signs of cancer in its initial

stages. True, the organism’s defenses may be able to counteract this tendency

so long as its total functions are intact. However, tissues that swell rapidly in

KCl  and  show  vesicular  disintegration  and  T-bacilli  formation  must  be

considered  cancer-suspect  (cf. Figs.  55-a  and 55-b,  Appendix).  If  this

statement is correct, it opens up an exciting field of work for the diagnosis of

incipient cancer long before the actual cancer cells have organized or any

destructive growth and infiltration has taken place (cf. Fig. 56a, Appendix).


2. Acute Inflammatory Stage (Ca II)


The organism reacts to the damage caused by the T-bacilli with the familiar

means: hyperemia, accumulation of leucocytes, and formation of granulation

tissue.  As  was  often  shown  in  the  T-mice  experiments,  the  inflammatory

growth  may  remain  localized  or  it  can  spread  without  yet  having  to  bedesignated as carcinomatous. Brownish or brownish red granulation tissue

can be observed spreading from the point of injection along the blood and

lymph vessels into deeper tissues. These inflammatory growths extend with

particular  frequency  into  the  glands.  Microscopically,  we  cannot  as  yet

detect,  apart  from  the  elements  of  any  inflammation,  any  trace  of

carcinomatous cell forms in such tissues, whether examined in the living state

or in section (cf. Figs. 57, 58-b, and 58-c, Appendix).






















 

1. Part of the cell shows a blue striated structure

2. The cell assumes an oblong shape; blue bions develop

3. The blue bions flow together and form a dense,
striated structure

4. The cell assumes club shape
FIGURE 21. Stages in the transformation of an epithelial cell into a cancer cell (Ca II)


3. Individual spindle and club-shaped cell forms in chronic inflammatory

growths (Ca III)


This third stage is already carcinomatous and characterized by processes not

found in healthy or merely inflamed tissue. There are mostly spindle- and

club-shaped arrangements of vesicles (cf. Figs. 56-c, d, and e, Appendix) and

a vesicular disintegration of the tissue surrounding the inflammation (cf. Fig.

59, Appendix). Macroscopically, it can be seen that the brownish granulation

tissue merges almost imperceptibly into gray-white hard streaks. These are inpart newly formed connective tissue; but they already show a variety and

multiplicity  of  cells  (cf. Figs.  62-c  and 62-d,  Appendix). The  leucocytes

become less numerous and formations of a new kind are present. These cell

formations, showing varying degrees of organization, are characterized by a

pronounced biological stainability (chromophilia). Common to all of them,

whatever their size, is the tendency toward a caudate shape. The same gray-

white streaks that, in the eosin-hematoxylin preparation, indicate only chronic

inflammation are found in the lungs, kidneys, liver, glands, and omentum. At

this stage, the dead stained section shows us nothing of the carcinomatous

bion formations, vesicle heaps, and spindle forms that are unmistakably seen

in the living preparation at a magnification of 4000x. A cancer diagnosis can

therefore be made from the living preparation at a time when the dead stain

preparation cannot possibly yield such a result.rony (8397
lo 9\3 ‘@ ”f”ﬂ/
\a(ﬁ 5h

D

a. A typical form of  b. Four epithelial cells, one
precancerous of them cancerous. From
epithelial cells the renal tubule of a

‘T-mouse. Drawn from life

 

ice with spontaneous
jection of T-bacilli

  
 

 

c. Various forms of cancer cells, as found i
tumors and with tumors produced by the
FIGURE 22. Cancer cells in the stage of maturing (Ca III)


  For instance, the living preparation from kidney tissue may present the

following picture (cf. Fig. 22-b): Three cells surrounding a tubule are still

completely normal, the plasm homogeneous, a well-defined nucleus in the

center, and no vesicle formation. The fourth cell, on the other hand, is already

club-shaped and shows a vesicular structure and a strong stainability over the

entire  cell  body.  The  nucleus  can  no  longer  be  distinguished  from  the

structure of the plasm; nuclear material fills the entire body of the cell. Thus,

the metamorphosis from the normal cell to the cancer cell of the first stage

(Ca  III) takes  place  through  vesicular  disintegration  of  the  cell  and  its

transformation into a club-shaped structure (cf. Fig. 58-c, Appendix).

  In other cases, it is possible to see two or three cells lose their contiguous

borders to form one new kind of caudate, club-shaped cell. This confluence

can be reproduced experimentally. If we send electrical impulses of about 8–

10 volts through a preparation of muscle or kidney tissue in KCl solution, we

see  the  progressive  appearance  of  vesicles  in  the  plasm,  strong  light

refraction,  and  elongation.  The  boundaries  between  the  cells  gradually

dissolve and they flow together into one piece. The same experiment can be

carried out with muscle tissue. Application of methylene blue stain shows

that the cells that have become vesicular stain faster and more vividly than

the healthy cells. The formations are identical with those which, in the eosin-

hematoxylin  section,  gave  the  impression  of  “chromatin  rich,”  oval-to-

spindle-shaped  forms.  If  such  formations  are  never  found  in  the  lungs  or

kidneys of healthy mice but appear regularly in diseased mice at the stage of

chronic inflammation (Ca III), it is justifiable to diagnose them as preliminary

stages of the later amoeboid cancer cell. This assumption is verified by the

fact that, with the continuance of the disease, these formations become more

abundant  and  defined.  The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this  series  of

observations on T-mice is as follows: It is true that one single healthy cell can

change  into  one  single,  spindle-shaped  carcinomatous  cell  but,  as  a  rule,several healthy cells disintegrate vesicularly and flow together into a vesicle,

from which one or several cancer cells develop.

  Among these new formations in the diseased tissues are some peculiar

structures formed from vesicularly disintegrated erythrocytes combined with

unstructured vesicular bion heaps. The assumption can be made that in the

process of vesicular tissue disintegration every conceivable combination of

the disintegrated forms is possible. The vesicular structure is, however, the

essential  formation.  It  took  considerable  effort  to  locate  these  new

formations, confirmed in the living preparation, in the stained section of the

same tissue. Figure 60-b (Appendix) shows those transformed chromatin-rich

cells that correspond to the vesicular, spindle-shaped new formations.

  In the dead, stained section of the intestinal epithelium, for example, it is

possible to observe, at a magnification of approximately 1600x, alongside

healthy cells, deeply stained elongated cells and cell heaps that do not appear

in  healthy  mice.  If  extensive  growths  of  such  cells  are  found  outside  the

intestines (cf. Fig. 60-c, Appendix) and if heaps of spindle formations are

observed in the same tissue in the living preparation, then the diagnosis of

cancer (Ca III) is confirmed.

  In many of the experimental mice, the same dark cell heaps seen inside

the intestinal epithelium are found in places far removed from the intestines,

e.g.,  in  the  epidermis  of  the  back  or  neck,  in  the  connective  tissue

surrounding blood vessels, in and around glands, in fat tissue, etc. (cf. Fig.

59, Appendix).

  At a magnification of 4000x many cases reveal glandular cells that have

become detached from the membrane and transformed into dark, strongly

stained club-shaped formations. In other cases, the entire gland is permeated

with massive heaps of such degenerated cells. To my knowledge, these cell

formations are not known in classical pathology. I was unable to find any

mention  of  them  in  specialized  works  on  pathology.  Several  pathologists

either gave varying diagnoses for these cells or admitted they were puzzled.One pathologist thought they were pancreas cells because they were located

outside the stomach. When I showed this same pathologist the identical cells

in the subcutaneous tissue of the neck he conceded their novelty.

  It has been known for a long time that genuine cancer tumors can result

from  chronic  inflammatory  processes  (tuberculosis,  syphilis,  scars,  burns,

etc.), but interest was always directed toward the nature of the cancer cell.

Our bion experiments, and in particular the new tissue formations in T-mice,

shed  considerable  light  on  this  question.  When  the  histologist  is  still

diagnosing  “chronic  inflammation”  in  the  stained  section,  I  am  able  to

diagnose “cancer (Ca III)” on the basis of the living preparation. The sharp

diagnostic  distinction  between  genuine  tumors  and  chronic  inflammations

according  to  the  dead,  stained-section  picture  is  understandable  from  the

pathological-histological  point  of  view.  But,  in  order  to  create  common

ground  upon  which  to  discuss  the  findings  outlined  here,  it  is  absolutely

necessary to consider the different results obtained by examining the living

preparation.  In  bion  research, the  diagnosis  “malignant  tumor”  is  made

when  there  is  evidence,  no  matter  how  sparse,  in  the  live  preparation  of

vesicular disintegration of the cells and the formation of new spindle-shaped

structures (Ca III). All that then remains to be determined is the degree of

maturation of the tumor cells.

  In  his  comprehensive  study Ergebnisse  der  experimentellen

Krebsforschung (1934), Blumenthal writes about autonomous growth:


  While it can be observed in individual tumors, this characteristic may only seem to exist, for we

  may discover one day that they are of infectious origin. Such a discovery would, as Lubarsch

  says,  greatly  restrict  the  realm  of  autonomous  tumors  and  extend  the  realm  of  infectious

  neoplasms. Fewer and fewer actual cancer tumors would then remain. But the study of all these

  granulomata would constitute a large part of what cancer research had previously occupied itself

  with. In the final analysis autonomous growth is conceived of only as the opposite of the growth

of those tumors in which the growth impulse is a parasite, the death of which terminates the

  growth of the tumor. A different stimulus can take the place of the parasite and would be

  regarded from the standpoint of the cell as exogenous. Autonomous growth means only that the

  growth  impulse  is  assumed  to  be  inside  the  cell.  In  spite  of  the  presence  of  the  stimulus,  autonomous  growth  can  belong  only  to  the  cell.  When  present  in  cancer,  this  growth  is

  necessary only for the precancerous stage; i.e., it provides the impulse for the transformation of

  normal cells into cancer cells.


  My bion and T-bacilli experiments lead me to agree with Blumenthal.

The T-bacilli are in fact only the stimulus for the transformation of normal

cells  into  cancer  cells. The  T-bacilli  are  responsible  only  for  the

precancerous  stage.  Once  they  are  formed,  the  cancer  cells’  growth  is

completely autonomous, i.e., independent of the T-bacilli.

  The pathologist and cancer researcher Borst came upon this problem a

long time ago:


    The histological diagnosis of a carcinoma is frequently not easy. Precancerous changes are a

  factor as well as the atypical epithelial growths, similar to those frequently found in chronic

  inflammations,  that  precede  the  formation  of  cancer  cells.  It  is  certain  that  new  epithelial

  formations of an inflammatory, regenerative, or hyperplastic nature can lead to carcinomas by

  way of fluid transitions. But it is impossible to predict histologically how the various atypical

  epithelial growths will develop. Experience has taught us only that some of these growths will

  change  into  carcinoma  more  frequently  than  others,  and  a  few  will  not  change  at  all.  Our

  practical  knowledge  of  the  reversibility  of  these  growths,  however,  is  still  incomplete.

  Consequently, it does not seem wise to speak of precancerous transformations, because the

  term implies that these atypical epithelial growths are necessary early stages of cancer. A better

  term to use in certain cases, where experience can be a guide, would be cancer-suspect growths,

  and in such cases the physician should be alerted to keep a close watch. The histological picture

of  the  so-called  atypical  epithelial  growths  can  show  a  marked  resemblance  to  incipient

  carcinoma.  How  then  can  the  boundary  be  found  histologically?  The  most  essential

  characteristic of cancerous epithelial growths is the autonomous penetration of the epithelium

  into  the  underlying  connective  tissue.  The  epithelium  leaves  its  place  on  the  surface  and

  penetrates  deep  into  the  tissue;  the  glandular  epithelium  breaks  through  the  membranae

  propriae. The histological diagnosis of a carcinoma will therefore have to be based primarily

  upon the heterotopy of epithelial growth. However, it is essential to point out here that chronic

  inflammatory conditions also cause this borderline tug-of-war between the epithelium and the

  connective  tissues,  and  that  in  such  cases  the  epithelium  can  often  penetrate  far  into  the

  underlying  connective  tissue,  especially  in  ulcerous  and  fistula-forming  processes.  These

  “inflammatory” epithelial heterotopies are not easy to distinguish from carcinoma. Epithelial

  heterotopy alone  should  therefore  not  be  regarded  as  a  sufficient  histological  proof  of

  carcinoma,  and  careful  examination  must  be  made  to  establish  the  destructive  character  of

  cancerous epithelial growth. In carcinoma we often find in the autonomous penetration of the  epithelial cells an absence of accompanying connective tissue, indicating the displacing and

  tissue-consuming  character  of  this  autonomous  epithelial  growth.  Even  if  a  histological

  diagnosis  of  carcinoma  is  thus  possible  on  the  basis  of  the destructive  heterotopy  of

  independently growing epithelia, it is necessary to concede that the early stages of carcinoma,

  during which the growing epithelium still confines itself within its physiological boundaries,

  cannot be comprehended histologically. However, although no absolutely certain and specific

  histological  guidelines  exist  for  so-called potential  malignancy  (Ewing),  certain nuclear

  transformations  take  place  in  the  surface  and  glandular  epithelia  before  their  destructive

  penetration  into  the  tissues,  allowing,  with  a  reasonable  degree  of  probability,  for  the

  recognition of an incipient cancerous change. When an epithelial growth gives evidence of

  significant variability in size, shape, chromatin content, and the general structure of its nuclei, it

is always a sign of unregulated processes of cell division and probably indicative of the presence
              7
of carcinoma.


  The bion experiments in the living preparation, described earlier, fill the

gap so clearly formulated by Blumenthal and Borst:

  1.  There  is  a  series  of  transitional  stages  between  the  “biologically

damaged but still-normal cell” and the “destructively growing cancer cell”:


a) vesicular disintegration of the healthy cells;

b) organization of the bionous cell mass into spindle- and club-shaped structures;

c) maturation of these structures, at various rates, into autonomous cancer cells;

d) autonomous growth of the cancer cells into tumors.


  2. The destructive “spread” of the cancer cells into the surrounding tissue

is to be ascribed, for the most part, to the bionous disintegration of the latter.

The surrounding healthy tissue appears to retreat before the mass of cancer

cells,  but,  in  so  doing,  itself  undergoes  carcinomatous  transformation.

“Carcinomatous”  transformation  signifies  here  nothing  other  than bionous

disintegration due to inner suffocation. This interpretation is in accord with

that of Bierisch:


    We have used the finding that in cancer tissue there is aerobic glycolysis and that tumor

  tissue contains a relatively high concentration of lactic acid to help us form an idea of how the

  cancer tumor affects its immediate surroundings. It has been established by Cori, Warburg, and

us that the tumor tissue gives off lactic acid. The lactic acid content of the tumor remains high,  however, indicating that the lactic acid must pass directly from the tumor to the adjoining tissue.

  Our first investigation concerned the effect of lactic acid concentrations, as they are found in the

  tumors, upon the histological structure of normal tissues when allowed to slowly infiltrate such

  tissues. The result was the gradual dissolution of the connective tissue. In this process there are

  the  same  structural  transformations  as  occur  in  the  course  of  experimental  tar  cancer

  development in the connective tissue bordering the tumor tissue. The dissolution process is one

of proteolytic recession, which in living tissue requires the presence of lactic acid, activated

  kathespin, and a third factor. Once the specific structures in the connective tissue immediately

  adjoining  the  tumor  are  disintegrated,  the  physiological  borderline  normally  separating

  epithelium  and  connective  tissue  is  eliminated  and  the  cancer  cells  can  advance  into  the

  weakened vicinity. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, it must be assumed that the lactic

  acid is the pacemaker for the spread of the cancer cells into the epithelial tissues or the blood

  vessels, which leads to the conclusion that the “uninhibited growth” of the tumor is not the

  direct outcome of its own cellular activity but results indirectly from the destruction of the
                    8
  surrounding tissues.


  The cancer cell itself is therefore less significant than the tissue damage

that precedes its formation. The cancer cell results from and does not cause

the cancer disease. It becomes immediately dangerous to life only through its

T-disintegration.

  The  question  as  to  what  specific  stimulus  is  responsible  for  the

transformation of the normal cell into a cancer cell may be briefly answered

as follows:

  T-bacilli, due to vesicular disintegration of the tissues (self-destruction),

by  first  stimulating  bion  formation,  constitute  the  specific  stimulus  for

cancerous formations. The effect of the T-bacilli is limited to this action. The

further  development  of  the  bions  into  cancer  cell  formations  and  the

proliferation of these formations into a cancer tumor are autonomous, i.e.,

independent of the action of the T-bacilli. The cancerous bion formation and

the subsequent formation of cancerous cells must be regarded as a defense of

the  organism  against  the  T-bacilli  stimulus.  This  defense,  however,  is

pathological in character, since it makes use of the destruction of healthy cell

formations and provokes, in turn, a new defense of the organism against the

destruction.4. The Mature Cancer Cell (Ca IV).


The chief characteristic of this fourth, mature stage is the presence of lively

amoeboid cells. They represent the final phase in the evolution of the spindle

cell formations. In the event that the organism does not perish in the early

stages of chronic inflammation, i.e., the early stages of cancer (Ca II–Ca III),

then the new cell formations have time to develop into genuine amoebae (cf.

Fig. 23). Mechanistic cancer pathology regards them as “parasites”!

  In  Döflein’s  textbook  on  protozoology  we  find  the  following

observations:


  Lieberkühn had already noticed the presence of strange cells in the ascitic fluid which occurs in

  certain malignant tumors; he was able to confirm their motility but made no other observations

  about their nature. These cells have probably been observed by many researchers since then but

  without having received due attention.

    No careful examination of these formations was undertaken until 1896 when Leyden and

  Schaudinn came to the surprising conclusion that the formations were a new kind of parasitic

  rhizipod in the ascitic fluid of living human organisms. Since this was the first time a prominent

  protozoologist had verified the protozoal nature of formations in a cancer-type human disease

  and,  in  so  doing,  had  authoritatively  confirmed  the  clinical  finding,  it  would  be  useful  to

  investigate the matter more closely.Y

Alive. The arrows indicate the jerk-like movements of the plasm. The

 

Dead. Assumption of spherical shape and disintegration
FIGURE 23. Forms of mature amoeboid cancer cells from T-mice (Ca IV)


    According to Leyden’s account, the formations were present in the ascites of a man found,

  on autopsy, to have been suffering from carcinoma of the stomach, and of a girl who likewise

  revealed  tumors  in  the  abdominal  cavity.  Tapped  fluid  contained,  besides  leucocytes  and

  erythrocytes and endothelium-like cells, “large numbers of round cells with fat-like droplets and

  yellow pigment, usually patterned in larger groups and difficult to separate.” They moved in a

  lively manner, with lobe- or thread-like pseudopodia, particularly during the warm days of July.

In fluid kept sterile for three to seven days, they retained their motility and did not die. Some

  had  erythrocytes  inside  their  plasma.  Schaudinn,  who  examined  the  formations  closely,
                                          9
  considered them to be amoeba-like parasites.


  One can see how far from reality the prejudice of parasitic infection has

led  even  eminent  scientists.  Leyden  had  observed  nothing  but  amoeboid

cancer  cells which  had  developed  in  the  organism  itself.  The

misinterpretation of the cancer cells as exogenous parasites is found even in

1942:


      Miscellaneous Protozoa.  Other  observers  could  not  regard  all  the  cancer  cells  as  alien

  parasites, but certain of the tumor cells they identified as parasitic amoebae because of their  bizarre forms and long pseudopodia which stretched between adjacent cells. These were the

    “Rhopalocephalus carcino-matosus” of Korotneff, and “Cancriamaeba macroglossia” of Eisen.

L. Pfeiffer described and depicted intracellular structures which resembled the microsporidia of

  muscle tissue.

      Podwyssozki and Sawtschenko described as sporozoa a variety of free and encapsulated

  intracellular structures many of which resembled Soudakewitch’s parasites. Ruffer and Walker

  improved  the  technical  methods  of  demonstrating  the  cancer  bodies  and  endeavored  to

  distinguish between true and spurious parasites. Kahane thought he detected a minute protozoan

in the circulating blood of cancer patients. In cancerous ascitic fluid Schaudinn observed a large

  amoeboid cell which he named Leydenia gemmipara. Schuller traced the complete cycle of a

  minute  intranuclear  protozoan  in  cancer  cells  which  differed  from  nearly  all  other  cancer
          10
  parasites.


  At  this  point,  we  must  assume  that  the  malignancy  of  a  tumor  is

dependent upon the degree of maturation of the cancer cells and the speed

with  which  the  cancer  cells  and  the  destroyed  tissue  disintegrate  into  T-

bacilli. Metastases already exist in the maturing stage of cancer (Ca III), as

the experiments on mice showed. However, spindle- or round-shaped cells

with restricted motility cannot cause the same harm as amoebae with more

rapid movement and consequently greater destructivity.


5. The Final Phase of the Cancer Tumor: Putrid Disintegration (Ca V)


Putrid  disintegration  may  be  ascribed  to  simple  infection  if  the  tumor  is

exposed  to  the  air.  But  all  dying  cancer  cells  are  characterized  by

disintegration of the tumor accompanied by the formation of rot bacteria and

T-bacilli. This disintegration of newly formed cells into bacteria corresponds

to the experimental decomposition of egg medium when T-bacilli are added.

In  both  cases,  the  eosin-hematoxylin  picture  is  the  same  (cf. Fig.  58-d,

Appendix).  It  resembles  the  post-mortem  necrosis  of  the  tissue  in  which

animal protein disintegrates into its chemical components. We can therefore

speak of “premortem necrosis” in stage Ca V. In this final stage, the cancer

displays a tendency to increasingly rapid destruction of the total organism.

This is now understandable, since a systemic bacteremia and toxemia of theorganism develops from the disintegration into T-bacilli of the short-lived

cancer cells. When there is no gross disturbance of vital functions by the

tumor itself, the cancer death is a death from general toxic putrefaction. For

that reason, the disease tends to worsen rapidly at the end and lead to death.


TOWARD AN UNDERSTANDING OF EXPERIMENTAL TAR

                                CANCER IN MICE


In  its  animal  experiments,  classical  cancer  research  has  discovered  an

abundance  of  facts,  few  of  which  can  be  brought  together  into  a

comprehensible  relationship.  One  of  these  inexplicable  findings  is  the

experimental induction of carcinoma in mice and rabbits by the application of

                11
tar.  Yamagiwa  and  Itschikawa  were  the  first  scientists  to  succeed  in

producing cancer by the continuous brushing of the ears of rabbits with tar.

They produced carcinomatous ulcers and, in a few isolated cases, metastases

in regional glands. Tsutsui, Dellman, Bloch, and Dreifuss then successfully

carried out the same experiment on white mice. Naturally an effort was made

to  establish  what  components  of  the  tar  were  exercising  the  carcinogenic

effect. Dellman discovered that only tar distillates of 900–1000° C. and above

were effective, while Kenneway and Russell arrived at the same result using

coal tar at 900° C. which had been ineffective when unheated.

  The  carcinogenic  effect  of  tar  has  so  far  remained  unexplained.  Two

questions need to be answered: 1) Why and how does tar substance provoke

cancer? 2) Why is the tar substance carcinogenic only when heated to high

temperatures?

    Blumenthal gives the following conclusive summary of the tar-brushing

experiments:


  1. Tar cancer, as Lubarsch was the first to note, eliminates many diverse cancer theories,

    including that of a unitary cancer agent, malformation, and embryonic germ disposition.

    The ear of a rabbit does not have any special disposition and, therefore, there can be no

    consideration of inherited disposition.  2. An inflammatory stage of considerable length precedes the cancer formation.


  These  two  statements  deal  a  mortal  blow  to  the  hereditary  theory  of

cancer. They also strictly refute those pathologists who insist on maintaining

a  sharp  distinction  between  the  inflammatory  and  the  carcinomatous

processes.  The  tar-mice  experiments  also  correspond  with  the  fact  that

persons working with tar and aniline, as well as chimney sweeps in constant

contact with soot, develop cancer more frequently than others.

  What contribution can the bion experiment make to the solution of these

problems?

  First,  it  gives  us  some  fundamental  facts  upon  which  to  base  an

understanding of the problems:


  1. Protozoa, which include cancer cells, develop from bion vesicles (orgone energy vesicles).

  2. Animal and plant tissue can disintegrate into bions.

  3.  Carbon,  the  essential  component  of  animal  protein,  plays  a  crucial  role  in  the  bion

    experiment. Heated to incandescence and combined with nutrients and substances to cause

    swelling, carbon yields bions and bion cultures.

  4. Seen either at a magnification of 2000–3000x or in the dark-field, tar substances heated to

    high temperatures exhibit a vesicular structure similar to that of the bions produced from

    carbon heated to incandescence.


    Unheated  carbon  and  carbon  heated  to  incandescence  show  basic

differences. Unheated carbon displays only minimal vesicular structure, and

viewed with the fluorescence microscope, shows its own color, black. Carbon

heated to incandescence, on the other hand, if made to swell and inoculated

on  a  culture  medium,  disintegrates  immediately  into  bion  vesicles  which

exhibit a bluish, not a black, fluorescence.

  If we produce a carbon bion preparation, the following noteworthy facts

are observed: The higher the temperature to which we heat the carbon, the

easier and more rapid the development of bions and the more distinct their

blue coloration. The carbon bion is, of course, something entirely different

from the carbon from which it originates. First of all, its structure has beenchanged. A carbon crystal has become a conglomeration of orgone energy

vesicles. These vesicles are capable of swelling, dividing, penetrating other

substances,  etc.  Inoculated  on  culture  media  or  placed  in  solutions  that

produce swelling, these vesicles absorb protein fluid and various salts. It is

true  that  we  do  not  yet  know  how  to  define  the  finished  carbon  bion

chemically;  we  are  certain,  however,  that  it  is  no  longer  pure  carbon.  Its

behavior in the culture medium experiment indicates that it bears a close

relationship  to  living  protein.  Living  protein  is  not  merely  a  highly

complicated  carbon-hydrogen  compound.  Functionally,  it  is  differentiated

from non-living protein: The chemical substances are merely the carriers of

the orgone energy that governs the living function.

  Microscopic observation of the combination of mature carbon bions and

protein substances—e.g., egg medium IV or autoclaved blood—reveals that

the  carbon  bions  permeate  the  protein  substance  and,  combined  with  it,

organize into diverse formations.

  If fresh carbon bion solution is poured over egg culture medium IV, after

a few weeks small “growths” about the size of a pinhead develop on the

medium (Ca Experiment XIV). Microscopic examination reveals remarkably

organized and structured formations, not previously found in the egg medium

or the carbon bion preparation (cf. Fig. 61-a, b, c, d, Appendix).

  The  injection  of  fresh  or  twenty-four-hour-old  carbon  bions

subcutaneously  into  mice  causes  around  the  point  of  injection  the

development of structures that are similar to those formed by the combination

of  carbon  bions  and  protein  substance.  Over  the  course  of  months,  cell

growths develop with a pronounced chromophilic structure. They permeate,

infiltrate, and, in time, destroy the tissues. In a few such cases microscopic

examination revealed the typical spindle- and club-shaped formations in the

organs, i.e., cells of the immature phase Ca III. Thirty-four healthy mice were

subjected to the carbon bion experiment. All the mice became sick and the

majority developed precancerous and mature growths (10 e Ca).  These experiments explain the effect of tar brushing. Carbon heated to

high  temperatures  is  carcinogenic  because,  at  high  temperatures,  bions

develop from the carbon substance and are the fundamental element in the

organization of cancerous formations.

  The question naturally arose during these carbon bion experiments as to

whether it was simply the carbon bions that produced the growths or whether

some connection with T-bacilli existed; i.e., whether the proliferation of T-

bacilli effect was also operative in the tarred mice. I brushed tar on the neck

of mice, in the usual way. Some of these mice died before the formation of a

growth. The blood of these mice revealed T-bacilli that could be cultivated in

pure culture (T 11 4). Cultures of cardiac blood from a few tarred mice that

had already passed the stage of chronic inflammation and reached that of

infiltrating growths also yielded T-bacilli.

  How did the T-bacilli enter the blood of the tarred mice?

  The question remained unanswered for some time until it occurred to me

to Gram-stain a freshly produced carbon bion solution. I discovered that T-

bacilli  can  be  detected  immediately  after  producing  a  carbon  bion

preparation. Unheated and untreated carbon, on the other hand, shows no

reaction to Gram stain. In one case, I succeeded in cultivating the T-bacilli

directly from carbon bions (10 e T XVI).

  T-bacilli  are  therefore  brought  into  the  organism  with  the  carbon-

hydrogen substance that has been heated to a high temperature. The question

of how the carbon bions act on the T-bacilli in the tissues of the animal

remains unanswered. Do they complement each other in their effects or do

they hamper each other? It can be established microscopically that the carbon

bions attract, irritate, and paralyze the T-bacilli. Finding an answer to this

question is important, both theoretically and practically, but, at this time, I

can offer no experimental solution.

  Protein substances are stimulated to growth by carbon bions (PA and T).

This fact explains the chimney sweep’s cancer, the cancer of tar and anilineworkers, and the lip cancer of pipe smokers.


    4. THE CANCER CELL: PRODUCT OF A DEFENSE

                    REACTION OF THE ORGANISM


Cancer also tends to develop readily from old scars or chronically damaged

tissues, as when, for example, dental bridgework, over a period of years,

damages the epithelium of the tongue. Severe injury to tissue, such as a blow,

can  cause  a  sarcoma  leading  to  a  rapid  death.  The  results  of  the  bion

experiments make this sequence easy to understand: Injury to tissue produces

formations that degenerate into T-bacilli and stimulate cancer growth. In

tissue that is orgonotically strong, i.e., healthy, a scar or wound will not cause

real harm. The crucial element is therefore not the local damage to the tissue,

as  has  been  the  traditional  belief,  but  rather  the  tissue’s  orgone  strength,

which we may refer to as its “orgonotic potency.”

  The discovery of T-bacilli made all these factors more understandable and

strengthened  my  contention  that  they  were  in  fact  the  specific  cancer

stimulus, occurring only in cancer patients. It is always gratifying to find the

“specific”  stimulus  or  cause  of  a  disease  and  thus  be  able  to  delineate  it

sharply from what is healthy. We then feel more secure in establishing that

there are organisms free of this particular stimulus. However, this concept is

incorrect and impedes important insights into the nature of immunity, i.e., the

natural  defense  functions  of  the  living  organism—in  other  words,  its

orgonotic potency. It is wrong to think that there are emotionally healthy

people here and emotionally sick people there. And it is wrong to assume that

there are “cancer patients” here and “cancer free” persons there. Deep within

every  “healthy”  person  are  both  catatonic  mechanisms  and  T-bacilli.  The

boundary line is by no means clearly drawn and the problem shifts from the

specific  “causes”  and  specific  “stimuli”  of  the  diseases  to the  orgonotic

defense mechanisms against diseases. We must first understand health before

we attempt to cure disease. It is therefore encouraging that medicine today isgiving increasing consideration to the viewpoint that the specific “stimuli”

and “causes” of disease are effective only when the organism allows them to

be. Tubercle bacilli, for example, can produce their pathological effect only

under well-defined bio-energetic conditions within the organism. The degree

to which a psychic trauma is operative depends upon the emotional state of

the organism. Similarly, a general impairment of biological functioning must

be present for the T-bacillus to have free rein. The crucial factor seems, once

again, to be the disposition to disease, but not as the theories of heredity

conceive of it. Disposition to disease signifies for us the living orgonotic

functioning of the organism and does not refer either to dead substances in

the  blastoderm  or  to  moralistic,  empty  concepts  like  “psychopathically

degenerative  constitution.”  Disposition  to  disease  seems  to  us  therefore

essentially a reaction to the misery of life and not a fixed inheritance from our

ancestors.  It  signifies the  kind  and  degree  of  the  emotional  (orgonotic)

motility of the biosystem.

  It is assumed that the cancer cell originally initiates the disease process

“cancer,”  in  that  “normal  cells  are  transformed  into  cancer  cells.”  More

precise  scrutiny  of  the  development  of  cancer  cells,  however,  proves  this

view false. The truth is exactly the reverse: The cancer cell results from the

resistance of the tissues to the effect of the T-bacilli. This may sound strange,

but examination of the facts will reveal its accuracy. The first step in the

development  of  the  cancer  tumor  is  not  the  cancer  cell;  nor  is  it  the

disintegration of the tissue into blue bions. It is the appearance of masses of

T-bacilli in the tissue or in the blood. T-bacilli are present also in healthy

tissue and in healthy blood; and they are always found wherever there is

degeneration of protein.

  After I had completed a series of examinations of the blood of cancer

patients, I proceeded to examine the blood of persons who could not be said

to have cancer in the usual sense of the word. I was able to cultivate T-bacilli

from the blood and excreta of completely healthy persons. This finding wasat first alarming and confusing; for if, as I firmly believed by the end of 1937,

the T-bacilli are specifically connected with the development of cancer, then

their cultivability from the blood of healthy persons meant that basically all

humans have “cancer.” Since this supposition could not possibly be correct,

the only alternative was that the T-bacillus is not connected specifically with

cancer. Against this conclusion, however, was the irrefutable fact that every

cancer patient and every cancer tissue contains masses of T-bacilli. Many

months passed before experiment and deliberation yielded the correct answer:

The distinction between the healthy individual and the cancer patient does

not  lie  in  the  absence  of  T-bacilli  but  in  the  orgonotic  potency  of  the

organism, i.e., in the capacity of the organism to eliminate its T-bacilli and in

the degree to which the tissues and the blood cells tend toward disintegration

into T-bacilli.  True,  I  was  able  to  cultivate  T-bacilli  from  the  blood  and

excreta  of  healthy  persons.  But  whereas  the  blood  and  tissues  of  cancer

patients  produced  T-bacilli easily  and quickly,  the  blood  and  excreta  of

healthy individuals had to be subjected to a more or less lengthy process of

degeneration—in some cases several days, in others several weeks—in order

to produce the T-bacilli. The disposition to cancer is therefore determined by

the biological resistance of the blood and the tissues to putrefaction. This

biological  resistance,  in  turn,  is  itself  determined  by  the  orgone  energy

content of the blood and the tissues, which is to say, by the orgonotic potency

of the organism. Every process that reduces the orgone energy content and

the orgonotic functioning of the organism, or the individual organs, increases

proportionately the disposition to shrinking and to cancerous disintegration.

There are a number of solid observations to substantiate this.

  The problem now confronting me was the difficult and decisive question

of whether the T-bacillus appears only where cancer develops, or whether it

is ubiquitous, meaning that cancer can appear anywhere and at any time. I

proceeded  to  examine  the  blood,  epithelia,  and  excreta  of  several  healthy

individuals. I could in fact identify local T-bacilli formations in organs andtissues  where  there  was  no  suggestion  of  cancer.  I  saw  T-bacilli

disintegration in the vaginal and cervical epithelium of many healthy women.

In some cases, the T-picture disappeared after a certain time, in others it

remained constant. I found T-disintegration where a dental bridge had rubbed

the epithelium on the left side of my own tongue and caused a small erosion.

I was even able to produce a T-bacilli culture from it. That was years ago,

and I still do not have cancer. The right side of my tongue yielded no T-

bacilli and had healthy epithelial cells. I cultivated T-bacilli from the blood of

one of my assistants by allowing it to degenerate, then injected them into a

healthy mouse and produced a well-defined adenocarcinoma in the buttock

muscle (cf. Fig. 62-a,  Appendix).  It  was  the  first  time  I  had  produced  a

malignant  tumor  with  T-bacilli  from  healthy  blood.  The  fact  that  it  was

indeed the T-bacilli that had caused the tumor was proved by the sequence in

which it developed: an inflammation extended from the place of injection

along the lymph vessels on the right flank of the mouse toward the buttock

muscles;  there  then  appeared  a  chronic  inflammation  which  subsequently

developed into an adenocarcinoma. This diagnosis was verified at Columbia

University, although I had not reported that it was a cancer of the muscle

tissue (10 Ge T Ca; cf. Fig. 62-a through e, Appendix). Thus, the healthiest

organism contains T-bacilli and tends toward putrid disintegration. Cancer

disposition is therefore universal. But so long as the tissues and blood are

orgonotically  strong,  every  developing  T-bacillus  will  be  destroyed  and

eliminated before it can propagate, accumulate, and cause damage. What is

the first  damage  the  T-bacillus  inflicts?  The  answer  to  this  question  will

prove that the formation of cancer cells represents a defense reaction of the

organism against T-bacilli and is not the disease itself.

  When T-bacilli form anywhere in the organism and begin to accumulate,

the organism reacts with a mild but chronic inflammation. Occasionally the

massing  of  white  blood  cells  provides  sufficient  resistance  against  the

advance  of  the  T-bacilli.  In  other  cases,  however,  either  the  T-bacilliautoinfection  is  too  strong  or  the  orgonotic  defense  mechanism  of  the

organism  is  too  weak.  What  happens  then?  How  does  the  infected  tissue

react?

  A test-tube experiment with T-bacilli provides one possible answer. A

completely sterile egg medium (E IV) is inoculated with T-bacilli, which now

grow on the medium. But we find that T-bacilli are not the only substances

growing on it. Before starting the experiment, we had examined the sterile

egg medium carefully under the microscope at a magnification of 2000x and

saw  neither  T-bacilli  nor  blue  PA  bions.  However,  now  the  inoculated

medium shows not only T-bacilli, but to our great astonishment, a mass of

motile  blue  PA  bions  at  the  point  of  inoculation.  This  means  that  the

inoculated T-bacilli have not only proliferated themselves in the egg medium

but, in addition, have stimulated the protein substances that surround them

(the organic protein) to form blue PA bions; i.e. they have set in motion the

processes of swelling and bionous disintegration.

  The identical process occurs in the healthy tissue of a mouse that we

inoculate in the neck or any other place with T-bacilli in such a dosage that,

instead  of  immediate  abscess  formation  and  death,  a  mild  but  chronic

inflammatory  reaction  is  produced. The  tissue  surrounding  the  place  of

inoculation  shows  bionous  disintegration.  It  is  possible  to  follow  the

development of the cancer cell formations from the PA bions by examining

dissected T-mice in series from the first day to about the tenth week.

  I repeated these two experiments many times and always obtained the

same  results.  At  first  I  was  not  able  to  understand  it.  Even  after  things

became clearer, the full implications of the findings continued to elude me for

quite some time. Briefly stated: T-bacilli, which are the product of putrid

disintegration of organic or living matter, stimulate in other organic or living

matter  the  formation  of  blue  bions.  Corresponding  to  the  antithetical

relationship between blue PA bions and T-bacilli, this bion formation has the

function  of  reacting  against  the  T-bacilli.  That  means  the  blue  bionsstimulated by the T-bacilli are a defense reaction against T-infection.

  T-bacilli would be of small interest if their only effect were this local PA

bion formation, i.e., “B-reaction.” Blood platelets, which are nothing other

than blue PA bion bodies surrounded by dead T-bacilli adhering to them, are

often seen in the blood of healthy persons. Leucocytes are also sometimes

filled with T-bodies. The reaction of the PA against the T, i.e., the B-reaction,

takes place constantly and everywhere, even in the healthiest organism. The

weaker the orgone charge of the PA-formations, the greater the quantity of

blue bions that must be produced to eliminate the T. However, the blue bions

organize into higher biological forms, protozoa, including cancer cells. We

now understand that the cancer cell is in reality a product of the many blue

PA bions that originated from blood cells or tissue as a defense against the

local autoinfection with T-bacilli. With this realization the problem solves

itself in a very simple way. Here we might mention a seemingly farfetched

but actually quite pertinent fact, namely that humus is bionously disintegrated

organic  matter.  The  fertilization  of  humus  results  from  the  putrid

disintegration of organic matter, essentially from simple nitrogen compounds.

This “fertilization” is simply a stimulation of blue PA bion formation in the

humus by putrid matter, i.e., T-bacilli. The striking fact that humus is sterile

and has a sterilizing effect is to be ascribed to the presence of the blue earth

PA bions. These bions can be easily reproduced and observed experimentally

by autoclaving earth in KCl.

  The T-bacilli experiments occasionally open up glimpses into a future

chemical  concept.  These  matters,  however,  remain  obscure.  Nevertheless,

there  is  one  finding  of  extreme  interest  that  should  be  mentioned  in  this

context: Methyl and nitrogen compounds (urea, scatol, indol), constituents of

urine  and  feces,  are  the  essential  products  of  the  putrid  disintegration  of

protein substances. Old T-bacilli cultures have a putrid odor that is acrid and

ammonia-like. The body odors of advanced cancer patients are similar and

characteristic. “Putrefaction in the living body” is therefore not a simile but avery real fact.

  A relationship that is still obscure also exists between the T-bacilli and

cyanide  (CN).  According  to  Warburg,  this  poison  exercises  a  paralyzing

effect  on  the  respiratory  processes  in  the  cells  in  inhibiting  oxidation  by

combining with the iron-containing respiratory enzyme of cells. Many of our

T-mice died from suffocation, due to respiratory paralysis and hypervenous

blood.  The  connection  between  this  property  of  the  T-bacilli  and  the

suffocation metabolism of the cancer tissue is obvious. A rich field is opened

here for the biochemist.

  Thus far, we have become acquainted with only one direction of the T-

bacilli effect: tissue damage → T-bacilli → bionous tissue disintegration →

organization of protozoa (cancer cells) from the PA bions of the tissues. This

process  represents  a  progression  from  the  T-bacillus  to higher  biological

formations. Now, the reverse process also exists, in which the cancer cells

disintegrate  into  T-bacilli  with  increasing  putrefaction:  cancer  cell  →  T-

bacilli → general blood and tissue putrefaction and T-intoxication. The actual

cause of death is not to be ascribed to the formation of cancer cells but to the

secondary T-disintegration. Even though the tissue damage was previously

confined  locally  and  the  T-bacilli  were  relatively  few  in  number,  the

disintegration process of the cancer tumor effects an enormous acceleration

and general spreading of the putrefaction in the body: putrefaction of the

blood and lymph and T-bacilli intoxication of the body fluid system. It should

be  clear  therefore  why  cancer  patients  can  maintain  themselves

comparatively  well  for  months  and  even  years  and  then,  quite  suddenly,

systemic decay, rapid cachexia, and death all follow in quick succession. The

second phase, the disintegration of the cancer tumors into putrid masses, lasts

only a few weeks, in sharp contrast to the length of time for tumor formation.

T-bacilli formation and putrefaction are thus just as much a cause as an effect

of the cancer biopathy.

  This distinction has great therapeutic importance. Once tumors, tissue,and blood are involved in the process of secondary putrid disintegration, such

enormous masses of T-bacilli are formed that any attempt at treatment is

hopeless.  However,  in  the  first  phase,  when  the  cancer  tissue  is  forming,

orgone therapy can accomplish a great deal. I will return to this particular

point later.

  The whole problem of the treatment and prevention of cancer can now be

formulated simply: the T-reaction of the organism, the orgone weakness, is

counteracted by the B-reaction, the orgone strength in the blood and tissues.

The fate of the cancer patient depends completely on the relationship of the

B-reaction to the T-reaction. A practical mastery of this problem requires

more knowledge of the effects of orgone energy.


  5. A COMMENT ON THE PROBLEM OF HEREDITY


The reader who has some familiarity with the cancer problem will now raise

a very legitimate question: What about the hereditary factor in cancer? Has it

not been “demonstrated” that there are mice with a special tendency to cancer

formation,  and  that  in  man  cancer  is  found  more  frequently  in  certain

families? I have felt obliged to stress on many occasions in my writings that

we do not deny the existence of heredity. What we do emphasize, however, is

that research on heredity has still not supplied us with any concrete account

of  how  this  hereditary  factor  manifests  itself  and  how  it  functions

biologically. Theoretically and practically the notion of genes is of no use to

us.  Since  its  earliest  days,  sex-economy  has  been  prepared  to  debate  the

mechanisms of the heredity of characteristics and conditions, about which

research  on  heredity  has  nothing  to  say.  I  refer  here  not  to  “hereditary

substances” but to plasmatic functions. While working on the problem of

cancer, we encountered the heredity question in a completely unexpected but

simple way, quite different from the question of hereditary character traits.

Most pathological characteristics can be traced back to the effects of early

upbringing, and especially the influence of identification and early sexualstasis.  This  “heredity”  of  biopathic  character  traits  is  thus  a postnatal

phenomenon. The heredity of cancer, on the other hand, is actually a prenatal

phenomenon, though quite different from the way the science of heredity sees

it.

  In our laboratory, we have had the opportunity to observe hundreds of

mice, both healthy and cancerous. A striking fact was how few of the young

born  to  our  cancerous  mice  developed  cancer  themselves.  At  first,  we

satisfied ourselves with the thought that we were not dealing with a specific

cancer strain. A few cases of cancer did occur in the young mice, but we had

no  explanation  for  this.  I  refer  here  only  to  mice  who  developed  cancer

spontaneously and not from experimental interference.

  The surprise circumstance was supplied by the mice originally completely

healthy and injected with T-bacilli at the age of three to eight months. The

young of these originally healthy mice  were  frequently  diseased  and  died

early, often having developed cancer tumors. On the other hand, there was

not one single case of a control mouse—not injected with T-bacilli—having

cancerous or otherwise sick young. Autopsy and bacteriological examination

of the cancerous young, who had not been given T-bacilli injections, yielded

precisely the same results as they did with the mothers who had received the

T-bacilli injections: T-bacilli in the blood, putrid disintegration of the tissues

in the stomach, in glands, and especially in the genitals. Mice that develop

cancer spontaneously are usually free of cancer manifestations in the other

organs, unless there are metastases. Mice injected with T-bacilli, on the other

hand,  were  cancerously  affected  in  almost  all  organs.  This  is  easily

understood since the spontaneous tumor develops from local damage to the

tissues, whereas the T-tumors in the injected mice were characterized by a

general spread of the T throughout the organism. These T-mice can die of

systemic carcinosis and T-intoxication without ever developing large local

tumors. This seems in fact to be the general rule and the explanation for it is

simply that the T-bacilli that have been injected are carried along in the bloodin great numbers.

  We now understand why the young of T-mice so often develop cancer

prenatally  when  born  after  the  injection  of  T-bacilli  in  the  mother: The

injected T-bacilli are carried from the blood of the mother into the blood of

the embryos, where they produce cancer.

  This finding sheds light on a large area of the problem of cancer heredity:

If  a  mother  during  pregnancy  has  a  large  enough  number  of  sufficiently

virulent T-bacilli in the blood, the child must necessarily become infected

with the T-bacilli. Whether the organism of the child can cope with the T-

bacilli  absorbed  depends  on  additional  circumstances.  It  depends  on  the

relationship of the B-reaction of the child to the T-reaction that has developed

so early.

  The formation of breast cancer in mice is still not understood. It must be

stressed, however, that the female mice used for observation no longer lead a

natural sexual existence. Either they are separated constantly from the males

or breeding is regulated. Some of our observations of males injected with T-

bacilli do indicate that sexual stasis increases the effect of the T-reaction and

reduces  the  B-reaction  of  the  organism.  Males  kept  abstinent  developed

cancer more easily, especially in the testicles, than males left together with

the females. I would like to stress here that these experiments have not yet

been carried out comprehensively enough to permit generalizations.

  In human mothers, two other “hereditary” influences must be considered,

in addition to the transmission of T-bacilli through the blood: the local effect

of spasm of the uterus and the general biopathic respiratory inhibition. At the

moment, nothing definitive can be said about these factors. It is important,

however, to note that a severe respiratory disturbance in the mother must

have an adverse effect on the tissue respiration of the embryo; a chronic

spasm of the uterus is also bound to have a damaging influence. But prenatal

influences of this type upon the embryo are not hereditary effects in the sense

of the term as understood by the “gene” theorists. They are much more socialeffects. The organism of the mother is, strictly speaking, the first “social

factor” of the unborn embryo.

  The  mechanistic  and  metaphysical  hypothesis  of  heredity  provides  us

with no possibility of understanding prenatally acquired disturbances or of

eliminating them practically. On the other hand, knowledge of the existence

and nature of T-bacilli, of the character structure and the pulsatory functions

of the parents, does enable us to clear the way toward an understanding of the

problem  of  heredity  which  could  very  well  be  of  great  practical  and

                          12
theoretical importance.

  This excursion into the problem of heredity was not intentionally sought.

It  was  made  necessary  by  a  number  of  pertinent  observations  closely

connected to the question of orgone therapy for cancer. We will have to (and

can) make ourselves increasingly familiar with the thought that cancer  is

beginning to lose its dread and that the prevention of cancer will be easier

than the cure. For instance, it will now be possible to determine the degree to

which maternal blood tends toward disintegration into T-bacilli, and whether

it contains free T-bacilli, etc. Orgone treatment of the mother would in such

cases  protect  the  embryo  from  the  effects  of  T-bacilli.  It  would  also  be

possible to treat the infant with orgone therapy. As yet, we do not know

whether the T-bacillus is specific for cancer only or whether it can also cause

other diseases when it occurs in another form and in a different location.

Complete obscurity reigns here, and we shall have to be prepared for great

surprises.  Infectious  diseases,  seemingly  as  far  apart  as  acute  ptomaine

poisoning and the acute stage of poliomyelitis, may find their explanation

here. This is a justifiable assumption, but it is no more than an assumption.                                      CHAPTER VII


    Nature and Development of the Orgone Therapy


                                    Experiments




We are now sufficiently prepared to discuss the biophysical basis of orgone

therapy. It can be reduced to a simple biological formula: enhancement of the

B-reaction of the organism; reduction or elimination of the T-reaction. If

there is a preponderant T-reaction in the blood and tissues, orgone therapy

must increase the B-reaction or it will have failed. Conversely, therapy can be

considered successful if the T-reactions are replaced by B-reactions. Let us

now compare the B-reactions and the T-reactions schematically:1. Total organism

2. Skin

3. Musculature

3a. Facial
expression

B-Reaction

Erect, good tonicity. No
spasms, no clonisms.
Fecling of strength.
Capacity for pleasure.
‘Warm, good tone, rosy or
tanned; perspiration warm.

Relased, capable of alter-
nating tension and relaxa-
tion; strong. No muscular
armor. Peristalss good, no.
constipation, no hemor-
hoids.

Lively, changeable.

T-Reaction
Bent, flaccid or hypertonic
Spasms,cloniss. Feeling
of weaknes. Incapacity for
pleasure. Pleasure anxicy.
Cold, clammy; livid,

wrinkled, pale o deathly
white; sweat cold.

Often excessive fat. Gen-
eral muscular armor, par-
tcularly jaw, forchead,
neck, thigh adductors,
buttacks, back.

 

Masklike, rigid.
Blood.

Cardiovascular
system

Tisues
(epithelial
cel,tissues
from biopsy,
ete.)

. Eyes

Respiration

Orgasm

Orgone feld
around
orginiih.

B-Reaction
Bereaction on autoclava-
tion. Erythrocytes taut,
pulsating; wide, strong.
orgone margin; very slow.
bionous disintegration in
physilogical NaCl solu-
tion. No T-bacil{ n cul.
tures,

 

Blood pressure normal
pulse regular, quiet,
strong,

Turgor strong, No bion
formation in KC.

Bright. Lively pupillary
reaction. Eycballs neither
protruding or sunken.

Full expiraton, with pause
afterward. Free pulsation
of thora. Plessure sensa-
tion n the gental ap-
paratus afte each expira-
ion

Rogular; total body con-
‘lsion, No sexual stasis.
Wide, “elasti.”

T-Reaction
Tereacton on autoclava-
tion. Erythrocytessmall o
shrunken; o pulsation;
Tepikes; orgone margin
‘weak and narrow bonaus
disntegraton fn physio-
logieal NaCl vry rapid
Staphylococe,stop-
tocoect, or Tbacll in
aulturer

Blood presure oo high or
oo low, pule oo fstor
o0 slw, imegular or

weak.

Turgor weak, shrunken.
Bionousstrcture or apid
bionous disitegration
Xal

Dull, “faraway” look. Slug-
gsh pupillary_reaction;
mydriasis. Eycballs pro-
truding or sunken.
Expiraton shallow, incom-
plete. Chronic inspiratory
atitude, pause after in-
spiation. Chronic anxity.
attitude of the chest, No
pleasure sensation after
expiration.

Absent or disturbed.
‘Chronic sexual stasis.

rrow or absent.

 
  The symptoms of the T-reaction are identical with many symptoms of

chronic sympatheticotonic contraction. However, symptoms of the B-reaction

are not identical with chronic vagotonic expansion; they simply correspond to

a  condition  of  the  organism  characterized  by quiet,  well-ordered,  full

pulsation in all organs.

  The essence of orgone therapy (not only in the treatment of cancer but in

all  biopathies  based  on  contraction  or  shrinking  of  the  vital  apparatus)

basically is the  overcoming  of  chronic  contraction  and  the  stimulating  of

expansion.  Once  the  organism  is  again  capable  of  expansion,  dilating  its

vessels, driving blood into the skin and tissues, absorbing fluids and foods

into  the  tissues,  establishing  the  wave-like  peristaltic  movement  of  the

intestines, relaxing the tensed muscles—in other words, expanding the totalautonomic system—normal pulsation follows spontaneously and the state of

living  function  that  consists  of oscillation  between  contraction  and

expansion, i.e., biological pulsation, is established. The predominance of the

B-reaction over the T-reaction is simply the predominance of all life-positive

reactions, in every part of the organism. Since the organism is a functioning

unit,  the  orderly  pulsation  of  the  total  organism  is  the  fundamental

prerequisite  for  neutralizing  the  T-reaction  in  the  tissues  and  blood.  And

since  T-bacilli  develop  from  the  chronic  contraction  (T-reaction)  of  the

organism, it is clear that the natural, full pulsation of the organism is the

basis of cancer prevention. Conversely, chronic contraction is the general

basis for the carcinomatous shrinking biopathy.

  It is now clear that the cancer problem cannot be restricted to individual

organs  or  to  an  individual  tumor  or  enzyme.  It  is  a  problem  of  the  total

biological functioning of the organism. Consequently, treatment of cancer

with  hormones,  enzymes,  freezing,  surgery,  or  local  irradiation  does  not

really affect the core of the problem. Cancer is not a local disease of the

organs but a systemic process of premature dying, manifested in the clinically

tangible T-reactions. The only cancer therapy that could claim to be valid

would be one that grasps this biopathy at its root. The term “cancer therapy”

is, in fact, legitimate only if the treatment is realistically aimed at removing

systemic T-reactions and reestablishing a predominance of the B-reaction,

i.e.,  if  it  is  designed  to  restore  vital  functioning.  If,  for  instance,  orgone

therapy succeeded in eliminating the local tumor and destroying the T-bacilli

in the blood, but did not achieve any other systemic influence, then it could

be  regarded  as  a  good symptomatic  method  of  treatment,  but  not  a  true

“cancer therapy.”

  We have learned from psychiatry not to consider a neurosis as “cured”

just because we have eliminated a headache or a compulsion. In the practice

of character-analytic vegetotherapy, we speak of a “cure” only after we have

successfully  removed  the  general  characterological  and  biophysiologicalbasis of the local individual symptoms, i.e., the “character neurosis.” This can

be accomplished only by establishing orgastic potency, the capacity for full

pulsation. This requirement is exacting, but it is the only one that meets the

essential  medical  and  social  hygienic  demands.  Our  work  must  not  be

confused with those illusory methods, directed at the gullible, that claim to be

able to “cure” a neurotic headache with bromides, or cancer with surgery.

This requirement, i.e., that we consider a case cured only when the character

neurosis has been removed, governed our clinical work even during the first

years  of  the  seminar  for  psychoanalytic  therapy  in  Vienna.  We  want  to

maintain it, for it has served us well.

  I would like to anticipate: We do not yet know if orgone therapy can be

regarded as the best method of treatment for cancer. It is true that we are

already in a position to change the systemic T-reaction of the organism into a

systemic B-reaction and eliminate local tumors in the body. But what we still

do  not  know  is  how  long  the  systemic  B-reaction  can  hold  its  own  and

whether, sooner or later, the T-reaction will again replace it. Nevertheless, the

present publication of The Cancer Biopathy is justified, even though it will

take many years of experience and extensive work before orgone therapy can

be regarded as the method for treating cancer and before we know the exact

limits of its capabilities. But what has been achieved until now far exceeds

our expectations of a few years ago and merits a detailed discussion here.

  I  will  now  relate  how  today’s  experimental  orgone  therapy  developed

from the first groping bion experiments of 1936.

  Orgone  therapy  for  cancer  can  be  traced,  historically,  to  the  first

observation of the killing effect exerted by blue PA bions on many kinds of

rot and other bacilli. It was only logical then to observe microscopically the

various kinds of blue PA bions and bacilli, and to inject them into mice.

Microscopic  examination  revealed  that  motile  bacilli  in  the  vicinity  of

vigorous blue bions—derived from iron filings, humus, earth crystals, carbon,

etc.—become  agitated,  seem  to  struggle  to  pull  away,  and  at  closerproximities, become motionless, as if paralyzed. The same reaction occurred

if rapidly moving T-bacilli were brought together with blue PA bions. The T-

bacilli tended either to adhere motionlessly to the blue bions or to agglutinate

into  immobile  heaps  all  around  them.  As  previously  mentioned,  all  mice

injected with PA bions alone remained healthy. Mice injected simultaneously

with PA bions and T-bacilli remained, for the most part, healthy.

  These results disclosed the healing effect of the blue bions (later called

“orgone energy vesicles”) in T-bacilli infection. Nothing was known about

the possible direct effects of PA bions upon carcinomatous tissue. At that

phase of my work, there were as yet no certainties and only a few useful

guidelines. No one knew what to expect from the experiments. I brought PA

bions and cancer cells together and examined them under the microscope.

The PA bions swarmed around the heaps of cancer cells, finally penetrating

into the mass and destroying its structure (cf. Fig. 63, Appendix).

  A medical colleague at the Institute persuaded a surgeon to inject sterile

PA bions from the blood of a cancer patient into a patient who was dying of

cancer. The surgeon gave three intravenous injections of about 10 cc. of PA

bion solution. The patient reacted with a fever. She died about eight days

later. Autopsy revealed a hard tumor, about the size of a fist, in the liver. In

several places, the surface area of the tumor showed a softening to a depth of

about  1  cm.  The  pathologist  considered  this  unusual.  To  us  it  was  an

indeterminate finding that did, however, correspond with the findings in our

experiments conducted under the microscope. (At the time, I knew of several

experiments  that  had  been  undertaken  in  Europe  to  test  the  effect  that

injections of streptococci had on cancer. My bions, on the other hand, were

sterile formations, obtained by autoclavation.)

  I was now confronted by two facts: PA bions paralyze T-baccilli, which

are at the root of cancer, and they also destroy cancer tissue itself. The first

fact  pointed  toward  cancer  prevention;  the  second  toward  local  cancer

therapy.  Over  the  course  of  the  years  that  followed,  the  first  directionincreasingly gained our attention.

  It  would  have  seemed  logical  to  undertake  further  experiments  with

humans. One could, for example, determine the effect of injections of PA

bion cultures. But certain observations of the PA bions restrained me, namely

that they were nothing other than a particular kind of living organism. When

brought together with the T-bacilli, they exhausted their biological energy in

the ensuing struggle. Microscopically, it could be seen that many PA bions

had  lost  their  blue  color,  and  numerous  forms  of  blue  vesicles  had

degenerated into round black cocci, i.e., pus-producing staphylococci. Thus

the idea of injecting PA bions into humans had to be discarded.

  Between the fall of 1937, when I discovered the T-bacilli in Norway, and

the fall of 1939, when we started the first orgone therapy experiments on

cancer mice, a number of unrelated observations were made that served as

guideposts in our work. The blue PA bion cultures killed T-bacilli that had

been injected into mice. When I had obtained the first SAPA bion culture, in

which orgone radiation was discovered, I was confronted with an important

question: Is the energy radiated by the sand bion cultures the same as the

energy in the blue PA bions that I had injected into mice to protect them

against the effects of T-bacilli? Today it is taken for granted in our work that

the energy in the earth bions, the energy in the radiating SAPA bions, the

energy  in  the  blue-glimmering  “red”  blood  corpuscles,  and,  finally,  the

energy visible in the atmosphere are all manifestations of one and the same

energy. The identity of the energy in the various substances and conditions

has  been  confirmed  experimentally  and  has  led  to  essential  theoretical

assumptions on the nature of the life function. But when I first saw the effects

of orgone energy on cancer tissue, before I realized that it was orgone energy,

everything was still uncertain. Every new hypothesis that suggested itself and

was incompatible with traditional pathology made me pull back. To be sure, I

clearly saw that the blue coloration of the PA bions was somehow connected

to their killing effect; but I could not have suspected that this blue was thespecific color of biological energy. Only after the existence of the SAPA

radiation had been established in 1939, and with it, the solar origin of orgone

energy, did I venture bolder assumptions.

  To proceed at all, I had to hypothesize that the blue in the PA bions

represented precisely the same energy contained in the radiation from SAPA

bions, that is, energy outside the bion vesicles and outside the tube in which

the cultures were contained.

  I had developed a small wart on my left cheek that was found to contain

T-bacilli. I applied the SAPA culture test tube to the wart a few times for

periods of several minutes. Microscopic examination had previously shown

live T-bacilli; now, after the tube application, they were dead. The wart itself

healed. The orgone energy of the SAPA bions was therefore effective even at

a distance, through the glass of the test tube. An erosion on the left side of

my  tongue  showed  living  T-bacilli.  I  exposed  it  to  orgone  radiation  by

bringing the SAPA bion test tube close to the eroded spot. The erosion healed

rapidly  and  the  T-bacilli  became  immobile.  In  a  woman  suffering  from

leucorrhea,  I  found  degeneration  in  the  vaginal  epithelium  and  masses  of

living T-bacilli in the secretions. In addition, there were caudate protozoa

with  amoeboid  motility,  the  so-called Trichomonas  vaginalis.  Under  the

microscope,  I  observed  that  when  a  small  number  of  SAPA  bions  were

brought into the vicinity of the protozoa, the latter lost their motility (cf. Fig.

50-a and 50-b, Appendix). I had the woman introduce a sterile SAPA bion

test  tube  into  her  vagina  for  periods  of  half  a  minute.  She  very  soon

complained of a burning sensation and had to stop. I immediately examined

the vaginal secretion again and found to my amazement that it no longer

contained any living T-bacilli. What surprised me was the promptness of the

reaction, even though I was already familiar with the rapid reddening of the

skin caused by application of a SAPA culture.

  In May 1939 I was forced to interrupt my research because of the smear

campaign begun in the Norwegian press the year before. I transferred mylaboratory  to  New  York,  sending  the  SAPA  cultures  with  one  of  my

assistants. It was the middle of September 1939 before I had my laboratory

set up again in Forest Hills and could resume my work. It had not been easy

to remain patient during the waiting period. The actual experiments in orgone

therapy for cancer began with the subcutaneous injection of a solution of

SAPA culture into mice (obtained from Herrlein Inc., New York City, N.Y.)

that had spontaneously developed rapidly growing tumors. The first mouse to

be injected was from a Paris strain and suffering, according to the diagnosis,

from  a  “mammary  tumor.”  (I  had  obtained  the  mouse—Paris  R3—from

Columbia University through a student of mine who was a physician.) I can

well remember the great excitement we all felt at the laboratory when this

mouse received the first injection. I knew (and the thought was confirmed by

the physician) that even a small reduction in the size of the tumor would be a

tremendous event. For never before in the history of cancer research had

anyone  been  successful  in  reducing  cancer  tumors  in  mice,  let  alone  in

eliminating them.

  The tumor was on the left breast, the size of a bean, and hard. On the

second day it was softer, and after a few days it had shrunk to the size of a

small pea. Our sense of triumph was great, but experience had taught us not

to  be  overly  optimistic.  My  caution  turned  out  to  be  justified.  After  two

weeks the tumor began to grow again, until it was the size of a walnut. I did

not know whether I should continue with the SAPA injections or stop. During

this  time  a  number  of  untreated  cancer  mice  died  rapidly  of  cachexia.

However, healthy mice that I had injected with SAPA bions, as a control,

died also, with liver enlargement and degeneration in the acini. It was some

consolation that the cancer mice injected with the SAPA bions survived many

untreated ones by at least several weeks and, in a few cases, several months.

But in the end all the mice died, a few with reduced tumors, others with

tumors  that  had,  at  first,  either  receded  or  completely  disappeared,  then

grown  large  again.  It  was  depressing. Yet  the  fact  that  orgone  energy  iseffective in reducing the size of tumors was established.

  I now proceeded to inject dozens of mice with the SAPA solution, using

101 mice, all told. In subsequent months the confused situation began to clear

up. The puzzling factor had been the enlargement of the tumors after they had

initially disappeared. (There were only a few cases where the tumor did not

reappear.)

  From the beginning of the experiment, I had examined the injected and

untreated  mice  very  carefully;  yet  it  was  not  clear  how  the  SAPA  bions

destroyed the tumor tissue. Did the SAPA bions penetrate the tumor through

the bloodstream and then destroy tissue the same way they destroyed the

motile cancer cells on the microscope slide? Autopsies of all injected mice

disclosed a very mysterious finding: There was no trace at all, either in the

blood or in the tumor, of the injected SAPA bions.

  I did not understand, but I was struck by the fact that the tumors in the

treated  mice  were  abnormally  hyperemic.  After  some  time  we  began  to

realize why the tumors first receded and then enlarged again. The regrowth

was brought about by the hyperemia of the tumors. The blood had something

to do with the destruction of the tumor.

  The  mice  treated  with  SAPA  bions  could  be  distinguished  from  the

untreated mice by the fact that their erythrocytes were taut and biologically

vigorous, whereas the untreated mice showed a typical cancer blood picture:

shrunken membranes of the erythrocytes, T-spikes, and masses of T-bacilli in

the blood and the blood culture. The treated mice, however, had few or no

active T-bacilli in the blood. This striking difference in the form and activity

of the erythrocytes led us to surmise that in reality it was the erythrocytes and

not the SAPA bions that were the direct agents of the tumor destruction. The

SAPA bions obviously charged the erythrocytes orgonotically, and perished

in the process. The charged erythrocytes carried out the healing of the tumor

that we had originally ascribed to the SAPA bions. This surmise proved to be

correct, for it led to further important observations and the realization that theactual healing factor is the orgonotically strongly charged blood. We applied

this knowledge consistently in our work from that time on. Above all, it made

comprehensible the anemic and cachectic conditions of the untreated mice.

The treated mice died also, but they never attained the degree of cachexia and

anemia reached by the untreated ones. In the untreated mice, the available

biological energy of the blood corpuscles was used up in the struggle against

the disease, causing the decline of the organism: cachexia. In orgone-treated

cancer mice, the organism could save its own biological energy, since it was

supplied with orgone energy from the outside. The results were the same

when we injected autoclaved earth bions instead of the SAPA orgone energy

vesicles.

  We dissected several dozen untreated cancer mice and found that here,

too, the tumor sometimes contained blood-filled cavities. These cavities were

free of organized or compact cancer tissue. They contained a macroscopically

brownish mass which was seen microscopically to consist of detritus and T-

bacilli. In the dark-field, and at a magnification of 3000x, it could be clearly

seen that whenever erythrocytes came into contact with cancer cells, they not

only  caused  the  disintegration  of  the  tissues  into  T-bodies,  but  they  also

disintegrated into T-bodies themselves. The untreated mice had orgone-weak

blood. I was therefore unsure whether the T-disintegration of the erythrocytes

should be ascribed to this orgone weakness or to the loss of energy in the

struggle against the cancer cells. Later we discovered the same phenomenon

even in the tumors of mice that had been treated (cf. Fig. 64-e and 64-f,

Appendix).  In  these  cases,  too,  erythrocytes  distintegrated  into  T-bodies

wherever they came into contact with the cancer cells. This finding can also

be observed in the stained section. We now knew that the disintegration of

the erythrocytes into T-bacilli was a consequence of their struggle against the

cancer tissue, and not a result of orgone weakness.

  Thus, we came upon the natural autocurative mechanism of the organism,

which  guided  us  in  all  further  work. The  natural  curative  factor  againstcancer must be the blood.

  The reader should be reminded that at this particular time (winter 1939–

1940)  no  one  had  a  presentiment  of  the  existence  of  atmospheric  orgone

energy. There was no such thing as an orgone accumulator. Orgone therapy

with cancer mice consisted of injecting them with orgone-containing bions.

We observed the injected mice carefully every day. We had the feeling that

the  orgone  energy  vesicles  we  injected,  while  certainly  causing  the

destruction of the tumor, somehow also damaged the mice. Personally, I had

always  had  an  antipathy  toward  injecting  living  organisms  with  foreign

substances, whether chemicals or exogenous sera. It could not be overlooked

that  so  many  drugs  that  may  alleviate  pain  simultaneously  damage  the

autonomic vital apparatus. For example, the anaesthetic effect of the alkaloids

(morphine,  etc.)  is  based  on  a  depression  of  the  organism’s  vegetative

sensibility.  Biologically,  their  effect  is  exactly  opposite  to  that  of  orgone

therapy: they depress, while orgone therapy stimulates, the life functions.

This is a very old medical problem. Can there be synthetic agents that can

destroy disease-producing factors and alleviate pain without causing damage

to  the  life  system?  Chemical  research  has  not  been  able  to  answer  this

question.

  Healthy control mice also became diseased after receiving injections of

SAPA bions and treated cancer mice, although rid of their tumors, failed to

recuperate properly. Therefore, even in those early stages of research, I tried

to develop methods other than the injection of orgone energy vesicles. At first

we saw no way to apply orgone energy without bion injections. However,

once it was established that the bions did not exert their effect directly, but

rather by way of the blood, new means were found of administering orgone

energy, which dispensed with the need to inject bions. I will describe these

methods briefly. They represented only an instructive intermediate phase in

the orgone therapy experiments and were later completely abandoned. They

did,  however,  reveal  important  properties  of  the  blood  in  its  relation  toorgone energy and to malignant tumors. The following methods of indirect

administering of orgone energy were tried:

  1. The blood-filled tumors of the mice that had been treated with orgone

energy were tapped. The blood was drawn off under sterile conditions and

then centrifuged, to separate the erythrocytes from the blood serum. A sterile

SAPA bion culture was added to the serum and the solution was refrigerated

for one day. Since fluids absorb orgone energy, we felt certain that the serum

would be charged with orgone energy from the SAPA bions. This serum was

filtered, separating it from the SAPA bions. Then the orgone-charged serum

was injected into the cancer mice. It exerted a quite distinct effect, though, to

be  sure,  not  as  strong  as  that  of  direct  SAPA  bion  injections.  In  another

series, where the serum was not treated with SAPA bions, there was not the

slightest  therapeutic  effect.  The  blood  of  cancer-diseased  organisms  not

exposed to SAPA bions is in itself orgonotically too weak. This experiment

convinced us that no specific antibodies against cancer cells develop in the

blood of cancer mice.

  2. We injected SAPA bions several times into healthy rabbits, withdrew

blood (again satisfying ourselves that it no longer contained any structured

SAPA bions), and injected it into cancer mice in two ways: one group of

cancer  mice  received  injections  of  rabbit  blood  (0.2–0.5  cc.)  diluted  with

potassium chloride, every day for several weeks; the other group received

injections of centrifuged rabbit blood, i.e., pure rabbit serum, orgonotically

highly charged. This method of indirectly administering orgone energy was

successful. Intravenous injection of the mice proved to be more effective than

subcutaneous injection, but there were a few deaths from the shock effect of

introducing KCl intravenously.

  3. Neither the rabbit serum nor whole blood injected directly into the

tumor had a favorable effect.

  4. Finally, we experimented with human blood. Blood was taken from an

arm  vein  and  brought  together  with  SAPA  bions  in  the  test  tube.Microscopically,  it  could  be  clearly  seen  that  the  erythrocytes  gathered

greedily  around  the  individual  SAPA  bions,  formed  orgone  bridges,  and

absorbed orgone energy. These observations were just as instructive as they

were  exciting.  The  erythrocytes  became  tauter,  the  blue  orgone  margin

broadened, and the radiation (seen especially well with a blue filter) became

very strong. Two groups of cancer mice were again injected, one group with

centrifuged  serum,  free  of  erythrocytes,  the  other  with  serum  containing

erythrocytes.  The  effect  on  the  cancer  tumors  in  the  mice  was  marked.

However, the whole procedure required a substantial investment of time and

effort.  Sterile  precautions  had  to  be  carefully  observed;  and  in  addition,

intravenous injections into the tail veins of mice were not easily done.

  5.  We  also  tried  to  produce  a  “T-bacilli  serum.”  We  injected  healthy

rabbits with very small dosages of T-bacilli, took blood samples after eight

days, filtered the blood, and injected the serum into cancer mice. We could

see  no  satisfactory  effects,  though  we  had  microscopically  observed  the

formation of blue orgone energy vesicles in the clear, filtered serum when T-

bacilli were added. We soon gave up the production of a specific T-bacilli

serum.  Equally  unsuccessful  were  attempts  to  stimulate  the  formation  of

antibodies in the blood of mice and rabbits by the injection of autoclaved T-

bacilli.

  Of all the methods of indirectly administering orgone energy, the one that

worked  best  was  the  injection  of  erythrocytes  that  had  been  previously

charged orgonotically with SAPA bions. This method had the same effect as

the direct injection of SAPA bions: Tumor tissue disintegrated into dead T-

bodies, anemia improved, and in the autoclavation test the T-reaction of the

blood was found to be replaced by a B-reaction.

  The table on here provides a summary of the results of this experiment

(also cf. Fig. 64-a through g, Appendix).

  Of the 27 control mice specifically examined—in actual fact, we observed

a far greater number of untreated cancer mice—8 died during the first weekof our experiment. (This was approximately two weeks after the mice were

found to be tumorous at the animal farm. The breeder of the mice assured us

that he had examined each mouse carefully once a week, so the visible tumor

could  not  have  been  older  than  seven  days,  at  most,  at  the  time  of  its

discovery.)  The  majority  of  these  8  exhibited  the  full  cancer  syndrome:

cachexia, sepsis, T-reaction, tumor growth, putrid disintegration of the cancer

tissue, etc. During the second week, 5 cancer mice died. Two mice died every

week from the third to the seventh week, and 1 every week between the

eighth and the eleventh week. In other words, with untreated cancer mice the

maximum life span after the appearance of a tumor was between 10 and 12

weeks. Average life span of these mice was, however, much lower, namely

about 3.9 weeks.

  By contrast, the average life expectancy of the 101 mice that received

either direct or indirect bion treatment was 9.1 weeks. The average life span

figure  is  computed  by  dividing  the  total  number  of  weeks  of  post-tumor

survival of all the treated cancer mice by the total number of mice. The actual

figure should really be set slightly higher than 9.1, since we killed 47 of the

                                                                            1
101 treated cancer mice to study the orgone effects on the tissues. Only 54 of

the 101 treated cancer mice died spontaneously. The average life span of the

treated cancer mice was therefore approximately 2.5 times longer than that

of the untreated mice. Whereas the longest life span for an untreated mouse

was only 11 weeks, two of the mice treated with orgone energy lived for 28

weeks, i.e., for a total of 7 months after the appearance of the tumor. This

result was quite unusual and represented a very successful first experiment in

applying orgone therapy in the treatment of cancer mice. Since the total life

expectancy of a healthy mouse is only about 2.5 years, and most of the cancer

mice were already five to eight months old when they came to us, we had

prolonged their life span by roughly a quarter of their normal life expectancy.

This prolongation would be equivalent to fifteen years in a human life. These

initial  results  were  encouraging,  even  though  they  did  not  come  close  toproviding  a  radical  cancer  therapy.  It  seemed  justified  that  we  should

anticipate  even  better  results  in  applying  orgone  therapy  to  the  human

organism. First of all in relation to the size of the whole body, a human tumor

is much smaller than the tumor of a mouse. Moreover, the mouse is unable to

communicate any pain or other symptoms that might indicate the formation

of a tumor. Man also has at his disposal a wide range of medical aids to

supplement orgone therapy: vegetotherapy, forced fluids, iron colloids, diet,

vitamins, etc. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

w se
Fwoma] T 7 T TRl
T
S 3 TFT R T=FEFFFITR
® 1o
B
s
i
It bs pia pumte
s [ o o e e e e R
a1 o i e oy maiio
=% et
o v

 

o A S b e S 20 M
  This  was  the  situation,  in  1940,  relative  to  our  orgone  therapy

experiments on mice. I am not reporting here on the many efforts we made to

fill the gaps in our knowledge and achieve better results. There was just one

major difficulty, which we encountered again during later orgone therapy

experiments on humans, that should be mentioned. Although we were able to

destroy tumors by the orgonotic charging of the blood, the life or death of thetreated  mice  depended  essentially  on how  successfully  the  dead  tumor

material  was  eliminated  from  the  organism.  Many  mice  died  during  the

course  of  these  experiments  not  from  the  cancer  tumor  nor  from  T-

intoxication but rather—and here I might appropriately quote the notorious

saying “operation successful, patient dead”—from the clogging of renal and

lymph passages, or from the enormous enlargement of the liver and spleen.

These organs have the responsibility for the elimination of the detritus. The

clogging of the renal passages was especially typical. The larger the tumor

that had disintegrated, the greater this particular danger. The mice did not die

from cancer cachexia, nor from the putrefaction of the tissue and the blood.

At  the  time  of  death,  they  looked  well,  had  smooth  fur,  and  were  not

emaciated. Death resulted from attempts to eliminate the tumor detritus. This

extremely critical problem is still unsolved. If large tumors are destroyed too

rapidly, the excretory organs become clogged; if they are destroyed slowly,

secondary tumors are likely to develop. There is only one answer here: The

tumor must not be allowed to grow too large. Clearly then, our blood test for

early  diagnosis  of  cancer  (T-reaction,  culture,  etc.)  acquires  crucial

significance.

  I  discovered  atmospheric  orgone  energy  in  July  1940.  Within  a  few

months  we  constructed  the  orgone  accumulator,  which  was  designed  to

concentrate  this  energy.  From  various  experiments  it  appeared  that

atmospheric  orgone  energy  displayed  the  same  properties  as  the  orgone

energy inside the bion vesicles that we injected into cancer mice. Therefore,

instead of injecting the mice with bions, we placed them in the accumulator

for a half-hour each day. Positive effects were recorded in an astonishingly

short  time.  Mice  thus  treated  with  atmospheric  orgone  energy  improved

quickly; their fur became smooth and shiny, their eyes, bright, the organism

as  a  whole,  strong;  the  bent,  contracted  posture,  typical  of  cancer  mice,

became straighter and the tumors either ceased to grow or receded. At first it

seemed  strange  that  such  biological  effects  could  be  obtained  simply  byplacing the mice in a small box lined on the inside with metal. Long after

these effects had become a routine occurrence for us, we continued to note

the  astonished  reaction  of  people  who  were  visiting  the  laboratory.  They

searched for electrical wiring and complex machinery and were unable to

understand how such a simple metal-lined box could influence cancer.

  After several months it became evident, statistically, that the results we

were obtaining from the treatment of mice with atmospheric orgone energy

were better than those obtained from the bion-injection treatment. Altogether,

36 cancer mice were treated in the orgone accumulator. The average life span

of the mice injected with orgone energy vesicles had been 9.1 weeks. The

average life span of the mice treated in the orgone accumulator was 11.1

weeks. In the mice treated by injection, the maximum life span had been 28

weeks, or 7 months, from date of discovery of the tumor. The maximum life

span  in  mice  treated  with  atmospheric  orgone  energy  was  38  weeks,  or

approximately  9.5  months  after  discovery  of  the  tumor.  This  finding

represented an important step forward. We had increased the life span of

cancer mice from about one-quarter (7 months) to one-third (9.5 months) of

their total life expectancy (about 30 months). This would be equivalent to

prolonging human life for 20 years, even if normal human life expectancy is

set as low as 60. Of course, it has to be noted that mice probably do not

suffer,  as  humans  do,  from  severe  emotional  biopathies,  which  tend  to

complicate  the  cancer  process  enormously.  We  were  glad  that  it  was  no

longer necessary to introduce foreign bodies into the organism. In addition,

the treatment was much easier to prepare and carry out. While the mice were

in the accumulator, we were free to work at other tasks. The whole discovery

opened up new perspectives for a future cancer therapy for humans. In the

event  that  the  orgone  accumulator  proved  effective  and  not  damaging  to

normal tissue and blood, it might be possible to let healthy people, as well as

sick  people,  have  an  accumulator  in  their  own  home.  The  first  orgone

accumulator designed for human use was built in December 1940. I will nowpresent  an  account  of  the  tests  we  made  to  establish  whether  or  not

atmospheric  orgone  energy,  concentrated  in  the  accumulator,  would  be

damaging to healthy humans.

  In order to investigate orgone effects I had been spending, over the past

two years, several hours a day in a Faraday cage that had iron walls and thus

functioned as an orgone accumulator. Not only did I not feel pain, or any

other symptom, I actually felt robust. Some of the laboratory workers used

the accumulator daily for at least a half-hour. Over a period of months, we

had rabbits and mice spend several hours a day in it. Apart from a certain

restlessness, we could ascertain no negative effects. Too long an exposure to

concentrated orgone energy at any one time can cause dizziness and nausea

in humans, but these symptoms disappear quickly in the open air.

  A  special  experiment  that  we  undertook  disclosed  a  peculiar  fact  that

nevertheless fit well into the overall view. In a grass infusion, under normal

circumstances, protozoa develop profusely between the second and fifth day.

We now placed grass infusions in a small orgone accumulator and found that

these infusions, treated with orgone energy produced no, or only minimal,

protozoal  development.  However,  once  protozoa  and  bacteria  were  fully

developed and the normal grass structure largely destroyed, the accumulator

did not have a killing effect on the protozoa. At first we could not understand

this. The blood tests on cancer mice had clearly indicated that exposure to

orgone energy in the accumulator charged the blood and eliminated the T-

bacilli. Yet if we placed a T-bacilli culture in the accumulator, there was no

killing effect. While this finding corresponded to the result of the experiment

with grass infusions, it was incomprehensible.

  Careful deliberation finally led to the following analysis of the process:

The SAPA bions had also not exerted a direct killing effect on the cancer

cells  and  the  T-bacilli  but  had  been  effective indirectly,  by  charging  the

erythrocytes and the healthy tissue. Accordingly, the orgone energy in the

accumulator charged the fresh grass tissue in the infusion and by so doingdelayed its disintegration into protozoa. If there was no healthy tissue to be

charged, the killing effect on protozoa was also absent; in the absence of

healthy tissue, the orgone energy simply charged the protozoa biologically.

Clearly,  the  orgone  experiments  cannot  be  understood  with  the  rigid

prejudice of mechanistic thinking. Healthy, vigorous orgone systems capable

of absorbing a strong orgonotic charge must be present for the elimination of

protozoal  or  bacterial  foreign  bodies,  or  for  the  prevention  of  their

development.  It  is  a  fundamental  law  in  orgone  physics  that  the stronger

orgonotic system always attracts the weaker and withdraws a charge from it

(which is the exact opposite of what happens with electrical charge, where

the energy always flows from the stronger to the weaker system). The tissue

or blood of a human or a mouse is a much stronger orgonotic system than that

of protozoa, cancer cells, or T-bacilli: hence, its killing power. Normally, this

killing effect is not dependent on any absorption of additional orgone energy

from external sources. But healthy tissue and blood, in their struggle against

cancer cells and T-bacilli, lose increasing amounts of orgone energy, causing

anemia  and  loss  of  weight. If  the  organism  is  supplied  regularly  with

concentrated orgone energy from the outside, it will not need to consume its

own body energy. In this case, cachexia and anemia either do not occur or are

eliminated.

  The  experiment  with  grass  infusions  confirmed,  in  an  interesting  and

important way, the concept of the effect of orgone energy on tissues and

blood.  However,  a  whole  series  of  important  questions  still  need  to  be

answered experimentally.

  In  the  application  of  atmospheric  orgone  energy,  we  encountered

precisely  the  same  obstacles  we  found  in  our  experiments  with  bion

injections.  Many  of  the  mice  died  of  a  clogging  of  the  excretory  organs,

without developing anemia or cachexia. This problem will be discussed in

more detail later, in connection with the orgone therapy experiments with

humans.  I shall now proceed with the description of the application of therapy in

human cancer. Before doing so, I want to emphasize once again that I am not

offering any final solutions; I am merely submitting a report of my important

findings, even though they are punctuated by gaps, doubts, and uncertainties.                                      CHAPTER VIII


Results of Experimental Orgone Therapy in Humans


                                  with Cancer




1. ORGONOTIC CELL LUMINATION: THE EFFECT OF

          THE ORGONE ACCUMULATOR AND THE

                          THERAPEUTIC FACTOR


The reader who is unfamiliar with the orgone therapy experiments may view

claims  for  the  therapeutic  value  of  the  orgone  energy  accumulator  with

disbelief. It seems implausible that one can derive any beneficial effect from

sitting  in  an  unimpressive-looking  cabinet,  simply  constructed  with  outer

walls of organic material and inner ones of metal, that is designed to absorb

orgone  energy  from  the  air.  It  seems  even  more  unbelievable  when  one

realizes that the accumulator contains no sophisticated components, wiring,

buttons, or motors. Not only that, but orgone energy, which has been found to

have such significant effects upon the shrinking biopathy, does not have to be

                                    1
purchased. The Orgone Institute has sought to prevent any profiteering in the

application of this energy. The incredulity that can be expected in response to

the simplicity of the device and its use will have to be countered by careful

documentation.

  The  fact  that  atmospheric  orgone  energy  is concentrated  within  the

orgone accumulator is demonstrated by the physical and biological effects it

exerts;  but  its  therapeutic  effect  on  the  living  organism  is  not  thereby

explained. We will attempt in this chapter to obtain a clearer picture of this

phenomenon.

  Not much was actually known about the nature of orgone energy duringour initial experiments with its therapeutic effects in early 1941. It had, of

course, been made visible, and the existence of differences in temperature

and in electroscopic discharge had been discovered, even if they had not yet

been  fully  elaborated.  The  fact  of  the  concentration  of  the  energy  was

therefore established, but the mechanism of its therapeutic effect was still

unexplained. Our working hypothesis at the time was that the concentrated

orgone in the accumulator penetrated the naked body and in that way charged

the  blood  and  the  tissues  biologically.  But  over  the  following  two  years,

many  observations  were  made  that  provided  a  different  and  better

explanation.

  In scientific research, isolated facts have no importance. Consequently,

there is a tendency to adorn unconnected facts with names, as in the theory of

“static electricity,” and then to believe, erroneously, that they are understood.

People find an “interpretation” for every single one of these facts, without

providing  any  overall  context  in  which  to  see  their  true  correlation.  It  is

different  when  the  congruity  of  many  facts  spontaneously  yields  a  single

concept  that  is  inescapable,  indispensable,  and  brings  together  the  many

diverse  findings  into  a  functioning  unity.  If  this  single  concept  not  only

elucidates the functional connection of the facts but also makes a variety of

interpretations, explanations, etc. unnecessary, and if, in addition, it discloses

new facts, then the theory can be regarded as satisfactory.

  Although many so-called pragmatists regard the postulation of theories as

a  “philosophical  luxury,”  it  is  in  fact  a  scientific  tool  comparable  to  the

ordering  of  the  instruments  to  be  used  in  a  surgical  operation.  The

arrangement  of  the  instruments  is  just  as  germane  to  the  outcome  of  the

operation as is each individual instrument. The best surgeon in the world

could hardly perform a successful operation if he always had to look around

the  operating  room  for  every  instrument  he  needed.  Just  as  there  is

improvement  in  the  way  one  arranges  tools,  there  is,  in  the  formation  of

theories,  a  progressive  improvement  in  the  way  one  arranges  the  facts.Theories, therefore, can never form a perfect system and will always remain

incomplete and in need of improvement. This principle also applies to the

following account of the therapeutic effect of accumulated orgone energy.

  Our initial hypothesis that the orgone energy in the accumulator simply

penetrates the organism left a few facts unexplained. Some patients reacted

immediately to the orgone radiation, while others needed repeated exposure

before  any  effects  were  felt.  If  the  effect  were  dependent  simply  on  a

mechanical penetration of the organism, then every organism should react in

the same way. Since reactions were not the same, an explanation was needed.

  We made the assumption that the organism is penetrated by the orgone

energy,  while  itself  remaining  passive  and  uninvolved,  as  happens  during

irradiation with X-rays or radium. Both of these radiation treatments involve

the application of an energy that is non-biological in nature, i.e., an energy

basically alien to the body, because the organism does not emit either X-rays

or  radium  rays.  Atmospheric  orgone  energy,  however,  is an  organic,

specifically  biological  energy.  It  is  absorbed  constantly  by  the  organism

directly from the air and sun, through the skin and by pulmonary ventilation.

The  organism  therefore  contains  orgone  energy  in  all  its  cells  and  body

fluids, and constantly radiates it. When the organism is in the accumulator,

two orgonotic systems come together in a functional relationship. We know

this  today;  we  did  not  know  it  in  1941.  To  understand  the  functional

relationship between two orgonotic systems, it is necessary to refer to my

earlier  account  of  the  observations  on  bions  (orgone  energy  vesicles)  (cf.

Chapter II).

  As we know, an erythrocyte and an earth bion each form a self-contained

orgonotic system. The constituents of such a system, seen biophysically, are a

bio-energetic nucleus,  a plasmatic periphery,  and  an orgone  energy  field

surrounding the organism. In diagram form it would look like this: 

+ biological nucleus
: plasmatic periphery
: orgone energy field
orgone absorption or charge
orgone emission or discharge

 
FIGURE 24. Schematic presentation of the living “orgonotic system”


  If two orgonotic systems move close to each other, contact is established

between  their  energy  fields,  resulting  in  mutual excitation  and attraction.

This  reaction  is  evidenced  by  their  moving  closer  to  each  other.  The

erythrocytes group themselves around the heavier, and therefore less motile,

earth  bion.  Once  the  erythrocytes  are  close  enough,  a  bridge  of  orgone

energy,  strongly  refractile,  is  formed.  The  biological  nuclei  of  the  two

orgonotic systems now begin to radiate more strongly, a phenomenon we call

“orgonotic lumination.” It is the same phenomenon observed by traditional

biology  in  cell  division,  referred  to  as  “mitogenetic  radiation.”  All  the

fundamental bio-energetic processes, such as sexual excitation, orgasm, cell

fusion, and cell division, are accompanied by a high degree of bio-energetic

excitation,  that  is,  by orgonotic  lumination.  In  living  matter,  substantialquantities  of  energy  are  discharged  during  this  process.  “Sexual  contact”

between two living organisms striving toward the sexual act represents, in

orgone-physical  terms,  this  same  process  of  the  formation  of  an orgone

bridge and orgonotic lumination between the two bodies (orgonotic systems).

Many biologists (Burr, among them) have demonstrated the existence of an

energy field surrounding living cells and multicellular organisms, outside the

material  boundary  of  the  organism  itself.  It  is  considered  to  be  an

electromagnetic energy field. In orgone physics, however, we contend that

this  field  of  energy  surrounding  the  organism  has  nothing  to  do  with

electromagnetism  and  is  in  reality  an orgone energy field,  i.e., a  field  of

specific biological energy. It functions at a distance, without the need for

material  contact  between  the  body  surfaces  of  the  organisms.  My  own

experiments with the oscillograph and the recently constructed orgone energy

field meter have shown not only that such an energy field exists but also that

its area of radiation varies considerably from individual to individual, from as

little  as  a  few  centimeters  to  as  much  as  four  meters  (according  to

observations made up to now). It also varies with any given organism; i.e., it

expands  and  contracts.  These  functions  of  the  energy  field  are  dependent

upon the emotional state of the organism. In orgonotic cell lumination, for

example, there is always a considerable expansion of the energy field.

  Thus, even in two such widely divergent relationships as that between an

erythrocyte and an earth bion and that between the orgone accumulator and

the living organism seated inside it, we are actually dealing with one and the

same phenomenon. However, there is one essential difference. In the first

relationship, a radiating bridge forms only where the surfaces make contact

with each other, whereas in the case of the accumulator, the orgone energy

field  of  the  non-living  orgonotic  system  completely  envelops  the  orgone

energy  field  of  the  living  orgonotic  system.  The  following  diagram  will

illustrate this process: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Contact between the orgone energy fields of the organism and of the orgone accumulator (solid

arrows). The dotted arrows on the outside show the attraction of the atmospheric orgone energy. Effect:

lumination of the organism


  What facts are there to confirm this theoretical assumption?

  1. The effects of the orgone accumulator are weakened and sometimes

eliminated if its inner walls are more than 4–8 inches from the surface of the

organism.  Ignorance  of  this  fact  was  the  cause  of  a  series  of  therapeutic

failures.  For  example,  when  mice  were  treated  in  accumulators  built  for

humans, the effects on them were poor. They improved as soon as we built

small accumulators, measuring approximately 8–12 inches. At present, we

use even smaller accumulators but have increased the number of layers of

organic material and metal. A four-year-old boy with bone cancer failed to

react as favorably as adults suffering from bone cancer; he had been treated

in an accumulator built for adults. The objection has been frequently raised

that  electrophysicists  who  work  in  Faraday  cages  would  have  had  to

experience the accumulator effect. Our answer to this objection is simply that

a wire cage, many meters in width, cannot be a biologically effective orgone

accumulator.  For  instance,  I  can  stay  much  longer  in  my  experimental

accumulator,  which  is  3  ×  2  meters,  than  in  the  therapeutic  accumulator,

which measures 2 × 2 1/2 feet.

  2. In vegetative (orgonotic) terms, lively persons feel the effects of theorgone  energy  in  the  accumulator  far  more  rapidly  than  do  sluggish

individuals. The former have a more extensive orgone energy field than the

latter; thus, the contact between the orgone energy fields of their bodies and

that  of  the  metal  inner  walls  of  the  accumulator  is  established  far  more

rapidly and easily.

  3.  Orgonotically  sluggish  individuals  begin  to  notice  the  effects  of  an

exposure  to  orgone  radiation  in  the  accumulator  only  after  several

irradiations.  There  can  be  only  one  explanation  for  this  phenomenon:  the

organism itself must be charged passively to a certain minimal degree and its

own orgone radiation intensified before subjective perception of the orgone

effect is possible. One physician was unable to feel the typical prickling and

warmth in the palms of the hands for the first few months of his use of the

accumulator.  He  began  to  feel  them  only  after  he  had  started  to  use  the

accumulator regularly. In other words, his organism at first remained passive,

but after a while “stretched out,” as it were, toward the orgone field of the

metal walls.

  These experiences are of immense importance for an understanding not

only of the effects of accumulated orgone energy but also of the orgonotic

reactions  of  the  organism.  We  are  still  a  long  way  from  a  complete

comprehension.

  4. The metal inner walls of the accumulator are cold. But if the palm of

the hand is held long enough at a distance of about 4 centimeters from the

walls, a delicate prickling and warmth are felt. (The objective temperature

differences  in  the  accumulator  have  been  comprehensively  reported  in

Chapter IV.) The assumption has to be made that the feelings of warmth and

prickling are the subjective result of the impact of orgone energy particles on

the skin. This fact has great significance for an understanding of the sensation

of warmth with orgone irradiation.

  In 1942 an important phenomenon was discovered which has a decisive

connection with the body lumination in the accumulator: Body temperaturerises in the accumulator as much as one degree centrigrade (the rapidity and

amount  of  increase  varying  from  individual  to  individual).  If  the  body

temperature before irradiaton is close to the fever point, it will climb beyond

this point in the accumulator. Thus, orgone energy can produce mild fever.

    Temperature rise in the organism is known to be a fundamental excitation

reaction of the cells and the blood. Until now it has not been understood. The

temperature  rise  in  the  accumulator  is  indicative  of  lumination  of  the

orgonotic body system. The blood and other cell systems luminate during

contact  with  the  orgone  energy  field  of  the  accumulator  by  a  process

analogous to that which occurs in the contact between two bions. This contact

between two orgonotic systems leads to an increase in the orgone energy

metabolism of the organism, and it is to this metabolic increase that we must

ascribe the restorative and enlivening effect of orgone therapy. In sequence,

the essential stages of the process are: contact between two energy fields;

interpenetration; cell lumination; increase in orgone energy metabolism. They

correspond  exactly  to  the  characteristic  phases  of  important  biological

processes such as copulation and conjugation. Thus, in orgone therapy we are

dealing with sexual energy processes in the strictest biophysical sense of the

word, and only the realization of this fact can explain why so many patients,

suffering  from  a  standstill  of  their  biological  energy  metabolism,  develop

sexual excitations and sexual stasis while undergoing orgone therapy. More

will be said on this subject during discussions of specific cases.

  Our accumulator, made with organic substance on the outside and with

sheet metal on the inside, is therefore not at all the unremarkable box it seems

to be. It is, in fact, a biologically highly active system that will provide us

with considerable material for thought in another context.

  The repeated luminations of the organism brought about by the orgone

accumulator  manifest  themselves  also  in  the  gradual  intensification  of

biological energy in the erythrocytes, enabling them to radiate more strongly,

gain in turgor, destroy cancer cells, kill T-bacilli, etc., all of which they wereincapable of doing while still orgonotically weak. From one point of view,

orgone therapy could also be designated as a natural fever therapy, if fever is

understood  correctly  as  a  sign  of  intensified  bio-energetic  activity  of  the

organism. This interpretation would create a framework within which many

frequently applied but little understood curative methods in medicine would

become more comprehensible. The malaria therapy against general paresis

developed  by  my  teacher  Wagner-Jauregg,  in  Vienna,  is  basically  the

artificial stimulation of strong cellular lumination through the injection of

malaria parasites. Hot tea with rum against colds and the “hot compress” for

toothache are treatments that belong in this category. What confronts us now

is the task of understanding the effects of many chemotherapeutic techniques

from this standpoint and thereby making it possible to distinguish the drugs

that are beneficial from those that are damaging. A drug that kills the bacilli

but simultaneously damages the blood cells and the plasma system, rather

than strengthening them, should not be permitted, even if powerful vested

interests lobby against such controls. It can only be the lumination within the

organism that quickly reduces or even eliminates pains of all kinds.

    Observations  to  date  suggest  that  the  cell  lumination  produced  in  the

organism  by  the  orgone  accumulator  is  the  real  and  essential  therapeutic

factor. This cell lumination exercises an effect on the cancer cells and the T-

bacilli in the organism that is as destructive as the paralyzing effect exerted

by the strong orgone radiation of SAPA bions on T-bacilli and motile cancer

cells, which I have observed microscopically and filmed. It is to be expected

that  further  experiments  using  different  arrangements  of  materials  will

considerably increase the radiation effect of the orgone accumulator. What is

most  important  is  to  find  ways  of  shortening  the  duration  of  individual

irradiations while achieving greater rises in body temperatures.

  The results of orgone therapy in human cancer, which I will now present,

are incomplete. I would have gladly postponed their publication until more

cases had been treated, but it was felt that the general effort to master cancerwould receive a decided impetus if this analysis of the mechanism of the

carcinomatous  biopathy  were  explained,  the  fundamental  question  of  the

formation of cancer cells elucidated, and the effects of the newly discovered

orgone energy made known.

  The  first  cancer  patients  to  submit  to  the  orgone  experiment  were

accepted at my Orgone and Cancer Research Laboratory in Forest Hills only

under the condition that their physicians had no objection to the experiment

and that their relatives signed the following statement:


    I state herewith that I came to Dr. Wilhelm Reich for possible help in the case of my ———

  who suffers from cancer. I came because I was told of the experiments that Dr. Reich has made

  with cancer mice and human beings. Dr. Reich did not promise me any cure, did not charge any

  money, and told me that only during the last few months has he tried the orgone radiation on

  human beings who suffer from cancer … Death or abscesses could occur as a consequence of

  the  disease.  I  told  Dr.  Reich  that  the  physicians  have  given  up  the  case  of  my  ———  as

  hopeless. Should death or abscesses occur during the time of the experiment, it will not be

  because of the treatment.


  I would like to describe the disappointments and failures we experienced,

if for no other reason than to forestall the impression that we now have a

cure-all, the means to “cure” cancer under any circumstances. Understanding

of  the  failures  is  vital  to  any  future  efforts  to  broaden  and  develop  the

beneficial  effects  of  orgone  therapy.  The  following  examples  will

demonstrate the types of difficulty and failures we encountered.

  Case  M.  F.,  a  fifty-seven-year-old  widow  came  to  us  with  numerous

tumors, predominantly in the cranium and in the bones of the arms. She was

compulsively religious. She also suffered from hypochondria and masochistic

complaining.  Seventeen  years  previously  her  uterus  had  been  extirpated

because of tumors. About two years previously pains developed in her neck,

the  top  of  her  head,  and  her  lower  back.  She  slept  poorly  and  lost  her

appetite. It was difficult to separate her hypochondriacal complaining from

her genuine complaints about acute cancer pains. She was able to walk only

with support; her skin was clammy and livid, feet and hands cold and sweaty.The hemoglobin content of her blood was 33%. The blood tests were all

cancer-positive:  T-bacilli  growth,  T-reaction  on  autoclavation,  rapid

shrinking of the red blood corpuscles in physiological saline. The tumors in

the  cranium  were  palpable  and  hard.  The  diagnosis  of  cancer  had  been

confirmed at Memorial Hospital.

  The patient came for orgone treatment daily for eight weeks. On the third

day the hemoglobin content of her blood was 41%, on the sixth day, 55%, on

the eighth day, 85%. The hemoglobin remained normal for four weeks, then

dropped to 78% and stayed at approximately that level. The T-reactions were

positive for about three weeks. After four weeks there were no more T-bacilli

in the blood; but the T-disintegration of the erythrocytes, which had been

almost 100% at the beginning, was 35% after seven weeks.

  The  palpable  tumors  in  the  cranium  became  distinctly  smaller  and

softened.  Nosebleeds  developed.  The  blood  was  a  brownish  color  and

contained  characteristic  tumor  material.  The  pains  subsided,  sleep  and

appetite improved. She began to like the accumulator and wanted to have one

at home in order to spare herself the daily journey. I could not accede to her

wish, however, because I still had too little experience with the effects of

orgone therapy on human cancer.

  After two months the patient developed tensions in the upper thighs, in

the  deep  adductor  muscles.  Moreover,  she  seemed  reluctant  to  use  the

accumulator, which I, at first, did not understand. At about the same time, the

first  cancer  patient,  whose  case  I  described  earlier,  reacted  to  the  orgone

radiation with sexual stasis. I therefore thought it justified to assume that this

patient  too  had  been  charged  sexually  and  that  the  spasms  in  the  deep

adductor  of  the  upper  thigh  were  a  direct  reaction.  Her  hypochondria

intensified. She had no cancer pain but became querulous. Her relatives could

not tolerate her any more and the patient went into a home for the aged. The

orgone  treatment  was  interrupted.  A  new  set  of  X-rays  clearly  showed

reduction and calcification of the tumors in the upper arm and in the cranium.But the patient’s neurosis complicated the cancer therapy. After a few months

of distinct improvement in her condition, she died. The orgone therapy had

prolonged her life for a few months and her pains had been alleviated.

  Like the other cancer patients, she had also presented a picture of total

emotional resignation, a factor that had been noticed also by her relatives.

Her nephew once said to me, “She has nothing to live for.” It seemed quite

clear that the patient died because her “instinct for life” had never functioned

correctly and her vital system gave up for want of joy in life.

  Case C. K., thirty-three years old, was receiving medical treatment for a

colostomy which had been carried out because of a cancer of the colon. The

patient reported that she had always been constipated, even as a small child,

and had always been anemic. In the summer of 1939 she began to suffer from

a “dysentery” that coincided with every menstrual period thereafter. In 1940

she  had  intestinal  hemorrhages.  Previous  to  that,  for  many  months,  she

suffered from unbearable pains in the rectum. Constant use of analgesic rectal

suppositories and codeine by mouth provided no more than very temporary

relief.

  When we accepted this case at the laboratory on May 7, 1941, the patient

was in a desperate state. Her cachexia was far advanced, and although she

was tall, she weighed only 115 lbs. It was immediately apparent that she was

suffering from a severe sexual biopathy. She had an anxious expression and

suffered from anxiety dreams. Her husband had died eight years before and

ever  since  that  date  she  had  lived  in  total  abstinence.  Even  during  her

marriage  her  husband  had  been  constantly  sick  and  “too  weak  to  pay

attention to such things.” The colostomy had intensified her nervous state.

She believed she would faint when she passed intestinal gas without being

able to control it. She suffered from insomnia, which had started long before

her cancer appeared. During her attacks of anxiety, spasms occurred in her

throat and anus; she “thought she would die.”

  This case had been diagnosed as cancer by several private physicians andalso at the hospital.

  Results of the tests were as follows: hemoglobin, 72%, autoclavation test,

99% T-reaction. Red blood corpuscles were pale, orgone margins narrow;

degeneration was gradual, but with distinct T-spike formation. Culture from

the  intestinal  excreta  showed  a  strong  T-reaction,  numerous  rot  bacteria,

formed cancer cells up to amoeboid forms.

  Two  days  after  the  initiation  of  orgone  irradiation,  the  hemoglobin

content  climbed  to  82%  and  remained  there.  After  about  two  weeks,  the

blood picture was vastly improved. The intestinal excreta now showed only a

few fully formed cancer cells, but heaps of destroyed cancer cells and non-

motile T-bodies. At the end of four weeks, the T-reaction of the blood on

autoclavation was only 5%, or, in other words, a B-reaction of 95%.

  Her pains had already decreased considerably after the fifth irradiation.

The patient was able to get through the night with only one codeine tablet,

which had never been possible before, and she was able to sleep. After the

twelfth  orgone  irradiation,  she  stopped  using  the  rectal  suppositories,  and

during  the  following  six  weeks  she  needed  to  use  them  only  twice.  In

addition, she no longer took codeine. Her appetite improved, but she did not

put on any weight.

  On  May  29  examination  of  rectal  excretions  showed  total  absence  of

formed cancer cells and the presence only of cancer detritus, non-motile T-

bodies, etc. The excretion was no longer gray but brownish, an indication of

disintegrated blood from the tumor.

  After the twelfth orgone irradiation, itching of the anus occurred. The

patient perspired freely in the accumulator and her skin lost its pallor. She

was  free  of  pain,  slept  well,  walked  about,  and  enjoyed  the  company  of

friends, etc.

  The patient continued the treatment with short interruptions until July 28,

1941. She was still free of pain and felt well. At the beginning of August she

stopped coming for treatment. In the middle of September she told me overthe telephone that she still had no pain and felt well, but that she could no

longer come for treatment. On September 30 I wrote a letter to her relatives

refusing to accept any responsibility for the future fate of the patient. I then

discovered  that  it  was  her  neurosis  that  prevented  her  from  coming  for

treatment. Ever since puberty she had suffered from severe claustrophobia

and for that reason was unable to use the subway to come to our laboratory.

Her relationship to her close relatives was extraordinarily poor. Frequently I

had the impression that their deep, unconscious hatred actually made them

hope for her early death. They had no time for her and made the fact that she

was a burden so clear that, in her quiet, resigned state, she no longer asked to

be brought to the laboratory by car. I knew she was doomed, but I could do

nothing. The family situation could not be overcome, and I did not feel free

to give the patient an accumulator to use at home because her own physician

was  hostile,  even  though  on  May  24  he  had  admitted  to  her  brother  the

improvement in her condition. When the patient had first begun the orgone

treatment, this physician had threatened to report me to the police and refused

to let me have the patient’s case history. During the summer of 1942 I heard

that the patient had died.

  Her death was clearly due to the shrinking biopathy. Her condition had

been greatly alleviated for a number of months by the orgone treatment, and

her life prolonged by about one year. This case showed, however, that orgone

therapy is not independent of social and family conditions.


2. OPEN QUESTIONS CONCERNING ORGONE THERAPY

                                  FOR CANCER


Orgone  therapy  will  be  capable  of  eliminating  a  series  of  cancerous

afflictions or preventing their development, but it will never be able to master

the cancer scourge by itself. Orgone therapy is only one of the sex-economic

measures in the struggle against biopathies. Orgone energy can charge tissues

and bring about expansion of the vital apparatus. But when the social milieucontinually forces the organism into contraction, resignation, shrinking, etc.,

then the use of orgone energy is like trying to fill a bottomless barrel with

water.

  For classification let us separate the specific use of orgone energy from

the more general social measures involved in the therapeutic process. The

practicing physician will be interested only in the therapeutic application of

orgone energy. But he must never lose sight of the general social causation of

biopathies if he wishes to treat the human organism as a product of both

biological and social influences.

  Orgone therapy for cancer offers several advantages over the methods of

radium and X-ray irradiation and surgery. It is true that irradiation with X-

rays can halt the growth of a tumor temporarily. But this kind of treatment is

accompanied by a general biological weakening of the organism. It reduces

the appetite and causes nausea and vomiting. Its effects are local and have no

beneficial influence on the shrinking biopathy. The results obtained by local

radium  irradiation  are  better,  but  they  are  still  superficial  and,  like  X-ray

treatment,  leave  the  biopathy  untouched.  Surgical  extirpation  of  a  tumor

admittedly  has  a  radical  local  effect,  but  does  not,  however,  impede  the

development of metastases or in any way modify the general process.

  By contrast, orgone therapy has the tremendous advantage of applying a

body-own  energy  that  can  reach  every  part  of  the  body  by  way  of  the

bloodstream.  The  orgonotic  charging  of  the  erythrocytes  fulfills  two

important tasks at one stroke: the general expansion of the organism and the

establishment  of  the  organism’s  own  defense  forces  against  the  T-

intoxication. Provided the disintegration in the organism is not too advanced,

there  is  usually  an  increase  of  appetite,  halt  in  weight  loss  and  even  an

increase in weight, reduction of nausea and pains, and strengthening of the

blood reactions. The tumor is not immediately destroyed. The first effect is

shown in the invigoration of the blood. The attack of the blood upon the

tumor and upon the systemic T-infection does not take place until the generalbiological invigoration has reached a certain level. Therefore, the excretion of

liquefied tumor masses, in the form of a brownish red liquid, does not occur

for some weeks, and the T-cultures from the blood do not become negative

until after weeks of treatment. In many cases with biologically weakened

blood and severe anemia, a fresh supply of young erythrocytes develops prior

to the attack on the tumor; this process can be observed microscopically.

Breast tumors have been known to disappear after about two to three weeks.

  Our experience so far indicates that no matter where they are localized,

the tumors always soften. As gratifying as this is, the fact remains that the

cancer  therapy  becomes  complicated  precisely  by  the destruction  of  the

tumors in cases where the detritus cannot be absorbed or eliminated. The

process is familiar to us from our experiments on mice. Orgonotically strong

blood flows into the tumor and the cancer tissue disintegrates. Large blood-

filled cavities develop, which can even enlarge the tumor. A brown, non-

putrid fluid composed of gigantic masses of inactive T-bodies collects in the

cavities, exactly as in the case of orgone-treated mice. This can be observed

microscopically  by  a  study  of  the  excreta.  The  outcome  of  the  case  now

depends upon whether or not these enormous masses of waste materials of

destroyed cancer tissue can be eliminated from the organism. A brain tumor

in a woman was destroyed within two weeks. The intracranial pressure was

reduced;  the  peripheral  signs  receded.  But  the  tumor  detritus  clogged  the

lymph glands of the neck and the patient died, according to the report of her

doctor, of suffocation from glottis edema.

  Another  woman,  who  had  a  stomach  tumor  the  size  of  an  apple,

responded  extremely  well  to  our  orgone  therapy.  The  tumor,  which  was

palpable, softened and became noticeably smaller. But, after eight weeks, the

renal  passages  became  clogged;  her  legs  became  edematous,  the  heart

became affected, and the patient died of cardiac decompensation. In the case

of  this  particular  patient,  the  excretion  of  the  waste  products  through  the

intestines was theoretically possible, but the patient suffered from chronicconstipation.  Consequently  the  intestines  were  unable  to  handle  the

elimination,  and  most  of  the  waste  products  were  absorbed  into  the

bloodstream.

  A third woman, who had an ovarian tumor, died of kidney complications

after  reacting  to  the  orgone  therapy  with  improvement  of  her  general

condition and with softening and recession of the tumor.

  In the case of a five-year-old boy with an adrenal tumor and metastases in

the spine, the X-ray pictures showed calcification of the bone defects after

four weeks, and the primary tumor in the left adrenal gland was no longer

palpable after two weeks of treatment. But the decomposed tumor pulp from

the spine clogged the spinal canal and the boy developed a flaccid paralysis

of  the  legs.  He  died  later  of  hypertrophic  degeneration  of  the  liver,  an

apparent outcome of the failure of the process of elimination.

    Enlargement of the liver with degeneration of the liver cells and clogging

of  the  renal  passages  are  the  most  frequent  and  typical  results  of  the

destruction of the tumor in cases where the destroyed tumorous tissue mass is

not eliminated quickly and easily. We do not yet know any answer to this

problem. It is correct but not very helpful to say that the tumor should not be

allowed to grow beyond a certain size. Ways and means have to be found to

deal with these secondary manifestations in cases that come for treatment so

late. I would like to remind the reader that none of the cancer patients treated

in the Orgone and Cancer Research Laboratory came to us immediately after

discovery of the tumor. All had spent two or more years in other forms of

treatment; all were terminal cases. We therefore do not know whether many

tumors  would  not  disappear  without  such  secondary  manifestations  if  the

patients came to us immediately after discovery of the tumor. With smaller

tumors, the mass of waste material would also be smaller and the danger of

clogging the excretory passages therefore reduced.

  It should be stressed here that the biological strength of the blood cannot

be judged according to its hemoglobin content. We have encountered caseswhere the hemoglobin content was 80% and the T-reaction on autoclavation

100%.  Since  it  is  the  T-  and  B-reactions  of  the  blood  that  indicate  its

biological resistance, they must be regarded as essentially independent of the

iron content of the blood.

  In addition, I would like to consider briefly a few sex-economic problems

in orgone therapy for cancer which have great practical importance. We are

now  aware  that  sexual  resignation  is  active  in  the  background  of  the

carcinomatous  shrinking  biopathy.  Patients  come  to  us,  therefore,  with  a

pronounced libido deficiency. Orgone treatment brings about a reduction of

the pains and an orgonotic charging of the blood system. These two effects

lead in many cases to a reawakening of sexual excitation. If the repressions

and armoring are very marked, the patient will not be aware of the sexual

excitation.  He  will  express  it  in  a  way  understandable  only  to  the  sex-

economist, namely in the appearance of acute anxiety, in genital spasms, in

“heaviness” in the thigh and pelvic musculature, or simply by fleeing from

the “weird” orgone radiation (which happened in two cases). In other cases,

where the sexual life had not completely ceased and where the patient was

still having sexual intercourse (though without orgastic potency, of course),

the  difficulties  were  more  easily  approached.  Here  the  disturbance  in  the

sexual life mostly takes the form of harmful practices and inhibitions as a

consequence of ignorance. For instance, a man with cancer of the rectum

developed  pains  in  the  testicles  and  spermatic  ducts  after  his  general

condition had improved. He attributed the new pains to his disease, but I

recognized  their  stasis  character  and  was  able  to  relieve  them.  His  wife

refused  him  sexual  intercourse.  He  was  too  sick  to  look  for  gratification

elsewhere  and  masturbation  did  not  occur  to  him.  During  a  consultation,

attended also by his brother, who was very understanding, he realized that his

pains  were  caused  by  genital  stasis  and  that  his  only  recourse  was  to

masturbation. After a short time, the pains disappeared.

  Another patient suffering from cancer of the urinary bladder sporadicallydeveloped violent pains in the pelvis, different from the pains caused by the

tumor before the orgone treatment. I tried to obtain a clear picture of his

sexual situation. For fifteen years the man had not had any sexual intercourse

with  his  wife  and  for  the  past  five  years  he  had  experienced  no  sexual

gratification at all. I cannot say for sure whether this stasis had any direct

influence  upon  the  development  of  the  bladder  cancer,  but  it  could  be

assumed that it did. I discussed the matter with him and he realized it was

imperative  to  eliminate  the  genital  stasis.  His  pains  then  disappeared  so

rapidly  that  there  could  be  no  doubt  about  the  connection.  All  the  more

incomprehensible therefore is the medical attitude expressed in a review of

the  first  issue  of  our  journal:  “One  may  reasonably  object  to  the

recommendation to practice masturbation in order to achieve relaxation of the

genital apparatus.” Why should there be such an objection? I do not believe

there can be any rational argument against this measure. Moreover, I am of

the opinion that much more attention should be paid to the pains and stasis

conditions in the genital apparatus of cancer patients, as the two cases just

mentioned so clearly reveal.

  The  greatest  difficulty  confronting  orgone  treatment  of  cancer  is  the

general  biopathic  background  of  the  disease.  The  shrinking  of  the  entire

autonomic  system  touches  upon  the  very  roots  of  the  life  functions.  We,

therefore, have to be prepared for great difficulties in any efforts to deal with

this problem. The reader will no doubt have weighed the significance of the

findings in the cancer case described in the chapter on “The Carcinomatous

Shrinking Biopathy”: the organism shrank even after the local tumors had

been eliminated.  This  outcome  shifted  the  whole  emphasis  of  the  cancer

problem from the local tumor to the general shrinking. But, in this area, it is a

question  not  only  of  biological  problems  but  of  social  and  sex-economic

problems as well. It is as yet too early to say to what extent, if any, orgone

therapy can counteract the tendency to general shrinking. It will probably

depend on whether and to what degree the general sex-economic way of lifeof the patient can be improved. Additional practical experiences are needed

before any conclusive observations can be made.

  I have so far been reporting only the difficulties of orgone therapy and the

problems  impeding  it.  Let  us  now  turn  to  its  achievements,  which  are

unequivocal and gratifying:

  Case S. T., forty-two years old, came for orgone therapy on April 30,

1941. In February 1938 she had undergone a radical mastectomy of the left

breast for cancer. Two months after leaving the hospital, tumors developed

on each leg below the knees. The pains were severe and it was difficult for

her to walk. She therefore stayed in bed most of the time. Even before the

mastectomy, she had suffered from “rheumatic” pains in the legs. Her big

toes had felt “numb.” She had also suffered, for years, from “pulling” pains

in the arms, fingertips, and in the neck. Headaches and dizzy spells had been

a constant source of suffering long before the operation. She suffered also

from obstipation. She had been through five premature deliveries and three

miscarriages. Due to X-ray treatment, menstruation had ceased six months

prior to her coming to us. The leg tumors were growing slowly but steadily.

The pains always intensified when the weather was bad. Her arms were so

weak that she often had to support one with the other when lifting something.

Ever since her breast operation, her left arm had been swollen and painful.

  Here before us was the typical disease history of a biopathy. Examination

confirmed this picture. The entire neck musculature was severely hypertonic.

The thorax was held high, expiration was almost completely inhibited, the

neck  was  rigid  and  held  in  an  attitude  of  defiance.  The  abdominal

musculature was hard and could not be pressed in. The leg tumors were about

the size of walnuts.

  Blood test: Hemoglobin 80%; autoclavation test and Gram stain showed a

40%  T-reaction.  T-cultures  were  +  +  +,  with  numerous  rot  bacteria.  The

erythrocytes were pale, with narrow orgone margin, but without T-spikes.

Disintegration occurred within five minutes.  Vaginal secretion: T-bacilli, + + +, with numerous rot bacteria and T-

bacilli visible microscopically.

  By May 4 she was able to walk better. The feeling of numbness in her

arms and legs disappeared. The leg tumors were visibly smaller. On May 6

her physician confirmed the reduction in the size of the tumors and advised

the patient to continue her treatment with us. She wrote to her son about the

noticeable improvement in her condition. She was no longer bedridden, in

fact, was able to walk around and do a little shopping. By May 7 the tumor

below the left knee had disappeared and the tumor below the right knee was

scarcely palpable. Her reactions in the accumulator intensified: she began to

perspire warmly, indicating that a vagotonic response had been achieved. Her

weight remained constant at about 173 lbs.

  X-ray findings: Before coming to us, there were numerous shadowy areas

in the bony structures, especially in the pelvic bones. On June 20, 1941, the

X-rays showed considerable lightening of these dark areas, especially in the

pelvis. The knees were normal.

  The patient remained almost free of pain during the subsequent months,

she no longer required morphine, lost no weight, and was able to do her

housework  without  difficulty.  She  discontinued  the  orgone  treatment  in

December  1941.  In  January  1943  she  was  still  alive  and  well.  It  is  not

possible to predict if the cancerous process will set in again. It should be

noted that the patient did not have an accumulator at home.

  Case F. H., a forty-five-year-old man, came to our laboratory on April 19,

1941. One year before, a pulling pain which “choked him” had developed in

the chest. Since then he had lost 25 lbs. He could no longer eat solid foods

and could take fluids only by the teaspoonful, and with great difficulty at that.

He  suffered  from  a  diaphragmatic  tic  (“hiccups”)  and  insomnia,  and  he

quickly became extremely tired when working. The emotional nature of this

case  was  described  in  the  chapter  on  “The  Carcinomatous  Shrinking

Biopathy.”  The diagnosis by the patient’s physician was inoperable cancer of the

esophagus, with almost total constriction of the lumen, confirmed by X-ray.

The epigastrium was tense and the patient suffered from severe constipation.

The thorax did not move with respiration. He weighed 144 lbs.

  Blood  Test:  Hemoglobin,  70%,  T-culture,  +  +  +,  T-reactions,  95%.

Erythrocytes with T-spikes showed immediate bionous disintegration, then

transformed into small erythrocytes with homogenous cytoplasm.

  The  patient’s  reaction  to  the  orgone  accumulator  was  immediate  and

strong: warm perspiration, reddening of the skin, a feeling of fogginess after

twenty minutes’ exposure.

  On April 28 the hemoglobin was 85% and remained at that level for the

following  months.  Over  the  same  period  of  time,  the  patient’s  weight

increased by about 5 lbs. His fatigue was gone, and he was able to swallow

soft solids (tenderized meat, noodle soup, etc.). The T-reaction on May 9th

was only 10%. The choking feeling had disappeared; he slept well and was

able  to  work  without  tiring.  The  skin  became  tanned.  The  patient  was

extremely  happy  and  grateful.  The  orgone  treatment  lasted  approximately

twelve  weeks.  Two  years  later  the  patient  was  still  alive  and  working.

However, in this case, too, a relapse could occur.


Summary


Altogether, thirteen cases of cancer diagnosed at hospitals and given X-ray

treatment and two cases I diagnosed were closely observed and treated with

orgone irradiation. All cases, when accepted, were already in advanced stages

of cachexia. In every case the cancer pains were alleviated and the use of

morphine  was  considerably  reduced,  in  some  cases  even  eliminated.

Recession of the tumors and improvement of the general condition of the

blood and the weight factor were achieved in every case. Breast tumors were

eliminated in all cases; reduction of size and softening occurred in all other

tumors.  In four cases, X-rays showed calcification of the bone defects. In most

cases, elimination of the destroyed tumor material was successful. In three

cases, the orgone treatment did not improve life expectancy. In six cases, the

orgone treatment delayed the process of death by five to twelve months and

made the last few months of life considerably more bearable. In six cases, the

process of shrinking was halted. In six cases, the capability for working was

restored. Five out of fourteen cases diagnosed as inoperable and terminal

were still living two years after the orgone treatment was completed, and

were in tolerable to good condition. In one case, the orgone treatment had no

effect in eliminating ascitic fluid in the abdominal cavity.

  These results were encouraging even if far from satisfactory, and made us

feel a responsibility toward continuation of the work. Compared with the

condition of the patients before they began the orgone treatment, the results

must  be  regarded  as surprisingly  good.  However,  the  problem  of  the

elimination of the destroyed tumor pulp remains unsolved.

  The results confirmed the fundamental correctness of the bion research

and, in addition, formed the juncture at which the T-mice experiments, the

orgone blood tests, the tension-charge formula, and the findings to date in

orgone biophysics proved to be correct and consequential.


      3. FIVE YEARS’ EXPERIENCE WITH PHYSICAL

                              ORGONE THERAPY


It seems appropriate at this time to offer a brief summary of the results I

obtained over a period of five years with the application of physical orgone

therapy  in  diseases  other  than  cancer.  As  astonishing  as  the  therapeutic

successes have been, equally great has been the mystical expectation that any

new form of therapy tends to inspire in the general public. People expect to

be freed of all misery, cured of every ailment, and even to be provided access

immediately  and  effortlessly  to  some  earthly  paradise.  Physical  orgone

therapy,  i.e.,  the  specific  use  of  the  orgone  energy  accumulator,  is  farremoved from such views. It works with a new form of energy discovered

only a few years ago and not yet sufficiently investigated and tested, namely

cosmic  orgone  energy.  Caution  is  therefore  essential.  Honest  physicians,

genuinely dedicated to their profession, are so disillusioned by the raucous

propaganda of the pharmaceutical industry and so mistrustful of all kinds of

“cures”  that  a  genuine  new  therapy  has  difficulty  gaining  acceptance.

Moreover,  classical  medicine  is  helpless  in  the  face  of  biopathies,  the

diseases of the autonomic life apparatus which no drugs can affect. Orgone

energy, on the other hand, has proven its effectiveness with precisely these

diseases. For that reason, as the reader will understand, I took steps to keep

orgone therapy outside the framework of everyday routine clinical practice,

mainly to avoid certain temptations and mistakes:


  1.  In  all  my  publications  on  the  subject  of  the  cancer  biopathy,  I  emphasized  the  deep-

    rootedness of cancer and the failures of our treatment compared to isolated astonishing

    successes. In traditional medicine the failures are not talked about.

  2. The use of orgone accumulators was removed from all suspicion of profiteering by the

    creation of a foundation administered as a charitable organization.

  3.  Use  of  the  usual  propaganda  methods  for  bringing  the  therapy  before  the  public  was

    avoided.

  4.  No  cure  was  promised  the  users  of  the  orgone  accumulator.  The  decision  about  its

    effectiveness was left to the patient.


  Physical orgone therapy is applied in the following ways:


      IRRADIATION OF THE TOTAL ORGANISM IN THE

                        ORGONE ACCUMULATOR


The patient sits in the orgone accumulator once or twice daily with or without

clothes.  According  to  the  individual’s  receptivity,  the  duration  of  the

irradiation will vary between fifteen and forty-five minutes. Some persons are

strongly orgonotic and feel the effects after only five minutes or so. Others

who suffer from anorgonia may need a full hour or more before they feel thesensations of heat and prickling. The full therapeutic effect is provided only

with regular, daily use, and in the case of anorgonotic patients, not until after

two  to  three  weeks  of  regular  use.  People  whose  orgone  energy  field  is

restricted at first feel nothing at all. Sensations increase in relation to the

extent to which the organism becomes charged.

    Indications  of  a  full  reaction  of  the  organism  to  orgone  treatment  are

subjective  sensations  of  warmth,  sometimes  intensifying  to  heat;  warm

perspiration; reddening of the skin, frequently in the face and neck but also

elsewhere  on  the  body;  prickling  and  tingling  sensations;  objectively

measurable rise in temperature; disappearance of tensions and pains.

  To date, total irradiation of the organism has shown the following results

when the accumulator was used regularly over a period of several months:

  Anemias were eliminated within three to six weeks. This effect is one of

the most definite findings. To the practiced medical eye, the disappearance of

the anemia is accompanied by a clearly perceptible improvement of the blood

circulation in the skin; the skin tans and no longer feels clammy or leathery.

The tendency to contract colds is reduced in almost all cases. Colds that do

occur are less frequent and less severe. Similarly, the disposition to “chills,”

which has little to do with viruses but does reveal a close connection with the

atmospheric orgone conditions, is also reduced.

  In  a  few  cases,  including  my  own,  additional  irradiations  each  day

succeeded in nipping various diseases in the bud or in greatly reducing their

effect. During the flu epidemic in New York in the winter of 1945–1946, for

example,  I  suffered  from  the  illness  for  only  about  twelve  hours  and  my

temperature never rose above 100° F. Other experimental subjects reported a

similar brevity of the flu attack and mildness of symptoms. It is clear how

significant  this  finding  could  be  for  the  prevention  of  pneumonia  as  a

consequence of severe flu.

  A  very  gratifying  and  promising  effect  is  the  lowering  of  the  blood

pressure in vascular hypertension. This effect is explained by the vagotonicinfluence of orgone energy. It was observed in only four cases and requires

detailed study.

  Orgone  radiation  has  proved  beneficial  in  cases  where  an  indefinable

condition of weakness—referred to in orgone biophysics as an anorgonotic

attack—impedes the life of the affected person. In cases where the anorgonia

was accompanied by symptoms indicative of a tendency to cancerous tissue

putrefaction, orgone therapy has almost always achieved successful results.

The  success  is  reflected  particularly  clearly  in  the  improvement  of  the

biological  blood  test  reactions,  in  the  change  from  a  T-reaction  to  a  B-

reaction.

  Several years ago, at the beginning of my experiments, I thought that

while orgone energy might well exert a favorable influence upon the tissues,

it could have no influence where structural changes had already taken place. I

therefore felt that the accumulator would not be effective in cases of arthritis

where there are marked contractures and joint changes. During the summer of

1944 I was called to examine an old, sick man in Rangeley, Maine. He had

been suffering for many years from severe arthritis, and for the past few years

had  been  totally  bedridden.  When  I  saw  him  my  first  reaction  was  a

disinclination to take on his case. His knees were fixed in the bent position.

He was unable to walk and could manage only to shuffle along with stiff

knees.  He  was  emaciated,  pale,  severely  anemic,  and  close  to  death.  His

finger  joints  were  rigid  and  typically  deformed.  The  family  asked  me  to

attempt  to  treat  him  despite  the  apparent  hopelessness  of  his  condition.  I

made it clear to them that I did not think anything could be done for him but

that if they wanted to try, they should. I sent an orgone accumulator to their

house, free of charge. For several months I heard nothing more from them.

Then, during the winter, I received news that the patient was feeling better,

stronger; his appetite had improved considerably and, in addition, he was able

occasionally to get out of bed and walk around in his room. The next contact

was in the summer of 1945, when I was in Rangeley again and visited thefamily. I scarcely dared to trust my own eyes and ears: I had the feeling of

having  become  one  of  those  mystical  faith  healers.  The  old  man  was  no

longer confined to bed, but was walking about the house with almost no

restrictions in his movements. His face had a ruddy color, having completely

lost its former pallor. I learned he had really started to get around just a few

weeks  before,  had  taken  walks  in  the  yard,  no  longer  suffered  from

constipation, ate well, and in general was in fine spirits. When he saw me, the

man  began  to  cry.  I  must  emphasize  categorically  that  there  can  be  no

question  of  suggestion  or  the  like.  In  the  first  place,  suggestion  cannot

influence advanced arthritis; in the second, I had spoken to the patient only

once and had told him expressly that I did not believe in the possibility of a

cure in his case; and in the third, I had not seen the patient, nor spoken to

him, for almost a year.

  It was entirely the work of the orgone accumulator that was responsible

for  the  changes  in  the  patient’s  condition.  A  few  weeks  later  the  patient

visited me at my laboratory, about ten miles from his home. He was deeply

grateful and took a touching interest in our work.

  I have treated only three cases of angina pectoris, one chronic, severe case

and two milder ones. In all three cases, orgone therapy was successful in

exerting an ameliorative effect. The patient with the chronic affliction had

less frequent attacks and was able to stop taking drugs for a lengthy period,

although he was not completely cured. In the other cases, all the symptoms

disappeared after a few months of orgone irradiation.

  I would like to reserve my account of the effect of orgone treatment in

                                                2
cases of schizophrenia for another context.

  I shall now relate the interesting case of a female patient who was able to

avoid a dangerous operation as a result of orgone therapy. Physicians had

found a growth in her descending colon and had diagnosed it as a probable

cancer  tumor  and  advised  surgery.  The  patient  had  heard  of  my  cancer

experiments and wanted my opinion before undergoing the operation.  My examination by fluoroscope and palpation confirmed the presence of

a hard tumor the size of a walnut in the middle of the descending colon. The

tumor was movable. However, the orgone-physical blood tests yielded no

trace of cancerous degeneration. I therefore advised the patient, who also

suffered from obstipation, to postpone the operation until we had established

the  nature  of  the  growth  with  the  aid  of  orgone  irradiation.  I  knew  from

experience that it could be a localized spastic knot, and that such spasms can

often be relieved by orgone therapy.

  The patient was provided with an accumulator in her home. Eight days

later  I  saw  her  again;  the  tumor  was  no  longer  palpable.  I  had  correctly

surmised that the “tumor” was nothing more than a simple spasm. But since

chronically spastic tissue can degenerate into cancer, I advised the patient to

be careful and to use the accumulator regularly. She thus avoided the dreadful

operation and was very grateful. Her obstipation was also mitigated and her

total functioning improved. Such cases are gratifying and reassuring.

  I would now like to add that children enjoy using the accumulator from a

very  early  age.  At  the  beginning  of  my  experiments,  I  tended  to  advise

pregnant women against the use of the accumulator, since I did not know

what  effects  orgone  irradiation  might  have  upon  the  embryo  and  the

functioning of the uterus. The first experiment with the orgone irradiation of

a pregnant woman was conducted in my own home. I am grateful to my wife

for  having  taken  the  risk.  However,  as  a  responsible  co-worker  in  the

laboratory, she said she was prepared to venture the experiment, true to the

principle of our Institute that anything recommended to others must have

been tried out first on one of us. The success of the orgone irradiation during

pregnancy was marked. The mother felt strong and vigorous throughout her

pregnancy. The child was lively, and the attending gynecologist stated that

the fetal heartbeat was unusually strong. The child today clearly exhibits the

biological effects of the orgone irradiation; he is tall for his age and enjoys

extraordinary physical health.ON THE LOCAL USE OF ATMOSPHERIC ORGONE ENERGY


We can retain the principle of the orgone accumulator, while changing its

form, by using a tube instead of a box. The most suitable material for this

purpose is BX cable pipe used for the housing of electrical wiring. The tube

should be covered on the outside with an organic substance, such as wool or

insulating  tape,  and  one  end  then  inserted  into  an  accumulator  built  as

follows:  a  wooden  frame  with  sides  about  8  inches  long  covered  on  the

outside with celotex and on the inside with thin sheet metal, with a mixture of

steel wool and fiber glass or similar non-metallic material between the sheet

metal and the celotex. The intermediate layer absorbs the atmospheric orgone

energy readily and transmits it rapidly into the enclosed space of the interior.

From there the concentrated orgone energy flows through the metal tube. A

small metal funnel is attached to the free end of the tube and held close to the

area requiring irradiation. Although further experience will no doubt suggest

many adjustments, I tend daily to irradiate myself and other persons used as

experimental subjects as follows: cardiac region, two to five minutes; root of

the nose, about four minutes; mouth cavity, about five minutes; eyes with lids

closed, from a half to a full minute; ear at the mastoid bone, one to two

minutes; solar plexus region, three minutes.

  The organism attracts orgone energy from the accumulator to itself and

after a few minutes (the length of time differs from person to person) distinct

sensations of warmth and prickling are felt at the place being irradiated.

  The inside of the nose can be irradiated with thin glass tubes about 10

centimeters  long  filled  with  steel  wool.  The  inside  of  the  vagina  can  be

irradiated in a similar way. Microscopic examination shows that rot bacteria

are immobilized by the radiation after about one minute. Irradiation of the

vagina is not tolerable for more than about thirty seconds; a strong burning

sensation usually occurs.

  Burns and wounds heal very quickly with local orgone irradiation, and in

many cases it is possible to actually observe the healing process. Bedsorescan also be treated successfully with orgone irradiation.

  The  powerful  healing  effect  of  orgone  energy  administered  locally  by

means of a tube was fully tested for the first time in the case of a sixty-year-

old man suffering from varicose ulcers. He had ulcers of various depths and

an  inflammatory  reaction  of  the  skin  over  both  tibias.  The  condition  had

existed for several years and the man had been treated for months at a time in

a number of hospitals without results. He was able to walk around only with

pain  and  his  ability  to  earn  a  living  (he  was  a  farmer)  was  considerably

reduced. His life savings had amounted to $400, of which he had already

spent $300 for medical treatment and hospital bills. He offered me his last

$100 to try to help him. Naturally I refused to take his money and I did not

promise him any “cure,” but I placed at his disposal one of the small “orgone

shooters.” Actually I had no hope for his improvement. During the first four

weeks there was no change despite orgone irradiations several times each

day. Then, the ulcers began to heal. The skin became smoother and after six

more weeks looked normal. Both legs healed. They showed a tendency to

relapse, but the patient was able to halt every incipient tissue breakdown with

additional, intensive irradiation. This poor farmer spread the story of “the

miracle  of  his  healing”  all  over  the  countryside.  His  gratitude  and  the

restoration of his ability to earn his livelihood were very rewarding.

  This particular success was talked about so much in Maine that during the

summer of 1945 a young man came to see me from Augusta. He too was

suffering from deep leg ulcers, which in this case were dry with necrotic

margins and anemic surroundings and were about 2 cm. deep and 3 cm. wide.

It seemed a hopeless case. The patient took a small orgone shooter home with

him  and  was  soon  able  to  determine  for  himself  the  correct  duration  of

irradiation sessions. After only two weeks, he made the 80-mile journey from

his home to see me again. The ulcers had reddened, were separating from the

surface, and showed considerable secretion. At the bottom and around the

edges of the ulcers, regenerative tissue was clearly noticed.  Four months later he wrote me that one of the ulcers was healed and in

the other the crater had disappeared, though without as yet having formed a

new skin membrane.

  Since varicose ulcers tend to defy every kind of therapy, this success with

the use of the orgone accumulator was all the more astonishing. It is just as

astonishing that the physicians who saw these results did nothing to make the

orgone energy accumulator generally available. Every physician, it seems,

waits for the others to “accept it officially.” This attitude is incomprehensible

and pernicious.

  In this particular case, I later learned that the patient had resisted use of

the  large  accumulator,  which  I  had  prescribed  in  addition  to  the  local

“shooter.” Furthermore, although I had warned against it, he continued to

wear an elastic bandage on the leg that had not yet healed. I realized that

without the general charging of the organism through the use of the large

accumulator, the local healing would be limited.

  Violent pains also disappear when the injured part is exposed to local

                                                                                          3
orgone irradiation. A worker employed in building the laboratory at Orgonon

cut his ankle to the bone with an axe. The pain was so severe that the man

was near fainting. I immediately irradiated the wound, and after two minutes

the pain ceased. I then dressed the wound and he was driven to a physician in

Rangeley for further treatment.

  With burns, too, the pain is promptly alleviated. My concept of the nature

of pain is that the autonomic nerves pull back from the damaged spot; in

other words, they literally “pull” at the tissues. The disappearance of the pain

seems to be ascribable to the fact that under the influence of orgone energy

the nerves again stretch out, so that the “pulling” ceases. I am, of course,

ready to accept any other interpretation if it explains the phenomenon better

than mine does.


  LOCAL ORGONE IRRADIATION BY MEANS OF EARTH                                        BIONS


The  old  treatment  that  made  use  of  mud  packs  was  actually  very  well

founded: mud is bionous earth and therefore rich in orgone energy. However,

mud is not always easily available and its application is laborious and messy.

A  new  way  to  administer  the  biological  energy  present  in  humus  was

discovered during Experiment XX.

  In  this  preparation,  we  obtain  three  simultaneous  results.  First,  the

orgone-rich  water,  which  we  use  to  further  growth;  second,  the  flakes

produced by freezing the orgone water, which theoretically are of crucial

importance  for  an  understanding  of  primary  biogenesis;  and  third,  the

bionous earth itself. We collect the earth bions that remain when the orgone

water is filtered and preserve them in a dry condition. We then put them into

thin linen bags of various sizes and sew them closed. Treatment consists of

moistening one of these small packets of bionous earth and applying it to the

painful or inflamed spot. The pain subsides rapidly and, since orgone energy

is  being  administered  from  the  outside,  the  organism  is  spared  a  certain

amount of systemic effort in not having to expend its own energy in dealing

with the inflammation at the affected spot. Experience so far suggests that an

irradiation  of  thirty  seconds  to  a  minute  is  sufficient.  Longer  irradiation

causes violent inflammation in some patients and should be avoided. This

method of administering orgone energy seems also to relax local spasms; but

before its efficacy can be properly judged, more experiences are needed.

    Experiments  with  the  fourth  method  of  administering  orgone  energy,

namely by the ingestion or injection of orgone water, are still in progress.

There  is  no  question,  however,  that  it  produces  vagotonic  effects  and

accelerates the growth of animals and plants.

  To  summarize,  I  think  it  is  justifiable  to  claim  that  the  discovery  of

orgone  energy  and  its  medical  application  by  means  of  the  orgone

accumulator,  the  orgone  shooter,  bionous  earth,  and  orgone  water  have

opened up an abundance of new and, it appears, amazingly good prospects.Further investigations are of course necessary to establish the scope of the

medical applications of this newly discovered biological energy.

  Orgone therapy for cancer can claim today to have made the transition

from  an  experiment  to  an  essential  tool  for  general  practical  application.

Cancer  prevention,  however,  is  a  much  more  complex  problem,  both

technically and organizationally.                                      CHAPTER IX


Anorgonia in the Carcinomatous Shrinking Biopathy




1. A CONTRIBUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF CANCER

                                    PREVENTION


The concept of anorgonia encompasses those biopathic conditions that share

one common source, namely a block in plasma motility. This disturbance of

plasmatic functioning is unknown in classical pathology but is quite familiar

to  the  medical  practitioner  through  everyday  experience.  Mechanistic

pathology has not understood this disturbance because there are no structural

changes in the tissues or lesions of the nerve tracts; rather, there is a lowering

of  the  total  energy  function  of  the  organism.  There  are  various  ways  of

referring to anorgonia in the popular idiom. Words and phrases intended to

depict the emotional expression of an organism, such as “unalive,” “dead,”

“stiff,” “contactless,” “unattractive,” etc. (in contrast to “alive,” “sparkling,”

“warm,” “contactful,” etc.), actually communicate the impression made upon

us by another person. However, the concept of anorgonia, which is new and

                                                                                      1
introduced here for the first time, denotes more than just “contactlessness” or

“unaliveness.”  It  refers,  in  fact,  to  a  well-defined,  previously  unknown,

pathological condition of the organism which I have found to be especially

pronounced in cancer patients and in persons with a disposition to cancer.

  In order to describe anorgonia in the cancer biopathy, I must refer back to

a well-known finding of clinical sex-economy. Its significance for health and

disease can be much more profoundly understood today than it could before

the discovery of orgone energy. I am speaking of the stability of plasmatic

functioning in the healthy organism and of its opposite, the biopathic fallinganxiety.

  Let us briefly summarize what we have learned so far about the falling

anxiety in biopathic diseases. Falling anxiety is always present in cases of

character  neurosis  or  somatic  biopathy  and  manifests  itself  when  the

armoring  is  dissolved  and  orgastic  sensations  break  through.  “Orgonotic

sensation” is actually the subjective perception of the objective process of

“plasmatic excitation,” which we have previously described, in a mechanistic

way, as “vegetative current.” To us, the appearance of the falling anxiety is a

sure sign that plasmatic excitations and orgastic sensations are beginning to

be felt throughout the entire organism. Falling anxiety can manifest itself in

various ways, for example, as dizziness, “sinking” feelings, falling dreams,

pressure or pain in the gastric region, nausea and vomiting. These and similar

symptoms  are  all  typical  of  the  clinical  pattern  that  characterizes  the

breakdown of the armoring, which is accompanied by orgonotic sensations,

involuntary muscular spasms, cold shivers and hot flushes, prickling, itching,

etc.  The  psychic  manifestations  of  these  biological  symptoms  appear  as

overall anxiety or insecurity. Roughly speaking, the essential states of the

therapeutic  process  are  loosening  of  the  armor,  orgonotic  sensations,

breakdown  of  the  armor,  clonisms,  falling  anxiety,  intensified  plasmatic

excitation, and, finally, orgastic sensations in the genital apparatus.

  If the armoring is dissolved correctly, unpleasurable organ sensations will

gradually yield to pleasurable body experiences. We often hear patients who

have just experienced clonic convulsions say that they “feel better than ever

before.” However, if the armoring is not dissolved correctly layer by layer, if

rigid armor blocks remain or if the orgonotic currents are permitted to break

through  too  abruptly,  so  that  they  strike  too  harshly  against  the  still

undissolved  armor  layers,  the  patient  may  easily  react  with  complete

withdrawal into the old armoring. Fear of the plasmatic excitations (“pleasure

anxiety”) intensifies his biopathic rigidity. As a consequence of the markedly

increased  quantities  of  flowing  biological  energy,  the  patient  will  feeloverwhelmed by a sense of disorientation, to the point of sheer panic. This

condition can intensify even further and produce suicidal impulses. So much

for the known clinical phenomena.

  The falling anxiety may predominate in either the somatic or the psychic

realm. Most frequently it appears as a combination of both. In any case, the

appearance of symptoms of falling anxiety indicate to us a biopsychic crisis,

which is the first step toward health, in the sense of orgastic potency. If the

orgone  therapist  is  in  control  of  the  case,  the  presence  of  conspicuous

symptoms of falling anxiety should not alarm him.

  Falling  anxiety  is  not  dangerous  in  cases  of  pure  character  neuroses.

However, my experiences with a succession of patients having cancer or a

cancer disposition compel the conclusion that falling anxiety can appear as a

symptom of a deadly process. It is then indicative of a complete breakdown of

the plasma function in the biological core of the organism.

  The crucial element is obviously the depth of the biopathic disturbance.

The orgone therapist has to decide whether he is dealing with a superficial

disorientation of the organism during the transition from rigid to free-moving

functioning,  as  in  pure  character  neurosis,  or  whether  the  entire  plasma

functioning  is  oscillating  between pulsation  and non-pulsation,  as  in  the

carcinomatous  shrinking  biopathy.  These  two  conditions  are  not  sharply

delineated; the transitions are always fluid, and if the distinction between

mild and severe falling anxiety syndrome is to be made, the therapist must

develop a keen sensitivity for the fine transitions between the two. Actually,

the  carcinomatous  shrinking  biopathy  is  to  be  seen  as  nothing  but  a

particularly severe form of character neurosis, if we are logically consistent

and understand “character” to mean the biophysical mode of reaction of an

organism. Thus, resignation can spread from the superficial to the deep layers

of the biosystem and ultimately seize the cell plasma function itself.

  We now want to investigate the biophysical mechanism of conspicuous

falling anxiety in the cancer biopathy.  Whoever  has  attentively  studied  my  earlier  account  of  a  case  of  the

carcinomatous shrinking biopathy will have been struck by the crucial role

played in it by the biopathic falling anxiety. The patient in that case might

well have been able to maintain the health she had at first regained if only the

appearance of sexual excitations had not evoked severe falling anxiety. She

had actually collapsed in my office soon after becoming symptomatologically

free  of  cancer.  Her  legs  had  suddenly  failed  her.  From  then  on  she  was

bedridden, developed a phobic anxiety against getting up, thereby preventing

continuation of the orgone therapy, and she literally shrank to death within a

few months. I had not really been able to understand her falling anxiety and

knew only that sexual excitations had evoked it. The subsequent cancer cases

that have come under my care for experimental treatment have all displayed

this falling anxiety, with the same typical manifestations. I recognized these

manifestations more readily in the later cases and was closer to understanding

their biological basis, but I was still powerless to do much about treating the

condition. Nevertheless, it was justifiable to expect that further research into

the falling anxiety of the shrinking biopathy would probably result in the

development of therapeutic measures. This expectation was in fact confirmed

in two cases of cancer biopathy that were treated before having developed to

a hopeless stage. In all, I have been able to thoroughly observe the falling

anxiety in six cases of cancer and also, in its genesis, in an infant of four

weeks. I am not including here cases of the falling anxiety in pure character

neurosis. Of the six cancer cases, the two patients who came to me early

recovered, while the other four, who came when their cancer had reached an

advanced stage, died. I do not intend to present complete case histories but

simply  to  excerpt  those  parts  that  are  appropriate  to  the  diagnosis  of

anorgonia and to falling anxiety. The key to the problem was provided by the

case of falling anxiety observed in the infant.


      2. FALLING ANXIETY AS THE EXPRESSION OFPLASMATIC IMMOBILITY: ANORGONOTIC PARALYSIS


I would like first to compile the findings that make it possible to understand

the biopathic falling anxiety as an expression of plasmatic immobility. The

observed  cancer  patients  had  in  common  the  following  symptoms  of

plasmatic immobility:

  1. General  physical  debility.  This  condition  manifested  itself  as  a

disinclination to move and as sluggishness in every movement. There was a

strong tendency to want to remain lying down. It should be noted that the

disturbance of plasmatic motility had existed in each of these patients long

before there were even the slightest signs of the subsequent cancer. Three of

the six cases had exhibited a retardation of speech and movements since early

childhood.

  The falling anxiety was clearly demonstrated to me for the first time in

one particular case (first published in 1942). The patient reported that on a

certain occasion when she thought she was being followed by a young man,

her  legs  suddenly  failed  and  she  had  the  feeling  that  she  was  going  to

collapse.  Later,  in  the  terminal  stage  of  her  shrinking  biopathy,  her  legs

exhibited a marked atrophy, which had its basis in their previous weakness.

All the motor and sensory reflexes were intact. Fear of breaking her spine

was the reason the patient gave for constantly remaining in bed; but in my

account of the case I was able to show that the real cause of her fear was not a

mechanical pain in the vertebrae but the falling anxiety. The patient could be

made to walk. During the period of her recuperation she had walked around a

good deal, even though the deformation of the spine was irreversible. But

later she was incapable of moving her legs and she feared that movement

might cause some part of her body to break.

  2.  In  all  cases,  the  falling  anxiety  was  accompanied  by  a feeling  of

unsteadiness.  I  witnessed  the  same  disturbance  in  the  case  of  the

aforementioned infant while he was suffering from falling anxiety. If we look

for the connection between the two phenomena, it is more probable that thedisturbed sense of equilibrium causes the falling anxiety, and not vice versa.

The falling anxiety is the rational expression of a biopathic disturbance of

innervation, and not its cause. In a few cases it was a secondary threat to the

life of the patient, since it caused the interruption of therapy, increased the

atrophy  of  the  muscles,  and  caused  bedsores  that  accelerated  the  dying

process.

  One of the six cancer patients, who was suffering from cancer of the

prostate,  was  free  of  local  symptoms  for  some  time  as  a  consequence  of

orgone therapy (urine clear without cancer cells and T-bacilli, no local pain,

etc.), but his leg muscles became atrophic and he developed a functional

abasia.  The  motor  reflexes  also  were  normal  in  this  case.  During  the

summers of 1942 and 1943 I treated this patient daily for four months with

the orgone accumulator and a simplified vegetotherapy. In this way I was

able  to  study  carefully  the  peculiarities  of  the  paralysis.  After  the  local

prostatic tumor had been eliminated, the patient was able to walk around and

seemed to regain his health; he had no pain, developed an excellent appetite,

gained 7 lbs. in just a few weeks, was optimistic, and was even able to work.

One day, in the middle of this progress, his knees buckled under him and he

collapsed. All at once he had lost control of his legs and feet. “It’s as if the

life has suddenly gone out of my legs,” he said. From that point on, he was

unable  to  move  his  legs  and  had  to  stay  in  bed.  A  gradual,  progressive

shrinking of the muscle substance soon began in both legs. Two months later

he lost control of defecation and urination. A sensation of numbness was felt

in the legs and the perineal region and extended to the symphysis. His tactile

sensations were unimpaired, but his sensitivity to pain stimuli was blunted.

The urinary sphincter was spastic; the anal sphincter, on the other hand, was

flaccidly paralyzed. He was unable to urinate and could not hold his feces.

The localization of the sensory disturbance was not well defined; i.e., it did

not  correspond  precisely  to  a  specific  spinal  segment.  The  fact  that  the

trouble  was  caused  not  by  a  central  lesion  of  the  spinal  cord  but  by  abiopathic paralysis of the plasma periphery was evident not only because the

disturbance was irregular but also—and above all—because I had succeeded

in first reducing and finally eliminating the paralysis. The biopathic character

of the paralysis revealed itself only in the course of the orgone treatment of

the immobility; i.e., the falling anxiety and the disturbance of equilibrium

appeared only with the return of the patient’s ability to sit up and move his

legs.

  Before discussing this further, I must eliminate a few objections. It is

unlikely that the disturbance was of a mechanical nature. In the case of an

organic lesion in the spinal cord, e.g., a tumor at the spot corresponding to the

disturbance,  the  effects  would  have  persisted  and,  with  a  growing  tumor,

would  have  increased.  Diminution  of  the  disturbance  would  have  been

impossible. The fact that there were pains similar to those experienced in

neuritis might suggest a peripheral paralysis of the nerve. This is out of the

question,  however,  since  the  pains  were  eliminated  by  purely  orgone-

therapeutic measures. Besides, neuritis itself would have to be explained as a

symptom. With a mechanical lesion, peripheral or central, it would not have

been possible to modify or eliminate the anal control disturbance. Yet this

disturbance fluctuated with the general biopsychic condition of the patient.

When he was relaxed and optimistic, he was able to move his legs much

more easily and completely than during the periods when he felt hopeless.

  The localization of the tumor in the prostate was directly caused by eight

years of sexual abstinence. The subsequent spasm of the urinary sphincter

and the paralysis of the anal musculature were sympatheticotonic in nature

and according to our experience may be regarded as the direct cause of the

carcinomatous degeneration of the tissue. Moving out from this center at the

perineum, the biopathic paralysis spread in all directions and entirely affected

both legs, including the toes. Thanks to the orgone accumulator, the patient

did not develop any metastases. Torso and arms retained their mobility and

strength to the end. Only the legs showed evidence of wasting. Thus, theremust have been a specific reason for the localization of the paralysis in the

legs.

  During the summer of 1943 I treated the patient daily in order to restore

mobility to the legs. First, I moved the ankle to gradually relax the spasms of

the ankle musculature; then, day by day, I loosened up another small part of

the leg. The procedure caused the patient great pain, but he was soon able to

bend  and  stretch  the  toes,  ankles,  and  knees.  Then  I  treated  the  thigh

musculature, and finally the hips. After about four weeks of orgone therapy

he was able to move his knees and hip joints. Soon afterward he was able to

sit up in bed, which gave him new courage and strengthened his readiness to

fight his way to recovery.

  I now suggested that he try sitting in an easy chair. His reaction was

strange. He gave the impression of being enthusiastic but became evasive

when the moment actually came for him to make the change, saying that

perhaps he had better wait a while, etc. There could be no doubt of his fitness

to sit up in an easy chair, since he could sit up in bed without any difficulty. It

was clear he was afraid of moving from the bed to the chair, even though he

knew he would be supported by two strong persons and that nothing could

happen to him. To help him get used to the idea, I suggested that he sit on the

edge  of  the  bed.  He  was  hesitant  to  do  so.  We  helped  him,  holding  him

firmly. However, as soon as his legs were hanging free, he was overcome

with intense anxiety. He became pale and broke out in a cold sweat. He was

experiencing not pain but fear. After only half a minute he begged us to allow

him to lie down again. (I had witnessed precisely the same behavior in my

first cancer patient.)

  I asked him to precisely describe the sensations that had caused him to

abjectly beg to be allowed to lie down again. He told me that he felt very

insecure. His body felt numb from the hips down, as though it were not part

of him, as though it might “break at any moment.” He was terrified that he

might fall or be dropped and that his body would then break. He remembereda peculiar pathological condition that had afflicted him between the ages of

six  and  eighteen.  He  used  to  have  hard  work  to  do  in  the  woods  and

frequently his  knees  and  thighs  would  suddenly  fail  him  and  he  either

collapsed or had to sit down quickly. No doctor had been able to diagnose

this weakness, which would disappear only to come back several months

later.

  It is now clear to us that the later anorgonia of the lower part of the body

was  based  on  this  childhood  anorgonia.  The  anorgonia  thus  preceded  the

development of cancer by about sixty years. How such attacks of anorgonotic

weakness occur is not known. I should add here that the patient’s mother died

shortly after his birth. He had been brought up without love by foster parents,

who made him work hard even as a child.

  The  sensation  of  numbness  in  the  lower  part  of  the  body  had  been

dissolved by the orgone therapy, except for a spot the size of a small apple at

the root of the penis. Reaction to stimuli was normal. He experienced no pain

from movement of the joints; he was able, lying on his back in bed, to move

all  of  them  and  even  to  perform  dance-like  leg  movements.  His  panic  at

sitting up without support was therefore all the more baffling.

  To get him used to the idea, I now had him sit on the edge of the bed

every day for one or two minutes. This helped. After just eight more days his

falling anxiety had diminished so much that we were finally able to sit him in

a wheelchair and take him outside. The effects of lying in bed for several

months and the atrophy of the legs had caused him to lose the feeling of his

own body and with it his feeling of equilibrium. He had partially regained

this,  however,  by  the  practice  of  sitting  up,  so  that  the  falling  anxiety

disappeared.

    Translated into the language of orgone biophysics, the process took place

as follows: The biopathic shrinking process had almost destroyed orgonotic

motility and with it organ sensation, which fact supports the conclusion that

organ sensation is a direct expression of the motility of the organ plasma.When organ sensation is lost, what logically follow are a sense of alienation

of the body and the fear of falling and “breaking.” The feeling of numbness,

when the sensory motor reactions are present, can be interpreted in only one

way: Organ numbness is the subjective perception of objective immobility of

the  orgone  energy  in  the  affected  parts  of  the  body.  The  characteristic

accompanying feeling is similar to that of an organ that has “gone to sleep”

and has “pins and needles.” The anorgonia of our patient differed from the

condition  of  acute  organ  numbness  only  in  its  duration  and  its  biopathic

background. Otherwise it was the same.

  We must now ask how anorgonia is to be explained. Is it a loss of orgone

content  in  the  tissues  or  an immobility  of  tissue  orgone  energy,  i.e.,  a

restriction of orgonotic pulsation, without actual quantitative loss? Let us

postpone an answer.

  For several months more the patient did well. He even regained control

over defecation. Then bad weather set in and he experienced severe pains. To

alleviate them, a physician, hurriedly summoned, injected snake venom. In a

few days the patient was dead. It is possible he would have died anyway,

since  the  carcinomatous  shrinking  had  already  penetrated  deeply  into  the

organism. Nevertheless, tissue that is weak orgonotically has an extremely

low tolerance for poisonous substances. We have therefore made it a rule in

the treatment of cancer biopathies never to use chemical agents if they have a

sympatheticotonic effect on the vital apparatus or damage the tissue, even if

they alleviate pain. They intensify the anorgonia instead of eliminating it.

  I would now like to give a brief account of the case of a third cancer

patient, who also died. The tumor (histologically diagnosed as a sarcoma) had

developed  in  the  right  deltoid  muscle.  X-ray  treatment  had  effected  a

recession of the tumor but had also caused a third-degree burn 6 to 8 inches

square, a bad prognostic sign. The general biopathic condition of the patient

was  equally  disquieting.  The  skin  over  the  entire  body  was  sallow  and

clammy.  The  legs  were  cold  and  showed  a  condition  of  the  skin  nowidentifiable as anorgonotic: livid coloration, cold and clammy, no perceptible

orgone field. The patient was a very quiet, resigned person. He believed he

had made a mess of his life and had attained nothing. He was especially

concerned about his pelvis, which he felt was “numb” and “dead.” He had

actually wanted to come to me earlier, a full year before the emergence of the

tumor,  but  had  not  done  so  because  of  the  rumor  spread  by  some

psychoanalysts that I was insane. However, when the tumor appeared on his

right upper arm, confirming his old fears, he decided to undergo the orgone

therapy experiment. It is hard to say with certainty whether in this instance

the babble of irresponsible colleagues cost a human life, but I am personally

of the opinion that it did. Had the patient come to me a year earlier, he could

perhaps have been saved.

  The patient made good progress during the four months of continuous

physical and psychiatric orgone therapy. He emerged gradually from his shell

and on occasion even broke out in a rage, which he had never been able to do

before.  The  X-ray  burn  healed  quickly  under  the  influence  of  orgone

treatment, but the spot in the right deltoid remained unaffected. The patient

gained weight, improved his neurotically complicated family situation, and

made such rapid strides that the orgasm reflex was about to appear.

  The reason for the localization of the tumor in the right deltoid was clear.

For as long as he could remember, his right arm had been “weak”; he felt as

if all impulses in that arm had been blocked. His right shoulder blade was

more severely retracted than the left. During the twelfth treatment, violent

beating impulses broke through in his right arm, but it was quite some time

before he was able to let himself strike out freely with his fist. Each time the

beating impulse began to appear in his arm, the patient experienced a severe

spasm of the glottis. The constriction made the patient look as though he were

suffocating; voice and breath were cut off and he produced a high-pitched

whistling sound. His face assumed a dying expression. The eyeballs rolled

upward, the skin became pale and livid, the respiration shallow, the pulsethin.

  Orgone therapy had brought to the surface a syndrome that had actually

been present for decades in a milder form. The patient himself traced a part

of his resignation to the fact that as a small boy he had never been able to

defend himself successfully against other boys. As soon as the moment came

for him to put up his fists and start to fight, his throat constricted and he had

to gasp for breath. This reaction made him helpless and cowardly. His self-

respect  naturally  suffered  and  he  resigned  very  early  in  life.  He  became

cowardly, submissive, evasive, and he despised himself for it.

  Let us carefully note this biopathic reaction of the patient’s. We shall

meet  it  again  at  the  end  of  his  life  and  understand  what  tremendous

significance must be ascribed to the biophysical structure for the vicissitudes

of life. It should be stressed that this patient was not an exceptional case but a

typical one.

  The spasm of the glottis and the dying attitude of the patient became his

habitual reaction to any progress in the treatment. As he put it, his pelvis was

“dead” at the time he came to see me. The orgasm reflex gradually began to

emerge, but it was mechanical and orgonotic sensations in the pelvis were

absent. It improved when his childhood masturbation inhibition was cleared

up, but the anorgonia of the pelvis remained. Both of us had the impression

that this pelvis had never really “lived” and was “hopelessly dead.” For many

years this deadness had been his greatest worry, and when he first heard of

orgone therapy, he knew immediately that it fitted his own case.

  After several weeks of strenuous efforts to revive the emotions in the

pelvis, finally and quite abruptly, a spontaneous contraction forward, with

intense  orgonotic  sensations,  took  place.  This  indicated  that  orgonotic

motility  was  still  alive  in  the  depths  of  the  organism.  But  the  patient’s

reaction  to  it  was  so  violent  that  suddenly  I  understood  the  depth  of  the

anorgonia.

    Immediately  after  the  pelvic  contraction,  he  relapsed  into  the  “dying”attitude. This time the glottis spasm was so severe he could scarcely breathe.

A few days later isolated spots on the burned right shoulder began to swell.

  Spastic reactions to newly released plasma currents are well known to the

orgone therapist. It cannot be expected that the orgasm reflex will develop

without spasms. On the contrary, every new stage in the advance toward the

establishment of plasma currents in the biological core provokes increasingly

deep anxiety reactions, sympatheticotonic conditions at the place where the

breakthrough occurs, the return of old, previously dissolved muscle spasms,

etc. We encounter these factors in every case.

  In the carcinomatous shrinking biopathy, the process is complicated by

the fact that here, in contrast to other biopathies, the anorgonia is operative in

the core  and  may  well  lead  to  a  total  block  of  pulsation.  Experiences  in

clinical practice leave no doubt about this factor. The actual cessation of life

functions is thus brought alarmingly close, so that the problem is whether,

and how rapidly, the expansion function can be stimulated to counteract the

anorgonia. The cases to be described will clarify this point.

  To  return  to  our  case:  Repeated  blood  tests  showed  that  the  patient’s

biological progress was maintained. When he first began treatment, his blood

was  extremely  weak  orgonotically:  hemoglobin  70%, T-reaction  99%,

disintegration of the erythrocytes in seconds, etc. After about six weeks of

orgone treatment, the blood was normal: almost 100% B-reaction, duration of

disintegration prolonged to about thirty minutes, wide orgone margin of the

red cells, hemoglobin normal at 84%.

  The complexity of the cancer biopathy was exhibited in this case by the

fact that the surgical removal of the tumor and the restoration of full orgonity

to the blood were not enough to halt the progress of the shrinking of the

autonomic life apparatus. The subsequent death of our patient is clear proof

of this. Nor could the prevention of cachexia by orgone-therapeutic means

halt the process of dying. The patient died with healthy blood and without

cachexia. This fact was confirmed with some astonishment by a specialist inthe field of mechanistic cancer pathology shortly before the patient’s death.

  It should be clear now why I take great pains to stress repeatedly in my

accounts of the experimental orgone therapy for the cancer biopathy that,

although we are on the way to the elimination of the cancer scourge, there

still remain basic pathological mechanisms to be understood and mastered. In

view of the complexity of the disease, it seems strange that scarcely a week

goes  by  without  some  announcement  in  the  newspapers  that  this  or  that

chemical will provide a cure for cancer. Radical cancer therapy will not be

achieved so easily.

  The attitude of traditional pathology is therefore all the more difficult to

understand. Not only is its approach to cancer based on false premises; not

only is it bogged down in the study of the local symptom and unable to

proceed further; worse still, it also is so strangled by a sense of hopelessness

that  it  seems  unable  to  take  cognizance  of  the  fruitful  efforts  of  orgone

biophysics. I say “seems unable.” The possibility cannot be excluded that its

persistent silence on the subject of sex-economic cancer research is simply

the outward manifestation of a “wait-and-see” attitude. At times in our work

we have felt that we are speaking in a huge empty hall where “the walls have

ears,” but of course can say nothing. This situation should not discourage the

friends of orgone biophysics. One day its potential will be recognized.

  Let us survey the therapeutic situation of our patient: His anorgonia was

pronounced; his characterological inclination to resignation was extreme. He

had no tumors, but his plasmatic motility, which alone could save him, was

still  in  the  grip  of  anorgonia.  It  had  just  shown  the  first  weak  signs  of

recovery, to which the patient had reacted with severe orgasm anxiety and

especially with spasm of the glottis.

  The patient took lessons in non-specific vegetotherapeutic gymnastics in

order to improve the motility of his body. One day he slightly strained the left

gluteus muscle; three weeks later, a small tumor slowly started growing at

that spot until, after three more weeks, it had reached the size of a smallgourd. Although capable of walking, he once again took to his bed and never

left it until his death. The tumor at the left hip stopped growing, but the small

swelling on the right shoulder began to grow and spread.

  One  day  the  patient  had  difficulty  urinating  and—exactly  as  in  the

previously described cancer case—the perineum and the root of the penis

became “numb.” X-rays taken of the whole body showed that there were no

metastases in the internal organs. This was remarkable for a lymphosarcoma.

There was some glandular swelling in the right inguinal region and in the

right and left axillae. The condition of the right deltoid became increasingly

ominous. An edema appeared that spread over the entire right arm and up to

the first rib. The glottis spasm occurred more frequently. The patient’s voice

became hoarse and the danger of death by suffocation from the glottis edema

increased. The surgeons were powerless to help with the edema. A punch

biopsy of the tumor at the hip yielded small malignant cells.

  The numbness in the genital region could be alleviated repeatedly, and

catheterization was unnecessary.

  Then, one day, a persistent glottis spasm set in that resulted in death by

suffocation.

  Like the earlier cancer patients whose cases I have described, this patient

did not die of a local tumor, or of weakness, heart failure, or cachexia. The

immediate  cause  of  death  was  the  glottis  spasm  that  the  patient  had

developed decades before the emergence of the tumor. The localization of the

tumor and the later edema in the right arm were plainly determined by a

chronic bio-pathic inhibition of an impulse in the right shoulder.

  We understand the immediate cause of death, namely the development of

the glottis spasm in connection with the patients’ orgasm anxiety. We also

understand that his serious relapse was a reaction against the first stirrings of

the  plasmatic  currents. What  we  do  not  adequately  understand  is  the

biological  mechanism  at  work  in  the  tissues  of  the  right  shoulder  which

eventually  resulted  in  the  appearance  of  the  edema.  The  X-ray  picturesshowed the tumorous tissue at the right clavicle to be about the size of a small

apple.  The  swelling  of  the  arm  and  the  shoulder  could  therefore  not  be

ascribed to a substantial tumor growth. The “clogging of the lymph passages”

may explain a part of the edema formation, but certainly not all of it. It can be

assumed that the edema of the tissues blocked the drainage of the tissue fluids

and  that,  conversely,  a  clogging  of  the  lymph  passages  with  tumor  pulp

produced the edema.

  In place of the purely mechanical interpretation of the edema of cancer

patients, I would like to suggest here a biophysical interpretation which I

believe  is  more  consistent  with  the  cancer  biopathy  than  are  the  simple

mechanics of “the clogging of the passages.” Since there are enough branch

passages and secondary channels to permit drainage of the fluids from the

tissues, there must be some other factor at work here.

  That edema tends to appear in starvation is well known. There can be no

question  of  “clogged  lymph  passages”  in  such  cases,  yet  there  is  edema.

Edema  of  the  gums  can  accompany  severe  toothache.  In  this  case,  too,

“clogged lymph passages” play no part, yet there is edema. Pregnant women

often suffer from edema of the legs. If it were the pregnancy itself that caused

a purely mechanical blockage of the elimination of the tissue fluids from the

lower parts of the body, then all pregnant women would suffer from edema;

but  such  is  not  the  case.  There  is  also  the  edema  in  burns  and  severe

inflammations where there can be no question of a disturbance in drainage.

                                                              2
  The following observations are reported by Hoff:


    In all cases of paraplegia that have lasted any length of time, edema always occurs in the

  legs, due in all probability primarily to the disturbance of the blood circulation resulting from

  lack of movement. In two cases, however, Bowing observed, immediately after spinal injury,

  edematous swelling of the legs of such severity that it seemed explicable only by the assumption

of trophic damage to the vessels. The same observation has been made by Marburg and Rance

  on patients with gunshot injuries of the spine. In a case of hemiplegia, we witnessed an edema

of  one  side  of  the  face  accompanied  by  facial  paralysis.  These  observations  are  an  aid  to

  understanding the angioneurotic edemas described most of all by Quincke. It is not yet clear by

  what processes a disturbance of vegetative vascular innervation leads to edemas. According to  the investigations of Asher and his school it seems probable that the vegetative nerves can affect

  the permeability of the membranes and of the walls of the capillaries.… Unilateral edemas on

  the side of the head opposite the brain lesion are not rare, yet the impairment of movement alone

is not a sufficient explanation. Böwing observed the formation of vesicles on the skin, thinning

of the skin with increased shininess, changes of the nails, and increased hair growth on the

  paralyzed side. In cases of psychosis with organic brain changes, Reichardt frequently found

  trophic skin changes, particularly ulcers, which could not be traced to either emaciation or

  pressure damage. [Italics mine.]


  Let us return to the edema in cancer. Observations in cancer patients, as

well as the non-carcinomatous edemas just described by Hoff, permit the

assumption of a functional, biophysical cause of the edema. The movement

of fluids in the organism is not a purely mechanical function. It is highly

improbable that the lymph glands and the lymph vessels are rigid and the

motion  of  the  lymph  is  purely  passive  and  mechanical.  In  fact,  we  are

compelled to assume that all organs, including the nerves, vessels, lymph

passages,  and  tissue  cells,  are  contractile,  that  they pulsate,  although  in

different rhythms.

  The life functions of the different organs are linked with their pulsation.

We must be consistent in applying our functional viewpoint, according to

which every organ forms a living unit independent of the total organism, fully

equipped with sensory perception and the ability to react to stimuli. This

finding  has  been  unequivocally  confirmed  in  experiments  on  extirpated

organs,  such  as  the  heart,  intestines,  urinary  bladder,  etc.  Therefore  the

assumption can justifiably be made that the individual organ reacts to injuries

and disturbances of function in the same way that the total organism does. In

all realms of life, the living reaction to disturbances of function is either an

intensification of the specific function to destroy the disrupting stimulus or a

withdrawal from the stimulus. Processes of regeneration and inflammation,

increases of temperature of the blood, etc. are examples of the first type of

reaction. The formation of PA bions and cancer cells as a defense against

cancerous  tissue  disintegration  also  belongs  in  this  category,  as  does

destructive rage reaction.  Anorgonia  belongs  to  the  second  type  of  reaction  to  disturbances  of

function.  Whereas  the  first  kind  of  reaction  represents  a  struggle  against

damage  to  the  organism,  the  second  is  comparable  to  a resignation  or

withdrawal; in other words, an isolation of the diseased part from the still-

healthy organs. The isolation of diseased organs is known to pathology as

sequestration. An example would be the expulsion of a diseased bone part. In

the  animal  kingdom,  a  diseased  limb  is  sometimes  eliminated  by  simply

biting it off. The counterpart to the physical isolation of diseased organs is

inflammation with regeneration. In cases where regeneration, i.e., plasmatic

growth reaction, is not possible, isolation occurs instead.

  This isolation of the diseased organ can be observed very well in cancer

patients.  Its  primary  characteristics  are  the  withdrawal  of  the  autonomic

nerves from the diseased spot and the cessation of their pulsation, which in

turn result, in a simple and logical way, in a number of secondary disease

symptoms: local anemia, sensory numbness, excess of carbon dioxide, and

finally atrophy of the cell substance. In the case of carcinoma of the stomach

or of the ovary, the appearance of severe ascites is usual, though there can be

no  question  of  a  mechanical  clogging  of  drainage  passages.  This

accumulation of serous fluids causes general disturbances of function, such as

intestinal paralysis, thus accelerating the dying process. The major factor in

the stemming of the movement of body fluids in the region of the diseased

organ  is  therefore  the anorgonotic  blocking  of  motility  in  the  autonomic

nerves.  This  provides  a  functional  explanation  of  the  edema.  Edema  and

similar  anorgonotic  disorders  are  not  mechanical,  chemical,  or  physical

functions but specific orgonotic life functions.

  Can  this  orgone-physical  concept  be  proved  experimentally?  The

immediate  reply  is  that  anorgonotic  conditions  have  been  successfully

eliminated or alleviated by physical and psychiatric orgone therapy. Since

these two therapeutic methods both proceed from the assumption that the

autonomic system is contractile, the practical results of the treatment confirmthe correctness of the hypothesis.

    Moreover, a large number of phenomena in classical physiology remain

completely  incomprehensible  without  knowledge  of  the  orgone-physical

functions. A particular example is the normal function of resorption in the

intestines. The outcome of an edema caused by a local anorgonia depends on

whether the edema fluid can be resorbed. This resorption in turn depends on

the  orgonotic  potency  and  the  pulsation  of  the  affected  tissues.  Here

mechanistic  concepts  fail  completely.  First,  let  us  orient  ourselves  in  the

known processes of intestinal resorption.

  The nature of the resorption ability of the organism forms an important

and,  according  to  physiologists,  still  completely  unsolved  problem  of

mechanistic physiology. Does the resorbing membrane of the intestinal wall

act like a dead membrane during the passage of foodstuffs or do the cells of

the  alimentary  tract  work  actively  during  this  process?  These  are  the

questions  the  physiologists  ask.  The  processes  in  the  living  tissue  often

contradict  the  purely  physical-mechanical  processes  in  semipermeable

membranes. The assimilation of fluidic foodstuff through the intestinal wall

                                                  3
cannot be ascribed to osmosis. Heidenheim drew off blood from a dog, and

after  opening  its  abdomen,  inserted its  own  blood  serum  into  an  empty

intestinal loop, closed at both ends. The dog resorbed its own serum. In this

experiment, there was no difference of concentration between the intestinal

content  and  the  tissue  fluid,  so  that  the  purely  mechanical  processes  of

diffusion  and  osmosis  have  no  part  in  the  resorption.  The  physiologists

subsequently tried to explain the fact of intestinal resorption as the work of

the intestinal muscles. They assumed that the intestinal muscles, which can

exert pressure on the intestinal contents from all sides, had pressed the serum

mechanically into the blood, filtering it, as it were, through the intestinal

mucous  membrane.  But  experiments  undertaken  to  clarify  this  problem

showed that filtration as a result of mechanical pressure is impossible. Using

pieces of small intestine extracted from a freshly killed rabbit as a diaphragm,Reid separated two spaces filled with the same salt solution, that is, isotonic

spaces. These pieces of cut intestine were seen to transport the solution for a

while from the mucosa side to the serosa side. Thus, according to Höber, who

reports on this experiment in his textbook of physiology, the intestinal wall

itself does the work. Höber sums up the process of intestinal resorption in

these words: “It (the intestinal wall) presses or sucks the solution through

itself.” Then he adds:


    After  a  while  it  fails—when  the  intestinal  wall  dies,  obviously,  but  also  when  it  is

  chloroformed—which proves it is determined by the viability of the cells. How is this fact to be

  explained? One plausible hypothesis is that, first, the intestinal villi can be shortened by their

  smooth muscle fibers, and second, the lymph spaces of the subepithelial reticular connective

  tissue expand into a central chyle vessel which empties into the deeper, larger lymph vessels

  carrying chyle, i.e., intestinal lymph. Since periodic activity of the muscles causes the villi to

  alternately become erect and shorten, a sucking and pumping action is created: the villi do not

  thicken as they shorten, which makes the space of the central chylus vessel alternately small and

  large  …  If  there  really  does  exist  such  a  functioning  “villus  pump,”  then  the  puzzling

  experiment conducted by Reid becomes understandable. It may be true that we have to give

  unqualified recognition to the part played by vital activities in the process of resorption, but the

  problem which then remains to be solved is no different from that confronting us in any muscle

  contraction. [Italics mine.]


  It is clear that the mechanistic interpretation of the function of resorption,

the  movement  of  fluid  through  the  intestinal  wall,  is  deficient.  The

mechanical  functions  of  osmosis  and  diffusion  fail  to  explain  the  living

phenomena. After he has tried in vain to defend the mechanistic position,

Höber continues:


    However, observations also exist that are absolutely at variance with what is anticipated

  according to the laws of diffusion and osmosis. O. Cohnheim, for instance, demonstrated that

  when a cephalopod intestine is filled with sodium iodide and suspended in ocean water, all NaI

  disappears and is pushed out into the surrounding solution. It can be shown in dogs that under

  certain conditions the NaCl content of a solution in the intestines sinks below the NaCl content

of the blood plasma during the process of resorption; that, in other words, the NaCl wanders

  contrary to the concentration potential. [The NaCl does not, therefore, wander from the higher

to  the  lower  concentration,  as  anticipated,  but  from  the  lower  to  the  higher.]  Here  it  is  an  accomplishment comparable to bringing a gas from a lower concentration or pressure to a higher

  one. It is an accomplishment like those carried out in a comparable way in other organs; for the

  work of concentration is typical of numerous glands.… This accomplishment provides new

  proof that the living cells play an active role in the process of resorption.


  The  statement  actually  makes  no  contribution  to  the  solution  of  the

problem, which has been formulated correctly by mechanistic physiology.

However,  the  mechanistic  formulation  is  of  no  help  when  it  comes  to

understanding  in  what  manner  and  according  to  what  laws  of  energy  the

living cells accomplish their task, a task that contradicts the mechanistic laws

of energy potential drop. The familiar laws of mechanics are not valid here.

  Can orgone physics provide a better understanding? Its answer would be

the following:

  1. Since, according to the law of orgone physics, the stronger orgonotic

system always attracts the weaker system, it is clear that the intestinal wall

can always absorb the intestinal contents, but the converse is not possible;

i.e., the intestinal contents can never absorb the fluids of the intestinal wall.

The movement of fluids in one direction only during the process of digestion

is therefore to be ascribed to the law of orgonotic functioning. The bions of

the  foodstuffs  in  the  intestine  are  extremely  weak  orgonotic  systems  in

relation  to  the  orgonity  of  the  intestinal  wall.  This  law  of  orgonotic

functioning was determined on the basis of direct observation and was not

invented for the sake of explaining biological phenomena. It was applied to

biological  processes  secondarily,  and  successfully,  after  having  been

discovered in the orgone accumulator. The attraction of the weaker orgonotic

system by the stronger is valid both in the living and in the non-living realm

of functioning.

  2.  The  circulation  of  the  blood  and  the  tissue  fluids  depends  on  the

liveliness of the pulsation function in the organs. The more “alive,” the more

active an organism is and the stronger its orgonotic pulsation, the more rapid

and complete will be the metabolism of its body fluids. Intensification and

reduction of the metabolism are vegetative life functions that depend directlyon the general pulsatory activity of the organs. The “decrease of vitality” can

be  understood  in  orgone  biophysics  as  a reduction  of  orgonotic  motility,

sometimes to the point of complete anorgonia. From this perspective, the

edema that develops with toothache, starvation, nerve injury or burns, poorly

tolerated pregnancies, and locally confined cancer tumors has one essential

cause:  the  pulsatory  activity  of  the  affected  organ  region  is  reduced  and,

consequently, the flow of body fluids is slowed down. An accumulation of

fluids takes place in the part of the body where there is weakened pulsation:

there is more fluid flowing into the diseased area than out of it.

  The pulsatory activity of an organ depends primarily on the activity of the

autonomic nerves. An immobilization of the autonomic nerves in any given

part of the body must therefore result in a standstill of the movement of body

fluids. The rapid formation of fluid-filled vesicles in burns can thus be easily

understood, as can various other edemas.

  To return to our cancer patient: From childhood he had suffered from

inhibition of motility of the right arm and impairment of the speech organs.

This inhibition of motility, with its attendant spasms and local anorgonia of

the  tissues,  led  to  the  local  tumor  in  the  right  deltoid  muscle.  In  the

background of this local anorgonia, the general characterological resignation

was active, centered particularly in the pelvis and the genitals. Corresponding

to it was the local anorgonia of the genital apparatus which, shortly before

death, led to a paralysis of the bladder function. Edemas developed at these

two anorgonotic regions of the body as a consequence of the block in motility

of  the  autonomic  nerves.  Death  was  caused  by  suffocation  as  a  result  of

glottis spasm.

  Let  us  now  turn  to  another  case  that  demonstrates  the  anorgonotic

paralysis with particular clarity. As a child, this patient had suffered from an

angina (inflammation of the throat), probably of diphtheritic origin, which

was followed by a slight cardiac weakness. Her menstruation began at the age

of twelve and in the beginning it was normal. But later she suffered on thefirst day from violent cramp-like pains in the region of the left ovary. Hot

compresses  did  not  help,  and  neither  did  drugs.  From  then  on  the  lower

abdominal  region  on  the  left  side  remained  a  “weak  spot”  where  violent

tearing pains were continually recurring. At sixteen the patient went to work

in an X-ray laboratory. Three months after starting the job, she felt miserable,

suffered  attacks  of  nausea,  palpitations,  and  loss  of  hair.  A  physician

prescribed arsenic, but she tolerated it poorly. The cardiac complaints became

worse. At seventeen, severe anemia, swelling of the breasts, and damage to

the ovaries were diagnosed. The pains in the region of the left ovary grew

continually worse. Different physicians arrived at different diagnoses, such as

“spasm of the uterus,” “inflammation of the ovary,” etc. Medication did not

help. Two years later her left leg began to tire easily and a phlebitis appeared.

Two  or  three  times  each  year  the  patient  had  “grippe,”  during  which  the

weakness in the legs and the phlebitis regularly intensified. Soon thereafter

she began to feel pains in the abdomen. The swelling in her left leg increased

after the delivery of a child, and in addition she became hypersensitive over

her whole body to pressure. She developed an anemia, with a hemoglobin of

56% and an erythrocyte count of 3.2 million. Various forms of therapy were

tried, but nothing helped. The case history showed a great deal of conflicting

medical  opinion,  with  regard  to  both  the  diagnosis  and  the  therapy.  At

various times the patient was treated with diathermy, liver injections, heat

therapy, and evipan, all without success.

  Blood findings: The orgone-physical examination of the blood yielded a

pecular result; in fact, I had never before encountered such a blood picture.

Hemoglobin  content  was  95%;  the  blood  culture,  however,  was  strongly

positive. T-reaction on autoclavation and in Gram stain of the blood colloids

was  almost  100%.  Microscopic  examination  revealed  the  following:  the

autoclavation test had indicated extreme orgone weakness in the erythrocytes,

yet  microscopically  they  showed  no  shrinking  and no  premature  bionous

disintegration  (disintegration  took  twenty  minutes);  on  the  contrary,  theyexhibited a  broad,  strongly  radiating  orgone  margin.  One  especially

surprising factor was that some erythrocytes were far larger than normal. In

every field there were numerous large cells with smooth plasm, similar to

macrophages. The erythrocytes grouped themselves around these large cells,

maintaining  a  distance  that  prevented  contact  of  the  membranes  but,

nevertheless,  forming  very  strong  orgone  bridges.  A  few  minutes’

observation gave me the impression that the erythrocytes were enormously

overcharged. This overcharge, which was manifested in the color and size of

the  erythrocytes,  corresponded  to  the  finding  that  the  erythrocytes

disintegrated unusually slowly in the physiological salt solution. Whereas the

first bion vesicles normally appear in the blood corpuscles after about three to

five  minutes,  in  the  case  of  this  patient  there  was  still  no  bionous

disintegration even after fifteen minutes. By the time it finally started, the

energy vesicles were extraordinarily large and radiating strongly.

  I would like to summarize the particular character of this patient’s blood

picture  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  my  diagnosis  of  a latent  leukemia

intelligible.

  A few years ago, when writing about my experimental orgone therapy for

the cancer biopathy, I surmised that leukemia is not a disease of the white

blood  corpuscles  but  is  rather  a  disease  of  the  red  corpuscle  system.  I

conjectured that the erythrocytes are subject to a process of disintegration or

putrefaction and that the white blood corpuscles proliferate in exactly the

same way as when bacteria or other foreign bodies enter the bloodstream. In

leukemia this “foreign body” is the disintegrating erythrocyte itself.

  Our  patient’s  blood  picture  contained  the  following  contradiction:

microscopically, the erythrocytes were overcharged, radiating too strongly;

yet the autoclavation test showed internal putrefaction, i.e., almost 100% T-

disintegration. It is difficult to reconcile the orgonotic over-radiation with the

process of putrefaction that was occurring simultaneously in the erythrocytes.

Still, many familiar processes in the organism involve exaggeration of thenormal biological functions when the defense against pathological processes

in the same organ makes it necessary. In my opinion, therefore, the patient

was  suffering  from  a  chronic,  latent  tendency  of  the  erythrocytes  to

putrefaction. The organism reacted to this putrefaction of the erythrocytes

with  proliferation  of  the  white  blood  corpuscles,  development  of  large,

                                4
macrophage-like white cells, and a rise in temperature, i.e., with repeated

lumination of the blood system to overcome the orgonotic weakness.

  In  this  case,  as  always,  orgone  therapy  became  the  criterion  for  the

accuracy of my hypothesis. If it was correct, then the supplying of orgone

energy  necessarily  had  to  eliminate  the  tendency  of  the  erythrocytes  to

putrefaction and all the corresponding symptoms. My expectation was borne

out. One week after the beginning of orgone therapy the blood culture was

negative. The erythrocytes were smaller than before and the number of white

blood corpuscles in the field was reduced. Disintegration of the erythrocytes

began after three to five minutes, and this time T-spikes also appeared.

  In the third blood test, two weeks after beginning orgone therapy, there

were no longer any large-celled, plasmatically smooth formations, and three

weeks  later  both  T-spikes  and  over-radiation  had  also  disappeared.  After

three more weeks had passed, renewed examination of the blood revealed

that the T-reaction after autoclavation, which at the first examination had

been almost 100% positive, was now only 10–20%. The blood picture was

already almost normal. In the course of the following year, blood tests were

undertaken about once a month. The culture reaction continued to be negative

and there was no over-radiation of the red cells or proliferation of the white

blood  corpuscles.  However,  T-reaction  on  autoclavation,  in  the  form  of

greenish discoloration of the colloid and T-disintegration, stayed constant at

between  30%  and  40%.  Once,  during  this  year,  the  culture  reaction  was

positive; that occurred after the prescription of drugs by another physician.

  The fever attacks, from which our patient had suffered for so long, were

therefore  to  be  understood  as reactions  by  the  blood  system  to  its  owntendency to putrefaction. The impression was that in this case the blood had

reacted to its own orgonotic weakness as it would to a toxicosis. Proof of this

interpretation  is  supplied  by  the  fact  that  the  fever  attacks  disappeared

together with the hyporgonia and the T-reaction of the blood. It will have to

be  left  to  future  research  to  decide  if  what  we  call  “functional  fever”  is

attributable regularly to lumination of the blood cell system, and therefore to

a defense reaction against disturbances of vegetative functions. The blood

system acted in this case exactly as it does in the face of bacterial infection.

  The father of this patient had died of leukemia. For a while she herself

had suffered from a suspicious leucocytosis. There were times during her

functional fever when the number of leucocytes was as high as 14,000. Her

physician had shared my suspicion of a kind of latent leukemia, even though

the traditional methods of diagnosis could provide no tangible proof. Our

blood tests left no doubt about the cancerous character of the blood picture. It

is true that there were still no circumscribed malignant tumors, but there were

numerous early signs, including tumors of the ovaries, putrefaction of the

uterus, etc.

  There  is  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  patient  would  have  died  of

leukemia if the orgone therapy had not been successful.

  Thus, a latent hyporgonia of the erythrocytes existed. The seriousness of

this condition was disclosed later in the experimental orgone therapy, when

we found that it could be eliminated only slowly, and had a strong tendency

to recur. In other words, the coherence of the plasma in the erythrocytes was

weak and the tendency to putrefaction was therefore great.

  The attacks of weakness did not stop with the restoration of the normal

blood reaction, but they occurred much less often, did not last long, and no

longer prostrated the patient for months. Therefore the anorgonia could not

be  ascribed  solely  to  the  bio-energetic  weakness  of  the  blood  system.

Obviously anorgonia can affect specific organs and organ groups and in this

way  cause  disturbance  of  the  specific  organ  functions  and  produce  localmalignant growths. However, as this case demonstrated, anorgonia can be

present without tissue disturbances; its effects can be purely functional.

  Our patient was able to overcome every attack of weakness by using the

orgone accumulator. But the tendency to anorgonia lasted for more than two

years after the patient’s recovery. Quite evidently we are dealing here with a

disturbance  in  the  functioning  of  the  total  body  orgone  content,  existing

independent of the mechanical or physiological organ disturbances that may

be connected with anorgonia. The assumption of such an independent and

total anorgonia is indispensable.

  Anorgonia is not identical with the condition of plasmatic contraction that

we encounter in vascular hypertension. While it can accompany or follow

muscular and vascular hypertension, it can also appear without hypertension.

  Nor  is  anorgonia  identical  with  the  carcinomatous  shrinking  process.

Even if the shrinking invariably leads to anorgonia and death, anorgonia does

not always lead to shrinking. I have seen anorgonotic conditions where there

could have been no question of a shrinking of the autonomic system.

  It is important to understand the hypertonia of the vital apparatus as a

biophysical contraction that resists strong impulses from the biological core.

The shrinking biopathy is accompanied by a decrease of the impulses from

the core; there is a gradual weakening of the pulsatory impulse functions.

  Anorgonia, on the other hand, is characterized by a sudden cessation of

motility, as in shock paralysis, which probably represents acute anorgonia in

its purest form. All the cases described until now have shown acute anorgonia

together with the gradual shrinking process. Our first cancer patient collapsed

in the laboratory only after she had started recovering and gaining weight.

The same thing happened to our patient suffering from cancer of the prostate;

he collapsed just when he was improving. Our third patient was also suddenly

stricken by anorgonia at a time when his condition was visibly improving.

  Fright  paralysis  and  vegetative  shock  give  us  an  indication  of  the

phenomenon  we  are  dealing  with,  namely an  abrupt  standstill  of  theplasmatic functioning of the total organism. If the acute anorgonia extends to

the cardiovascular system, death occurs.

  Our present patient’s case revealed part of the mechanism underlying the

cessation  of  plasmatic  motility.  She  came  to  us  for  orgone  therapy  to

eliminate  the  biopathic  background  of  her  latent  leukemia.  For  several

months she made considerable progress; the memory of her illness receded

further  and  further.  Then  one  day  the  old  disease  picture  returned  in  its

totality, as if nothing had happened in the meantime. The cause of this was

the appearance of very strong genital sensations, which the patient stubbornly

rejected. When these sensations of current in the vagina were felt, orgasm

anxiety appeared, and with it, an anorgonotic state that lasted ten days and

seemed to be seriously alarming. This time, however, I was not baffled and

helpless. Previous experiences with cancer patients had prepared me for this

development.  In  concentrated  therapeutic  efforts—the  patient  was  treated

every  day—I  tried  to  eliminate  the  acute  anxiety  reactions  that  made  her

shrink from experiencing genital sensations and thus from developing the

orgasm  reflex  fully.  A  host  of  childhood  experiences,  which  were  now

recalled, showed that the patient’s mother had threatened to severely punish

any  activity  that  might  induce  genital  excitation,  e.g.,  dancing,  and  had

discouraged such activity by calling it the behavior of a “whore.”

  I would like to emphasize this connection. It is the key to understanding

not  only  biopathies  in  general,  but  the  shock-like  anorgonia  in  particular.

What is important is not, of course, the word “whore,” but rather all that the

word  implies—socially,  psychically,  structurally,  and  biophysically.  For

genital impulses not to be considered “whorish,” either by compulsive social

moralism or by the armored structure, they have to be mild, controllable at all

times, and easy to repress. The vigorous natural impulse of uncontrollable

welling-up (lumination) of the body plasma is officially designated, on the

other hand, as immoral, criminal, or whorish, and is experienced subjectively

as an indication of the “loss of self-control.”  This  fact  has  far-reaching  social  and  biopsychiatric  implications.  The

words “pleasure anxiety” and “orgasm anxiety” are too weak and too narrow

to express the bio-energetic turbulences occurring within the organism when

it  experiences  full  orgastic  excitation  while  still  under  the  pressure  of  its

armoring. This conflict between armoring and orgastic excitation has very

serious  consequences;  far  from  being  a  harmless  “clinical  problem,”  it

becomes a matter of life and death. I hope I succeed in communicating this

fact.

  Again and again, anorgonotic paralysis killed cancer patients under my

care who were actually on the way to recovery. The first three patients whose

cases I described died when the natural orgastic excitation collided with the

plasma stasis. In the fourth case, I succeeded in preventing this outcome. The

fifth case, which I shall now describe, will reveal the danger of anorgonia

even more clearly.

  The  most  salient  features  of  the  case  history  of  this  patient  can  be

summarized as follows:

  The initial signs of the disease developed between the ages of twelve and

fourteen, that is, at the beginning of puberty. A pulling pain in the left hip,

which was the first symptom, lasted, with interruptions, for several years. Not

long afterward, the patient began to experience chest pains that recurred in

frequent attacks over the next ten years. The diagnosis was “pleuritis.” An X-

ray  picture  of  the  lungs  when  she  was  twenty-two  revealed  “healed

tuberculosis.” At the age of about thirteen, general “rheumatic and neuritic

pains” set in, lasting on and off for about fifteen years. At the age of twelve

she underwent her first tonsillectomy, for “tonsillar infection.” Inflammation

of the salivary gland (parotitis) occurred during her fifteenth year, and at the

same  period  she  suffered  from  violent  pains  in  her  big  toes,  which  often

assumed  a  livid  discoloration,  caused  presumably  by  angiospastic  attacks.

Since her early childhood, the patient had suffered from severe anxiety states

which, by the time she had reached the age of nineteen, had intensified intoattacks of acute palpitation. When she was fifteen she suffered an “infection”

of the jaw and the roots of the teeth. A large part of the lower jaw, along with

nine teeth, had to be resected. The diagnosis was “osteomyelitis.” Between

the  ages  of  sixteen  and  twenty  she  was  afflicted  with  various  intestinal

symptoms and diarrhea alternating with constipation. In addition, there were

bouts of fever and, in particular, a general debility and fatigue that persisted

right up to the time she started orgone therapy.

  Intense pains in both inguinal regions occurred during her nineteenth year

and  surgery  was  performed  again,  this  time  for  “appendicitis.”  After  the

operation, she suffered constantly for eight months from high temperatures

accompanied by “diarrhea” and cold chills. The condition culminated in a

“nervous breakdown.”

  She  underwent  a  second  tonsillectomy  sometime  between  the  ages  of

twenty-one and twenty-six, again for “tonsillar infection and inflammation.”

A diagnostic laparotomy was also performed on her during this same period,

“for the purpose of finding the cause of the pains.” On this occasion a few

thread-like  adhesions  in  the  lower  abdomen  were  cut  through.  The  high

temperatures persisted. The diagnoses were always “infection.” In the period

between the ages of twenty-four and twenty-seven, diagnoses of “anemia”

and “enlarged liver” were made. For a while rectal bleeding occurred with

every defecation. Two years later “amoebic dysentery” was diagnosed in a

hospital, and she was operated on for hemorrhoids. At thirty she underwent a

third tonsil operation, this time because of “suppuration.” At thirty-one she

began to suffer from a constant urge to urinate. Again she was operated on,

this time for “multiple benign tumors” of the uterus; the body of the uterus

and one cystic ovary were removed. Not long after this operation “stomach

ulcers”  were  diagnosed.  Two  years  before  beginning  orgone  therapy  a

suppurating fistula appeared in the middle of the abdomen.

  The gynecological findings were as follows:


    Two finger introitus. Urethra, Bartholin’s and Skene’s glands free. Cervix in axis. Uterine  stump  freely  movable,  no  stump  exudate.  Left  adnexa  cannot  be  felt,  had  apparently  been

  extirpated at the time of the supracervical hysterectomy. The right tube is normal. The right

  ovary  extremely  small.  Speculum  examination  shows  severe  inflammatory  changes  due  to

  trichomonas infection in an atrophic vaginal mucosa. Of other physical signs, I mention only the

  cystic mastitis.


  The gynecologist diagnosed dysfunction of the endocrine glands as the

cause of the plethora of infections.

  Let us refrain from dwelling upon the tragicomic aspects of this patient’s

history  of  suffering.  There  are  an  infinite  number  of  such  people  who,

without being hypochondriacal neurasthenics, spend their entire lives going

from  one  doctor  to  another  with  acute  organic  ailments.  They  not  only

receive varying diagnoses on the basis of their various symptoms, but are

prescribed  differing  treatments  from  different  physicians  for  one  and  the

same symptom. It is characteristic of the calamity caused by the mechanistic

viewpoint in internal medicine that medical understanding has been replaced

by  diagnostic  catchwords,  among  which  two  are  especially  prominent:

“infection”  and  “disturbance  of  glandular  functioning.”  It  makes  no

difference whether the attempt at a cure is based on the knife or on vitamins,

the real problem is the reliance on mechanistic slogans and concepts. The

“bacillus in the air” is nothing more than a makeshift term and “hormonal

dysfunction”  is  a  mere  catchword.  The  scalpel  has  become  the  ultimate

symbol of the mechanistic abuse of the organism. The question is never asked

why the ligaments in the parametrium shorten, or why tumors develop in the

uterus,  or why  “air  bacilli”  are  able  to  affect  all  of  the  organs.  Vaginal

infection  with  protozoa  is  blandly  assumed  despite  the  fact  that  no  such

protozoa can be detected in the air.

  In short, the great medical discoveries about infection, inner secretion,

etc., have been reduced to a deus ex machina, a set pattern that not only

founders any new questioning but also destroys countless human lives. Does

it seem probable that this patient really was suffering from a dozen different

diseases?  It  would  be  hard  to  believe.  She  was  actually  suffering  from  asingle  disturbance:  the  dysfunction  of  plasmatic  pulsation.  The  individual

diagnoses have no significance here. When the body plasma as a whole is not

functioning in an orderly manner, biologically undercharged organs will be

vulnerable to the invasion of bacteria, the glands of internal secretion will

function poorly, ligaments will become pulled because of contraction of the

muscles, the mucous membranes will atrophy, etc.

  Imagine the following developments over the course of twenty years in a

house built on sand: crevices in the chimney, cracks in the ceiling, warped

floors, a child injured by a falling fixture, a broken water pipe, seepage of

water  through  the  walls.  What  is  to  be  done  with  a  builder  who  fails  to

recognize  the  reason  for  all  this  havoc?  The  obtuseness  of  the  builder  is

exactly analogous to the mechanistic obtuseness in the diagnosis of somatic

diseases. Words coined by mechanistics like “infection” or “grippe” simply

disguise  the  fact  that  the  disease  stimuli  are  actually  not  known  and  not

demonstrable. The orgone therapist who witnesses the emergence of catarrh

or rheumatic or pleuritic pains as soon as the corresponding region of the

body becomes contracted reasons that infections are possibly the result of

biopathic  disturbances  of  function.  This  entire  area  of  research  is  still

unexplored;  everything  remains  to  be  done.  During  epidemics,  such  as

cholera, typhus, poliomyelitis, etc., we will have to learn to ascribe at least as

much significance to the orgonity of the organism as we do to the specific

disease  stimulus.  Since  it  has  now  been  established  that  specific  micro-

organisms can develop autogenously, through the degeneration of body cells,

the “bacillus” can be regarded as a result of the systemic disease as well as its

cause.

  The tumors of our patient’s genital apparatus, which necessitated total

extirpation  of  the  uterus,  and  the  tendency  toward  tissue  destruction  by

suppuration make this case similar to case 4. The fever attacks and the states

of  exhaustion  indicate  a  severe  disturbance  in  the  equilibrium  of  the

biological energy. It is true that with the exception of the genital tumors theprecancerous symptoms were minimal, but they were sufficiently pronounced

to justify the opinion that the patient would have died of cancer. Just as the

psychiatric orgone therapist infers the development of a psychoneurosis from

acute anxiety attacks even before its symptoms become visible, so in cancer

pathology the development of a cancer biopathy can be inferred when its

harbingers begin to appear. One of the tasks of cancer prevention will be the

earliest  possible  recognition  and  elimination  of  these  precursors  of  the

disease. Physical and psychiatric orgone therapy is especially well equipped

for this task.

  Now to the patient’s reactions in orgone therapy: Her thorax was typically

immobile,  her  respiration  shallow,  the  neck  musculature  tense,  the  spine

lordotic, the pelvis “dead.” Her facial expression was characterized by a stiff

smile that seemed locked into the position of a twisted grimace. It was not

difficult to perceive a deep depression and impulse to cry.

  Elimination of the superficial respiratory inhibition at once evoked body

impulses  consisting  of  violent,  jerky,  pushing  movements.  This  pushing

reaction soon manifested itself as a defense against sexual attack, and was

accompanied  by  a  hateful  facial  expression. The  orgasm  reflex  served,

paradoxically, to express hatred of sexual movements. As a child, between

the ages of six and sixteen, the patient had often been sexually abused by her

older brothers, and had always been torn between excitation and repulsion.

The excitation had compelled her again and again to permit the molestations;

the repulsion had become somatically anchored in the “pushing away.” Her

orgasm reflex had thus taken on its special form.

  I shall disregard the many details of her infantile history and limit myself

to the anorgonia. It is not really important to know which early experiences

determine the anorgonia, since there are no specific causes of the malady.

Anorgonia is a purely biological reaction to a chronic block of the orgasm

function. The one specific element of anorgonia is probably the contradiction

between  very  powerful,  natural,  genital  impulses  and  equally  powerfuldisruptions in the orgasm reflex. I would surmise that children who do not

develop an especially strong genital orgonity also tend to be less vulnerable

to anorgonotic attacks. However, I must emphasize the tentative nature of this

assumption.

  To  return  to  our  patient:  As  long  as  the  body  contractions  expressed

hatred, the work proceeded along familiar lines. The change came when the

contractions became softer, more yielding, and therefore pleasurable. At the

same  time  that  the  expression  of  hate  gave  way  to  that  of  pleasure,  the

movement  of  the  pelvis  reversed  its  direction.  Previously  the  pelvis  had

tended to move backward during contraction, “to push away”; now forward

movements  occurred  in  the  pelvis.  It  was  not  long  before  the  anticipated

preorgastic sensations could be felt in the pelvic floor. At the same time, the

inflammation of the vaginal mucosa receded and microscopic examination of

the  vaginal  secretion  showed  a  decrease  in  the  number  of  trichomonal

parasites, which were now preponderately immobile and even disintegrating.

From then on I was able to observe, over a period of months, how genital

frigidity  was  accompanied  by  intensified  formation  of  protozoa  and,

conversely, how vaginal excitations were accompanied by a decrease in the

formation  of  protozoa.  This  finding  is  in  agreement  with  the  orgone-

biophysical  assertion  that  protozoa  form  only  when  there  is  orgonotic

weakness in the affected organs and they disappear when orgonity is strong.

The  fact  that  trichomonal  protozoa  develop  from  bionously  disintegrating

vaginal or cervical epithelium makes understandable their relationship to the

                                    5
orgonotic potency of the tissue.

  While the plasmatic currents in the vagina were still weak, the treatment

of our patient in no way differed from that of other cases. But the situation

changed  when  the  patient  experienced  the  first  strong  surge  of  sexual

excitation. On one occasion she yielded much more than usual. An intense

wave of excitation ran through the lower part of her body and she was unable

to move. Her speech failed and she did not answer when spoken to. She couldnot  get  up.  A  flaccid  paralysis  of  the  extremities  appeared.  The  general

picture was alarming. The skin of the neck and the upper body was livid and

blotchy, as in vegetative shock, and there was no reaction to such stimuli as

pinching; yet the patient was not unconscious. When the anorgonotic attack

had passed, she said that everything had gone “black” all around her; she had

suddenly not been able to feel her body at all and had believed herself to be

“dying.”

  The  attack  showed  all  the  signs  of  acute  anorgonia.  The  reflexes  and

tactile and pain perception were all present, but motility had vanished. The

anorgonia lasted about forty minutes. I sat the patient up, but she sank back

helplessly. After an hour she was able to sit up herself, but with effort. When

she tried to stand, her legs buckled beneath her. Another hour of rest was

necessary before she was finally in a condition to go home alone.

  At the next session the armoring was again very strong, but once it had

been successfully loosened, the anorgonia returned, this time lasting for a

shorter period and taking a less intense form. The patient described the attack

as a “fading out.” From that point on I was able to induce the anorgonia at

will. For instance, I could produce it by moving her head to one side or

backward.

  It is important to note that the attacks occurred without anxiety. Gradually

the  relation  of  the  anorgonia  to  the  orgonotic  current  became  clear.  The

patient  had  always  used  superficial  joking  as  a  defense  against  serious

emotions. She was also able “to go dead” when her emotions became too

strong. The anorgonotic attack now supervened as a third mechanism.

  The  characterological  shallowness  and  the  affective  dullness  were

superficial  armorings.  The  anorgonia  was  and  remained  the  real  depth

mechanism.  It  became  perfectly  clear  during  the  subsequent  months  that

evidence of the anorgonia had always been present. It was responsible for the

patient’s  states  of  weakness  and  many  of  the  suppurative  processes.  The

anorgonia  did  not  appear  when  the  patient  allowed  herself  to  experiencesexual excitation, but it did appear abruptly whenever excitation was not able

to run its course, i.e., when it was checked while still mounting.

  The  anorgonia  was  accompanied  by  vertigo  and  falling  anxiety.  Its

development could be “superficial” and prolonged over a number of days, or

“deep,”  i.e.,  immediate  and  full.  As  was  shown  in  case  4,  the  attack  of

weakness could often be overcome in the orgone accumulator. The release of

the orgasm reflex also relieved it.

  The mechanism of the anorgonia in this case corresponds fully to the

cases described earlier: The organism reacts to unfamiliar, strong plasmatic

excitation  with  a  block  in  motility  that  manifests  itself  as  “weakness,”

“collapsing,” “fading out,” disturbance of equilibrium, and falling anxiety. It

is as if the orgonotic expansion began but was unable to run its course fully,

as if the expansion impulse suddenly died out.

  During  the  period  she  was  in  treatment  the  patient  recalled  several

childhood  situations  in  which  such  attacks  of  weakness  had  set  in.  For

example, she had felt “paralyzed” whenever she had the impulse to show

affection to her father. A study of the details of these incidents left no doubt

that  the  paralysis  was  due  to  an  exceedingly  strong  sexual  excitation

developing within her. Her father was a hard, cold man. To feel the sensation

of sexual current in his presence was a horrendous experience. Her paralysis

expressed the helplessness of a child who wanted to display affection but was

unable to tolerate the physical sensation that accompanies the expression of

affection. The result was a block in motility and an attack of weakness.

  I succeeded in locating where the block occurred. As the orgasm reflex

intensified and spread from the thorax to the abdomen, the patient developed

a strange reflex action. She literally caved in from the umbilicus down; the

legs jerked suddenly upward and the trunk of her body thrust forward. She

grabbed at her abdomen with both hands as if she were in pain. Gradually, it

became clear—it was later confirmed by palpation of the abdomen—that the

wave of orgonotic excitation going toward the genitals had been blocked by aspasm of the intestines precisely at the place where the suppurating fistula

had  broken  through  the  abdominal  wall.  (The  fistula  itself  had  in  the

meantime been healed by orgone treatment.) It is evident that the abdominal

organs  became  spastic  as  soon  as  orgonotic  waves  of  excitation  pressed

toward the genitals. This caused the abdominal pains, the colics, the diarrhea,

and the constipation. What is not so clear is how such spasms produce the

histomorphology of uterine or intestinal tumors. Yet there can be no doubt

whatsoever  about  the  development  of  benign  tumors  of  the  genitals  from

spastic conditions of the abdominal organs.

  Two weeks of intensive work were necessary to remove this block in the

abdomen. The orgasm reflex lost its harsh, jerky quality and became instead a

fluid  movement.  The  pleasant  “streaming”  sensations  of  current  soon

appeared  in  the  abdomen,  and  for  the  first  time  in  her  life  the  patient

experienced, during the sexual act, the preorgastic sensations of current in the

genitals.  Once  the  block  in  motility  was  removed,  the  attacks  of  acute

anorgonia  ceased  also.  The  superficial,  prolonged  states  of  weakness

continued to recur until a few months later, when they also disappeared.

  Thus, the concept of anorgonia was confirmed by the therapeutic process.

    Symptomatically and dynamically, the condition of anorgonotic paralysis

has now been satisfactorily defined. It includes those states that hitherto led a

Cinderella  existence  in  pathology  as  “functional  paralyses.”  We  now

conceive of them as disturbances in the functioning of a concrete biological

energy rather than as “hysterical” or mechanical lesions of the nerve tracts.

  It  is  more  difficult  to  differentiate  the  anorgonia  that  is  the  result  of

gradual  plasmatic  shrinking  from  the  anorgonia  that  sets  in  acutely.  The

question is, Is anorgonia produced by a loss of orgone content in the body, or

is it merely the result of a block in the motility of the normal orgone content?

Moderate  anorgonotic  weakness  can  easily  be  distinguished  from  acute

attacks of anorgonia. The mechanism is presumably the same in both cases.

We have to assume that anorgonia of the type that manifests itself in acuteattacks can develop into a chronic shrinking process and that, conversely,

chronic anorgonia can culminate in acute functional paralysis. If the impulses

to expand are blocked, the organism may resign and ultimately shrink. If the

body is subject to a gradual loss of orgone energy, it may stop expanding.

What  both  conditions  have  in  common,  biophysically  speaking,  is  the

inhibition of expansion or, expressed psychologically, the inhibition of the

pleasure experience.

  The next question is: How far back in the developmental history of the

patient does this disturbance reach? In all five cases there were indications of

mild and transitory anorgonotic attacks dating back to early childhood. But

this fact does not answer the question. The inception of anorgonia must occur

very early, since the orgone functions of the body probably acquire their

individuality  during  fetal  development.  This  does  not  signify  “hereditary

disposition,”  but merely  shifts  the  problem  into  the  period  before  and

immediately  following  birth.  It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  the

constitution of an organism is a formative process and not something that

appears “ready-made.” Its development undoubtedly continues beyond birth

to approximately the end of the first year of life.

  Just  as  the  prevention  of  disease  cannot  begin  early  enough,  so  the

research into the biophysical constitution must go back to the formation of

the embryo. Thanks to our knowledge of many orgone functions, this is now

possible.

  The  advance  of  science  consists  in  the  reduction  of  empirical  data  to

primary  causes  and  the  progressive  unification  of  these  causes.  Freudian

psychopathology, through the discovery of the libidinal development in early

childhood, considerably reduced the importance of that catch-all “heredity.”

The  assertions  of  psychopathology  are  based  on  clinical  observations  of

children two years of age and up. Orgone research goes further back. Orgone

therapy  for  schizophrenics,  for  example,  leaves  no  doubt  that  the  central

mechanisms of the disease are established during the first few weeks of life.The language of movement, the language of the organs, and the language of

emotional  expression  utilized  in  orgone  therapy  are  phylogenetically  and

ontogenetically  older  than  the  language  of  words  and  ideas,  which  is  the

instrument  of  depth  psychology.  The  language  of  movement  and  body

expression does not begin at a certain age and is not limited to the human

animal,  as  is  the  language  of  word  and  idea.  The  language  of  bodily

expression is a general function of the animal world, even if we have not yet

learned to understand it. By utilizing it, orgone physics gains access to the

living  functions  in  man  and  animal before  the  first  year  of  life,  because

emotion and expressive movement are connected to plasmatic pulsation.

  I  should  like  to  report  on  the  insights  that  are  to  be  gained  from

experimental  orgone  therapy  with  schizophrenics  at  another  time  and

conclude this account of anorgonia with the description of the expressive

language of a newborn child. It will be shown that we can actually look for

and find the early beginnings of anorgonia in the period before and just after

birth.


3. FALLING ANXIETY IN A THREE-WEEK-OLD INFANT


I recently had the opportunity to observe the development of falling anxiety

in an infant of three weeks. This observation filled a gap in the investigation

of the cancer biopathy.

  The  infant  in  question  was  born  into  an  environment  in  which  the

expressive language of the organism is professionally understood and used. It

was therefore all the more disconcerting that the parents felt helpless when

confronted with the infant’s gesture language. They had the impression that

nothing at all is known about the emotional life of the newborn child. The

emotional needs of the infant are, of course, in no way satisfied by purely

mechanical care. The infant has only one way to communicate his needs,

namely by crying. This one form covers countless large and small needs,

from  the  irritation  of  a  diaper  crease  to  colic.  The  infant’s  expressivelanguage meets with no response from the environment.

  I shall refrain from discussing here those damaging kinds of infant care

that  modern  education  has  already  eliminated  from  the  world  or  is  still

combating: the rigid apportioning of food and inflexible adherence to feeding

times a la Pirquet; forcible extension of the legs by tight swaddling in the

manner of thirty years ago; denial of the breast during the first twenty-four

hours,  as  still  practiced  in  many  hospitals;  overheating  of  nurseries;  the

routine treatment of infants in large institutions; the practice of letting infants

“cry themselves out,” etc. Such compulsive measures express the parents’

and  physicians’  inimical  attitudes  toward  life.  Their  effect  is  immediate

postnatal damage to the biological self-regulation of the organism, creating

the basis for a later biopathy which is then misinterpreted as hereditary taint.

All this is common knowledge today, even though it may not yet have had an

impact on common practice in child care.

  I would like to limit myself here to one specific damaging influence in the

first weeks of life that has been neglected until now: the lack of orgonotic

contact, of a direct physical or of a psychological nature, between the infant

and the person who takes care of it. The capacity to understand the infant’s

language of emotional expression depends directly upon the closeness of this

contact:  the  more  complete  the  orgonotic  contact,  the  better  the

understanding.

  The  most  salient  place  of  contact  in  the  infant’s  body  is  the  bio-

energetically highly charged mouth and throat. This body organ reaches out

immediately for gratification. If the nipple of the mother reacts to the infant’s

sucking  movements  in  a  biophysically  normal  manner  with  sensations  of

pleasure, it will become strongly erect and the orgonotic excitation of the

nipple  will  become  one  with  that  of  the  infant’s  mouth,  just  as  in  the

orgastically  gratifying  sexual  act,  in  which  the  male  and  female  genitals

luminate and fuse orgonotically. There is nothing “abnormal” or “disgusting”

in this. Every healthy mother experiences the sucking as pleasure and yieldsto it.

  However, about 80 percent of all women suffer from vaginal anesthesia

and frigidity. Their nipples are correspondingly anorgonotic, i.e., “dead.” The

mother may develop anxiety or loathing in response to what would naturally

be a sensation of pleasure aroused in the breast by the infant’s sucking. This

is why so many mothers do not want to nurse their babies. Furthermore, an

anorgonotic breast functions poorly physiologically; i.e., the milk production

is disturbed. The excited mouth of the infant thus encounters either a “dead”

nipple,  so  that  it  experiences  no  satisfaction,  or  the  non-excitable  rubber

nipple of a bottle to which the mother, because of her phobia, has restricted

the infant.

  The impairment of plasmatic functioning in the mouth and the neck and

shoulder  regions  that  we  find  in  biopathies  leaves  no  doubt  that  severe

damage to the infant’s orgonity in the region of the head and neck is caused

by these disturbances in the mother. Speech disturbances, lack of emotional

expression,  spasms  of  the  neck  muscles,  eating  disturbances,  spastic

hysterical vomiting, fear of kissing, depression, stuttering, mutism, etc., are

consequences of poor orgonotic functioning of the mouth and neck organs.

So much for the infant’s first physiological contact with the world.

  Let us now proceed to the emotional contact, which is determined directly

by  the  orgonotic  contact.  The  infant  has  no  means  of  expression  at  his

disposal other than various forms of movement (grimaces, movements of the

arms, legs, and torso, expressions of the eyes) and crying. The mother grasps

the expression of the infant’s gestures at first through orgonotic contact (in

psychological terms, through identification). If her own organism is free and

emotionally expressive, she will understand the infant. But if she is armored,

characterologically  hard,  timid,  or  otherwise  inhibited,  she  will  fail  to

understand the infant’s language and therefore the emotional developent of

the child will be exposed to a variety of damaging influences. The infant’s

needs can be satisfied only if its expressions are understood. But exactly whatthe infant wants is not always easy to know.

  Every  newborn  child  has  its  individuality,  its own  emotional  keynote,

which  must  be  recognized  if  its  individual  emotional  reactions  are  to  be

comprehended.  The  infant  in  this  particular  case  of  falling  anxiety  was

characterized by an “earnest looking” expression. This “looking expression”

was fully developed just a few minutes after birth; i.e., the newborn baby’s

eyes were wide open and gave the impression of “seeing.” He took the breast

immediately and vigorously. During the first week he did not cry very much.

In the second week, however, he cried frequently, and none of the people

looking after him were able to figure out what was causing him to cry. The

pacifier did not always quiet him, and I often had the sense that the child

wanted  something quite  definite.  But what?  It  was  two  weeks  before  I

understood that what he wanted was body contact. I will have to explain this

point.

  During  the  few  hours  the  baby  was  awake,  his  eyes  followed  the  red

winding lines painted on the wall of his room. Red was clearly preferred over

blue and green: the infant’s gaze would stay much longer on the red, with a

much more intense expression in his look.

  At  the  age  of  two  weeks,  the  infant  experienced  his  first  orgastic

excitation  of  the  mouth.  It  happened  while  he  was  sucking:  the  eyeballs

turned  upward  and  sideways,  the  mouth  began  to  tremble,  the  tongue

quivered. Then the contractions spread over the whole face. After about ten

seconds  they  subsided  and  the  musculature  of  the  face  relaxed.  This

excitation  seemed  perfectly  natural  to  the  parents,  but  we  know  from

experience that many parents become alarmed when their child experiences

oral  orgasm.  In  the  following  four  weeks,  these  convulsive  movements

occurred several times.

  At the end of his third week of life, the infant experienced an attack of

acute falling anxiety as he was being taken from his bath and placed upon a

table on his back. It was not immediately apparent whether the movement oflaying him down had been too fast or whether the cooling of the skin had

brought about the falling anxiety. Whatever the cause, the child began to cry

violently, stretched his arms backward as though to gain support, tried to

bring his head forward, showed sheer panic in his eyes, and could not be

quieted. He had to be picked up. As soon as the attempt was again made to

lay him down, the falling anxiety reappeared just as violently. He could be

calmed only by being held.

  For the following few days the right shoulder blade and the right arm

were pulled back and less mobile than the left arm. The contraction of the

right shoulder musculature was quite distinct, and its connection with the

falling anxiety was clear. During the anxiety attack the child had drawn back

both  shoulders  as  if  keeping  himself  from  falling.  This  muscular  attitude

persisted; it failed to relax even during periods free of anxiety.

  I  now  believe  that  great  significance  attaches  to  this  incident.  The

following explanations can be excluded, however:

  It could not be a question of genital orgasm anxiety of the type that occurs

after puberty. Nor could it be a rational fear, since a three-week-old infant has

no concept of “falling” or of “height” or “depth.” It also could not be a case

of psychoneurotic  falling  anxiety,  since  there  are  no  concepts  before  the

development of word language and there can be no phobia without concepts.

  The psychoanalytic explanation of “instinct anxiety” usually offered in

such cases is not satisfactory. For the question would then be: What kind of

ego instinct was being warded off? There is no such thing as a moral ego at

this age, and where there is no moral defense according to psychoanalytic

theory, neither can there be instinct anxiety. There is no “ego” to “signal” an

instinctual breakthrough with the anxiety attack.

    Rationalistic as well as psychological explanations, therefore, provide no

answer. How is it possible for an acute anxiety attack to occur in a three-

week-old infant who possesses neither consciousness of the danger of falling

nor an instinctive defense signal of the ego against anxiety? Recourse to thenotion of an “archaic, inborn, instinct anxiety” would be plain laziness and

prove nothing at all. An anxiety attack is a functional disturbance and can be

understood only in terms of the orgonotic body functions.

  Let us attempt a biophysical interpretation: If the fear of danger and the

defense against an instinct are to be excluded, what remains is the pleasure-

anxiety mechanism of the orgonotic body system, which functions with the

very  first  stirring  of  the  plasma.  In  “Psychischer  Kontakt  und  vegetative

Strömung” (1934) I had to make the assumption that the sensation of falling

is a purely biophysical occurrence brought about by a rapid withdrawal of

the  biological  energy  from  the  periphery  to  the  vegetative  center  of  the

organism. It is the same type of kinesthetic organ sensation that occurs in

actual falling, in fright, and when orgastic expansion is suddenly inhibited.

As I have shown clinically, falling anxiety is always at the root of orgasm

anxiety. The rapid and extreme pulsation of orgasm is experienced as falling

if it cannot run its course unimpeded. By contrast, the uninhibited orgastic

contraction conveys the sensation of floating or flying.

  The  withdrawal  of  bio-energy  from  the  body  periphery  represents  an

anorgonia of the extremities; loss of the sense of equilibrium accompanies

the anorgonia of the supporting organs.

  Falling  anxiety  is  therefore  not  a  “psychic  formation”  but  the  simple

expression of sudden anorgonia in those organs that maintain the equilibrium

of the body by opposing the pull of gravity. Whether falling anxiety and

anorgonia are induced by the sudden onset of orgasm anxiety, by real falling,

or  by  a  fright  contraction,  the  mechanism  remains  the  same: loss  of

peripheral plasma motility, accompanied by loss of the sense of equilibrium

and  of  equilibrium  itself.  The  experience  of  anxiety  is  an  immediate

biophysical  reaction  to  sudden  contraction  of  the  plasma  system.  The

orgonotic contraction, however, is connected with the loss of plasma motility

at the periphery and, for this reason, manifests itself as the fear of falling.

  Whether the immobilization occurs as a result of a secondary pleasureblock or because of a primary anxiety contraction is a matter of indifference.

The effect is the same: the falling sensation is the immediate inner perception

of the immobilization of the body periphery and the loss of equilibrium. The

body’s balance in the gravitational field is therefore a function of the full

orgonotic pulsation at the periphery of the orgonotic system.

  I must relate an incident that supports this interpretation. A boy I knew

had caught a squirrel and was holding it in his hand. I was struck by the fact

that the squirrel lay completely limp in his hand, without struggling, without

biting,  and  without  wriggling,  indeed,  without  moving  at  all.  It  was

completely paralyzed with fright, and was suffering an acute anorgonotic

attack. After a few minutes the boy put the squirrel on the ground. At first it

lay there as though dead, i.e., completely motionless. Then it tried to get up

but fell down. In terms of physics, it could not overcome the pull of gravity.

Its attempts to get back on its legs remained unsuccessful for about fifteen

minutes.  Yet  it  was  not  hurt,  for  later  it  ran  and  climbed  very  well.  The

disturbance  of  the  sense  of  equilibrium  and  the  continuous  falling  down

produced increasing anxiety and caused more falling. For several minutes the

squirrel convulsed in sudden contractions that were so strong it was thrown

10 to 20 cm. into the air. Finally the animal recovered from the attack and

crawled into a bush where it rested for a long time before scampering away.

  Let us now return to our infant. Is it possible to infer a cause of the

anorgonotic attack? I think so. For about the first two weeks the mother’s

orgonotic contact with the baby had been poor. The child had obviously had

strong impulses for body contact that had not been satisfied. Then the oral

orgasm  occurred,  a  completely  natural  discharge  of  the  high-pitched

excitation in the head and throat region. This increased the need for contact

still  further.  The  lack  of  contact  led  to  a  contraction,  a  withdrawal  of

biological energy as a consequence of vain efforts to establish the contact. If

it were appropriate to use the terminology of psychology here, we would say

that the child “resigned” (that it was “frustrated”). However, the “biologicalresignation” brought on the anorgonia, and the falling anxiety appeared. This

calls to mind case 5, in which the same mechanism governed the biopathy.

  I succeeded in my attempts to overcome the falling anxiety in the infant.

Assuming  that  my  conclusions  were  correct,  I  found  the  following  three

procedures necessary:

  1. The infant had to be picked up and held when he cried. That helped,

and  the  falling  anxiety  ceased  to  occur  after  about  three  weeks.  Fear  of

strangers had appeared with the falling anxiety. Before the first attack, the

child would happily go into the arms of every stranger; after the attack, he

would begin to cry in fear. He had also reacted once with anxiety to the

sudden appearance of a dog.

  2. The shoulders, fixed in a “backward” position, had to be gently moved

forward, in order to eliminate this first onset of a characterological armoring

in the shoulders. I accomplished this playfully, laughing and making sounds

the child loved. This was continued on a daily basis for about two months,

always as if in play.

  3. The child actually had to be “allowed to fall” in order to let him get

used to the sensation of falling. He would be held under the armpits and

gently raised and then lowered, at first slowly, then increasingly quickly. At

first he reacted by crying, but in time began to enjoy the movements. Soon he

developed a game out of this routine of being lifted up and then lowered.

When  he  was  able  to  hold  himself  upright  he  began  to  make  “walking

movements” with his legs. He leaned against my chest and looked up at my

head. I understood. He wanted to climb up on me. Once he arrived at the top

of my head, he squealed for joy. In the weeks that followed, the climbing and

“falling” became a favorite game.

    Fortunately, the first biopathic reaction was overcome. During the next

six months we did not see any trace of the falling anxiety.

  It is important to follow the development of this infant in an area that is

directly connected with biopathic shrinking: If the carcinomatous shrinkingof  the  adult  organism  is  rooted  in  chronic  contraction  and  resignation

acquired  at  an  early  age,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  prevention  of  the

shrinking biopathy is dependent on the undisturbed development of the vital

impulses in the first months of life.

  It  would  no  doubt  be  simpler  and  more  popular  if  a  drug  against  the

shrinking process in cancer could be developed, but since this is not possible,

we have no alternative but to concentrate on the sex-economic upbringing of

the newborn infant. So far as I can see, there is no other way, despite the

serious social implications that this course of action involves.

  We  started  with  the  adult’s  lack  of  understanding  of  the  expressive

language of newborn infants. This lack is far-reaching and quite general. The

parents  of  the  infant  in  this  case  believed  themselves  to  be  especially

understanding when they allowed the newborn infant to decide for himself

when his feeding times should be and how much nourishment he should take.

But as early as the fourth week of the child’s life, we noticed a distress that

manifested itself in repeated crying. At first, we did not understand. Slowly

the simple realization dawned on us that it is extremely dreary to lie all alone

in a crib for hours at a time, day after day, with high walls on both sides and a

cover over the top.

  The  aliveness  of  the  newborn  infant  requires  aliveness  of  its

surroundings. The infant prefers vibrant colors to gray or dull tones, and

moving objects to stationary ones. If the infant is set in his carriage so that

the walls no longer obstruct his view, and if the top is removed, he can see

everything around him without difficulty and will show a lively interest in the

people passing by, in the trees, shrubs, posts, walls, and so on.

  The concept of the “autism of the child,” of his “being withdrawn into

himself,” is as erroneous as it is widespread. The autism of the infant is an

artifact caused by the behavior of the adults. It is artificially generated by the

strict  isolation  of  the  infant  and  by  the  characterological  armoring  of  the

adults responsible for his care and also of the theoreticians of child care. Theinfant will quite understandably not emerge from himself—or will do so only

with the greatest difficulty—if only inflexible rules and ungenuine behavior

are extended to him rather than living warmth.

  It  is  perfectly  true  that  today  most  newborn  infants  are  quiet  and

withdrawn into themselves. But is lordosis or anxiety neurosis natural just

because it is common? As long as parents, doctors, and educators approach

infants  with  false,  unbending  behavior,  inflexible  opinions,  condescension

and officiousness, instead of with orgonotic contact, infants will continue to

be quiet, withdrawn, apathetic, “autistic,” “peculiar,” and, later, “little wild

animals,” whom the cultivated feel they have to “tame.”

  This  world  will  not  change,  despite  all  the  political  talk,  as  long  as

grownups  fail  to  take  the  trouble  to  prevent  their  own  deadness  from

exercising an influence on the still-unspoiled plasma system of the infant.

  An  infant  does  not  respond  with  any  expressive  movement  to  honey-

sweet “baby talk” or to the strict language of adults. He responds only to the

intonation and pitch of a voice, to a language that is related to his own. In an

infant just a few weeks old, it is possible to educe glowing pleasure and lively

responses  by  talking  to  him  in his  guttural  sounds,  and  making his

movements, and above all, by maintaining a lively contact with him. False

behavior on the part of the grownup inevitably forces the child back into

himself. It cannot be emphasized enough that in this particular matter 90

percent  of  all  adults  are  still  completely  unaware,  and  because  of  this,

biopathic constitutions are being produced every day.

  Deficiencies  of  inner  secretion  and  of  the  highly  interesting  enzyme

functions are the results and symptoms, not the causes, of later diseases of the

biosystem.  This  must  be  correct  if  the  mechanical-chemical  viewpoint  of

biology is incorrect—and it is incorrect. The miserable state of health of the

population of this planet is sufficient proof of this point.

  The horrendous way Indians, Japanese, or any other kind of authoritarian

Asiatics bring up small children should not be too great a surprise to us. Weare not much better here in the “cultured” West. Only the methods of “taming

the  wild  little  animals”  are  different.  The  old-spinster  spirit,  intolerant  of

anything alive in its vicinity, is the same. In twenty or fifty years’ time it will

have  become  commonplace  that  persons  who  take  care  of  children  must

experience love themselves and that their organism must know the orgastic

sensation and convulsion before they can understand a small child. I am well

aware how repugnant that must sound to some ears today, yet in everyday

experience it remains true that the greatest danger to the development of the

child is represented by orgastically impotent educators.

  The  so-called  autism  of  the  small  child—his  stillness,  his  pallor,  his

withdrawnness—is an artifact of upbringing, a product of our total social

misery. Diarrhea, anemia, etc., will soon be placed in this category too—a

statement that may sound far-fetched but is not. If the intestinal function is

vegetative  in  nature,  which  it  is,  then  the  faulty  emotional,  i.e.,  orgone-

biophysical,  development  of  the  child  must  play  a  crucial  role  also  in

diarrhea,  pallor,  anemia,  and  so  on.  To  speak  of  “social  misery”  is

meaningless, actually, for in the final analysis this social misery is itself the

result of a world of stultified human animals, of a world in which there is

always more than enough money for wars but never enough—not even a

minimal fraction of what is spent on paying the costs of one day of war—to

ensure the protection of life. This is true because stultified, stiffened human

beings have no understanding of what is alive; in fact, they fear it. There is no

kind of social misery to equal the misery of the infants of biopathic parents.

  It is a widespread misconception that grasping, crawling, walking, and

similar functions are one day simply there, that a child just starts in grasping

at the age of x weeks, crawling at the age of y weeks, and walking at the age

of z weeks. It is surprising that pediatricians have not worked out a schedule

of how many steps an infant must take per day, just as they have determined

the daily number of calories he should consume. A nipple that is erogenously

alive, and warm contact with the mother, are much more effective than anychemical prescriptions in stimulating digestion and the total body functioning

of the newborn. Once the contact is established between the infant and a

warm,  understanding  environment,  then—and  only  then—can  natural

processes be observed, rather than the artificial products of a pathological

education. The educators themselves have to become sexually healthy before

their scientific statements about children can be accurate. In my opinion, any

statement should—and no doubt one day will—be judged according to the

character structure of the person making it, just as a book is judged by its

stylistic elegance or a surgeon is judged by the dexterity of his hands.

  A  framework  for  accurate  observations  must  first  be  established.  If

orgonotic  contact  is  present,  it  is  possible  to  see  the  various  functions

manifest themselves in the infant long before they have a “purpose.” The eye,

for  instance,  follows  a  moving  hand.  The  closing  motion  of  the  hand

develops long before the infant actually takes hold of any object and has

nothing  to  do  with  mechanical  “grasping  reflexes.” Purposeful  grasping

develops gradually through the merger of many functions, i.e., through the

contactful coordination of movements of previously uncoordinated organs.

Purposeful  seeing,  for  instance,  is  established  when  the  eye  comes  into

contact with a pleasure-inducing movement in the surroundings. Once the act

of seeing is accomplished, then the function, already complicated, seeks new

pleasurable subjects on which to fix the gaze. Unpleasurable stimuli produce

contractions and do not develop an act of seeing. The excessive amount of

anxiety and displeasure experienced by our infants later leads to “dull eyes,”

“myopia,” restriction of movement of the lids and, with it, to the “dead”

expression in the eyes.

  In  the  face  of  these  facts,  what  can  be  done  with  the  mechanistic

misconception  that  “seeing  is  the  response  of  the  retina  to  a  light  ray”?

Certainly it is, but the reaction of the retina is only a vehicle, a means of

seeing. Is a child’s dancing “only” the contact of feet and floor or “only”

such and such a sequence of muscle contractions? The emptiness of all themechanistic interpretations of life is revealed here very clearly.

  The child looks at you in one way when you smile at him and in another

when you frown. The crucial element therefore is the motor expression of the

plasma, not the individual stimuli, reactions, muscle contractions, etc. The

light ray striking the retina always involves the same process of fixed wave

lengths. Yet the infant’s eye can be shining or dull depending upon the tissue

turgor, which is increased by pleasure and inhibited by anxiety.

  A person who has established good contact with the infant can encourage

its  functions.  Whenever  I  came  nearby,  the  infant  I  was  observing  made

walking motions while lying down, to indicate to me his desire to “walk.”

When he was three and a half months old, he would become ecstatic as I held

him under the arms and let him put his feet rhythmically on the floor and

move  along.  He  looked  continuously  at  the  walls  or  ceiling  to  convince

himself that there really was movement, i.e., that the objects were moving

past him.

  Small  children  go  through  a  phase  of  development  characterized  by

vigorous activity of the voice musculature. The joy the infant derives from

loud noises (crying, shrieking, and forming a variety of sounds) is regarded

by many parents as pathological aggressiveness. The children are accordingly

admonished  not  to  scream,  to  be  “still,”  etc.  The  impulses  of  the  voice

apparatus are inhibited, its musculature becomes chronically contracted, and

the child becomes quiet, “well brought-up,” and withdrawn. The effect of

such mistreatment is soon manifested in eating disturbances, general apathy,

pallor  of  the  face,  etc.  Speech  disturbances  and  retardation  of  speech

development are presumably caused in this manner. In the adult we see the

effects  of  such  mistreatment  in  the  form  of  spasms  of  the  throat.  The

automatic constriction of the glottis and the deep throat musculature, with

subsequent inhibition of the aggressive impulses of the head and neck, seems

to be particularly characteristic. Clinical experience has taught us that small

children must be allowed to “shout themselves out” when the shouting isinspired  by  pleasure.  This  might  be  disagreeable  to  some  parents,  but

questions of education must be decided exclusively in the interests of the

child, not in those of the adults.

  I want to make it clear that I see the origin of the biopathic shrinking

process in the dependency of psychic and physical-chemical functions on the

bio-emotional activity of the organism at the beginning of its development.

Here, and only here, will the means for the prevention of this process be

found, not in drugs or cultural theories of sublimation.

  I have stressed the dependence of psychosomatic functions on the bio-

energetic functions of plasmatic pulsation. Lively pulsatory activity from the

first  moment  of  birth  is  the  only  conceivable  preventive  against  chronic

contraction and premature shrinking.

    Bio-energetic  pulsation  is  a  function  completely  dependent  on  the

stimulations from and contacts with the environment. The character structure

of the parents forms a crucial part of this environment, particularly that of the

mother, who provides the environment from the moment the embryo is formed

until the moment of birth.

  I should like now to discuss the few insights we possess into the prenatal

development of the organism. They do not amount to a great deal and are not

decisive. Much more will have to be learned before it is possible to open up

the obscure problem of heredity. But the following notes—they are no more

than that—are a beginning that can lead to further practical knowledge.

  If the onset of a shrinking biopathy is to be placed at the embryonic stage

of development, the next question will concern the influence of the mother’s

blood  on  the  embryo,  that  is,  the  effect  of  the  orgonity  of  her  organism,

especially the bio-energetic condition of the maternal genital organs, on the

embryo.

  The contractions of the chicken embryo, which have been demonstrated

on  film,  confirm  the  clonic-pulsatory  nature  of  embryonic  growth. The

vitality of an embryo is manifested in these contractions. The bladder-likeform  itself  shows  that  the  typical  bio-energetic  functions  of protoplasmic

protrusion, which can best be studied in flowing amoebae, are operative here.

It is necessary to assume that a freely contractile uterus provides a much

more favorable environment for the embryo than a spastic and anorgonotic

uterus. In a uterus that is orgonotically vigorous, the circulation of blood and

body fluids is more complete, making the energy metabolism more efficient.

In addition, the capacity for charge of the maternal tissue is transmitted to

the embryo. This is, after all, a functional part of the uterine mucosa.

  It is therefore perfectly understandable why the children of orgastically

potent  women  are  so  much  livelier  than  the  children  of  frigid,  armored

women—a contention that can easily be confirmed. So-called “heredity of

temperament”  is  in  large  measure  nothing  more  than  the  effect  of  the

maternal tissue on the embryo. Seen in this way, a part of the problem of

“heredity of character” can be grasped for the first time. Since emotional

functions  are  determined  by  the  orgonotic  energy  functions,  it  is

understandable  that  character  is  initially  only  a  question  of  the  degree  of

energy activity. In other words, temperament is an expression of the quantity

of the pulsatory activity of the orgonotic body system.

  The  “heredity  factor”  would  thus  be  tangible  in  principle  as  a

quantitative energy factor.  It  is  only  logical  that  a  system  rich  in  energy

resigns  less  easily  than  an  energy-impoverished  system.  A  legitimate

conclusion is that the energy level of an embryo is determined by the energy

level of the maternal genital organs. Quantitatively energy deficiency can be

understood as a decrease of orgonity, and it can be understood functionally as

reduced pulsatory activity of the plasma. It is quite likely that the reduction of

plasmatic pulsation in the embryo can secondarily cause an anorgonia. Thus,

we  cannot  automatically  assume  that  the  embryo  itself  was  initially

anorgonotic,  even  though  the  mother  may  have  suffered  from  decreased

orgone  energy  metabolism.  Two  possibilities  have  to  be  considered:  the

internal anorgonia of the embryo, and the anorgonia resulting from anorgoniaof the maternal genital apparatus.

  Let  us  pursue  this  train  of  thought  a  little  further.  Naturally,  concrete

observations will correct or amplify what is obscure here.

  During  the  sexual  act  of  the  parents,  the  embryo  participates  in  the

orgastic  contraction  of  the  uterus.  It  cannot  be  otherwise  because  of  the

  physiological-anatomical situation. Prior to birth there are also developmental

contractions  that  cannot  be  distinguished  bio-energetically  from  the

contractions stimulated by the mother’s orgasm. If, in addition, the female

organism  has  possessed  high  orgonity  before  pregnancy,  then  the  bio-

energetic  conditions  for  the  orgonity  of  the  embryo  are  favorable.  These

conditions are later qualified by the genital character structure of the parents,

which continues in the realm of psychic development what the bio-energetic

function  established  in  the  embryo.  After  birth,  the  newborn  infant

experiences independent orgastic contractions in the head and neck.

  Since  high  orgonity  leads  to  strong,  expansive,  instinctual  activity,

anorgonia is prevented. The anlage of a carcinomatous shrinking biopathy or

an  anorgonia  has  thus  become  unlikely,  though  not  entirely  impossible.

Destructive influences in later life can force even the most vigorous organism

into resignation and shrinking.

  But  let  us  return  to  our  newborn  infant:  From  the  fifth  month  of

pregnancy on, the movements of the child were extraordinarily vigorous; so

vigorous  in  fact  that  the  mother  often  experienced  pain.  The  obstetrician

noticed that the child’s heartbeat also was unusually strong. The delivery was

a difficult one—a first pregnancy with premature rupture of the membranes

and twenty hours labor. Nevertheless, there was no asphyxia at birth. The

mother’s  blood  remained  orgonotically  strong  and  free  of  T-bacilli

throughout the entire pregnancy.

  To recapitulate: The  biosocial  prerequisites  for  strong  orgonity  of  the

child in utero are high orgonity and orgastic potency in the parents, absence

of anorgonia in the uterus, and an absence of T-bacilli and no excess of CO
                                                                                          2in the maternal blood.

  Conversely,  low  orgonity  and  orgastic  impotence  in  the  parents,

anorgonia of the uterus, disturbances of inner tissue respiration, T-bacilli in

the  maternal  blood,  hyporgonia  of  the  blood,  and  muscular  armoring

together  create  the  disturbances  of  functioning  now  recognized  as  the

possible cause of a later anorgonia in the child.

  The mechanistic-mystical theory of heredity has thus lost more ground to

functional  pathology.  The  problem  is  no  longer  one  of  uncontrollable

“inherited  embryonic  damage”  “predisposing”  the  child  to  “hereditary

cancer”; instead, we are dealing with changeable life functions, with energy

quantities and disturbances of pulsation. These disturbances do indeed create

a tendency toward anorgonia, but the tendency does not have to develop if

favorable  living  circumstances  eradicate  the  initial  damage.  The  living

organism is very adaptable to both the bad and the good conditions of life.

  The time from the formation of the embryo to about the end of the first

year of life is considered in orgone biophysics to be the critical period in

which  the  “constitution  of  the  orgonotic  system  of  functioning”  is

established.  This  constitution,  measured  in  terms  of  orgonity  and  the

pulsatory  capability  of  the  tissues,  determines  the  degree  of  plasmatic

impulse activity.

    Embryonic development should be thought of as terminating not at birth

but at the time—roughly at the age of ten to twelve months—when all the

biological functions become fused into a unified, coordinated biosystem. This

critical span of life is decisive for later bio-energetic functioning. The critical

period for psychic development lies approximately in the third to fifth year of

life.  Its  outcome  is  profoundly  influenced  by  the  progress  of  the  critical,

earlier biophysical period. It is this earlier period that holds the solution to the

puzzling fact that after treatment, even when all the pathological mechanisms

have  been  worked  through,  an  intangible something  always  remains:  an

undeviating hopelessness in the life activity, a stillness in the organism, anirritability—in  brief,  what  classical  psychiatry  usually  calls  “inborn

disposition.”

  Much  remains  obscure  about  falling  anxiety  and  anorgonia.  Neither

anxiety  nor  anger  is  a  pathological  manifestation  of  the  life  system.  It  is

natural for a child to feel fear when it falls or is attacked by a dog and it is

natural for a newborn infant to express anger when its needs are not gratified.

  But falling anxiety is more than a fear of danger. It can appear long before

there is any consciousness of danger. It is connected with rapid contractions

of the vital apparatus, and, in fact, is produced by such contractions. Just as

actual  falling  causes  biological  contraction,  so  contraction  causes  the

sensation  of  falling.  It  is  therefore  understandable  why  a contraction that

occurs in the process of orgastic expansion precipitates falling anxiety. And it

is  equally  understandable  why  falling  anxiety  appears  when  the  muscular

armoring is pierced and the first plasmatic currents are felt. A contraction

occurring  in  the  middle  of  plasmatic  expansion  disturbs  the  sense  of

equilibrium. But still there is something that remains unexplained. Let us try

to pinpoint it even if we are unable to explain it.

  A basic function of the living orgonotic system is that it opposes and

overcomes  the  earth’s  gravitational  pull.  The dead  stalk  of  a  leaf  is

completely subject to the force of gravity; the living stalk grows in a direction

opposite to the force of gravity. (This phenomenon cannot, of course, be due

simply to the processes of mechanical tension, since a dead stalk remains

lying on the ground and does not raise itself even if filled with water.) The

flight of birds depends on the overcoming of the force of gravity. The upright

stance of man requires a vast amount of balance against the pull of gravity.

We know that this balance fails when the unity of the body motor functions is

somehow disturbed. This motor disturbance can be purely mechanical, such

as a leg injury or tabes, but it can also be functional. Anorgonia of the entire

body  or  of  essential  body  organs  signifies  a  disturbance  of  capacity  for

balance, hence a tendency to fall and the corresponding falling anxiety. Theprocess is clear so far. But the manifestation of falling anxiety in a three-

week-old infant (which we now know was precipitated by the cooling of the

skin after a bath) remains mysterious. It is true that the function of rapid

vascular contraction already exists, but the experience of falling does not.

Where then does the expression of falling anxiety originate? Turning to a

“phylogenetic  experience”  would  explain  nothing,  because  a  phylogenetic

experience  is  relevant  only  when  anchored  in  actuality.  Memory  function

does not exist without an actual mechanism.

  At this point we must give up trying to completely understand anorgonia

and  the  falling  anxiety  and  be  content  with  understanding  the  connection

between the block of orgonotic pulsation and the loss of organ sensation and

equilibrium. The relation of orgonity and anorgonia to the force of gravity is

clear. In the anorgonotic state the limbs are “heavy,” and movement can be

accomplished only with great effort. In the state of high orgonity, on the other

hand, one feels “light,” “floating.” Let us take such figures of speech literally

and seriously. In anorgonia, less biological energy is free and active. The

inert mass of the organism becomes greater and thus heavier in relation to

the active energy that has to move the body. In high orgonity, more bio-

energy is free and active and the mass of the organism becomes lighter in

relation to it. What we are dealing with is a genuine, alterable relationship

between mass and energy in the biosystem.

  It is not possible to go any further at the present time without invoking the

metaphysical construct that supposedly thinks, feels, acts, and reacts in the

background  of  living  functions.  This  would  lead  nowhere.  We  therefore

prefer to wait for a more favorable opportunity to finally solve what remains

unexplained. For the present it is enough to understand how early and in what

orgonotic functions the carcinomatous shrinking process and its anorgonia set

in.                                        CHAPTER X


      The Cancer Biopathy as a Problem of Sexual


                                      Sociology




Many  years  of  clinical  experience  will  be  required  before  we  completely

understand  the  devastations  to  the  life  system  caused  by  the  emotional

plague. This is all the more distressing because the shattered sex-economy of

cancer  patients,  which  is  essentially  due  to  the  emotional  plague,  is

consistently overlooked even though it is perfectly obvious: Deprived of the

natural  sexual  function,  potential  cancer  patients  develop  a  general

characterological resignation.

  First, there appear local, harmless “disturbances” such as stomach ulcers

or  perhaps  only  gastric  hyperacidity,  hemorrhoids,  a  spasm  of  the  throat,

genital numbness, menstrual problems, stiffness of the chest musculature, etc.

The  chronic  disturbance  of  the  biological  functioning  increasingly

undermines the respiration and pulsation of the tissues, which slowly begin to

disintegrate and putrefy. T-bacilli appear and accelerate the process, which

extends over a number of years. Finally, protozoa develop and proliferate

until the tumor becomes palpable and visible.

  Clearly, even the earliest diagnosis of the local cancer tumor is too late,

because the biopathy has already completed its devastation of the organism.

The  task  of  cancer  therapy  therefore  must  be  to  influence the  general

disturbance  of  function  in  the  biosystem,  to  foster  the  B-reaction  of  the

organism. Reduced to a single thought, this means that as long as education

continues to produce characterological resignation and muscular armoring

on a mass scale, eradication of the cancer scourge will be out of the question.Of course, it will be possible to eliminate a few tumors and save a few lives.

But it is a dangerous illusion to think that cancer can ever be overcome with

any single treatment, whether it be drugs, the knife, or orgone energy.

  I once had such illusions myself. When I first saw the effects of orgone

irradiation on cancer tumors in mice, I breathed a sigh of relief. At last, I told

myself, the way to a cancer therapy is opened; now we can start to cure

cancer  and  perhaps  even  learn  to  prevent  it.  I  felt  a  secret  delight  at  the

prospect of finally getting away from the “cursed sex problem” and escaping

safely into the “pure,” sex-free atmosphere of organic pathology. But I was

deceiving myself. The facts were there; justice had to be done to them. They

soon robbed me of the convenient illusion of having found an easy way out.

Great problems cannot be solved easily. The difficulty of the path is merely a

reflection  of  the  difficulty  of  the  problem.  I  did  not  get  away  from  the

“cursed” sex-economy, and for this I have to thank the incontrovertibility of

the facts.

  My cancer patients made me acutely aware of what I had been seeing for

the past twenty-four years, the devastation of sexual disturbances. There was

no getting away from it, no matter how I tried: Cancer is a putrefaction of the

tissues,  occurring  while  the  body  is  still  alive  and  caused  by  pleasure

starvation of the organism. It was not simply inadequate research methods or

therapeutic errors in biology that had been responsible for the overlooking of

this extremely simple fact. I had stumbled upon it only because I had to

remain consistent as a sex-economist; I had to follow the consequences of

sexual disturbances wherever they led. What is really responsible for this

oversight  is  our  whole  way  of  viewing  life:  our  moralism,  the  sexual

crippling of our children and youth, the moralistic prejudices in medicine and

education, in short, our fear of life and our blindness to it, attitudes that we

have handed down from generation to generation for thousands of years. We

have outlawed the most important life function; we have stamped it sinful,

even criminal, and denied it any social protection. In addition to that, we haveadded an unpardonable deed: we have tolerated and still tolerate the presence

of those things that hinder natural love-life—pornography, sexual gossip and

defamation,  sexual  compulsion,  and  medieval  sex  laws.  Filthy  fantasies,

whether hypocritically moralistic or openly sadistic and pornographic, still

determine how our children are brought up and whom we should embrace.

We have lost our trust in the natural laws of life and now we are beginning to

notice the consequences.

  The vitality and resilience of the human organism is to be wondered at.

Considering  the  devastations  to  which  it  is  continually  subjected  by

mechanistics and mysticism, it is amazing that the human organism does not

perish more rapidly. Our hope lies precisely in this resilience. If a mistreated

organism can survive for decades before developing local growths, then our

present terror of cancer can be ended, but only if we approach the problem

without illusions, above all refusing to accept the neurotic ideas of a plague-

infested humanity.

  The World Almanac for 1942 contains a statistical summary for the state

of New York of the frequency of the diseases we call biopathies. I quote the

                                                                              1
figures as they were presented in an article written by a colleague. While the

percentage of diseases of a non-biopathic nature (pneumonia, diphtheria, etc.)

sank considerably in the years between 1921 and 1940, the percentage figures

for biopathic diseases (mental illnesses, cardiovascular hypertension, cancer,

suicide,  criminality,  etc.)  show  an  extraordinary  increase  over  the  same

period:1921
1525

1935
1940

DEATHS, CHIEF CAUSES, NEW YORK STATE
(rates per 100,000 population)

Nox-Biopatiuic Diseases

s oNARY
roseRcuLoss
Deaths Rate
0508 886
9162 789
8146 646
887 524
5793 420

Deaths Rate
10665 993
13571 1168
12908 1024
Lo 844

6143 455

Deaths  Rate
1702 159
Lol 86

656 53
102 o8
15 o1
1921
1925
1930
1935
1940

1920
1925
1930
1935
1941

BropaTnic DiseAses

CATDIOVASCULAR
Deaths Rate
36,504 3414
43,370 3133
48,487 3845
55,109 4221
64,957 4813

cAneER
Deaths

11,163
13,201
15,144
18,600
21,384

INSANE IN NEW YORK STATE
(rates per 100,000 population)

Males
19,515
22,667
28674
36,124
45,870

Females
21,265
23,858
21,737
33,943
43,393

Total
40,780
46525
56,411
70,067
89,263

Rate
1041
1136
1218
1425
1584

Rate
3900
4136
4440
493.0
6642

CONVICTIONS FOR CRIME IN NEW YORK STATE

1920
1925
1930
1935
1940

Total
40,601
77,202

175,530
363,743
1,155,986

SUICIDES IN NEW YORK STATE
(rates per 100,000 population)

1920
1925
1930
1935
1941

Total
1442
1,664
2,135
2,180
2188

Rate
135
143
172
167
162
  These figures not only show that biopathies are fundamentally different

from  the  non-biopathic  diseases,  but  also  indicate  that  they  are  not

understood. Mechanistic medicine, which is not sex-economically oriented,

has no access to them. Biopathies are diseases that result from disturbances

of the biological pulsation of the autonomic life apparatus, thereby reducing

orgonotic  potency.  They  are  socially  determined  and  result  from sexual

stasis.  The  number  of  biopathies  is  steadily  increasing.  The  situation  is

extremely serious and calls for an investigation and, hopefully, a solution.    Sex-economy  and  orgone  physics  offer  medicine  and  pedagogy  a  few

important insights that could be of help, although not in the way one might

think. We have not discovered any chemical cure-all that, if applied on a

mass scale, would be capable of suddenly doing away with the scourge of

biopathic diseases. It is not so simple. The struggle against biopathies will be

one of the most difficult tasks ever faced by human society. I would even

venture that no human effort, not even the conquest of the plagues in the

Middle Ages, can compare with this task in magnitude, depth, and danger. Its

resolution will in all probability require the greatest revolution in thought and

action that man has ever had to accomplish. It will be an achievement not of

individuals but of society as a whole.

  Biopathies are an endemic disease of the earth’s population. The fact that

the number of mentally ill people doubled in New York State over a period of

twenty  years  (a  figure  valid  for  every  state  or  country)  is  a  statistic  that

speaks  for  itself  in  unequivocal  terms.  It  is  impossible  to  expect  that

biopathies  will  be  eliminated  rapidly,  easily,  and  without  danger;  the

necessary  knowledge  is  not  there,  or  if  it  is  there,  it  is  not  well  enough

organized, and there are still too many erroneous fundamental doctrines. We

are only at the very beginning of the first insight into the colossal disaster

from which the human race has been suffering for thousands of years and by

which it seems about to be engulfed. This disaster cannot be understood or

overcome  by  little  medicinal  remedies,  ideologies,  political  slogans,  or

prayers. These methods will all only serve to deepen it. The first priorities

must be the preservation of insight that has been gained, the furtherance and

protection of truth under all circumstances, the courage to comprehend the

enormity of the social disaster, and a trust in the natural life function. An

essential  feature  of  this  biopathic  misery  is  the  fact  that  the  natural  life

function  is  ignored,  feared,  and  everywhere  repressed.  Yet  it  is,  and  will

remain, the only hope. It is and will remain bound to the natural sexual

function of the animal species “man.” There is no getting away from thisconclusion, and it is a good thing, too.

  Dr.  Friedrich  Lönne,  chief  physician  at  the  Theresienhospital  in

Düsseldorf, wrote in his treatise Wirksame Krebsbekämpfung (1937): “We

have to reckon with the fact that every year in Germany about 15,000 women

die of cancer of the uterus and the vagina and about 3,500 to 4,000 die of

breast cancer. Of the 15,000 that die of cancer of the vagina and uterus, more

than 12,000 have a cancer of the cervix…”

  Cancer  of  the  genital  organs  and  cancer  of  the  breast  are  far  more

common than cancer of any other organ. The sex-biopathic nature of cancer

emerges unmistakably from this fact. If considered in conjunction with the

prevalence of sexual frigidity in women, this finding is merely an expression

in cancer statistics of the disturbances of the sexual functions, which were

known to us for a long time from our sex-economic clinical practice. It is

precisely  this  relation  between  sexual  pathology  and  cancer  statistics  that

leads  to  an  important  conclusion: The  local  cancerous  process  is  a

manifestation  resulting  from  the  damaged  sex-economy  of  the  organism.

Consequently,  the  elimination  of  cancer  requires  a  radical  change  in  the

entire sexual hygiene of the population. In the face of this conclusion, the

statements of many cancer specialists do not sound very logical. Because of

their impotence in the battle against cancer, they hold to the old, erroneous

theories. Instead of drawing the same conclusions that we did, based on the

predilection of the cancer tumor for sexual organs, they write this sort of

thing:


      Scientific  cancer  research  today  is  of  the  opinion  that  besides  the  local  causes  for  the

  development of cancer, a second, systemic factor must be assumed, namely weakness of the

  anti-blastic system. [The antiblastic system, not understood until now, is in reality nothing other

  than  our  “B-reaction,”  that  is,  the  “orgonotic  potency”  of  the  organism.]  In  the practical

  treatment of cancer we have, for clinical reasons, to keep to the theory of the local origin of

  cancer. For, if we had to overcome a systemic disease already present before the appearance of

  the local cancer tumor, then even the best operation or the best form of irradiation would be only

a partial and rather questionable solution. Physician and patient would both lose their confidence

in the curability of cancer, for a method of treating a systemic disease, if it really exists, is not  known to us [from Krebskrankheiten (Leipzig, 1937)].


  In other words, if we do not know a way to cure the cancer biopathy, then

it simply does not exist and we must stay with the theory of the local origin

of the cancer tumor, otherwise both patient and doctor will lose confidence!

What confidence? Confidence in what? Confidence in an illusion, an illusion

blocking the way to an understanding and elimination of the carcinomatous

biopathy.  Lönne’s  argument  is  similar  to  that  of  many  psychiatrists:  they

deny the social origin of sexual repression and the sexual-biopathic nature of

neuroses and psychoses because, if they were to establish such connections,

they would come into sharp conflict with many social institutions and would

be forced to publicly defend unpopular facts. Such tactics have nothing to do

with either medicine or science in general. They are motivated strictly by

business interests and a concern for one’s livelihood.

  The reader will now better understand why the first cancer case I chose to

describe  was  a  carcinomatous  shrinking  biopathy  with  no  diagnosable

malignant tumors, and why, throughout this account of the cancer disease, the

biopathic background rather than the local tumor is emphasized.

  It  is  asserted  in  the  literature  on  cancer  statistics  that  the  increase  in

cancer  deaths  over  the  past  decades  is  to  be  ascribed  to  more  accurate

diagnosis, both on the living organism and post-mortem; in other words, that

the increase is an artifact. In order to uphold the “pure hereditary nature of

cancer,” it is denied that primitive peoples, who still lead a natural sexual life,

are relatively free of cancer and that the increase in the statistical record of

cancer deaths corresponds to a real growth of the disease.

  Following  is  a  table  giving  the  statistics  on  cancer  deaths  in  Norway

between 1853 and 1925 (according to Gade):Number of  Percentage of Cancer

Gancer Deaths Plysicons  Death Certificates
per 100000 nthe ‘Made Out By
Tnhabitants Country Physiians
1853 7 295 04
1860 12 30 88
1870 o 0 85
1880 o 551 500
1890 58 658 54
1900 oL 1068 827
1910 9 1177 83
1920 105 1281 924

1925 18 1496 985
  The  interpretation  of  such  statistics  by  the  theorists  of  heredity  is

understandable in the following way: the heredity mystique does not admit

that the social environment influences hereditary factors. Even though it is

correct, the doctrine of the heredity of acquired characteristics has not to this

day won practical acceptance. We have every reason to doubt the rational

scientific character of the heredity doctrine. However, there can be no doubt

at all that an emotional factor plays a completely uncontrolled role in all

considerations of heredity. And it is precisely this emotional factor in the

mystical  theory  of  heredity  that  excludes  the  influence  of  the  social

environment and eternalizes the inherited characteristics. According to this

theory, inherited diseases are already present in the “hereditary basis” and are

therefore  inaccessible  from  the  standpoint  of  prophylaxis.  Consequently,

changing  the  social  environment  is  considered  to  be  misleading  and

superfluous. Indeed, since cancer is found in plants and animals, in other

words, quite generally throughout nature, there is no difference, from this

point of view, between primitive peoples who live in close relation to nature

and  mechanized  man.  Accordingly,  the  cancer  tumor  corresponds  to  an

“embryonic  malformation”  and  is  treated  in  hereditarian  textbooks  in

conjunction  with  teratism.  It  follows  from  this  hereditarian  approach  that

there can be no genuine increase in cancer deaths, only an artificial one,

explained by the idea that better techniques of diagnosis and a greater number

of physicians have resulted in a rise in the number of cancer tumors that are

diagnosed.  The secret purpose of all these hereditary arguments is to try to save the

erroneous theory of the unalterable hereditary basis from being supplanted by

the living, functional concept of the interaction of plasma and environment.

Not one single productive thought on the subject of medical influencing of

so-called  hereditary  diseases  emerges  from  the  mechanistic,  metaphysical

theory of heredity. Thinking of this kind leads straight to the mystical idea of

the  hereditary  superman  and  inferior  man,  that  is,  to  the  ideas  of  the

emotional plague. We should not be surprised, however, because this kind of

thinking represents the conservative function of the theory of heredity, on

which the works of Darwin, De Vries, Freud, and others have barely had an

impact. The theory of heredity is not a science but an ethical alibi.

  For the reasons I have outlined, it is difficult to make any comment on

sham statistics such as those just given. The number of physicians in Norway

rose considerably after 1853, making an evaluation of the figures in that case

extremely difficult. However, it cannot be convincingly maintained that the

increase  in  cancer  deaths  in  New  York  State  between  1921  and  1940  is

attributable simply to better methods of diagnosis. Little has been learned

about cancer diagnosis since 1921, and there was not a marked increase in the

number of physicians. Yet, over the course of twenty years, the death rate

from  cancer  increased  in  New  York  from  104.1  to  158.4  per  100,000  of

population.

  The argument that the increase in cancer mortality is an artificial statistic

or that it can be explained by the increase in average life expectancy becomes

invalid if one does not isolate the cancer biopathy from the other sexual

biopathies but instead considers it alongside the parallel rise in deaths from

cardiovascular biopathy and the growing number of cases of schizophrenia,

criminality, and suicide. Once this connection is made and the common sex-

economic and social background of all the sexual biopathies is understood,

then such empty talk is silenced. We will be confronted at that time with the

naked  fact  of  the  murderous  effect  of  the  emotional  plague  and  of  theignorance of physicians and educators in questions concerning the natural

sexual life of children and adolescents. No other negligence committed by

medicine  can  compare  with  this  inexcusable  general  indifference  to  sex-

starvation  diseases.  It  was  not  the  fault  of  medicine  and  pedagogy  that

hundreds of thousands died of the bubonic plague, nor that countless women

died of puerperal fever. The agents causing these diseases were unknown.

But in the final analysis murderous biopathies are socially produced by the

irrational reactions of sexually pathological people. The avoidance of sexual

problems  or  the  compulsively  moralistic  judging  of  them  is  an  automatic

reaction on the part of physicians and educators. The opposition of these

social  groups  to  the  struggle  against  sexual  biopathies  is  proof  of  this

statement.

    Nevertheless, a powerful hope confronts these distressing truths. Once it

is understood that there are biopathic diseases of the vital apparatus that can

be simultaneously the cause and the result of social ills, the picture, at first

troubling and complicated, simplifies. It is true that there is no human being

capable  of  functioning  alone  as  a  saviour:  there  can  be  no  redeemer,  no

matter  how  much  the  mass  of  people  hope  for  one.  But  the  constant

deepening of the social misery will bring about what no individual could ever

achieve: the  human  masses,  who  suffer  so  much,  both  biopathically  and

socially, will be compelled to think rationally and to regain contact with their

basic biological being.  This  revolution  will  probably  be  one  of  the  most

significant results of the emotional plague of the twentieth century. There are

already many positive signs of its development.

  Ten or twenty years ago, a concern with the sexuality of the child and the

adolescent was taboo, almost as much for the scientist as for the layman.

Today that is no longer the case, and it is becoming less and less so. Sexual

suffering has become too obvious and too widespread. The attempts—still

predominantly unofficial—to get at the misery are becoming more numerous

and more insistent. They are not yet included in any political program, but forthe  first  time  in  human  history,  political  programs  themselves  are  being

examined very carefully with regard to their usefulness and rationality. We

already hear the question being asked as to whether politics itself is not a

social sickness. The consciousness of the natural demands of life is coming

more and more to the fore, not as a challenge or dream of individuals but as

an achievement of human society.

  The reader will ask what these general social questions have to do with

cancer. The answer is, a great deal, in fact everything! The main purpose of

this book is to demonstrate convincingly that cancer, as a special form of

biopathy, is inseparably connected with the problem of sexuality and with the

social structure of our society. Moreover, cancer has remained an unsolved

problem up to the present day because neither its sexual nor social causation

has been taken into consideration. What does organic pathology have to do

with sociology? is a question that we often hear. But what the sexual life of

the masses has to do with politics and sociology is no longer wondered about,

as  it  was  a  few  years  ago  in  Europe.  On  this  subject,  sex-economy  has

succeeded in breaking down the wall of traditional thinking. Today there is

no longer any “non-political” sexology, as there still was at the Third World

Congress of the World League for Sexual Reform in Vienna, in 1930. Today

it is well known in the realm of biopsychiatry that sexuality and sociology

can be treated only in relation to each other. It will not be long before organic

pathology, in evaluating a tissue lesion, will investigate its social and sexual

causations. Human beings are biosexual and social organisms that develop

disturbances in the tissue functions just as they do in their emotional lives.

  Those who are familiar with the figures on the increase of the cancer

biopathy will have asked themselves why this particular disease has spread

the way it has. Several years ago psychiatrists found themselves confronted

with  the  same  question  when  they  were  forced  to  recognize  that  psychic

diseases  were  not  limited  to  those  showing  hysterical  and  compulsive

symptoms and that character neuroses were increasing steadily and affectingmore  and  more  people.  The  answer  then  was  that  before  the  turn  of  the

century,  sexual  repression  and  armoring  were  total.  Breakthroughs  of

neurotic  symptoms  were,  therefore,  correspondingly  restricted  to

manifestations such as hysteria, etc. The totally armored individual was the

“normal  person.”  Since  then,  sexual  demands  have  broken  through  with

increasing  intensity,  requiring  recognition  and  gratification.  The

circumscribed symptom neurosis gave way more and more to the general

character neurosis: heightened life demands collided with old, rigid forms of

living, irrational dogmata, and inner neurotic inhibitions.

  Human beings who become conscious of their sexual needs because of

changing  mores  but  who  simultaneously  lack  the  ways  and  means  of

naturally discharging their sexual energy and experiencing full gratification

are  necessarily  torn  apart.  They  become  biopathically  ill,  asocial,  and

criminal. There is no way back to yesterday! We are dealing with progress,

even if it is a painful and momentarily dangerous process. Attempting to stem

it simply increases the misery that already exists.

  To  the  reactionary  and  the  mystic  this  will  confirm  the  dangers  of

“immorality” and make them demand a return to the old, resigned way of

living.  (Actually,  they  make  this  demand  constantly,  but  have  nothing

constructive to say that might alleviate human suffering.) However, there is

no  turning  back  biosocial  development.  There  is  only  the  possibility  of

allowing the development to occur in less painful and less dangerous ways.

  What  applies  to  the  growing  incidence  of  the  cancer  biopathy  is

applicable to biopathies in general. The entire development of society has

begun to replace the old ways of sexual living with new ones. At the turn of

the century, a woman of thirty-five was a matron. Today, she is a young

woman full of joie de vivre. The same applies to a man of forty or fifty. But

education and medicine have not kept in step with this social development.

The structural capacity of people to live fully has remained far behind their

knowledge  and  their  demands.  The  stasis  of  biological  energy  in  humanorganisms is therefore much greater than it was twenty or forty years ago.

Around 1900, a frigid woman, sitting at home with no job and no outside

contact with men, was much less likely to have experienced conscious sexual

conflict than she is today, when she takes an increasingly more active part in

social life. Industrial development and the present war are the main causes of

this situation. We can probably expect even more revolutionary changes in

the life of women. No one except the fascists will demand that she “return to

the hearth,” and we find that even fascism has been powerless in this matter.

It  now  follows  that  if  the  human  organism  is  exposed  to an  increasing

discrepancy between what it wants from life and its capacity for gratification,

then, clearly, the stasis of biological energy will increase proportionately.

And the greater the sexual stasis, the greater the physiological and emotional

damage to the organism. Cancer is the most significant somatic expression of

the  biophysiological  effect  of  sexual  stasis;  schizophrenia  is  the  most

significant expression in the emotional realm. It is no coincidence, in fact, it

is logical, that the state of Massachusetts, which has stringent laws against

contraception even in the middle of the twentieth century, also has one of the

                                                        2
highest cancer death rates in the United States. The finding that cancer is a

disease caused by sexual starvation will have to be taken seriously.

  The enormous increase in biopathies is therefore a simple expression of

the discrepancy between the desire for a sexual life and the incapacity for a

sexual life. The desire for life has grown enormously but the increase of the

capacity  for  living  (sexual  potency,  capacity  for  responsibility,  self-

regulation, etc.) has not been corresponding. The conclusion is not that the

will to live should be reduced but that in the human organism a structural

capacity  for  living  that  keeps  pace  with  the  demands  of  life  should  be

established. It is essentially an educational and social task, and not a medical

one. Clearly, the establishment of the full capacity for life and pleasure will

require the elimination of restricting institutions and laws, some of which

date back a hundred, some a thousand, years. If, therefore, adolescents ofeither sex enter into satisfying, natural love relationships before reaching the

“legal”  age,  and  are  then  exposed  to  reform  school,  an  antisocial

environment, because of some age-old laws, it is the old laws that should be

done away with, not the natural sexuality of the young people. From this one

example the reader can easily figure out for himself which reactionary forces

such  a  social  experiment  will  have  to  contend  with,  and  how  intense  the

conflict will be. Obviously the struggle for a “new world order,” such as is

longed for everywhere, will not be merely theoretical but will have to deal

practically with specific life problems. It is precisely these life problems that

have  led  our  troubled  world  into  chaos,  and  the  need  for  profound  and

revolutionary solutions has prevented those who are calling for a new world

order from speaking concretely and frankly. The change in society will be

brought about not by political plans and phrases but by the actual solution of

individual problems.


  THE “ORGONON” PLAN: ON THE POSSIBILITY OF

                          CANCER PREVENTION


Until  the  summer  of  1942  I  had  not  allowed  patients  to  keep  orgone

accumulators in their own homes. A number of friends had suggested it, but I

refused for several reasons. From a purely legal point of view it was unclear

in what form the orgone accumulators should be released for public use. Not

being particularly fond of business matters, I had no desire to become an

entrepreneur. Yet, to have left the manufacture and distribution of the orgone

accumulator to businessmen would have meant surrendering orgone research

to  the  money-making  practices  of  today’s  pharmaceutical  industry.  I  was

deterred also by the thought of the ugly competition that inevitably would

have broken out. I had neither the time nor the inclination for that sort of

thing.  I  applied  for  a  patent  on  the  accumulator,  but  with  the  explicit

notification to the Patent Office and to all my colleagues that I was patenting

it for the sole purpose of protecting it from unscrupulous exploitation andprofiteering. Like water and air, orgone energy can be obtained for nothing

and is available in unending quantities. The purpose of collecting it in the

accumulator (a process similar to filling a wash basin with water) is to supply

it  in concentrated  form.  It  is  important  to  provide  a  means  of  access  to

concentrated orgone energy for even the poorest people.

  It will be asked why I did not simply present my discovery to the world,

as  is  customary.  Even  though  I  have  no  interest  in  gaining  any  financial

rewards from the discovery, I could very easily have basked in the fame that

would have resulted from making my findings public. But I had to bear in

mind  the  future  of  orgone  research.  No  social  institution  had  deemed  it

necessary to offer our Institute the economic support that any below-average

experimental  work  in  the  chemical  field  could  obtain  easily.  I  was  also

influenced by the fact that in Scandinavia orgone researchers had to cope

with the pettiness and irrationality of conventional officials in science. These

officials had tried to completely destroy the work because they sensed that

orgone physics was a dangerous opponent and competitor to the mechanism

and mysticism that dominate natural science. My opponents had vigorously

attacked me in Norway in 1937–1938; it was a crucial warning. I had to rid

myself of any naïveté. It is dangerous to expect help from social institutions

that owe their existence to the lack of knowledge. What if Edison had had to

look  to  the  manufacturers  of  gas  lamps  for  material  support  in  the

construction  of  his  electrical  incandescent  lamps?  Atmospheric  orgone

energy is to chemical drugs what the electrical bulb was to the gas lamp.

  I always recall that Madame Curie did not have enough money to buy

radium for her research and had to rely on gifts while at the same time the

money barons were making millions from radium. Having seen the business

ethic in practice, and knowing how routine science depends on it, I learned

caution and circumspection.

  Since  I  would  not  sell,  donate,  or  personally  exploit  the  patent,  there

seemed to be no way to make orgone energy generally available for practicaluse. But as so often happens in such situations the natural course of events

led spontaneously to a solution, which I will now describe.

  For many years I had enjoyed the friendship of a seventy-year-old trapper

and fisherman in Maine, where I have a cabin. I had set up a laboratory there

for  the  study  of  atmospheric  orgone  energy.  The  high  relative  humidity

during the summer months in New York made work in the city impossible,

and the research in orgone physics was then transferred to Maine.

  In February 1942 I learned from this man’s family that he had fallen ill

with cancer of the prostate and was in the hospital for X-ray treatment. The

tumor had been discovered a few months earlier and in November 1941 his

doctors had given him only six to twelve months to live.

  The news affected me deeply. We had become close friends years before,

when I had told him about the nature of bions. This simple man revealed a

natural  understanding  of  the  living  process  far  more  acute  than  academic

biology or physics could have provided. I had my large microscope with me

and I asked the man if he would like to see the life energy in bions. To my

complete  astonishment,  my  friend  correctly  described  bions  even  before

looking into the microscope. For many decades he had been observing, with

the keen instinct of a human being intimately attuned to nature, the growth of

seeds and the character of earth humus. He had formed the following picture:

Everywhere,  he  told  me,  there  are  very  small,  very  delicate  “bubbles”

(vesicles);  they  represent  “life,”  and  from  them  everything  that  is  “life”

develops; they are so small that they cannot be seen with the naked eye; but

the  moss  on  the  rocks  develops  from  them,  and  the  rock,  exposed

permanently to rain, “softens” on the surface and forms these “life bubbles.”

He  had  often  tried  to  talk  with  academic  visitors  about  them,  but  their

response was always a strange smile. Yet he knew he was right. I knew he

was right also, for how could moss “seeds” “strike root” in the rock?

  When  this  man  saw,  now  magnified  to  4000x,  the  vesicles  whose

existence he had already surmised, he experienced what he described as “thedeepest shock of my life.” He had never believed that one day he would

actually  see  those  “bubbles,”  which  he  thought  of  each  time  he  tried  to

conceive of the greenness, the growth, the flowering, and the fertility of the

soil around him.

  I had not told him anything about atmospheric orgone energy during the

first  summers,  because  I  was  afraid  it  might  spoil  our  friendship.  It  later

turned out that he too, from the same fear, had said nothing to me about his

ideas.

  When I returned to the orgone-physical work in Maine in the summer of

1942, I found my friend in a cachectic state. He had lost a great deal of

weight, was stooped, was scarcely able to work, tired very quickly, had no

appetite,  and  was  losing  hope.  He  knew  he  did  not  have  long  to  live;  a

physician had told him so. He told me that he could not accept his fate. He

was, in fact, resisting it vigorously. He did not want to die; this world of

woods, mountains, and lakes, in which he had spent almost seventy years of

his life, was too beautiful, too much a part of him. It was impossible for him

to conceive of not being able to see and enjoy it. He loved the solitude of his

woods, in which for decades he had earned his livelihood with hard work.

  The X-ray treatment had partially alleviated his severe pains for a short

time;  now  they  were  returning.  He  had  no  money,  having  been  a  poor

businessman all his life. His family was in despair. The physicians had given

no hope at all; death was expected within a very short time. The man did not

want to go back to the hospital. He had felt miserable there and had rebelled

against everything and everyone. He was not only a bad businessman but a

bad patient as well. As a person close to nature, he did not adapt easily to the

“values” of culture and civilization.

  He  knew  too  much  about  nature,  love,  and  life  to  possess  the  highly

respected characteristic of “resignation to fate.” He was deeply religious in

the good sense, but he despised the church business. Hence, the people in the

area considered him an apostate, although they had great respect for him. Ialways  felt  that,  with  the  appropriate  financial  conditions,  he  could  have

become  an  outstanding  natural  scientist.  How  many  great  talents  are  lost

because the necessary material means are lacking.

  When I asked him one day whether he believed in God he replied: “Of

course, he is everywhere, in me and all around us. Just look over there.” He

pointed to the blue color in front of the distant mountains. “I call it life, but

people laugh at me, so I don’t like to speak about it.” Thus, he too was aware

of the existence of orgone energy in the atmosphere.

  For weeks I had been discussing with his family the possibility of getting

him  to  use  an  orgone  accumulator.  He  mistrusted  all  medicine  and  was

stubborn  too.  It  was  therefore  not  going  to  be  easy  to  persuade  him;  his

daughter was hesitant about trying.

  When  he  confided  his  impressions  to  me  and  called  the  blue  in  the

atmosphere “life,” I told him about my own findings. I told him that he was

completely right and that what he called “life” was in fact the biological

energy that I had discovered and named “orgone.” I told him it could be

concentrated, and could be seen flashing like lightning. The Northern Lights,

I told him, were a manifestation of a special state of orgone energy. One

evening  I  showed  him  the  orgone  radiation  in  the  orgonoscope.  He

immediately  understood  the  nature  of  this  radiation,  without  any  of  the

compulsive doubts that our mechanistic and mystical academicians develop

in such cases in order to preserve their scholarly dignity. We prevailed upon

him  to  build  an  orgone  accumulator  for  his  own  use.  Cautiously  and

suspiciously he went to work. We were anxious to have him finish it, because

he was declining rapidly. When the accumulator was finally built, and he had

sat in it for the first time, he told us with a beaming smile that he had felt a

prickling sensation in his hands. In spite of this, he could not be persuaded to

use the accumulator regularly. I eventually found out that he was resisting the

very idea that he was ill. A friendly talk was of little help. Then stormy

weather caused severe pains to set in and he could no longer move; he hadburning pains in the urethra and was on the verge of giving in to his disease.

  After a great deal of work on my part, and with the help of his strong will

to live, I persuaded him to sit in the accumulator twice a day, for an hour

each time. The pains stopped in a few days. Microscopic examination of the

urine showed disintegrating cancer cells; the T-bacilli were immobile, even

though they were present in large numbers. He was able to get up again, eat

well, and walk around. I made him promise me that he would take good care

of himself for at least a year and give his organism a chance to recover. I also

told him not to feel ashamed of being ill.

  The  effects  of  the  accumulator,  combined  with  my  psychotherapeutic

efforts,  were  successful.  I  followed  the  improvement  of  his  condition  for

several weeks. He came to visit me in my cabin, four miles from his home,

and  asked  about  the  properties  of  the  energy  that  he  called  “life.”  He

intuitively  understood  everything  that  I  had  worked  out  experimentally.

When the summer was over I departed, convinced that he would soon stop

using  the  accumulator  regularly.  But  I  was  wrong.  He  came  to  like  the

accumulator and acknowledged that for the time being it had saved his life.

He  wrote  that  he  was  feeling  much  better.  The  pains  had  gone,  he  was

gaining weight, and felt, as he put it, “young again.” In the space of two

months he put on 7 lbs. For a time he excreted a brown fluid, i.e., the tumor

detritus.

  Here was a man who was supposed to have died a long time ago. Yet at

the time this report was written he was still alive and lively, with almost no

pain and no need to use drugs. Whatever his future fate might be, he was

enjoying, at the end of his life, the power of what he called “God” and “life.”

  This man was Herman O. Templeton. He became the first manager of the

Orgone  Institute  Laboratories,  which  we  established  under  the  name

                                            3
“Orgonon” in Franklin County, Maine.

  What I am now going to describe is only a plan for the Orgone Institute.

Its realization does not depend on the Institute alone. We do not know howlong it will take for social administrators to recognize the danger to human

existence that results from sexual biopathies. Nor do we know how long this

war  will  last  and  impede  the  fostering  of  human  development.  But  the

Orgone Institute has, nevertheless, undertaken a few decisive steps toward

the prevention of biopathies. I now leave it to the readers to judge whether

our  efforts  deserve  the  support  of  the  public;  I  am  talking  not  merely  of

                                                                                4
recognition and praise, but of tangible economic and social support.

  Templeton was the first cancer patient to have an orgone accumulator in

his own home. The benefit of being able to treat oneself at home cannot be

overestimated. If my friend developed pains, he did not need to wait for an

appointment  with  a  doctor,  or  travel  50  miles  to  see  one,  as  he  would

otherwise  have  had  to  do.  He  could  utilize  the  orgone  irradiation

immediately, and as often as he needed to. He had the leisure to become

familiar  with  the  radiation—to  become  friendly  with  it,  as  it  were.  The

accumulator was not some medical apparatus in a clinical laboratory. The

patient could show it to his acquaintances and let them sit in it. They could

discuss the phenomena with him and confirm his experiences. He was not the

passive  object  of  a  course  of  treatment,  but  took  an  active  role.  He  was

learning to think about and control the energy that helped him so much. He

was becoming a new type of social worker, acquainting those in his own

social sphere with this subject, independent of his doctor. He was also saving

a great deal of money that would otherwise have had to be spent on travel,

the doctor, drugs, etc.

  These  medical  and  social  effects,  produced  by  having  the orgone

accumulator in the home, are the basis of the Orgonon plan. Our recuperating

cancer patient volunteered to take over the construction of the accumulators.

Later, his daughter succeeded him in this task. In time, if everything went as

planned, the demand for accumulators would increase. A piece of land was

therefore needed where we could set up workshops. But in order to buy the

land and build the workshops we needed money. Orgone research requireslarge amounts of money, which those of us working at the Institute cannot

provide and which no one else will provide. For that reason, the small sums

charged for the use of the orgone accumulators will eventually have to cover

not only the costs of their manufacture but also the entire research work. As

people become increasingly familiar with the nature of orgone energy, they

will  voluntarily  contribute  to  orgone  research.  Their  reward  will  be  the

health-providing effect of the orgone accumulator.

  So rather than selling or exploiting the orgone accumulator, we would put

it to work for orgone research. This could be done only in the form of a non-

                          5
profit, public institution.

  The Institute bought a 150-acre farm in Maine for $4000. The money was

made available as an interest-free loan by a schoolteacher who was a student

at the Institute; repayment was to take place at any time during the course of

the following years. There were a few old buildings on the land from which

enough  material  could  be  obtained  to  construct  the  essential  workshops.

Herman Templeton took over the administration of the building projects.

  The National Research Council in Washington was advised of the plan.

  Orgonon  is  situated  at  an  altitude  of  1600  feet,  and  has  a  dry,  sunny

climate. It is thus eminently suited for experimental orgone research. In time,

all of the biophysical work can be transferred to Orgonon. The difficulty of

working in a small New York laboratory overcrowded with instruments and

apparatus would at last be overcome. Orgonon could become the home of

orgone-physical  life-research,  which  has  been  wandering  from  country  to

country now for fifteen years. It deserves some stability and peace.

  The orgone accumulators built at Orgonon remain the property of the

Institute. Just as one rents a telephone, one acquires an orgone accumulator

for the desired period of time, in return for a monthly contribution to the

“Orgone Research Fund.” The income for this fund comes from contributions

by students and associates and others, payments for experimental tests in the

laboratory, and the monthly rentals for the use of the accumulators. The fundis our only source of money for the running costs of the project, the salaries

of the workers, and the costs of expanding the orgone biophysical research.

  Because the orgone accumulator produces a vagotonic excitation of the

organism  and  charges  the  blood  orgonotically,  thereby  increasing  the

resistance  of  the  organism  to  disease,  it  will  become  an  indispensable

instrument in the fight against those diseases that consist of a reduction in the

biological defense reactions of the organism and a contraction of the vital

apparatus. I have no doubt that the initial hesitant reaction to the novelty and

simplicity  of  the  apparatus  will  be  overcome  and  that  the  officials  will

eventually  authorize  the  distribution  of  orgone  accumulators.  I  have

relinquished any idea of material gain, not out of magnanimity but simply in

order  to  eliminate  any  suspicion  that  I  might  be  trying  to  compete

economically with the powerful pharmaceutical industry.

  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  my  research  with  the  orgone  energy

accumulator is not directed exclusively to cancer, even though orgone energy

has proved its efficacy primarily with this disease; it is directed toward the

bio-energetic charging of the organism. I maintain that cancer prevention

depends on our being able to increase the orgonotic potency in the organism

long before T-bacilli or even cancer cells develop. It is important that we

prevent the shrinking of the vital apparatus and the ensuing putrefaction.

This  task  falls  into  two  parts,  a  biophysical  aspect  and  a  broader  social-

medical one.

  The  biophysical  task  consists  in  the  direct  administration  of  orgone

energy by means of the accumulator. The broader, social task is to educate

people  to  understand  and  prevent  the  sexual  biopathies  of  children  and

adolescents, which lead not only to the carcinomatous shrinking biopathy but

to every kind of biopathy. Of the two, the former task is much the easier,

though at first, it will have to be carried out on a limited, experimental scale,

in one of two ways:

  1. As the number of users grows, we will keep an exact record of howmany of them develop cancer or other diseases after three to five years. This

will give us a picture of the possibilities of cancer prevention. (The emotional

factor, the shrinking of the life apparatus as a result of resignation, is, of

course,  incalculable.  In  all  probability,  it  can  be  prevented  only  by  the

fulfillment of the social task.) Let us assume that, from a given time, 5000

accumulators are in use. If the 5000 users were to develop cancer at a lesser

rate than the general populace this part of the task would be accomplished.

The principle could then be applied nationally or internationally.

  2. With the help of public organizations this task also could be solved in

the following manner: a district of a state or city with approximately 10,000

inhabitants would be provided with “an accumulator in every home.” Social

workers would keep exact records of the number of cancer cases occurring in

this district. These would be compared with the records of other districts

where the orgone accumulator was not being used. In two to five years it

would  be  possible  to  draw  valid  conclusions  about  the  possibilities  for

general cancer prophylaxis.

  This plan may appear fantastic to many readers, but I would say to them

that  if  it  is  possible  to  mobilize  the  populations  of  an  entire  planet  for

purposes of war then it must be possible to mobilize a district of 10,000

inhabitants for the purpose of a crucial experiment. I am well aware of all the

circumstances that will create difficulties, but the execution of this plan is

possible. It must not be left undone.                                      Notes






II. Orgone Energy Vesicles (Bions) and the Natural Organization of Protozoa

1. Professor Roger DuTeil conducted control experiments on the bions at the university in Nice. [Ed.]
2. This phenomenon, known as the reversed orgonomic potential, is discussed elsewhere from a purely
physical standpoint.
3. In 1944, protozoa were obtained from grass that had been sterilized at 50, 60, 70, and even 80
degrees centigrade.
4. Protocol begun January 2, 1945. Notarization of the protocol, March 8, 1945. Conclusion of the
protocol, May 26, 1945.


III. The Actual Discovery of Orgone Energy

1. Cf. Die Bione (1938).
2. Later, in the fall of 1940, I finally succeeded in demonstrating SAPA radiation on film.
3. Cf. “Drei Versuche am statischen Elektroskop,” in Experimenteller und klinischer Bericht, no. 7,
  1939.
4. Rudolf W. Ladenburg, in “The Nature of Cosmic Rays and the Constitution of Matter,” (Scientific
Monthly, May 1942), states: “… the origin of the primaries of the cosmic rays is still a great puzzle.
We do not know the processes responsible for the production of such immensely energetic particles.
Some of them carry a million times more energy than the most energetic particles we can produce
  artificially. And as to the question of the constitution of matter our answer is still rather incomplete.
We know that all matter consists of atoms, that the atoms consist of tiny nuclei surrounded by
  electrons and that the nuclei consist of protons and neutrons. There must be strong forces acting
  between the protons and neutrons holding the nuclei together. But we do not know what they are.
They  are  not  of  electrical  nature  as  we  have  seen,  and  many  theories  have  been  tried  for
  understanding these forces. The discovery of the meson in the cosmic rays has raised some hope for
reaching the goal, but this fundamental problem is still far from being solved.” (Italics are mine.—
W. R.)


IV. The Objective Demonstration of Orgone Radiation

1. Fluorescence, as distinct from luminescence, designates the property of a substance to produce light
while being acted upon by invisible energy particles. In the case of luminescence the light effect
  persists for shorter or longer periods of time even after the substance has been removed from the
  effective rays. Zinc sulfide is a fluorescing substance, calcium sulfide a luminescing substance.
2. The number of layers, each consisting of organic material on the outside and metal on the inside, canbe increased. Thus, there may be any number of layers. As many as twenty layers have been used.
[Ed.]
3. In accumulators designed for therapeutic purposes, the wood is usually replaced by celotex, the
  cotton by glass wool, and the sheet metal by steel wool, except for the rigid sheet metal used for the
  innermost layer. [Ed.]
4. Cf. “Orgonotic Pulsation,” International Journal of Sex-economy and Orgone Research, October,
  1944.
5. Cf. “Orgonotic Pulsation,” op. cit.
6. This arrangement is advantageous but not indispensable. Movements of a pendulum caused by the
  instability of the base on which it stands are easily distinguishable from orgonotic pendulations.


V. The Carcinomatous Shrinking Biopathy

1. Cf. Wilhelm Reich, The Function of the Orgasm.
2. Cf. Wilhelm Reich, “Der Urgegensatz des vegetativen Lebens” (1934).
3.  Women  are  usually  unable  to  understand  their  own  organ  sensations.  Character-analytical
  exploration is needed to enable them to do so.
4. Cf. Otto Warburg in Biochemische Zeitschrift, Bd. 317, a.o.
5. Cf. Wilhelm Reich, Bion Experiments on the Cancer Problem (Sex-polverlag, 1939).
6. Cf. Chapter VII.
7. The concentration of orgone energy inside the accumulator is about three to five times greater than in
the open air. One unit of electroscopic charge discharges inside the accumulator two, three, or five
times more slowly than in the atmosphere. The more minutes it takes for a single unit to discharge,
the higher the orgone energy tension.
8. Cf. Bion Experiments on the Cancer Problem.
9. The repression of sexual excitation by means of a chronic attitude of inspiration is a phenomenon
  familiar to the orgone therapist.
10. This phenomenon in the amoeba limax can be directly observed microscopically at a magnification
of 2000x.
11. Cf. Chapter X.
12. A comparable layering has been found in the character. [Cf. Wilhelm Reich, Character Analysis
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1972).]


VI. The Cancer Cell

1. Cf. Hartmann, Allgemeine Biologie (2nd ed., Jena, 1933), pp. 364 ff.
2. Cf. Wilhelm Reich, The Function of the Orgasm, p. 251 ff.
3. Cf. The Function of the Orgasm.
4. Ergebnisse der experimentellen Krebsforschung und Krebstherapie (Leiden, 1934).
5. Neuere Ergebnisse auf dem Gebiete der Krebskrankheiten (Leipzig, 1937).
6. Experimentellen Krebsforschung und Krebstherapie, p. 94.
7. Max Borst, Pathologische Histologie (1938), pp. 447–448.
8. R. Bierisch, “Uber den Stoffwechsel der Krebszellen,” in Neuere Ergebnisse auf dem Gebiete der
  Krebskrankheiten (Leipzig, 1937).
9. F. Döflein, Generelles Lehrbuch der Protozoenkunde, Vierte, stark vermehrte Auflage, 1916, p. 743.
10. James Ewing, Neoplastic Diseases, 4th ed. (Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 1942), p. 116 ff.
11. All citations in this section are from Blumenthal, op. cit.
12. It may be possible to answer the question of the heredity of cancer if we expose mice with a knownhigh percentage of cancer heredity to orgone radiation. The orgone-biophysical viewpoint would be
  confirmed if a reduction or elimination of cancer in the succeeding generations of cancer strain
could be achieved. (We tried unsuccessfully to obtain high cancer strain mice from the Jackson
  Memorial Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine.)


VII. Nature and Development of the Orgone Therapy Experiments

1. From a statistical standpoint, it might be argued that it is incorrect to include the killed mice in the
  calculation. It should be noted, however, that they were killed when they were obviously near death;
thus, including them in the calculation does not modify the result materially.


VIII. Results of Experimental Orgone Therapy in Humans with Cancer

1. The Orgone Institute was not an organization but simply the name under which Reich conducted his
work. It ceased to exist upon his death in 1957. [Ed.]
2. Cf. Character Analysis, “The Schizophrenic Split.”
3. The name of the property in Rangeley, Maine, where Reich had his laboratories. [Ed.]


IX. Anorgonia in the Carcinomatous Shrinking Biopathy

1. Cf. Character Analysis, pp. 310–323.
2. Cf. L. R. Müller, Lebensnerven und Lebenstriebe (3rd ed., 1931), pp. 753–754.
3. This information is from Höber’s excellent Lehrbuch der Physiologie des Menschen (7th ed., 1934),
p. 69 ff.
4. Diagnosis by stained smear preparation is not practicable in such cases. It is not the name or the
  structure of the different kinds of white blood corpuscles that is important but the living function of
the grouping of white cells around red cells, and the orgonotic constitution of the live and the
destroyed blood cells.
5. The organization of Trichomonas vaginalis from the epithelium of the vaginal mucosa has been
  demonstrated and recorded on film.


X. The Cancer Biopathy as a Problem of Sexual Sociology

1. Cf.  W.  F.  Thorburn,  “Mechanistic  Medicine  and  the  Biopathies,” International  Journal  of  Sex-
Economy and Orgone Research,” Vol. I, No. 3 (1942).
2. “What are the public health aspects of cancer? Cancer is responsible for more deaths than any other
disease  with  the  exception  of  heart  disease.  Approximately  one  out  of  every  eight  deaths  in
  Massachusetts is due to this disease. Massachusetts has one of the highest death rates of any state
from this disease.” Whats and Whys of Cancer, Massachusetts Department of Public Health (1939).
3. Mr. Templeton subsequently died from an anorgonotic attack. [Ed.]
4. While much progress was made toward the implementation of the plan described by Reich in the
following  pages  (written  in  1943),  the  circumstances  that  eventually  led  to  his  death  gradually
  brought the actual functioning of Orgonon to a halt. Today, as a part of the Wilhelm Reich Infant
Trust Fund, Reich’s estate, Orgonon awaits a renewal of support, which will enable it to again
  become the research center of orgonomy. The unprecedented interest in this young science gives us
hope that the support will be forthcoming. [Ed.]
5. The Wilhelm Reich Foundation was established in 1949 for this purpose. It no longer functions.
[Ed.]                                  Appendix



















 
FIGURE 25. Coal bions, produced from incandescent coal dust subjected to swelling in solution of

bouillon and potassium chloride 
FIGURE 26. Three T-bacilli (pointer). Gram stain (red). Photo taken immediately after a blood charcoal

preparation was made. Magnified about 5000x; actual size less than 0.25 micron. The large black spots

are fine coal dust 
FIGURE 27. Cast-iron filing, dry. Approx. 300x 
FIGURE 28. Iron filing after fifteen minutes in a solution of bouillon and potassium chloride. The

vesicles, originally non-motile, separate and order themselves in lines which correspond to a magnetic

field. Approx. 500x 
FIGURE 29. Energy vesicles in earth particles and humus 
FIGURE 30. PA bion culture. Approx. 3000x 
FIGURE 31. Blue PA bions from autoclaved human blood in the living preparation. Approx. 2000x (“B-

reaction”) 
FIGURE 32. T-bacilli obtained from sarcomatous tissue. Approx. 5400x 
FIGURE 33. Bacilli obtained through air infection. Approx. 1000x. Compare with Fig. 32 
FIGURE 34. Vesicular (bionous) disintegration in a grass infusion. Approx. 700x 
FIGURE 35. Bionous vesicles showing an intense blue glimmer in a blade of grass. Approx. 1500x 
FIGURE 36. An early phase in the development of amoeba limax. Spherical forms at the upper right

resulting from grass which has undergone swelling; developing into amoebae. At lower left a protozoan

forming. Approx. 1000x. Time-lapse photography was used to observe the process 
FIGURE 37. Same preparation as Fig. 36 in a more advanced phase. The large spherical forms at the left

in the process of developing into flowing amoebae. Approx. 1000x 

 
FIGURE 38. Protozoal germs dissolving (along the right margin of disintegrated grass). At the left and

top, amoebae in the process of separation 
FIGURE 39. Heap of bion vesicles in advanced phase of organization 
FIGURE 40. Protozoan developing from moss. Approx. 3500x 
FIGURE 41a. Beginning protozoal formation at margin of bionously disintegrating grass. Approx. 700x 
FIGURE 41b. Bion vesicles in an organized heap. Approx. 1500x 
FIGURE 41c. Protozoal germ (bionous vesicle) developing at right margin of disintegrating grass 
FIGURE 42. “Org-protozoan.” A completely organized protozoan in a state of expansion, although not

yet detached from the grass blade. Observe vesicular structure of the protoplasm. Approx. 3000x 
FIGURE 43. Plasmatic flakes from Experiment XX. Approx. 300x 
FIGURE 44. Plasmatic flakes from Experiment XX. Approx. 300x 
FIGURE 45. Plasmatic flakes from Experiment XX. Approx. 300x 

 
FIGURE 46. Plasmatic flakes from Experiment XX. Approx. 300x 
FIGURE 47. Plasmatic flakes from Experiment XX. Approx. 300x 
FIGURES 48a and b. The bion culture (SAPA) which disclosed the existence of biological orgone

energy, 1939 
FIGURE 49. Cancer of the bone (fibula) in which the tissue shows vesicular structure with a heap of

cancer cells in an advanced stage of organization. Approx. 1000x 

 
FIGURE 50a. Precancerous spindle-shaped cell formation (pointer) and SAPA bion (upper right) from

vaginal secretion 
FIGURE 50b. Contraction to spherical shape and immobilization of two amoeboid, oblong, mobile

cancer cells due to the effect of a SAPA bion 
FIGURE 51. Normal muscle tissue (human) showing striated, non-vesicular structure. Observed in the

living state in physiological salt solution. Approx. 1000x 
FIGURE 52. Cancerous muscle tissue from human uterus, showing bionous structure. Protozoal

organization appears at right margin. Observed in physiological salt solution. Approx. 1000x 
FIGURE 53. Epithelial cells from breast cancer. Observed in an unstained, live state in normal NaCl

solution, one hour post-mastectomy. At upper and lower right, healthy epithelial cells showing no

structure. Bionously disintegrated epithelium toward the center, extending downward. At left margin,

heaps of cancer cells are seen in the process of formation. Approx. 1000x 
FIGURE 54. Three typically club-shaped cancer cells from human tumor. Approx. 2300x, enlarged 

%
FIGURE 55a. Epithelial cells in KCl solution; from a wart on the cheek, showing precancerous changes

(X) 

 

 

 

 

 
FIGURE 55b. Proliferation (X) from epithelial cell of same wart 
FIGURE 56a. Precancerous epithelial cells from cervix, showing T-bodies and strongly luminating

vesicles 
FIGURE 56b. Cancerous cervical epithelium showing spindle formation (X) 
 
FIGURES 56c and d. Cancerous cervical epithelium showing developing cancer cells (X) 
FIGURE 56e. Single spindle-shaped cancer cell from vaginal secretion (CA III) 
FIGURE 57. Formation of strongly chromatic spindle forms (X) inside an epithelial cell (pointer)

obtained from vaginal secretion of a woman suspected of having cancer (CA III) 
FIGURE 58a. Healthy epithelium, gastric glands of mouse 
FIGURE 58b. Beginning carcinomatous degeneration of gastric epithelium in T-mouse, CA II and III.

Cross section 
FIGURE 58c. Carcinomatous changes in intestinal gland cells of T-mouse (darkly stained with

hematoxylin-eosin), corresponding to club-shaped forms in the living preparation. Phases CA II and III.

Longitudinal section 
FIGURE 58d. Putrid disintegration of cancerous gastric mucosa of T-mouse (CA V) 
FIGURE 59. Metastases in subcutaneous tissue of the neck, taken from T-mouse (CA III) 
FIGURE 60a. Section of lung of a T-mouse stained with hematoxylin-eosin, showing cancer cell

metastases. Approx. 300x 
FIGURE 60b. Subcutaneous tissue of T-mouse showing cancer cell metastases, stained with

hematoxylin-eosin. Arrow points to individual spindle cells. Approx. 300x 
FIGURE 60c. Same metastatic cells taken from peritoneal cavity of a T-mouse. Stained with

hematoxylin-eosin. Approx. 300x 
FIGURE 61a. Cancer cell model experiment Nr. 14. Coal bions shown penetrating substance of egg

medium. Approx. 300x 
FIGURE 61b. Same as 61a, at approx. 2000x 
FIGURE 61c. Bion cells in the living state 

 
FIGURE 61d. Same, Gram-stained 
FIGURE 61e. Tumor produced in a healthy mouse by injection of T-bacilli 
FIGURE 61f. T-bacilli seen in peritoneum of same mouse. Stained 
FIGURE 62a. Cancerous tumor in gluteal region in mouse, following injection of T-bacilli obtained from

blood taken from a healthy human and allowed to disintegrate (10 Ge T) 
FIGURE 62b. Same tumor excised from gluteal muscle 
FIGURE 62c. Section of same tumor, stained, at the boundary between healthy and chronically inflamed

tissue. Arrows indicate individual, large, deeply stained cancer cells 
FIGURE 62d. Cyst formation in section of same tumor. Pointer directed to area showing chronic

inflammation between healthy musculature and adenocarcinoma 
FIGURE 62e Another section showing complete adenocarcinomatous change in the muscle 
FIGURE 63. Blue PA bions penetrating into and destroying masses of cancer cells. Shown in living

preparation. Reproduced from motion-picture film 
FIGURES 64a and b. Compact, hard breast cancer tumors from two untreated mice 
FIGURE 64c. Sections from stomach and duodenum in which artificial cancer was produced (T-mouse).

Atrophic gastric mucosa; polypous cancerous growths; masses of cancer cells in the peritoneum 
FIGURE 64d. Mouse tumor showing putrid disintegration 
FIGURE 64e. Tumor taken from mouse treated with orgone energy. Large cavities, previously blood-

filled. Detritus (left) containing dead T-bacilli. Replacement by connective tissue (center). Residual

cancer masses (middle and right)GESEE s

 
FIGURE 64f. Tumor from a mouse treated with orgone energy. Large, previously blood-filled cavities

now contain cancer tissue and detritus consisting of T-bacilli 
FIGURE 64g. Tumor from mouse cured with orgone energy. Small amount of distintegrated cancer

tissue present. Detritus, in center, sterile. Replacement connective tissue in lower part                                      Index






The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the

pages in your eBook. Please use the search function on your eReading device

to search for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that appear in the

print index are listed below.


abasia, orgonomic explanation and treatment of

Adam and Auler

agglutination of bacteria and orgone energy withdrawal

air germs, theory of; absurdities of; refutation of

“algae,” and bions

amoebae, and cancer cells; flowing (amoeba limax); and the living process; in sputum of a cancer

patient; destructivity of; locomotor function of

anemia, secondary, cause of in cancer; effect of orgone accumulator on

angina pectoris, orgone accumulator in the treatment of

anorgonia, in cancer; and shrinking; degree of orgonity and susceptibility to; functional paralysis and

anxiety neurosis, and local tumor formation

Asher

autism, infantile

autoclavation of red blood cells, see blood tests

autocurative mechanism in cancer

autoinfection due to tissue disintegration

autonomic nervous system; traditional and orgonomic view of; the amoeba and; and the pleasure

function; and cancer pain; and the falling sensation; and cell nucleus


bedsores and burns, local orgone treatment of

Bergson, Henri

Bierisch, R.

biogenesis; and the origin of cancer cells

biological energy, stagnation of; properties ofbiological functioning, diagram of

biological pulsation; and sexual stasis; and the life process

biological vigor; and hemoglobin

bions, discovery and definition of; degeneration of; and protozoal organization; composition of;

experimental production of from coal; development of carbon bion; microscopic examination of;

biological stain reaction of; sources of; forms of movement of; iron; and “algae”; motility of heaps of;

color of; cultures of and air germs; see also earth bions, PA bions, SAPA bions

Bloch

blood tests, orgone-biophysical; see also T-blood test

Blumenthal, Ferdinand

Bon, W. F.

Borst, Max

Böwing

B-reaction

“Brownian movement”

Burr, H. S.


cancer, generalized symptoms in; sexual stasis and; muscle spasm and; nature of pain in; theories of the

origin of; sexual function and

cancer biopathy, requirements for an understanding of; and sexual sociology; see also carcinomatous

shrinking biopathy

cancer cell, riddle of the origin of; and protozoa; typical stages in the development of; development in

the T-mouse experiment; product of a defense reaction

cancer cure, question of in orgone therapy

cancer death in old age

cancer disposition; universality of

cancer in children, prenatal factors in

cancer metabolism and anoxia

cancer pain, see autonomic nervous system

cancer prevention; “Orgonon” plan

cancer research, errors in; riddles in

cancer therapy, conventional; rationale of; see orgone therapy

cancer tumor, relationship of to cancer disease; localization of; as a defense reaction

carbon dioxide excess in cancer tissue

carcinomatous shrinking biopathy

cardiovascular biopathy

“cell excitation,” see orgonotic cell lumination

Cohnheim, O.

Cori

Curie, Marie

cyanide and T-bacilliDarwin, Charles

death instinct, refutation of Freud’s hypothesis of

Dellman

De Vries

disintegration, vesicular, of swelling matter; see also PA bions

disposition to disease; see also cancer disposition

Döflein, F.

Dreifuss

Driesch, Hans

drugs, adverse effect in cancer

Du Teil, Roger


earth bions, preparation of; effect of on erythrocytes; application of in cancer mice; application of in

humans

earth bion water, fluorophotometric demonstration of orgone energy in

edema in cancer, orgone biophysical explanation of

Einstein, Albert

élan vital

electricity, and biological energy; effect of on muscle-nerve preparation; effect of on the living

organism

electroscope, response of to insulators exposed to bion cultures, the sun, and in contact with the living

organism; see also orgonometry, electroscopic; radium electroscope

emotional plague

entelechy

erythrocytes, in health and cancer; effect of earth bions on; “sympatheticotonia” in; T-spikes in; color

of

Ewing, James

Experiment XX


falling anxiety, and preorgastic excitation; in character neurosis and cancer; in an infant; orgone-

biophysical explanation of; see also anorgonia

Faraday cage, and the visualization of orgone radiation

“fertilization,” and PA bion formation

filming, of the organization of protozoa; of SAPA radiation; of the organization of Trichomonas

vaginalis

finalism, teleological

Fischer, A.

flickering in the sky, made objective; and haze or fog; and humidity

force créatrice

Fränkel, Ernst

Freud, Sigmundfright paralysis

functional disease, nature of

functional view of nature

fusion and interpenetration, orgonomic significance of in protozoa and metazoa


galvanic current, effect of on body

Geiger-Müller counter, demonstration of motor force with

grass infusion, development of protozoa in, see protozoa

Gurwitsch


Havrevold, Odd

hebephrenia, biopathic shrinking in

Heidenheim

heredity, and energetic functionalism; of acquired characteristics; and cancer; “heredity of

temperament” and orgastic potency

Hertwig, Richard

Höber, R.

Hoff

Hoppe, Walter

hypertension, effect of orgone accumulator on


immune bodies, and PA bions and T-bacilli

immunity, and orgonotic potency

Infeld, Leopold

infiltration, in cancerous tissue

International Journal of Sex Economy and Orgone Research

involution, and organismic shrinking

iron bions, preparation and examination of

Itschikawa


Jennings


Kahane

Kallikak family

Kammerer, Paul; and heredity of acquired characteristics

Kenneway

Klenitsky

Koch, Robert

Kraus, R.

“Kreiselwelle,” see spinning wavelactic acid, in cancerous tissue

Ladenburg, Rudolf W.

Lange, Friedrich

Lapique, Louis, rejection of publication plan of

Laser

Leeuwenhoek, Anthony van

leukemia; case of latent

Leyden

life energy, properties of

life formula, see T-C (tension-charge) formula

light, question of subjective impressions of

Lindner

Lister, Joseph L.

Lönne, F.

Lubarsch

lumination, and attraction; demonstration of orgonotic; in cell nuclei; mitogenetic radiation and


magnetism, and orgonotic attraction

Marburg

materialism, mechanistic

mechanistic comprehension of disease

metastases, orgonomic explanation of

metazoa, biological pulsation in

mitogenetic radiation, see lumination

mortality figures for non-biopathic and biopathic diseases

motor force in orgone energy

Moxnes

muscle spasm, in cancer; and localization of metastases

mysticism, and mechanistic biology


“natural leak,” and the atmospheric orgone

neurosis, cause and elimination of

nursing, and orgonotic contact


orgasm, oral

orgasm, orgonomic description of

orgasm anxiety, and fear of dying

orgasm formula, see T-C (tension-charge) formula

orgasm function; and cellular metabolism

orgasm reflex; in cancerorgastic discharge, nature of

orgastic impotence

orgone accumulator, effect of on red blood cells; effect of on grass infusion; construction of; principles

in construction of; basic design of; relief of pain in; temperature rise in; irradiation of the total organism

in; in pregnancy

orgone energy; SAPA bions and the discovery of; in the atmosphere; derivation of term; charging of

red blood cells with; relationship of atmospheric oxygen to; and organic matter; visualization of in the

atmosphere; demonstration of effect on organic substance and metal; measurement of in the open air;

quantitative determination of; and weather formation; envelope of the planet; motor force in; forms of

medical application of

orgone energy field

orgone energy field meter

orgone energy metabolism of the cell, and the orgasm function

orgone energy vesicles, see bions

orgone flakes, biological nature of; chemical composition of; development of protozoa from

“orgone hunger,”

Orgone Institute

orgone physics

orgone radiation; vagotonic effect of in cancer patients

orgone therapy, in cancer; effect on erythrocytes; a biological therapy; effect on the embryo;

experiments with mice; rationale of; function of the blood in; relief of pain with; experimental results of

in humans; compared with X-ray and radium therapy; elimination of tumor detritus in; failures in;

relationship to fever; sex-economic problems in; methods of application of; local application of; in

diseases other than cancer

orgone water

orgonometry, electroscopic

orgonometry, thermic; measurements indoors; measurements in open air; measurements in soil and

atmosphere; experimental conclusions

orgonomia

orgonomic potential

orgonoscope

orgonotic attraction, in energy field of orgone accumulator

orgonotic cell lumination

orgonotic potency, of fluids; fluorescence and; of tissues

orgonotic pulsation, in non-living matter

“orgonotic sensation,”

orgonotic system, red blood corpuscles as; protozoan as; cell as; diagram of

orgontin

“org”-protozoa

oxygen deficiency in cancer; see also Warburg, OttoPA bions; effect of on T-bacilli; in mouse injection experiment; and platelets

paralysis, functional

paramecia, origin of

Pasteur, Louis

Pauli

pendulum, oscillations of in energy field of metal sphere

Pfeiffer, L.

Pflüger

plasma system, and biopathic shrinking

platelets, blood, and PA bions

Podwyssozki

poikilocytosis, see erythrocytes, T-spikes in

Popoff

Pouchet, Felix

pregnancy, use of orgone accumulator in

“premortem necrosis” and advanced cancer; see also putrefaction

prenatal environment and embryonic development

protoplasm, and machines

protozoa, natural organization of from bions; and the concept of “encysted germs,”; in grass infusions;

stages in the development of in sterile, particle-free bion water; autumnal grass and; absorption of bions

by

pulsation, in non-living matter; observation of in the atmosphere; see also biological pulsation

“purpose,” in living matter

putrefaction, due to biopathic shrinking; ante-mortem in cancer; after death


Quincke


radiating bridge between two orgonotic systems

radium electroscope, nil effect of on SAPA bion cultures

Rance

red blood corpuscles, effect of on pathogenic microorganisms; fate of in cancerous tumors; see also

erythrocytes

Reichardt

Reid

religion, and the living process

resignation; and blocked affect

resorption, intestinal, orgone-biophysical explanation of

respiratory inhibition, and systemic cancer disease

rot bacteria in cancer

Rous sarcoma

RufferRussell


SAPA (sand-packet) bions; appearance of; evidence of radiation from; effect on microorganisms and

cancer cells; treatment of cancer mice with

Sawtschenko

Schaudinn

schizophrenia

Schuller

sex-economy, and cancer

sexual starvation and cancer

shrinking, biopathic; characterological expression in; without tumor; phases of

spasm, and tumor formation

specific etiology, doctrine of

spinning wave

staphylococcus, bacteriological and orgone-biophysical description of

stasis, and bionous disintegration

stasis, sexual, elimination of; the common denominator in cancer; and T-reaction

stasis neurosis and biopathic shrinking

static electricity

sympatheticotonia, manifestations of in various organ systems

“sympatheticotonia” of the erythrocytes


tar cancer in mice

T-bacilli; some sources of; effect on healthy mice

T-blood test

T-C (tension-charge) formula

Templeton, Herman O.

thermodynamics, second law of, and the orgonotic process

Thorburn, W.

T-reaction

treatment, conventional, of cancer tumor

Trichomonas vaginalis; and genital frigidity

Tsutsui


Üxküll


vaginal anesthesia

vagotonic expansion, in orgone therapy; and pleasure

vegetotherapy

vesicular disintegration of tissue in cancervitalists

vorticellae, see org-protozoa


Wagner-Jauregg, Julius

Walker

Warburg, Otto

Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund


Yamagiwa                              BOOKS BY WILHELM REICH


                                  Character Analysis

                Ether, God and Devil / Cosmic Superimposition

                            The Function of the Orgasm

                    The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality

                                  Listen, Little Man!

                        The Mass Psychology of Fascism

                                The Murder of Christ

                                Reich Speaks of Freud

                                  Selected Writings

                                The Sexual RevolutionCopyright © 1973 by Mary Boyd Higgins as Trustee of the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund

Der Krebs, Volumes I and II copyright © 1971 by Mary Boyd Higgins as Trustee of the Wilhelm Reich

Infant Trust Fund

Earlier translation published under the title The Discovery of the Orgone, Volume Two: The Cancer

Biopathy, copyright 1948 by the Orgone Institute Press, Inc.

All rights reserved

Library of Congress catalog card number: 72-97611

ISBN 0-374-11836-1

Published simultaneously in Canada by Doubleday Canada Ltd., Toronto

eISBN 9781466846869

First eBook edition: May 2013