PEOPLE IN
TROUBLE

VOLUME TWO OF
THE EMOTIONAL PLAGUE OF MANKIND

WILHELM REICH

TRANSLATED BY
PHILIP SCHMITZ

P
><f>t

 
 
Wilhelm Reich in Switzerland, 1927PEOPLE IN
TROUBLE

VOLUME TWO OF
THE EMOTIONAL PLAGUE OF MANKIND

WILHELM REICH

TRANSLATED BY
PHILIP SCHMITZ

i
 


The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your personal

use  only.  You  may  not  make  this  e-book  publicly  available  in  any  way.

Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy of this

e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify

the publisher at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.                                  Contents






                                      Title Page

                                  Copyright Notice

                                        Dedication

                                        Epigraph



                                The Silent Observer

                                      Introduction

                                1. Wrong Directions

                  2. A Practical Course in Marxist Sociology

      3. The Living Productive Power, “Work-Power,” of Karl Marx

                                  4. This Is Politics!

5. The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality into Innately Free Primitive

                                        Society

                            6. Everyone Is “Enraptured”

                      7. Irrationalism in Politics and Society

          8. The Psychoanalytic Congress in Lucerne, August 1934

                                9. Toward Biogenesis



                                      Photographs

                                          Notes

                                          Index                              Also by Wilhelm Reich

                                      Copyright 


      Love, work, and knowledge are the wellsprings of our life. They should also govern it.

                                      WILHELM REICH 


                            To the children of the future 


  And so in the course of development all former reality becomes unreal, loses its necessity, its
    right to existence, its reasonableness. In place of the dying reality emerges a new, viable
      reality—peacefully, when the old is reasonable enough to die without struggle, violently, if it
                              blocks the path of this necessity.

                        —Friedrich Engels, in Ludwig Feuerbach (1888)                    The Silent Observer





      People in Trouble is a translation of part of a German manuscript entitled Menschen im
    Staat, 1937, to which other material, notes, and comments were added in 1944–45. Prior to
  its first publication in 1953, Reich, referring to himself as the Silent Observer, added further
    comments throughout the text. These comments, some signed “SO” and others unsigned, are
    enclosed in brackets or are preceded by the date “1952.” The role of the Silent Observer is
                      explained by Reich himself in this introductory note.

                                          —Ed.


The  Silent  Observer  (SO)  in  this  autobiographical  volume  sees  events  in

retrospect as of 1950–52—that is, while the oranur experiment was running

its course. This experiment, which established unequivocally the existence of

the  primordial  cosmic  orgone  energy  in  a  practical  and  even  socially

penetrating manner, demolished every criticism, doubt, and distortion uttered

by the enemies of orgonomy during the Norwegian campaign (1934–38) and

by a few psychoanalytic slanderers (1934–47). The Silent Observer not only

views these enemies objectively; he also includes the discoverer of orgone

energy,  Wilhelm  Reich  (WR),  in  his  merciless  criticism.  The  errors  and

stupid mistakes as well as the great strides and experiences from 1927 to

1937 constitute an important lesson for anyone who in the future may try to

deal with human nature in a political rather than a scientific manner. Only the

factual,  not  the  political,  way  will  finally  come  to  grips  with  the  sexual

revolution of our times and master the emotional plague (EP).

  The Silent Observer knows very well that the discovery of the primordial

cosmic  energy  has  rendered  ineffective  and  outdated  all  petty  political

quibbling and all thinking in terms of class or of the unconscious. It is certainthat in due time this discovery will provide useful new tools of thinking and

acting  for  mankind  in  its  struggle  against  the  emotional  plague,  which

undermines  its  most  skillful  and  laborious  endeavors.  However,  it  seems

tragically  true  that  for  many  decades,  perhaps  centuries,  to  come,  the

politician and the mere ideologist will dominate the public scene and try to

change  human  nature  by  way  of  ideas,  programs,  platforms,  speeches,

promises, illusions, maneuvers, and politicking of all kinds, without taking a

single practical step to change conditions and to reestablish the natural laws

of life.

  This  account  of  WR’s  experiences  in  the  Socialist  and  psychoanalytic

movements  is  being  presented  in  an  effort  to  help  eliminate  error  and

unnecessary blundering in the future. It is hoped that even the skillful, hidden

slanderer, inside and outside the Communist Party, will feel enough respect

for human suffering and searching to come out from his hiding place in the

“bushes” and to desist from acts of abuse and misuse of candidness while this

historical material is being exposed on the “meadow.”                              Introduction





                                                                            1
This book comprises various writings from the period 1927–45. It is not a

compendium of sex-economic sociology; nor is it written in connection with

a specific event. It illustrates the gradual maturing of insights over the course

of  nearly  two  decades,  insights  that  finally  fused  into  a  composite  view.

Anyone  who  has  worked  in  unexplored  regions  will  realize  that  what  is

reflected in the final result is not a predetermined goal but rather the very

path of the search itself.

  The reader will ask why I emphasize this. The reason is simple: Natural-

scientific  thought  bears  witness  to  its  own  impartiality  when  it  describes

social events that occurred at various times and that reflect the paths both of

error  and  of  remedy.  I  did  not  write  this  book  out  of  emotion  or  of

preconceived theory. Nor did I write it as the result of an arbitrary thought

process or because I envisioned a state of improved social organization. I

gathered  the  insights  summarized  here  just  as  a  settler  in  an  uninhabited

wilderness must gather impressions and experiences if he wishes to survive.

  Originally  I  was  a  clinician  interested  strictly  in  natural  science  and

philosophy,  not  in  sociology  or  even  in  politics.  It  was  the  spontaneous

development of the science of orgonomy that led me, initially around 1919,

into the area of individual and social sex-economy. Sex-economy in turn was

the precursor of the discovery of the orgone, i.e. cosmic life energy.

  Looking backward from 1945, I must confess that my discovery of the

orgone would not have occurred without the experiences described herein. It

owes its very existence to the obstacles placed in its path by the irrationalframework of human society and the character structure of the human animal

in the twentieth century. Being compelled to recognize these obstacles as

biopathic manifestations of life and not as coincidental strokes of fate, and

being constrained to find means to overcome them, equipped me with the

methods for orgone research. I suspected the existence of the orgone as little

as did any psychoanalyst involved with drive psychology or any physicist or

biologist  involved  with  the  earth’s  magnetism  or  cell  division.  As  I  have

often stressed, what was remarkable was not the discovery of the orgone, but,

rather, its non-discovery over a period of roughly 2,500 years, which was an

achievement of repression. Two decades of clinical work with the human

tendency  to  repress  vital  processes  stimulated  the  quest  for  the  cause  of

human irrationalism. Why, I asked, does man resist nothing so much as the

realization of his own nature, his biological origin and constitution? I knew

nothing of the biological degeneration of the human animal which has for

thousands of years endangered his personal and social existence, chronically

and in periodic catastrophes.

  With this question, doubts arose in my mind as to the rationality of the

human thought process, doubts that were never again to be quieted. As long

as  peace  prevailed,  my  doubts  received  little  nourishment.  The  neuroses

Freud had learned to comprehend in a natural-scientific manner, although

only psychologically, appeared to me and to everyone else as illnesses in

otherwise healthy organisms. Had anyone proposed, prior to 1927, that so

many human institutions had been essentially irrational, i.e. biopathic, for

thousands of years, I would have been among the most vehement opponents.

Meanwhile  social  developments  throughout  the  world,  emanating  from

Europe,  have  made  a  platitude  of  the  fact  that  man  and  his  society  are

mentally ill in the strictest psychiatric sense of the word. I was fortunate, or

one might say unfortunate, in discovering this fact not in 1942, as did most

people, but as early as 1927, when I began my research. The first encounter

with human irrationality was an immense shock. I can’t imagine how I bore itwithout going mad. Consider that when I underwent this experience I was

comfortably adjusted to conventional modes of thinking. Unaware of what I

was dealing with, I landed in the “meat grinder,” a situation with which every

sex-economist or vegetotherapist who has entered the field in the past ten

years is well acquainted. It may be best described as follows: As if struck by

a  blow,  one  suddenly  recognizes  the  scientific  futility,  the  biological

senselessness,  and  the  social  noxiousness  of  views  and  institutions  which

until that moment had seemed altogether natural and self-evident. It is a kind

of eschatological experience so frequently encountered in a pathological form

in schizophrenics. I might even voice the belief that the schizophrenic form

of psychic illness is regularly accompanied by illuminating insight into the

irrationalism of social and political mores, primarily in regard to the rearing

of small children. What we term genuine “cultural progress” is nothing but

the  result  of  such  insight.  Pestalozzi,  Rousseau,  Voltaire,  Nietzsche,  and

many others are its representatives. The difference between the experience of

a schizophrenic and the insight of a strong creative mind lies in the fact that

revolutionary insight develops, in practice, over long periods of time, often

over centuries. Such rational insight floods the general perspective of the

masses in social revolutions such as the American Revolution of 1776, the

French in 1789, and the Russian in 1917. In time the “radical truths” become

as  self-evident  as  the  irrational  views  and  institutions  were  previously.

Whether rational insight will lead to individual mental illness or to rational

transformation of the social situation depends upon numerous factors. In the

individual it involves above all the capacity for genital satisfaction and the

rational organization of thought. On the broad scale of the masses, it depends

upon the integration of natural-scientific knowledge with social necessity.

However, it is a well-known fact that correct insight may arise prematurely in

an individual, i.e. before social processes have achieved the same level of

understanding.  The  history  of  the  natural  sciences  and  of  cultural

development is full of examples to prove this contention.  The axis about which this book revolves is the impeding of the functions

of  simple  and  natural  life  processes  by  social  irrationalism,  which,  once

engendered by biopathic human animals, becomes biophysically anchored in

the  character  of  the  masses  and  thus  assumes  social  relevance.  What  is

remarkable is that political irrationalism has been maintained instead of a

rational  organization  of  social  life.  [It  is  truly  a  devilish  problem.]  The

biological energy expended irrationally in a lifetime of biopathic functioning

would solve the towering mysteries of human existence if it were rationally

channeled.  No  one  active  in  biopsychiatry  can  deny  this  allegation.  The

dream of a better social existence remains a dream only because the thoughts

and  feelings  of  the  human  animal  are  blocked  off  from  the  simple  and

obvious. This fact became clear spontaneously in the course of events.

  I  myself  participated  in  the  social  irrationalism  in  Central  Europe  for

many years. Later I was a target of it in my capacity as a physician and

research scientist. For years I was both a political man [i.e. a man vitally

interested in social affairs] and a working man without ever realizing the

incompatibility of work and politics. The politician in me perished but the

working physician, research scientist, and sociologist not only endured but,

so far, actually survived the social chaos. I had the opportunity to follow

numerous  political  catastrophes  at  close  range  and  experienced  several  of

them  personally:  the  collapse  of  the  Austrian  monarchy,  the  council

dictatorship in Hungary and in Munich, the fall of Austrian social democracy

and  the  Austrian  Republic,  the  birth  and  fall  of  the  German  Republic.  I

experienced  the  Hungarian,  Austrian,  and  German  emigrations.  Then

followed in succession the fall of Czechoslovakia, Poland, Holland, Belgium,

Denmark, Norway, and France. Personal and professional interests connected

me with all of these countries. One fact stood out prominently in all this

political ruination: once a politician crossed the borders of his own country,

he became useless and unable to establish himself socially. If, on the other

hand, a working individual crossed the boundaries of his homeland, he wassooner  or  later  able  to  establish  himself  financially  and  vocationally  in

another country insofar as he was not hindered by politicians. This one fact

embodies  an  enormous  truth.  Politics  is  restricted  inherently  by  national

boundaries. Work is essentially international and free from the constraint of

any  borders.  We  shall  be  able  to  evaluate  this  fact  in  all  its  social

implications only at the end of this book.

  At present, there exist a number of groups in Europe and elsewhere which

have based their new social orientation on my sociological writings from the

period 1927–38. It is therefore imperative at this time to clarify my position: I

still  bear  the  entire  responsibility  for  every  natural-scientific,  medical,  or

socio-pedagogic claim made during that period, to the extent that corrections

have  not  been  made  in  later  works  or  may  be  made  in  the  future.  The

theoretical structure of sex-economy stands essentially unchanged, on firm

ground;  it  has  withstood  the  test  of  decisive  social  events.  Since

approximately 1934 orgone research has laid the experimental foundation for

this structure, although it is by no means complete. Today, sex-economy is a

recognized branch of natural-scientific research. However, none of the old

political concepts found in my early sociological writings remain justified.

They  were  discarded  along  with  the  organizations  under  whose  influence

they found their way into my writings. An extensive revision of the social

concepts of my political psychology may be found in the preface to the third

                                                  2
edition of The Mass Psychology of Fascism.

  The  exclusion  of  the  concept  of  political  parties  does  not  represent  a

regression to academic, socially disinterested natural science. Quite to the

contrary, it is an immense step forward—leading away from the realm of

political  irrationalism  into  the  rational  thought  system  of  natural  work

democracy. I do not and cannot know which of my old friends and colleagues

have gone through this same process and which of them are still operating

with outdated political concepts. Anyone who is acquainted with my shorter

essays on work democracy—for the most part published illegally between1936 and 1940—will also be informed on the process of my own detachment

from politics. Hence I would like to reject any attempts made to exploit my

party commitments of more than fourteen years ago by calling them party

politics.  I  would  feel  constrained  to  protest  immediately  and  publicly  if

anyone ventured to exploit my name or my writings in support of socialistic,

communistic,  parliamentarian,  or  any  other  type  of  power  politics.  The

danger of such exploitation is small, however; it could only be implemented

through  distortion  of  my  findings.  Experience  shows  that  ordinary  party

politics and orgone biophysics react to each other like fire to water.

  I am not and I have never been involved with power politics. I joined the

Socialist and Communist cultural and medical organizations in 1927 in order

to supplement, with mass psychology, the purely economistic view of society

contained in Socialist theory. Technically, I was a Socialist and a Communist

between 1927 and 1932. Factually, functionally, I have never been a Socialist

or a Communist and I was never accepted as such by the party bureaucrats. I

never believed in the ability of the Socialists and Communists really to solve

human emotional problems. Accordingly, I never held any party position. I

knew well their dry, economistic orientation and I wanted to help them since

they played the role of “progressives” in Europe in the 1920’s. I was never

duped by politics, but I was slow in distinguishing “social” from “political”

processes. I had a high regard for Karl Marx as a nineteenth-century thinker

in economics. Today, I deem his theory far surpassed and outdated by the

discovery of the cosmic life energy. Of Marx’s teaching, I believe only the

living character of human productivity will remain. This is an aspect of his

work that is utterly neglected and was forgotten long ago in the Socialist and

Communist  movements,  which  fell  victim  to  mechanistic  economy  and

mystical mass psychology—a mistake one does not commit so consistently

without forfeiting one’s place in the book of history.

  And finally, no trace of a distinction was made between a scientific view

of  society  and  the  bestial,  ignorant,  despicable  cruelties  perpetrated  uponworking  people  by  biopaths  who  knew  how  to  attain  power  by  way  of

intrigue. To confuse a Duncker or Kautsky or Engels with criminal murderers

of the Moscow Modju type is the surest sign of a degenerate, scientifically

incompetent,  and  confused  mind.  If  anyone  today  claims  to  fight

Communism he must prove that in addition to chopping off heads he knows

what it is all about.

  [1952: It is impossible to master functions of life if one does not live them

fully. No miner can mine coal while avoiding coal mining. No engineer can

build a bridge over a chasm without the actual risk of falling into it. No

physician  can  cure  an  infectious  disease  without  the  risk  of  acquiring  it

himself. One who has never been married knows nothing about marriage, and

no one who has never given birth to a child or at least assisted practically in

the birth of an infant knows what it is like. This is the meaning of work

democracy. When Malinowski decided to study ancient cultures, he went to

the Trobriand Islands, where he lived with the people in their huts, sharing

their lives and loves. In this way he discovered functionalism in ethnology.

To think functionally, you must live functionally.

  Similarly, when I decided to do work in preventive mental hygiene (today

called “social psychiatry”), I had to—and I gladly, even enthusiastically did

so—join the people at the very roots of society wherever and however they

lived, loved, hated, suffered, and dreamed into an uncertain future. At that

time in Europe, the so-called lower classes were organized under Socialist

and Communist leadership. There were four to five million Communist and

seven million Socialist voters in Germany alone, and those twelve million

leftist votes were significant among Germany’s approximately thirty million

votes. One must have lived these facts to know what “leftists” are; one cannot

possibly judge Europe from the American continent without having done so.

It  is  also  essential  to  know  that  in  the  late  1920’s  the  orientation  of  the

Communist  Party  in  Austria  and  Germany  was  still  predominantly

democratic. It had not yet fallen prey to the red Fascists, as was the case inthe 1930’s.

  This, then, was my field of work in social psychiatry, and my first steps

soon met with the full evil force of the emotional plague of man. It was not

long before I began to realize that I was the first physician and psychiatrist to

discover  the  emotional  plague  on  the  social  scene  and  to  find  himself

entangled in a deadly struggle with the worst epidemic disease which has

ever  ravaged  mankind,  a  struggle  which  continues  to  this  day.  This

realization was a crucial prerequisite to mustering the skill and will to learn,

which was indispensable if I was to survive.]

  The  concept  of  a  natural  work-democratic  life  process  in  society

precludes political activity in the old sense. We advocate factual processes,

not ideologies. The serious worker persists in his task under all circumstances

and pleads its cause as valiantly as possible. This holds true for every vitally

necessary work process. We inform the world how our work is organized.

The participants in all other work processes are just as responsible as we for

the outcome of this human society. We cannot dictate to the mining or food

industries how they are to organize their specific tasks in a work-democratic

fashion. Our task is to prevent cancer and other biopathies, and thus to foster

the sex-economic principle in rearing small children and to administer the

utilization of cosmic life (orgone) energy. We are doing pioneer work with

our  psychiatric  and  biophysical  knowledge  and  uncovering  the  basic

principles of the life process.

    Numerous, age-old experiences tell us that at every decisive step toward

social hygiene some powerful policy maker will obstruct our path. Here I

must mention that through many years of patient effort, and supported by the

practical success of our scientific endeavors, we have attempted to cooperate

with responsible politicians of every stamp. We have, however, encountered

only difficulty and have had to overcome the hazards and calumny for which

they were regularly responsible. Every catastrophe which sex-economy was

forced  to  overcome  in  its  development  was  brought  about  by  politicians:Communist  and  Socialist  politicians,  politicians  in  psychoanalytic  and

medical  organizations,  Christian  government  politicians,  fascistic  state

politicians,  dictatorial  police  politicians,  and  many  others.  The

representatives of sex-economy have proven they are willing to cooperate.

The politicians have proven they are enemies, not so much due to personal

motives, but rather because of the fundamental motives of their existence.

Hence the fault lies with them if representatives of sex-economy, political

psychology,  and  orgone  biophysics  no  longer  take  cognizance  of  them.

Because we are working for the implementation of our social tasks we have

no alternative but to automatically oppose politics of every sort.

  Our social position is clearly and unmistakably set forth in this book, as in

other  writings.  We  want  the  world  of  party  politics  to  be  aware  of  this

position so that no one may claim afterward that he “did not know.” The

experiences of these last terrible twelve years have taught us that politicians

like to use the fruits of other people’s honest work to solicit the vote. Once

they  have  secured  a  sufficient  number  of  votes  and  thus  gained  social

leverage,  they  throw  overboard  the  issue  on  which  they  rode  to  power,

without principle or scruple. It is characteristic of them to dispose of the

worker through calumny or the firing squad once they have appropriated the

fruit of his labor. No lengthy consideration is necessary to see that a Lenin or

an Engels could not have survived the Russia of 1930. An American Freud

would have had equally poor chances of survival had an American Hitler

risen to power on his ideas. Today these issues are banalities.

  We do not know who the politicians of Europe, America, or Asia will be

in  1960  or  1984.  Our  attitude  has  been  determined  by  the  political

machinations which we experienced in the years between 1914 and 1944. It is

in the nature of every brand of politics to jeopardize natural science when it

puts the politicians’ promises into practice. Those in power are not interested

in  eliminating  the  individual  worker  but  rather  in  eliminating  the  ruling

principle of work. They wish to exploit work, but they do not wish to grant itthe right to control the direction of society.

  These statements have no personal implications, as we do not know the

politicians  of  future  decades.  However,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  warn  against

them: Overt enmity is preferable to treacherous friendship.

  We are better armed against the irrational attacks of politicians today than

we were years ago. Time is now also on our side rather than against us.

Actually  the  attacks  of  the  emotional  plague  on  sex-economy  usually

boomeranged, but they still required a great deal of effort and money and

repeatedly jeopardized our lives. Hence it is essential to continually expose

the irrational nature of politics so that it is well defined and publicized should

ever an individual suffering from the emotional plague again feel provoked

by the presentation of facts. Of course, one cannot defend oneself against a

shot  in  the  back.  But  perhaps  politicians  will  be  content  to  refrain  from

murder if we assure them we do not intend to compete with them for power,

and that we shall cede the field of demagoguery to them completely, limiting

ourselves  to  our  work  with  hapless  human  victims.  Incidentally,

assassinations would be of no avail; they would only create martyrs. The

searching, the helping, the striving for truth and happiness would reappear a

thousandfold. I hope I have made myself sufficiently clear.                                            1




                              Wrong Directions




Following  the  First  World  War  (1918–27),  there  was  no  mention  of  a

psychological  interpretation  of  sociological  processes.  Social  economists

either  were  strictly  oriented  toward  a  Marxist  economy  or  based  their

contentions, in the struggle against the Marxist value theory, on a type of

economic psychologism as advanced, for example, by Max Weber or similar

schools.  In  the  nineteenth  century  Marx  had  traced  the  sociological  and

ideological processes of society to the development of economic-technical

productive forces. His successors as well as his opponents, during and after

his time, were correct in seeking the psychological factors underlying these

forces. But the Freudian natural-scientific concept of depth psychology was,

in  essence,  individualistically  oriented.  It  had  made  little  sociological

headway  and  even  that  was  in  the  wrong  direction.  (Cf.  my  sociological

criticism  of  psychoanalytic  attempts  at  sociology  in Der  Einbruch  der

                        1
Sexualmoral,  1932.)  Non-Freudian  psychology  dealt  with  surface

manifestations and was merely a branch of philosophy or of the so-called

ethical sciences. It could not yet be designated a natural science. It knew

nothing  of  the  unconscious  instinctual  life  of  the  human  organism  and

remained  focused  upon  surface  phenomena  to  the  extent  that  it  did  not

degenerate  into  ethics.  Because  of  these  historical  developments  the

“psychological”  schools  of  economics  and  sociology  moved  in  wrong

directions. They were unable to penetrate to the economic core of sociology

or  the  biological  [bioenergetic]  core  of  human  structure.  Obviously,  as  aresult, no trace could be found of a relationship between the biological sexual

process and socioeconomic processes. Ethical conviction, a substitute for a

natural-scientific explanation of the human striving for freedom, was also

mentioned in Marxist circles; the gap in Marx’s economic theory was already

felt at the time but it could not be filled. Questions were raised about the role

of  man  in  the  social  process,  his  “essence”  or  “nature”  [human  character

structure]. In this context we must mention the Belgian Socialist Hendrik de

Man, who contrasted Marx’s “materialistic socialism” with his own “ethical

socialism.” Thus the psychological gap in Marxist sociology was acutely felt

but no one was able to name the missing factor in the comprehension of

social  processes.  It  was  obvious  to  everyone  that  in  addition  to

socioeconomic processes independent of man, there somehow also existed

man’s own decisive intervention through thoughts and feelings. Ethical views

and demands intervened only where concrete knowledge about human nature

was lacking. Strictly speaking, the concept of classes was sociological, not

psychological,  even  though  every  “class”  had  its  own  interests,  desires,

needs, etc.

  As became apparent later, the [biopsychological] gap in social science

was,  in  fact,  the  absence  of  a  well-founded,  natural-scientific  theory  of

sexuality.  A  sociology  of  sex  could  only  gradually  develop  from  such  a

theory.  Not  only  was  this  insight  intellectually  distant,  but  if  anyone  had

advanced the theory he would merely have encountered a gaping void. There

were neither writings nor the experience that could have claimed to constitute

a theory of sexuality exactly suited to fill the gap in understanding left open

by  Marx’s  social  economy.  There  were  indeed  numerous  thorough

examinations of the “history of the family,” but in these the family—which is

merely  the  form  in  which  human  sexual  life  occurs—was  erroneously

assumed to be the basis of the biological sexual process per se. The question

of “the family” is, in itself, full of irrational, emotional elements and leads

back  to  ethics  once  again  instead  of  to  natural  science.  Thus  neither  the“problem of the family” nor the “question of procreation” (as “eugenics” or

“population politics”) was integrated into social economy. Today, after the

experience of Fascism, we know that the age-old mystical and unscientific

version  of  eugenics  and  population  politics  formed  the  basis  for  the

development  of  the  Hitlerian  theories  of Lebensraum  and  race.  We  now

understand that Hitler’s race theory developed precisely within the gap of

sociology  which  could  not  be  filled  by  purely  economically  oriented

sociology. I attempted to substantiate this fact fully in my books The Mass

                                                            2
Psychology of Fascism and The Sexual Revolution. My interpretation of the

gap is generally accepted today, to the extent that it is known: The issue was

not the form of the family or the question of procreation but rather that which

family  and  procreation  had  obscured  from  the  very  beginning,  i.e.  the

biological pleasure function in the human animal and the social institutions in

which this function has to take place.

  However, during that time, around the First World War and for many

years thereafter, the biosexual process was completely shrouded in darkness.

Sexology, represented by great names such as Bloch, Forel, Ellis, Krafft-

Ebing,  Hirschfeld,  and  others,  dealt  with  (and  could  only  deal  with)  the

biopathic sexuality of the time, that is to say, the perversions and procreation

of the biologically degenerate human animal. Orgastic potency, the core of

later sex-economic sociology, was discovered and described only between

1920 and 1927. I had as little to contribute to filling the biopsychological gap

in  sociology  as  anyone  else.  Only  one  thing  became  clear  to  me  at  the

beginning of my studies of Marxist and non-Marxist sociology: the lack of

concrete insight into human structure had been replaced and obscured in the

conservative  camp  by  ethical  demands  and  in  Marxist  sociology  by  an

“economistic,” i.e. rigidly mechanistic, view of the societal process which, as

I learned only much later, had already been vehemently opposed by Lenin

during the time of preparation for the Russian Revolution. In economism,

dead  machines  and  technology  are  the  only  decisive  factors.  Man,  asrepresentative and object of this mechanistic social process, drops out of the

picture. This will be demonstrated later with concrete examples.

  In short, all endeavors to comprehend and reorganize society operated

with  no  knowledge  at  all  of  the  central  biosexual  problem  of  the  human

animal. Fascist irrationalism has since forced the question of irrational human

structure upon us. At the time, however, it lay entirely outside the domain of

sociology.  I  became  involved  with  these  problems  through  a  remarkable

concatenation of my activities as a sexologist with important social events.

                                                                  3
  When I wrote my book Die Funktion des Orgasmus between 1925 and

1927,  I  was  already  trying  to  utilize  the  question  of  genitality  in  a

              4
sociopolitical way. This turned out badly. The entire chapter on “the social

                                                            5
significance of genital strivings” was later deleted. Under the influence of

the psychoanalytic theory of culture, I had attempted to use unusable theories.

  I also produced my “‘Contributions to the Understanding of…,” harmless

trifles  which  only  through  their  accumulation  become  dangerous.  They

contained  the  usual  mixture  of  half-truths  and  complete  falsities.  For

example:


  The war signified a collective lifting of repressions, particularly of cruel impulses, with the

  permission of an idealized father image, the Kaiser …


  Thus  I  followed  Freud’s  reflections  on  war  and  death:  the  war  as  an

expression of the sadism of the masses! In 1805 it was a corporal and in 1933

again a corporal whom the multitudes made their “Kaiser.” Today we know

that it is not “the sadism of the masses,” but the sadism of small groups to

whom  the  masses,  who  have  become  biologically  rigid,  helpless,  and

authority-craving, fall prey.


  Economic  interests  brought  external  limitations  which  were  added  to  the  individually

  conditioned  [!]  genital  inhibitions.  The  proletariat  is  not  burdened  with  such  economic

  limitations of genitality [!], and since the pressure of cultural demands is also lower than in the

    property-owning classes, neuroses appear relatively less often. Genitality is freer, the worse the

  material conditions of life.  I  was  a  naïve  and  harmless  academician:  There  are  “individually

conditioned” genital inhibitions; the proletariat is unburdened by economic

brakes  on  genitality;  it  has  fewer  cultural  needs;  the  poorer  the  material

conditions of life, the freer is genitality.

  Neither Marxists nor Freudians criticized me. They were in agreement.

Later, in their struggle against me, the Marxists attributed the “free sexuality

of  the  proletariat”  to  poor  living  conditions.  The  psychoanalysts  were

satisfied because I did not remove the boundaries of morality between those

human beings with and those without cultural needs. A leading Hungarian

analyst  once  told  me  that  the  proletariat  corresponded  to  the  unconscious

since  it  was  without  instinctual  inhibitions,  whereas  the  bourgeoisie

corresponded to the ego and superego, for it had to keep the id in check. This

statement was in complete accord with the psychoanalytic theory of culture

which maintained that society was structured psychologically exactly like an

individual. Everything was in proper order!

  There  were  also  obscure  sentences  having  a  core  of  truth  falsely

expressed:


  Whoever has learned to know the inner readiness to accept and to increase economic necessity

as a way out of inner conflicts, cannot believe in a thoroughgoing solution of social problems

  with the usual methods.


  Neurosis was an “individual” psychic conflict. It had nothing to do with

the social order, except for “a few hardships and injustices.”

  Freud’s  psychology  began  to  penetrate  Socialist  circles  through  the

influence of persons such as the Viennese counselor and pediatrician Dr. Karl

Friedjung. He explained to the Social Democratic physicians in charge of

public hygiene in Vienna that the child has a sexuality. The famous Freud

had discovered this; it was a great finding. With this knowledge, one could

further “sublimation of the instincts.” The Social Democrats supported Freud.

On his seventieth birthday, they made him a “citizen” (note: not an honoredcitizen) of the city of Vienna. Prior to Freud’s discovery, one had not known

where the devil, sexuality, had its dwelling place and therefore it could not be

adequately fought. Now one knew and rejoiced that it could be fought better,

more scientifically, and hence more successfully. Such slogans as “Sexual

enlightenment on a scientific basis” and “Healthy sex education” appeared,

representing  the  demand  for  instinctual  sublimation  and  the  scientific

prevention of “living out.” Psychoanalysts began to write books on sexual

hygiene.  They  advocated  the  “education  of  the  instincts,”  a  term  anyone

could interpret as he pleased. Federn and Meng, both members of Socialist

parties,  wrote:  “Under  our  social  and  economic  living  conditions,  sexual

abstinence may be necessary for valid general and personal reasons. For the

majority  of  human  beings,  abstinence  is  not  injurious  to  health”  (Das

psychoanalytische  Volksbuch,  1927,  p.  237). “Accordingly,  the  utmost

avoidance  of  outer  stimuli  [!] is  necessary  for  the  carrying  out  of  true

abstinence.…  Sexual  excitation  can  be  decreased  by  cold  baths  and

swimming.…  Spontaneous  erections  which  give  rise  to  masturbation  and

cause sleeplessness stop if one holds one’s breath as long as possible and

repeats this several times…” (ibid., p. 240) (italics mine, WR). When in 1929

                                                        6
I wrote my critique of bourgeois sexual reform I refrained from criticizing

these ethical Socialists. I had no answer myself, and to criticize without being

able to do better is easy. I still wrote in the name of psychoanalysis.

  Why do “the world,” “culture,” and “society” not allow young men the

natural satisfaction of genitality? Why are there such masses of psychically ill

people?  Why  has  Freud  been  so  mercilessly  opposed?  Why  do  medical

students hear nothing of the overridingly important processes of sexuality? In

analytic treatment, the social barrier against natural sexuality emerges clearly

and distinctly. Where is the sense in this nonsense? I knew no answer and the

literature  on  the  subject  offered  only  stereotyped  information:  Culture

demands morality—chastity in girls, sexual asceticism until marriage, and

abstinence during puberty. Otherwise there would be no systematic work andtherefore chaos.

  I began to study ethnology and sociology: Whence do sexual suppression

                                                    7
and repression stem? What is their function?                                            2




          A Practical Course in Marxist Sociology





                  (Vienna, July 15 and 16, 1927)



I  had  just  undertaken  the  first  few  steps  to  orient  myself  in  the  study  of

ethnological and sociological literature (Cunow, Mehring, Kautsky, Engels,

etc.) when certain events caught me “theoretically unprepared” and taught me

practical sociology.

    Schattendorf, a small village in the Austrian province of Burgenland, had

a two-thirds Social Democratic majority. On January 30, 1927, the Socialist

Party called a meeting at 4 p.m. Even before the meeting began, monarchist-

inclined  individuals  shot  at  the  crowd  without  provocation  from  a  tavern

frequented by veterans. The skull of a war invalid, a former comrade in arms,

was shattered. An eight-year-old child was shot, a six-year-old child critically

                                                    1
injured,  four  members  of  the  Schutzbund  received  minor  injuries.  The

snipers escaped unhindered.

  Why  did  the  threatened  crowd  not  react  in  absolutely  justifiable  self-

defense? How could the reactionary killers escape in a village composed of a

two-thirds Socialist majority? The population turned the matter over to the

courts in a disciplined manner. The next day several large plants shut down in

protest. On February 1, 1927, the chairman of the Socialist Party of Austria

and the Austrian labor union called for a fifteen-minute protest strike. This

was  unanimously  carried  out.  No  mass  demonstrations  were  held  in  thestreets  although  the  Social  Democratic  opposition  did  have  the  means  to

demonstrate impressively against the murderous action of the Monarchists.

“One did not wish to provoke the citizens and excite the workers.” The end

result was the fall of Social Democracy on February 14, 1934, brought about

by the same monarchistic organization which in 1927 attempted to find out

just how far it could go.

  On February 3 a parliamentary interpellation took place in the National

Assembly. The Social Democrats very politely asked the Christian Social,

Hapsburg-minded government whether it was prepared:

  1. “to vigorously prosecute those individuals responsible for the killings

in Schattendorf”;

  2.  to  dissolve  the  local  veterans’  organizations  in  the  province  of

Burgenland.

  The debate ended without a decision. The trial—I believe it was held on

July 14, 1927, in Krems—ended in the acquittal of the killers, apparently by

monarchist-inclined reactionary judges.

  At 10 a.m. on July 15, 1927, a physician came to my office to keep his

usual  appointment  for  analysis.  He  told  me  that  a  strike  of  the  Vienna

Workers’ Union had broken out. Several people had already been killed; the

police were being armed; and the workers had already occupied the inner city

area. At this I discontinued the session and walked down to the Schottenring,

which was close to my home. The police headquarters were located on one of

the streets I passed on my way. A number of policemen were standing there;

they were being handed rifles from a truck. On the Schottenring long lines of

workers marched in the direction of the University. They were dressed in

work clothes and walked in groups, some of them keeping in step, but they

were  unarmed.  I  noticed  especially  the  composure  in  their  faces  and  the

serious determination of their bearing. They were not singing or shouting.

They walked in silence. From the University, the columns of the Schutzbund

marched  in  the  opposite  direction  toward  the  Danube  embankment.Bystanders asked where they were going. The answer was: “To quarters.” No

one understood. Here a clash was brewing between heavily armed police and

factory  workers,  and  the  troops  of  the  Workers’  Union,  which  had  been

organized  for  years  for  just  such  an  occasion,  were  going  back  to  their

quarters. A week later, the general consensus was that the Social Democratic

Schutzbund could have prevented the bloodshed that subsequently occurred

by putting up barriers before the police. During the term of office of the

Social Democratic City Council, Vienna had at its disposal a fifty-thousand-

member Schutzbund with military training. If the encounter was to have been

avoided the workers would have needed protection from the police. No one

knew  what  went  on  within  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Social

Democratic  Party.  The  first  summary  of  events  by  the  Socialist  Party  of

Austria came out twenty-four hours later, on July 16.

  I am reporting here from the standpoint of a mere onlooker. I was among

those tens of thousands present at the time who were both onlookers and

targets of the police. The reality of such days and hours during the “war of

the classes” differs from the description in official reports on civil and class

struggles. In these reports the conflicts, according to theory, are fought out

between “capitalists” and “workers.” In the streets, however, people actually

run, scream, shoot, and die! I saw no capitalists on the street, only thousands

and  thousands  of  workers  in  and  out  of  uniform,  women,  children,

physicians,  and  spectators.  The  indelible  impression  remained  that people

were  warring  here  with  their  own  kind.  The  police  who  shot  a  hundred

people in those two days were Social Democrats. The workers were Social

Democrats.  The  Schutzbund  was  Social  Democratic.  The  crowd  was

predominantly Social Democratic. Was this class conflict? Within the same

class?  In  a  city  administered  by  Socialists?  Here  for  the  first  time  those

misgivings arose concerning the irrationalism of politics in general which

found  their  answer  twelve  years  later  in  the  formulation  of  natural  work

democracy.  It  was  a  practical  example  of  the  biopsychological  gap  inMarxism!

  I  continued  with  the  crowd  to  the  Schottentor.  An  armed  police

contingent was marching to the Palace of Justice, which was ablaze. The

troops, for the most part Social Democrats, were looking toward the ground;

the police officers walked with a constrained gait as if they had something to

hide. Groups of people of every age and vocation were everywhere; not just

the youth, but older women and office workers—in short, people one would

see in the downtown area of any city on a normal day. Many called out to the

police: “Don’t shoot! Don’t be fools! Whom do you want to shoot down?” A

group at the Vienna Bank Association screamed furiously: “Worker killers!”

and “You are workers yourselves!” The police hung their heads even lower.

Their faces betrayed even more confusion. The first casualties had already

occurred. The excitement was tremendous. But thousands upon thousands of

people were still merely nonparticipating onlookers.

  I walked on to the Rathaus Park. Suddenly shots rang out nearby. The

crowd  dispersed  in  the  direction  of  the  Ring  and  hid  in  the  side  streets.

Several minutes later they slowly emerged again, like curious children whose

fear had been overcome by defiance and boldness. When a crowd runs, one

feels an irresistible urge to run with it. Several people screamed: “Stop! If

you run away the police will shoot even more.” Shooting continued in the

park.  Mounted  police  rode  into  the  crowds.  Ambulances  with  red  flags

arrived and drove off bearing the dead and wounded. It was not a riot per se,

with two antagonistic factions, but simply tens of thousands of people, and

groups of policemen shooting into the defenseless crowd. Only at the Palace

of Justice was there a regular battle. Soon we saw flames mounting. Rumor

had it that several police stations had been stormed. Four policemen had been

killed at the Palace of Justice, compared to a hundred casualties among the

crowd. The mob was so dense there was no access to the building, not even

for the police.

  Several policemen were stripped of their uniforms and forced to crawlaway in shame in their underwear. The uniforms were symbolically hanging

from  flagpoles.  I  marveled  at  the  crowd’s  clemency.  There  were  enough

people  to  tear  the  policemen  to  shreds  and  still  they  were  peaceable  and

complaisant. The police passed unmolested among them even though people

in  the  immediate  vicinity  were  being  shot  down  like  rabbits.  I  could  not

understand this. How could the crowd look on and do nothing, absolutely

nothing at all, to prevent the bloodshed? “Sadism of the masses”? The news

that the Palace of Justice was afire was enthusiastically cheered by all. “That

shack had it coming.” Justice existed only for princes and the rich anyway.

There was grumbling, to be sure, and mourning for the dead; but there were

no actions that could have been termed resolute.

  The Palace of Justice was occupied by young workers. They had driven

the police out and now, in righteous fury, were throwing the records out of

the  windows  into  the  street  below,  where  they  were  set  aflame.  The

Schutzbund  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.  The  Social  Democratic  mayor  of

Vienna, Karl Seitz, drove a fire truck through the crowds toward the Palace

of Justice but was unable to get through. The crowd would not move aside

and simply allowed the building to burn down. Here and there killing was

taking place automatically. Whenever a policeman or group of policemen felt

the  urge  to  do  so,  they  shot  blindly  into  the  masses.  For  hours  people

continued to be shot down. I ran home to tell my wife, who could not believe

it  and  felt  it  was  all  utterly  impossible,  as  did,  I  am  sure,  hundreds  of

thousands of others in Vienna on that day. I asked her to come and witness it

with  her  own  eyes,  and  I  walked  to  the  University  with  her.  We  stood

between the University building and the Arcaden Café with a crowd of three

or four hundred watching the fire. Everyone felt that the blaze was a just

                                                          2
response  to  the  acquittal  of  the  two  Heimwehr  Fascists  who  had  shot  a

worker and a youth for no reason and had just been permitted to go free. This

was not objective justice but simply a “pact with murder.” Approximately

two hundred meters from the Town Hall there stood a phalanx of policemenwith rifles lowered. We saw them gradually begin to move. They approached

slowly,  very  slowly!  When  they  were  only  about  fifty  paces  from  the

unsuspecting  onlookers,  the  officer  in  charge  stepped  aside  and  gave  the

order to fire. I saw several policemen raise their gun barrels and shoot over

the  people’s  heads.  Many,  however,  fired  straight  into  the  crowd,  which

scattered. Dozens of people lay on the ground. It was hard to tell whether

they were dead, wounded, or merely trying to protect themselves. I jumped

behind a tree and pulled my wife after me. The police phalanx was now

positioned parallel to the Schottenring. They no longer used their rifles but

just stood there, two hundred meters away as before. Again I had the feeling

of watching “a senseless machine,” nothing more. A stupid, idiotic automaton

lacking  reason  and  judgment,  which  sometimes  goes  into  action  and

sometimes does not. And this was what governed us and was termed “civil

order.” It ruled and prescribed whom I was allowed or not allowed to love,

and when. Machine men! This thought was clear and irrefutable. Since then it

has never left me; it became the nucleus for all my later investigations of man

as a political being. I had been part of just such a machine during the war and

had  fired  just  as  blindly  on  command,  without  thinking.  “Lackeys  of  the

bourgeoisie”? “Paid executioners”? Wrong! Merely machines!

  Some of these machine men had enough life left in them at least to be

ashamed. They averted their eyes or shot over the heads of the crowd. A

living being does not fire blindly without knowing at what he is shooting and

for what reason. Life had to have died within those who did so. This was not

changed by the fact that the machines moved spontaneously, mechanically. If

these mechanical men did not exist there would be no war. But how did they

work? What controlled their actions? Who created them and why? How could

living  beings  degenerate  thus?  This  problem  was  not  to  be  solved  by

attributing it to “corruption” or the “bourgeoisie.” That was obvious. Being

uniformed was also not the cause, although undoubtedly “organization” had

something to do with the mechanization of humans. The psychologist Le Bonhad  studied  mass  mechanisms  of  this  kind,  and  Freud  based  his Group

Psychology  and  Ego  Analysis  on  Le  Bon’s  claims.  Using  the  hierarchic

organization of the army, the Church, and political groups as examples, he

attempted  to  prove  that  under  regimentation  man  divests  himself  of  his

individuality  and  identifies  with  the  leader  or  the  idea.  He  ceases  to  be

himself  and  reaches  back  to  infantile  phases  to  implement  identification.

Moreover,  the  “primal  horde”  situation  comes  into  play  again:  The  sons

submit to the all-powerful father and because of their guilt feelings identify

with him “for culture and civilization.” I quietly added: “and for peace and

quiet.” [SO: Witness the “quiet and order” in the middle of the twentieth

century brought about by such culture and civilization!]

  Freud’s claims were correct. Servile identification with the leader could

be directly observed, as could the loss of the individual ego and the effect of

an abstract idea as well. But still … I was not satisfied. These explanations

eternalized the facts and anchored them in biological lawfulness. The family

was,  after  all,  a  biological  institution  and  thus  everything  the  family

constellation engendered was biological as well! Therefore, there can be no

possibility  of  change.  Therefore,  policemen  for  all  eternity  will,  in  this

irresponsible  fashion,  shoot  at  people  observing  a  fire.  Therefore,  these

people  will—for  all  eternity—set  palaces  of  justice  on  fire  and  allow

themselves to be shot down like rabbits and react complaisantly. And this is

supposed to be progress in the development of culture! Is this culture? It is

said  that  culture  demands  “renunciation  of  the  instincts.”  Therefore,  this

crowd,  despite  its  numerical  advantage,  renounced  lynching  those  few

policemen  for  reasons  of  “instinct  renunciation,”  in  order  to  qualify  as

civilized, in order not to act out the destructive death instinct, in order to

sublimate  their  drives,  in  order  to  secure  civilization.  Yes  …  but  …  the

police, the “representatives of civilization,” fired indiscriminately at harmless

masses  of  people.  Where  was  the  sublimation  of their  drives?  And  the

“objective” judges had unhesitatingly acquitted outright murderers! Was thatsecuring culture? Impossible! Somewhere an enormous deception lay hidden.

Freud was hypocritical in this. But Freud was an honest, upright man! Why

would he be hypocritical? Did he know? Certainly not. But then, why his

firm,  confident  claims  regarding  cultural  morality  and  the  necessity  for

repression of the instincts? I felt an honest and very real urge to attack the

police and simply to strike out blindly in every direction just as they had fired

blindly into the crowd. Only the thought that I would stand alone restrained

me. I had the strange feeling that my action would seem ridiculous, even to

the individuals who had been shot at so recently. My strongest reaction was:

The  mistreated  masses  themselves  would  not  understand!  Otherwise  they

themselves would have reacted spontaneously! They did not need me to set

them an example. I thought perhaps cowardice was influencing me and that a

real Communist would certainly have jumped at the throats of the police

under such conditions. However, the Communists and the Social Democratic

leaders were nowhere to be seen. The latter had tried in vain to persuade the

crowd at the Palace of Justice to allow the fire to be put out. I felt that the

masses were unquestionably in the right and not their leaders. The judges

who were meant to uphold and practice justice had pronounced murderers

innocent.

  In Alser Street, in front of the University clinic, I encountered a working

woman who had just visited her son in the hospital. She cried out in despair:

“Where are the Communists? They should beat those policemen to a pulp!

They have shot my son!” But there were no Communists around. One or

another  may  have  been  present  as  individuals,  but  not  as  “leaders  of  the

proletariat.”  Only  on  the  following  day  did  the  Communists  distribute

leaflets. [SO: The “Communist” already appears here as one who rectifies

injustice by mere proclamation. In doing so, he hooks on to the yearning for

justice in people, who then become gullible stooges of the red Fascists.]

  In numerous illegal meetings I had learned that at such times the party

had  to  “consolidate,  direct  the  struggle  as  a  leader,  and  ensure  the  bestpossible outcome.” In isolated sessions behind locked doors, the Communists

dreamed of mass revolts that would lead to the triumph of the revolution.

Now the revolt against social offenses had erupted spontaneously. The leaflet

came one day too late. Similarly, when the German bank crash occurred in

July 1931 and everyone was waiting for the Communists, their poster arrived

in Berlin eight days later when the “mood” had already passed. In the same

way Russia came to Spain’s aid several months too late, with “We did not

know how to mobilize the masses,” “We were still too weak,” etc., etc. But

when one is “still too weak,” or does not yet “know how to mobilize the

masses,” it is a crime to call oneself the “only leader of the proletariat,” to

stand  by  helplessly  in  such  catastrophes,  undertaking  nothing  for  the

protection of the masses, and afterward to continue to agitate to revolt with

full force, depending upon the occasion—for or against a strike, for or against

bourgeois  democracy,  for  or  against  a  pact  with  Hitler  or  a  war  with

Germany, for or against birth control, for the abolition of market economy,

and for the oil trade with Italy in the Abyssinian war—in short, to be without

forethought or conviction.

  All  this  was  unknown  to  me  at  the  time.  I,  too,  was  waiting  for  the

Communists. Hadn’t they accomplished the Russian Revolution? They would

take care of everything. They were no doubt still deliberating. On the same

day,  I  had  a  Communist  doctor  register  me  in  the  medical  group  of  the

Arbeiterhilfe, one of the affiliates of the Austrian Communist Party.

  [1952: The Arbeiterhilfe (Workers’ Help) consisted mainly of people who

were  not  party  members  but  sympathized  openly  with  the  Russian

Revolution. It and the Rote Hilfe (Red Help) were organizations similar to

the Red Cross. In the early 1930’s, however, there were many instances in

which they were used for political purposes without the consent or even the

knowledge of their membership, which was nonpolitical. My later conflict

with the German Communist Party leadership over the Sexpol organization I

had  built  up  was  characterized  basically  by  the  same  pattern.  I  alwaysmaintained that the mental hygiene clinics had to be socially oriented but

suprapolitical. However, the Communist Party leadership, in the service of

Moscow,  was  already  deeply  entangled  in  power  politics  and  intent  on

misusing  the  original  purposes  for  which  these  organizations  had  been

founded.  It  is  the  same  today—everywhere.  In  this  conflict  which  started

around  1930,  I  strenuously  opposed  the  Communist  politicians  who  had

obviously begun to develop and to organize all the trends which a few years

later (1934–35) led them into full-fledged Fascism.

    Awareness of the sharp contradiction between the factual (social) and the

power-political approach to human problems was never again absent from

my  sociological  work.  The  factual  approach  maintains  that  social

organizations, including economic ones, should be determined by the needs

of the population. This was the way I had interpreted the Marxist economic

theory. However, it became clear in our first clashes that the party ideologists

had an entirely different interpretation of Marxist economics. To them all

action  and  thought  had  to  be  oriented  to  “productive  power,”  that  is,  to

nothing  more  than  machines.  It  is  obvious  that  the  industrial-mechanistic

point of view and my functional one could never agree, since they led to

opposite, mutually exclusive directions of social development. Today, these

two  views  characterize  two  inimical  camps.  In  1927  I  had  very  little

knowledge of all this. I was soon to learn the hard way to distinguish sharply

between a society determined by the needs of the people and one based on

power  machines.  The  poverty  in  Russia  and  the  marked  tendency  toward

poverty in Socialist England are clear expressions of complete disregard for

human needs as the basis of social structure.

  If we add to the economistic interpretation of Marxism the confusion of

state  with  society  and  a  misinterpretation  of  the  relationship  between

individual and society (which meant the state), we can begin to comprehend

the agony into which people slid unwittingly and unwillingly. We can also

appraise  the  importance  of  clear  thinking  and  the  correct  handling  ofscientific ideas for the benefit of the human community. I would suggest to

the reader that he view all events as they roll by us on the following pages

from  the  standpoint  of  this  sharp  contradiction  in  approach  to  human

existence.]

  I did not wish to censure or criticize but merely to help as best I could.

                                                                              3
When I heard from members of the Schutzbund that Otto Bauer had told

representatives of the gas and electric workers to “do what you like” and had

then  abruptly  walked  away,  I  felt  acutely  the  enormity  of  the  situation.

However, I did not leave the Socialist Party of Austria. I decided to work

socially  as  a  physician  wherever  I  could.  Let  me  emphasize  this:  I  was

apolitical, a scientific worker, a physician with a highly successful private

practice and wealthy American pupils. I was a member of the bourgeoisie.

  The  Palace  of  Justice  burned  to  the  ground.  Every  thoughtful  person

understood the motive for the fire. [SO: It was a true mass emotion, a genuine

reaching out for justice. Twenty years later, traitors and well-hidden spies,

misusing such emotions in order to kill justice everywhere, would enable red

Fascists to march in. But why?]

  The inner city was gradually cleared. Approximately a thousand critically

wounded persons were lying in the overflowing hospitals. The conflict had

claimed more than a hundred casualties because the Schutzbund had turned

their backs. No one could have envisioned the reverse, namely, that in 1934

the Schutzbund would bleed to death and that the masses, their trust betrayed

in 1927, would stay away.

  In the suburbs, especially Ottakring and Hernals, there was more fighting

on July 15. In the evening of that day, my wife and I walked through the

desolate streets. The fighting had subsided. We encountered many agitated

people, women in tears, and men who desperately asked what could be done

to prevent further bloodshed. There was still no sign of the “only leader of the

proletariat.” We decided to visit a friend who lived in the vicinity; her father

was in a Social Democratic organization and one of her brothers was even aSocial  Democratic  functionary.  We  arrived  and  were  amazed  to  find  the

dining-room  table  set  and  decorated  with  flowers;  they  were  expecting

guests. I was without a jacket and tie. The gory events appeared not to have

penetrated this room. In my agitated state of mind I suddenly felt out of place

and ludicrous in this cool, reserved atmosphere. I wanted to leave but was

asked to stay. Then the guests arrived. A very intelligent conversation about

the events of the day began in truly cultured Viennese fashion. It was obvious

that no one knew what had really happened. They spoke of the bloodshed as

they might ordinarily have spoken of Goethe. We said goodbye and took our

leave. We had both remained polite. I would have liked, at the very least, to

have overthrown their table, but I was sufficiently well-bred to discipline

myself. I was a leading assistant in the Polyclinic Hospital and the superior of

these Social Democratic colleagues.

  July 16 passed with fighting in the northern suburb of Ottakring, but only

isolated groups were involved and the crowds stayed away. Several people

were killed and a number wounded. The police either patrolled the streets

with special commando trucks loaded with carbines pointed upward, or rode

self-confidently and brutishly through the side streets. It was horrible. Early

in the morning of the third day the streetcars began to run again and the

newspapers resumed publication. The everyday appearance of a large city

was restored as if nothing had happened. However, a great deal occurred

from  that  time  onward.  On  July  15,  Austrian  Social  Democracy  had

enkindled the forces of its own downfall in 1934. No one was aware of this;

people  simply  debated  and  argued  about  the  tactics  and  strategy  of  the

“proletarian class struggle.” Although it was not true, the Social Democrats

accused the Communists of inciting people to set the fire that Seitz had tried

to extinguish. This argument did not end until their common downfall in

1933 and 1934. The ruling party, led by the Catholic priest Ignaz Seipel, and

various representatives of the wealthy bourgeoisie condemned the “revolt.”

No one spoke or wrote a word of explanation or pacification to the effect thatsuch conflicts should be prevented for all time. The political parties, whether

Christian Socialist, Liberal, or Communist, accused each other, threatened,

negotiated, and maneuvered politically, but no one could be found to get at

the root of the matter. Getting at the root of the matter would have required

discovering and declaring that politics in itself is entirely irrational and a

social disease. This would have necessitated dissolving all political parties. It

would have been senseless to complain or to appeal to the conscience of the

politicians. Their attitudes are a part of their social misfunction. One can

either recognize them or stop them from functioning, but complaining serves

no purpose.

  The Social Democrats disclaimed all responsibility for the revolt although

their organization had participated in the massacre. As one looks back on

their organizational and, in part, their personal liquidation by the royalists in

February 1934, several problems raised by the July revolt become quite clear.

At the time, I knew of no one who could have discerned or grasped these

problems. It is much easier to recognize them today after history has taught

its  cruel  lessons.  Hindsight  is  easy.  One  alters  history  only  when  one

recognizes in time the processes and problems that are obscured from the

general  public.  Social  catastrophes  result  from  the  very  obscurity  and

insurmountability of that which one would like to prevent. To this day, the

energies of world reformers usually exhaust themselves in the observation

that what has happened had to happen. But, to supplement a phrase by Marx,

it is important not only to interpret the world, but to change it as well! Our

politicians have remained interpreters and recorders, or else highway robbers.

Changing  the  world  radically  requires  honesty,  courage,  a  scientific

approach, and foresight, character traits no politician possesses.

  The actual problems of the July revolt were:

                                                                    4
  Why were the masses of mistreated people so helpless?

  Why  did  the  “reactionary”  sons  of  workers  and  farmers  shoot  down

workers and farmers?  Was  it  really  a  question  of  workers  rioting  against  capitalists  in  the

streets? Or was it the oppressed against the oppressed?

  Did the middle class really only vacillate between the two other classes?

Why  did  it  not,  in  view  of  its  own  miserable  economic  situation,

spontaneously and naturally take sides with the industrial workers?

  It was impossible to pose such questions at the time. This would have

required the complete exposure of political irrationalism as it occurred in the

subsequent fifteen years. In contrast, the workers’ movement had only the

following facts:

  Austrian  Social  Democracy  was  numerically  strong.  After  gaining  3

mandates in the election of April 24, 1927, it comprised 71 seats as opposed

to  the  85  of  the  Christian  Socialist  Party  bloc.  Let  us  note  that  these  85

Christian  Socialists  and  German  Nationalists  had  not  been  elected  by

capitalists  but  by  many  hundreds  of  thousands  of  working  people.  In

Parliament as well, it was not a matter of capitalists versus the working class,

but of representatives of socialist-inclined working people versus those of

Christian, monarchist, and German nationalist inclination. I am aware that

this is an example of the clarity of hindsight.

  The  number  of  Social  Democrat  votes  had  increased,  but  power  and

courage had declined. In 1926, when the national population was 6 million,

the  Socialist  Party  of  Austria  received  over  1,535,000  votes,  against

1,312,000 votes in 1923. And in Vienna, with a population of 1.8 million, it

received 694,000 votes in 1926, against 571,000 in 1923. When the party

convention in Linz declared that nothing could prevent a power take-over

once an outright majority was reached, there were numerous party members

who felt that the day the 51 percent point was reached would be a day of dire

catastrophe because then they would be compelled to assume power. But

what to do with their power?

  [There was no bridge whatsoever between what the Socialists promised

(peace, brotherhood, “bread and freedom,” a Socialist government, etc., etc.)and  the  true,  deeply  rooted  character  structure  of  the  people  which

reproduced daily its own miseries of which they knew nothing and did not

want to hear anything.]

  It is my contention—contrary to that of many politicians—that it was not

personal  timidity  or  malice  which  prompted  Otto  Bauer’s  dangerously

irresolute politics. I feel it was his complete insecurity as to what to do with

the masses after a take-over, which repeatedly made him indecisive. Their

helplessness  was  more  frightening  than  their  servility.  Yet  neither  the

helplessness  nor  the  servility  of  the  human  masses  was  recognized  or

acknowledged. I do not know whether Otto Bauer ever even considered them.

To  do  so  would  have  been  “heresy”  against  Socialist  views,  until  the

triumphant advance of Fascism made answers to these questions absolutely

necessary. The numerous lofty political arguments for and against democracy

obscured the central issue, namely, whether the working masses are capable

of  building  a  free  society.  They  are  certainly  able  to  destroy  the  old

authoritarian  social  institutions,  as  was  demonstrated  by  the  Russian

            5
Revolution. The very successful propaganda of the reactionary organizations

was based on the objection that one may not destroy the old unless one is able

to replace it with the new. There was no answer to this, nor was there relevant

historical experience—not even in Soviet Russia.

  In  general,  there  was  fear  of  a  breakthrough  of  mass  rule.  Very  few

people admitted this openly; many covered it with political slogans. No one

was acquainted with the abysmal depths of the problem of human character

structure. We were infinitely far from theoretical and practical organizational

measures for solving this problem. The readiness of the masses for freedom

was considered self-evident. No one could doubt this without being called a

reactionary. (As was demonstrated later, there existed a definite fear of the

                                                                                          6
basically conservative nature of the masses, which no one dared to confront.)

To do so would have undermined the entire basis of the political propaganda

which, in accordance with the Coué method, employed fantasies of an idealfuture society and illusions of human freedom. I lived through this phase, as

did many others. One was socialistic by inclination but rejected, especially in

vital areas, the foundation of a free development. It would have appeared

insane to speak of the incapacity of the masses for freedom and their fear of

freedom as was done later in 1935.

  In  1927  there  was  no  basis  upon  which  a  factual  evaluation  of  the

conservative attitude of the democratic leaders and the masses in every walk

of life could have been made. This became possible only after the collapse of

the Austrian and German democratic movements had conspicuously raised

the question of the masses’ capacity for freedom. It is easier initially for

reactionary politicians to deal with the masses because they do not try to

solve  basic  social  problems.  Their  actions  are  determined  by  nationalistic

sentiments and their success is based on complete disregard for and negation

of the working masses’ vital needs. The movements for freedom on the other

hand,  whether  Socialism,  Communism,  Liberalism,  or  other,  have  an

immensely difficult task; the number of questions and problems to be solved

is  limitless.  The  Socialists  and  Communists  certainly  knew  the  laws  of

capitalist economy and the outlines of a “socialistic society” as conceived by

Socialist pioneers. Democrats of other persuasions believed in the possibility

of peaceful and gradual reforms without taking into consideration the activity

of the political reactionaries. Every gap in the Socialists’ body of knowledge

constituted  an  advantage  for  the  reactionaries.  The  hesitant,  halfhearted

liberalism  of  the  democratic-bourgeois  faction  in  regard  to  strivings  for

freedom, and their frequently less hesitant liberalism toward the reactionaries,

                                                        7
paved  the  way  for  the  impending  catastrophe.  For  all  of  the  democratic

organizations, recognition of human anxiety and incapacity with respect to

freedom would have been second in importance only to the mastering of

daily tasks and the control of international social processes. For seven years

(1927–34)  I  struggled  within  the  workers’  movement  and  in  liberal

organizations to evaluate the role of the people in the social process and todetermine how to handle their subjective views and actions correctly. It was a

matter  of  clarifying  the  role  which  biopsychic  phenomena  play  in  the

development  of  society  and  of  comprehending  fundamental  life  processes

above and beyond their economic basis. There was no information available

which would have been of practical use. Hence everyone felt a gap which no

one was able to fill. All factions raised arguments in opposition to freedom

tendencies,  and  each  was  correct  in  some  respect:  the  conservatives  in

demanding concrete plans for reconstruction and in fearing social chaos; the

Social Democrats in their belief that the social revolution demanded by the

Communists was an impossibility; the Communists in claiming that Social

Democratic  politics  were  a  “betrayal”  of  the  cause  of  freedom,  that  they

constituted a strengthening of the reactionary political position and would

finally lead to ruin. On the other hand, the Christian Socialists could not keep

a single campaign promise, the Social Democrats were leading the masses to

destruction, and the Communists were correct in theory (which is very easy)

but not in practice. In 1927, they acted as a kind of admonishing conscience.

Ten years later in Spain and France, they adopted the same practices they had

accused the Social Democrats of using in 1927 in Germany and Austria. And

between 1936 and 1942, they slipped into the pact with Hitler and further into

complete confusion and the betrayal of their views. They carried on the war

against  Hitler  in  Russia  as  an  authoritarian,  dictatorial  nation,  not  as

possessors of a solution to the contradictions that were causing world chaos.

  The basis of all mistakes made by all parties and of all the catastrophes

they caused—no matter how well-meaning or honest they may have been—

was the ideological confusion of the working population, its exclusion from

practical control of the work process, and its incapacity for freedom, which

was unrecognized at the time owing to the parties’ fear of the masses. Their

point  of  departure  was  not  the  life  and  suffering  of  the  masses  but  an

“ideology  practiced  in  the  interest  of  the  masses”  and  used  to  brainwash

them. The bizarre and even ludicrous debates in Parliament following theJuly revolt in 1927 may be grasped and evaluated only from this perspective.

I shall cite but a few examples. A systematic chronicle of these events is not

intended here.

  The  tactics  of  the  bourgeois  democratic  governments  were  the  same

everywhere; they were unyielding and relentlessly opposed to the Socialist

parties. They took ample advantage of the serious gaps in the Socialist world-

view which revealed the Socialists’ political weakness and lack of principle,

as well as the guilt feelings of their leaders. They let no opportunity pass to

increase  the  Socialists’  insecurity  or  to  appeal  to  their  bourgeois  political

conscience. The Catholic prelate and Christian Socialist Federal Chancellor,

Ignaz  Seipel,  a  man  clever,  hard,  and  knowledgeable  about  psychology,

recognized  the  weakness  of  the  Socialists  immediately.  He  supported  the

acquittal of the murderers in the Schattendorf trial. He said the jurors had had

no other alternative, after the press campaign by the Socialists. They had to

view the killing as “a political affair” and not a private act. This attitude was

shrewd; the Social Democrats had portrayed the shooting as an individual act

of  murderers  and  had  appealed  to  the  conscience  of  the  government.

However, this government did not consider questions of conscience but rather

the economic interests of big industry, of property owners, and of the Church,

and this they did not deny. The Social Democrats were embarrassed that the

rioters had correctly recognized the political character of the matter. Hence

their first action was to draw a sharp line between themselves and the revolt.

In his rebuttal speech before the National Assembly on July 26, 1927, Otto

Bauer said that, in regard to the casualties, it was everyone’s moral duty first

of all to examine his own conscience. “Hence I wish to utter no word of

accusation  before  openly  confessing  any  fault  on  our  part  which  may  be

revealed by an examination of our consciences.” He then continued, naïvely

exposing the Social Democrats’ fear of their own mass support, and said the

party itself might have held a demonstration “with all possible security so

that order would not be disturbed.” This would have given the demonstration“a political sting” and justified it. Bauer deplored the conduct of the Christian

Socialists. “Shooting is popular nowadays, and shooting at citizens seems to

awaken feelings of gratitude.”

  Bauer tried to stir the members of the ruling party emotionally. He said he

understood when guards shot in self-defense, but that most of the casualties

had been caused by an inhumane method of clearing the streets. Why did

Bauer, a powerful man, with thousands backing him, not have the streets

closed off immediately? The army and police force were still predominantly

Social Democratic. They would not have opened fire had not the brother

organization,  the  Schutzbund,  been  withdrawn.  Bauer  had  not  been

confronted  with  the  question  of  seizing  power  but  only  with  the  task  of

achieving the realistic goal of preventing the massacre, supported by his own

authentic power. He would not have had to go begging in Parliament had he

rationally  used  his  power  in  Vienna  to  keep  the  peace.  Because  of  his

insecurity  with  the  masses  and  the  Christian  Socialist  government,  he

attempted to avoid civil war at any cost. Civil war had resulted nevertheless,

and Bauer was unable to prevent it in 1927 or in 1934; he had merely lost it.

  The  masses  go  where  they  see  strength,  courage,  and  determination.

There they feel secure. Every clear, decisive action increases the confidence

of the masses and the strength and courage of their organization. It is better to

lead a civil war with the masses than to have the police lead it against them.

[Consider Lincoln’s decisions in the American Civil War.]

  Bauer demanded a statement by the government in favor of the arrested

Socialists and sacrificed a general strike for it. However, “the government

gave no explanation, we made the sacrifice. I will stand by what I did; I

advised my friends to strike and I am proud of that. The beginning of this

movement  was  something  which  must  necessarily  have  aroused  the

reservations of every individual with a conscience, but its conclusion was a

triumph  of  organization  and  of  discipline.”  But  only  until  1934!  Bauer

appealed  to  the  reason  of  the  Christian  Socialist  government  and  to  itsstatesmanlike insight. “Hold me back or else I shall have to shoot against my

will!” This was the way Bauer functioned. Finally, in 1934, he did have “to

shoot” after the battle had long been lost. But Bauer could not have acted

otherwise. He really did not know what to do. [SO: Appeasement is always

the expression of a lack of knowledge as to how to act.] He would certainly

have carried through courageously to the end had he seen the issue in its

entirety. He later proved that he was personally not a coward.

  He made the right demands but they could not always be fulfilled. In

1927 there was no one competent to say how Otto Bauer should have handled

the situation. Most people knew or sensed that his actions were wrong; some

people even thought he was laying the groundwork for a catastrophe. But

would these critics have done a better job in his place? I say no! No one had

the ability. There are phases in the social development of a movement which

correspond to the demands of urgent life-forces. Then there are phases which

only partially correspond to these demands and in which one can already

perceive mistakes without being able to avoid them. One can explain which

mistakes lead to negative results but cannot yet say how the developmental

process could be turned in a positive direction. In such phases, a responsible

leader [It is said that a thousand heads are better than one; unfortunately, they

often see and know much less than one alone] should be able to: (1) see that

mistakes are being made, (2) look for the possible negative consequences, (3)

make  the  movement  aware  of  both,  and  (4)  mobilize  all  forces  in  the

movement which are capable of working together to reverse the trend.

  These are only the indispensable prerequisites for avoiding an impending

catastrophe.  They  do  not  in  themselves  avoid  it  but  merely  prepare  the

ground for further possibilities. When the actual events lead to success or

cause defeat, insight and comprehension are sharpened. Only in the course of

the  battle  for  the  new  are  its  most  important  weapons  forged.  At  the

beginning, only a yearning for freedom (in itself powerless) and a theory

about the goal (also powerless per se) are operative. They do not gain powerover people and hence over reality until they are in harmony with historical

development  and  only  insofar  as  they  solve  the  real  problems  of  human

existence,  step  by  step,  and  constantly  correct  themselves  in  relation  to

reality.

  No individual or movement can anticipate, control, or successfully master

all the questions the future will raise. Moreover, the spirit of opposition is

also actively plotting and its cunning increases in direct proportion to the

number of those yearning for freedom. Sometimes the movement is struck by

a catastrophe. This happened to the Russian Socialists in 1905 when their

revolt was crushed. However, a defeat of this nature, tragic as it may be, still

lies on the path toward success, to the extent that no glaring errors were made

beforehand.  The  inability  to  grasp  and  to  solve  everything  immediately

cannot be counted as a mistake. But it is an unpardonable mistake not to be

aware  of  this  and  to  hinder,  and  even  take  punitive  action  against,  the

initiative to fill in these gaps. In the long run no movement can escape the

consequences of this inferior manner of operating. If one is prepared for the

consequences of incomplete knowledge, in other words the possible success

of the opponent, then a setback does not necessarily mean complete failure.

The  German  and  Austrian  workers’  movement  brought  about  its  own

downfall  by  refusing  to  recognize  the  gaps  in  its  body  of  knowledge,  by

being arrogant about the success it achieved, by leaving the pioneers of the

movement  out  in  the  cold,  by  underestimating  the  opposition,  and  by

physically  and  spiritually  undermining  the  masses  who  supported  it.

However,  even  these  errors  and  self-destructive  actions  were  not  an

expression of malice or cowardice but were very deeply rooted. The gap that

had to be filled required knowledge and action contrary to the entire structure

of Socialism as it existed until 1934 and to the whole ideology as it was

maintained organizationally up to that point. The whole concept of Socialism,

to the extent that it concerned the transformation of man, was incorrect, often

basically false, and very frequently anti-socialistic. To explain and prove this,even in the briefest terms, would fill a hundred pages. There is far too much

to be clarified.

  When  a  movement  with  a  certain  goal,  a  circumscribed  ideology,

contradicts essentially itself, it will be crushed by its opponent. It crushes

itself, so to speak, because it rejects its own goal, which is then taken up by

other social forces. When the aims of a movement are broad but lack clarity

while  the  collective  will  toward  a  common  goal  is  indomitable,  then  the

entire society is threatened with ruin. This situation materialized with the

victory of German Fascism in 1933. Although thirty-five million Germans

wanted Socialism in that year, Hitler was victorious, as grotesque as it may

sound, with his reactionary and limited but courageous and shrewd tactics.

The socialistic will of a population of seventy million people lived under the

specter of barbarism, shabby tricks, and war as the center of their lives. No

one was able to comprehend this, to grasp it in time, and to prevent it. The

workers’ movement collapsed because it did not understand the thousand-

year-old problem which the Fascist movement had brought to light. It was a

basic problem of human society, and in this—but only in this—was German

Fascism progressive. I am convinced that the question it raised will be solved

not by Fascism but rather by the aggressive advance of science. It was the

question of the role of human beings in the technical developmental process

of  society,  a  misunderstood  and  even  abused  issue.  The  life  work  of

numerous secular geniuses, the sacrifice of millions of people, and all the

suffering of a thousand years of human history were needed to formulate it,

to grasp it, and to attain the first childlike beginnings of a solution.

  To introduce the exposition of this problem I must return to Otto Bauer

and the maltreatment he received from his opponents in 1927.

  Bauer had cleared his conscience before the opposition. He then appealed

to reason, to the government’s “judgment.” It had to try, he said, “to quiet the

agitated masses with a gesture indicating that this may not continue and that

the government does not wish you to abandon yourselves further to blindhate.” What fear of mass indignation! Certainly Bauer sensed the complexity

of  human  structure.  He  simply  did  not  know  that  this  structure  had  been

created by the oppressors. He believed in its biological, i.e. unchangeable,

nature since even Freud, the greatest psychologist of the century, had proven

scientifically that biologically immutable destructive drives exist in man. To

unleash these drives would unquestionably lead to chaos. Bauer’s Christian

Socialist opponents, however, were not theorizing about destructive drives,

introverted  or  extroverted.  They  were  not  even  considering  burdening

themselves  with  the  problem  of  how  “to  make  evil  people  good.”  Their

maxim was: Beasts should be under lock and key; make short work of them;

put them in chains. Hitler was the end product of this attitude. [SO: The

Socialists and Communists have no answer either and nothing to offer here

except, again, brutal force against the people, as used in red Fascist Russia.]

  After Bauer, Kunschak, the leader of the Christian Socialist government

party, spoke. He rejected an investigation. He was not interested in whether

any  police  agents  had  overstepped  their  authority,  but  solely  in  who  was

responsible  for  the  tragedy.  “The  Christian  Socialists  will  convey  their

gratitude to the Chancellor.”

  The  Christian  Socialist  Vice-Chancellor,  Hartleb,  declared  that  he

assumed all responsibility for the police intervention. Gürtler of the Christian

Socialists answered Bauer: “We would gladly have granted you this moral

success (the pacification and distraction of the masses), but we cannot simply

overlook the fact that you were no longer in a position to achieve it.… A

revolution is as much a calamity for you as for us.” [How true!] And Otto

Bauer, the initiator of the revolutionary program in Linz, had to listen to this

without being able to give an answer. Gürtler was right. A mass revolution

would have been a disaster for Bauer and his party, who would not have

known  how  to  handle  it.  Would  the  masses  have  known?  Or  the

Communists? Let us wait for an answer.

  The  Christian  Socialist  Aigner  recognized  Bauer’s  deep  emotions  as“honest  and  heartfelt.”  “However,”  he  said,  “during  his  speech  I  had  the

impression that here stands the responsible man of that party which for years

has led these unfortunate victims before the guns of the executive power of

the state through unrestrained agitation in the press and the spoken word.”

And Grailer remarked, “In the future when you raise your arm to strike, you

may expect the heavy blow to fall upon yourself.”

  How gruesomely correct these reactionaries were in the final analysis!

How could they be so confirmed in their opinion when they had absolutely

nothing to offer the human masses, either their supporters or their opponents?

  What  did  the  Communist  Party  of  Austria,  which  because  of  its

convictions considered itself the real “leader of the workers,” have to say

about all this? [SO: What would any of the “freedom” politicians have had to

offer? WR, at that time, was deeply involved in these problems, but he was

far from knowing that no politician had anything whatsoever to offer, and

that the events of 1927 were only a small link in the chain of mass murders

which occurred in the following decades.]

  The masses of manual laborers belonged to non-Communist, Christian

Socialist,  and  Social  Democratic  worker  organizations.  On  every  possible

occasion  the  Communists  demanded  the  arming  of  the  workers,  the

dissolution of antagonistic organizations, a general strike, etc., etc. When the

workers  were  involved  in  actual  fighting,  the  Communists  came  too  late

(Spain,  July  1936)  or  had  no  contact  with  the  mass  movement  and  no

leadership (Austria, February 1934) or curbed the mass movement (Germany,

October 1933). However, they always laid claim to leadership because of

their “convictions.”

  This brings us to the question of why, assuming its program is valid, the

Communist movement has no contact with the mass movement? The answer

to this is not to be found in any of the polemic writings but in the evidence

that, after 1918, the masses had a different concept of Socialism than the

Communists, that their desires were full of contradictions, and finally thatalthough  the  Communists  knew,  theoretically,  the  principles  of  socialist

economy [which they later abandoned] they never had the slightest idea of

the real life of the masses.

  For  years  the  Communists  had  encouraged  what  finally  took  place

spontaneously on July 15. On the evening of July 14 they called a meeting of

their plant representatives, about eighty people, “who said they were making

an attempt to lead the workers out of their shops, but were not convinced

their efforts would be successful. If successful in prevailing upon the workers

to walk out, a quiet demonstration was to take place.” (“Vienna is red—with

                                                        8
the blood of the workers.” —letter to Inprekkorr, July 19, 1927.)

  They “analyzed” the causes of the spontaneous movement with all the

latest subtleties of their “Marxist-Leninist” method, the only one suited for

leadership.  In  an  anonymous  pamphlet  put  out  by  the  Association  of

International  Publishing  Houses,  Berlin,  1929,  they  arrived  at  certain

conclusions. The causes of the July revolt were attributable to:

  1. The Social Democratic tactics of evasion and persuasion toward the

bourgeoisie. (This would mean that the Social Democratic workers rose up

on July 15, 1927, because they were infuriated at their hesitant leaders, whom

they  subsequently  followed  completely  for  another  full  seven  years  until

1934.)

  2.  The  Austro-Marxist  habit  of  “accompanying  all  compromise  with

radical speeches and gestures…” Please note carefully: The workers took to

the streets because of the radical language used by the Social Democrats. The

individuals in the Christian Social government made the same claim.

  3. The “poor economic situation of the workers.” In Austria the economy

was booming in 1927—and two casualties had mobilized the workers. In

1932,  there  was  dire  need  and  crisis;  there  were  continuous  killings

everywhere—and not one single worker took to the streets. The matter is

more complicated than the “only leaders of the proletariat” had indicated in

their premise.  4.  “The  main  reason  for  this  sudden  outbreak  is  the  lack  of  a

revolutionary people’s party with revolutionary leadership recognized by the

masses.” Please read this sentence carefully several times: The main reason

for “the revolt” was the lack of a revolutionary people’s party. If, however,

such a party had existed, no revolution would have taken place. Between

1930 and 1933, as Hitler rose to power, there was a revolutionary people’s

party.  At  that  time  no  sudden  revolt  occurred.  The  statement  thus  seems

correct but is nothing but confusing nonsense, an expression of the complete

factual and theoretical loss of direction on the part of Lenin’s successors.

Where were the units the Soviet Russians had trained in the “strategy and

tactics  of  class  struggle”?  And  why  were  the  masses  who  desired  the

revolution not willing to recognize this leadership either now or then? [SO:

Why did the red Fascists have to steal and murder their way into power even

after the Second World War?] Why, then, all the demands for a general strike

and  the  proclamations  of  the  plant  representatives  such  as  those  at  the

“Heimwehr”  demonstration  in  Pottendorf?  Why,  then,  the  Coué-type

proclamations and agitation for a general strike? It is not my intention here to

recapitulate the story of the Communist movement. I have merely attempted

to indicate the level on which politics was operating and the ideology into

which the struggle for recognition of mass psychology was placed.

  At the end of July 1927, I had a discussion with Freud on the Semmering.

It seemed to me that he lacked all understanding of the revolt and viewed it as

a catastrophe similar to a tidal wave. I would like to emphasize that, other

than the spontaneous angry eruption of the masses over the unjust verdict in

Schattendorf, there was no response, in either intellectual or political circles,

which shed any light on the events. Neither before nor after July 15 had the

working population shown any inclination to place the revolt in an intelligible

social context. Their reaction to the Schattendorf verdict was the burning of

the Palace of Justice in Vienna, for which they paid with thousands of dead

and  wounded.  They  did  not  respond  at  all  to  the  far  more  serious  anddangerous abuse of their civil rights by reactionary political forces in the

following years until the downfall of their organization in February 1934.

[This is a good historical example of mass-psychological irrationalism.]

  I would have given my thoughts free rein if I had known the answers to

the many questions which rushed one after another through my mind. To be

sure,  everyone  was  talking  about  everything  in  a  hit-or-miss  way.  As  I

listened to this talk, the feeling of the senselessness of politics must have

taken possession of me for the first time. Never had I seen any relationship of

politics to the actual life of human beings, but clinical work had convinced

me that one must have experienced a thing completely in order to judge it

correctly. Thus I began practical political-sociological work.                                            3




The Living Productive Power, “Work-Power,” of Karl


                                        Marx




    A brief comment to avoid any possible misunderstanding. I have portrayed the figures of
    capitalists and property owners in anything but glowing colors. In this context, however, such
      individuals have been referred to only insofar as they personify economic categories or
    champion certain class conditions and interests. I view the development of an economically
    based form of society as a natural historical process, and my theory holds the individual less
      responsible for prevailing conditions than does any other. Man remains the product of his
        social environment regardless of how far he may rise above it in a subjective sense.

                    —Karl Marx, Capital, preface to the first edition (1867).


                                    FOREWORD


This article was written in 1936 as the sociological illusions in the Soviet

Union  assumed  the  character  of  constitutional  statutes  (“Introduction  of

Soviet Democracy”). The article was not published at the time. There is a

twofold reason for its publication now.

  1. Scientific, i.e. truthful, thinking is more necessary in this miserable

human society than ever before. Armed conflict will not change the misery

one iota. Although German Fascism has been defeated by military power, the

fascistic human structure continues to thrive in Germany, Russia, America,

everywhere. It will metastasize underground, seeking new forms of political

organization,  and  without  fail  will  lead  to  a  new  catastrophe  unless

responsible groups throughout the world decide quickly and energetically to

protect and advance the truth. Only political lies are protected and advanced

today. This can be predicted with certainty.  From the scientific standpoint, which is the only possible perspective, the

following explanation is altogether permissible: Karl Marx discovered vital

facts having far-reaching social consequences, but the realization of these

consequences is impossible because knowledge and techniques are not yet

adequate to produce a sufficiently rapid change in human emotional structure.

There can be no objection to this viewpoint, which contains hope for the

future. One may hail Marx or condemn him. That is a matter of choice. But

one may not under any circumstances, if one lays claim to common decency,

refer  to  Marx  and  then  distort  his  scientific  findings  for  the  purpose  of

political maneuvering. We may not distort an established truth without sooner

or later making ourselves accomplices of Fascism, that past master of deceit.

Even  if  changing  the  human  situation  to  correspond  with  true  scientific

claims is impossible, the misery of daily life must under no circumstances

tempt us also to crush humanity’s only hope, the truth.

  [The emotional plague affected Marx’s theory of value in the following

way: In their attempt to arouse the emotions of the masses and to win them

over, the party politicians forgot about the unemotional explanation of the

value of work-power. They attached to the factual concept of “surplus value”

feelings of resentment, hatred, envy, and the urge to pocket surplus value

oneself. Thus the fruitful and promising findings of Marx got lost in a heap of

irrational  emotions  which  not  only  led  to  no  practical  achievement  but

brought ruin to the whole workers’ movement.

  True,  the  emotional  plague  is  able  to  win  masses,  conquer  nations,

destroy populations, but it is unable to provide even one constructive measure

for the improvement of economic misery. True, the emotional plague can

shoot to pieces, burn, or otherwise destroy millions of trees. But there can be

no dictatorship over the growth of trees; one cannot prescribe to a tree how

fast and how much it should grow. On the other hand, scientific research into

the laws of tree growth can provide the means of preventing damage to trees,

of  improving  the  conditions  under  which  trees  grow  faster  and  better.Scientific fact finding corresponds to the mastery of obstacles in the way of

unfolding life.

  This example shows clearly the biological function of natural science as

contrasted with the destructive function of every manifestation of emotional

plague. What political groups in Europe and America fight as “Marxism” has

nothing  to  do  with  Marx’s  economic  teachings.  Similarly,  the  various

“Marxist” parties of today have nothing in common with Marx’s science.]

  Ten or more years ago one was severely reprimanded if one tried to alter

a single line of Karl Marx’s writings and one would have been ostracized for

declaring  scientifically  that  Marxist  economy  badly  needed  to  be

supplemented by a scientific mass psychology. Yet, recently Marxism was

“revised” in the Soviet Union. Official state economists “discovered” that

Marx was incorrect in claiming that, in Socialism, no surplus value would be

produced and accumulated, that this was a specialty of capitalism.

  Here lies the distortion: Nowhere in Marx’s economic theory is there any

mention that, in Socialism, the production of surplus value would cease to

exist. This “revision” is meaningless; actually it is nonsense because what has

been corrected was never proposed.

  The basic problem of Karl Marx was not whether surplus value is or is

not produced in Socialism. The problem involved the nature and origin of

surplus  value  and  the  question  of  who  manipulates  it.  Surplus  value  is

produced because of the particular character of living productive power. The

fundamental difference between living and dead productive power forms the

core of Marx’s economic theory.

  A determination of the nature of living productive power, and through

this of the origin of surplus value, then leads to the sociological question of

who acquires the surplus value. It is always appropriated by the owners of the

social means of production: in private capitalism, by the individual capitalist;

                                                                        1
in state capitalism, by the state; and in free work democracies, by the society

of workers (as seen historically in primitive societies and envisioned by KarlMarx in the genuinely democratic society of the future).

  One  may  form  one’s  own  opinion  of  this  statement,  accept  it

enthusiastically or detest and reject it, but one may not distort it. Shifting the

problem of surplus value production from its nature, origin, and appropriation

to the question of “whether it exists” is an illegitimate distortion of scientific

findings. The following corrections have nothing at all to do with political

sentiments but only with a vital interest in protecting the body of scientific

knowledge.  In  our  day,  it  is  not  superfluous  to  emphasize  that  scientific

questions such as these are not to be disposed of by means of the firing

squad, that most modern instrument for settling human arguments.

  2. The second reason for the publication of this article at present is the

consonance of Marx’s analysis of living productive power in surplus value

with the orgone-physical investigation of biological activity in the human

animal. Since approximately 1928, sex-economy has been aware of the fact

that  Karl  Marx’s  living  productive  power  is  identical  with  what  orgone

biophysics refers to as the “work function of biological energy.” I would like

here and now to express my deep human and scientific satisfaction that a

thinker and researcher of the stature of Karl Marx elevated a specific life

function to the very core of his “dry” economic theories. Working humanity

owes him gratitude, for he was the first to achieve this. Allowing him to

practically starve, continually defiling his name, falsely ascribing claims to

him  which  he  never  made,  and  appropriating  his  practical  scientific

achievements without credit to him—all add to humanity’s already heavy

indebtedness to Marx. It is not Marx who is at fault. It was my duty as a

scientist to make clear what an unthinkable social mentality is attempting to

blur.

                                                                          Wilhelm Reich

                                                                    Orgonon, July 1944 


 


 


 


 


In the summer of 1927, while living with my family in the town of Lans near

Innsbruck, I studied Capital by Karl Marx. After carefully working through

the first hundred pages of argumentation regarding surplus value, I realized

that Marx signified for economics what Freud had meant for psychiatry. His

basic  views  were  simple,  self-evident,  and  contradicted  all  the  traditional

concepts.  Pre-Marxist  and  non-Marxist  economists,  on  the  other  hand,

attempted to deduce profits from the “natural value” of inanimate material,

and  from  currently  available  and  invested  capital,  etc.  Before  Marx,  the

economists had claimed that the value of commodities was determined by the

ratio of supply and demand. Marx proved that this causes only slight price

fluctuation and that the value of commodities is determined by the human

“work-power” expended upon them. Marx said that a tree, in itself, is of no

“value” as long as human effort is not “added” to it. Only when the tree has

been felled, sawn into pieces, processed into boards or poles, does it gain

“value” for mankind. This holds true of everything which has “value.” Air

has no “value”; it is free because it may be consumed without additional

human effort. The hide of an ox also has no value until human hands process

it into shoes.

  Marx  differentiates  between  constant  and  variable  capital.  Constant

capital is composed of inanimate raw material and inanimate machines. They

yield  no  profit  of  themselves  until  human  work,  i.e.  variable  capital,

transforms them into commodities, into use value. Since money can be lent

for interest, the value of capital lies in its yielding money over again, whetherthrough investments in business (industrial capital) or through loans (bank

capital).  Money,  according  to  Marx,  is  only  paper,  issued  to  facilitate

transactions based on a social convention. It has no value of itself, aside from

the effort expended to produce the bank notes and coins. It receives its actual

value only through what it represents, what it can be exchanged for, such as a

commodity. However, not only inanimate but also living commodities are

bought.  The  entrepreneur  pays  the  worker  for  the  use  of  the  commodity

“work-power.” Work-power can be bought and sold exactly like any other

product. If I am a shoemaker and sell a pair of shoes which I made, they no

longer belong to me. Similarly the labor which a machinist sells to an owner

of capital no longer belongs to him. Just as the buyer of the shoes may use the

intrinsic value of the shoes as he pleases, the entrepreneur may do as he

pleases with the work-power he has bought, and may exploit it however he

pleases.  This  is  not  “wrong”  but  entirely  legal  according  to  the  laws  of

market economy.

  Marx  defined  the  concept  “capitalist”  scientifically.  It  is  not,  as  is

commonly  assumed,  an  individual  who  possesses  a  lot  of  money,  but  a

person who is able to buy and make use of the work-power of others on the

basis of the laws of market economy. If, as a doctor, I am proficient in my

field, cure numerous patients, and discover good methods of healing, then

many sick people will come to me. They pay for my time and, along with

this,  for  the  value  of  my  work-power.  In  order  to  do  my  work  I  must

repeatedly  renew  my  work-power,  that  is,  I  must  eat,  house  myself,  buy

clothes, etc. This constitutes one part of the value of my work-power. But

with this alone I could not carry on my specific work. I need, additionally,

certain training which requires work and money, continuous expenditure of

effort  for  further  development,  instruments,  etc.,  upon  which  others  have

exerted their work-power. I pay for all this with portions of my work-power.

Hence the patient must pay not only for my work-power but for all the work-

power  expended  upon  him  through  my  work.  This  is  done  through  theconventional value substitute “money,” by means of which I, in turn, may

purchase the results of other people’s effort, such as shelter, food, clothing,

etc., i.e. use values. As long as I myself work, I am not a capitalist no matter

how much money I earn. However, if I were to employ, let us say, four

doctors, pay them a fixed salary of two hundred kronen a month, and use

their  eight-hour  work-power  to  treat  patients  for  me, then  I  would  be  a

capitalist.  Then  I  would  be  “exploiting”  the  work-power  of  others  and

appropriating the value of their work-power in the form of money. In eight

hours, I myself could treat eight patients and earn eight hundred kronen in

twenty-five working days. Four doctors, however, could earn four times as

much, namely thirty-two hundred kronen. While I would have to pay the four

doctors a total of eight hundred kronen, I could keep what was left of the

thirty-two  hundred  kronen  they  had  earned,  thus  acquiring  twenty-four

hundred  kronen  through  the  exploitation  of  other  people’s  work-power

without  having  worked  for  it  myself.  According  to  the  laws  of  market

economy, I would not be considered a swindler but would be acting entirely

within the law. No one could prosecute me or accuse me of wrongdoing.

  Karl Marx’s great accomplishment lies in having disclosed the secret of

the  living  commodity,  work-power,  its  dichotomous  character,  and  the

difference between exchange value and use value. If a person has produced a

pair of shoes which he does not plan to use for himself, the shoes have no use

value but rather exchange value. He can exchange them for peas, meat, or

money. As a value replacement, he receives approximately the value of the

work-power necessary to produce them. The work-power, as has been stated,

is measured in work-hours, the average number of work-hours expended. The

purchaser, however, does not buy the shoes for their exchange value but for

their use value. He must have them to satisfy a need, in this case to protect

the  soles  of  his  feet  while  walking.  He  is  entitled  to  have  the complete

exchange value of the shoes, which he paid for in the form of money or meat,

returned to him in the form of serviceability of the shoes. The exchange valueand  the  use  value  of  a  dead  commodity  in  which  human  work-power  is

objectified  are  identical.  On  the  other  hand,  the  only  living  commodity,

work-power, functions differently precisely because it is a living power. In it

the exchange value and the use value are not identical. The use value is far

greater than the exchange value.

  Every type of worker, i.e. the person who creates use value, sells his

commodity, work-power, to the entrepreneur just as the shoemaker sells a

pair of shoes, and according to exactly the same laws of market economy.

But  the  worker  must  reproduce  his  commodity  himself  by  eating,  buying

clothing, and finding shelter. For this he must work, let us say, three hours a

day if we again measure the value of food, shelter, and clothing in terms of

average  labor  necessary  for  the  reproduction  of  work-power.  These  three

hours  constitute,  according  to  the  laws  of  market  economy,  the  exchange

value of his work-power. The capitalist, therefore, does not cheat the worker

in paying him for the exchange value of his commodity, work-power, the

value of three hours of work a day. At least he does not cheat him according

to the laws of market economy in which human work-power is negotiable

like any other commodity. But the buyer of this commodity, e.g. the owner of

a  factory,  uses  the  laborer’s  work-power,  not  for  three  hours  a  day  (in

keeping with its reproductive value as measured in work-hours), but rather

for  eight  or  even  ten  hours.  This  means  that  the  use  value  of  the  labor

expended  by  the  worker  (eight  hours  of  work)  is  greater  by  far  than  the

exchange value for which he is paid (three hours of work). The profits of

market economy arise from the difference between the lower exchange value

and the far greater use value of work-power. If a wealthy purchaser of this

commodity buys the work-power of a thousand or ten thousand workers as

use value, he utilizes the latter at a corresponding multiple of its exchange

value. This is because a thousand or ten thousand workers now transform

inanimate  material,  dead  capital,  into  commodities  by  adding  their  work-

power a thousand or ten thousand times. Their labor is collective, but theappropriation of the value of the commodity is individual (“capitalistic”). If a

shoemaker produces two pairs of shoes a day in his shoeshop, he receives the

exchange  value  of  two  pairs  of  shoes.  If,  with  improved  machinery,  he

produces ten pairs of shoes a day instead of two, he can collect the exchange

value of ten pairs of shoes. If, however, he is a worker in a shoe factory

which continually improves its machinery, he nevertheless receives no pay

increase as exchange value for his labor despite the increased production of

use value. The utilization of his work-power by the capitalist has remained

approximately  the  same  although  the  “exploitation”  has  risen  because  the

exchange  (=use)  values  he  now  produces  have  greatly  increased.  But  the

product is not at his disposal. He simply continues to sell his commodity,

work-power, in compliance with the laws of market economy, at the market

price for three hours of work. Anyone who supports himself by selling his

work-power is a worker. Anyone who purchases the exchange value of this

commodity  and  exploits  its  use  value  is—due  to  the  difference  between

exchange and use values of living work-power—a capitalist in the Marxist

sense of the word.

    According to strict Marxist scientific principles, it is a mistake to hold the

capitalist responsible for exploiting the individuals who produce these values.

Contrary  to  the  views  of  narrow-minded  Socialists,  neither  the  individual

capitalist nor the capitalist class is “at fault.” The essence of the exploitation

lies in the nature of economically structured class society based on market

economy.  This  is  what  makes  it  possible  for  an  individual—by  whatever

means—to acquire sufficient capital to enable him to purchase other people’s

work-power and make use of the difference between the exchange value and

the use value of work-power. The economic swindling of the worker is based

on the conditions of capitalistic production and not on human intent.

    Comprehension of the following paradox in the reasoning and propaganda

of the Marxist parties is indispensable for an understanding of natural work

democracy. On the one hand, they were strictly economistically oriented; thecharacter structure of human beings as they are in reality was completely

excluded from their thinking. As became apparent later, any consideration of

human character structure in the struggle for genuine democracy was sharply

opposed. On the other hand, Marxist propaganda did not operate with the

“material” facts of human biological and social existence, but essentially with

secondary, neurotic drives such as hate, jealousy, power mania, etc. I am

aware that the followers of Marx will take my statements as a grave insult. It

is not my intention, however, to insult anyone but merely to reveal the facts

which helped to bring on the catastrophe. Using a simple example from my

medical practice, I would like to illustrate the difference in attitude between

Marxist party politicians and those making work-democratic efforts toward

freedom.  When  one  is  confronted  with  a  neurotic  child  suffering  from

insomnia  and  learning  disturbances,  even  a  superficial  conversation  will

reveal the child’s neurosis as the result of faulty upbringing by a neurotic

mother. At this point it would serve no purpose whatsoever to condemn the

neurotic mother or to provoke the child’s hate against her. Establishing the

harmful influence of the mother in rearing her child serves only one purpose,

namely to cure the child’s neurosis. Realization of this fact enables me to

intervene and be of assistance. Without knowledge of this fact, revolutionary

moral indignation or the kindling of hate in the child could help neither child

nor mother. The ill mother who caused her child to become neurotic is not

“bad” or “evil”; she has not “oppressed” the child or “exploited the child’s

helplessness.” She is the tool and, together with her child, the victim of an

unfortunate sexual-social situation.

  Exactly  the  same  holds  true  for  the  “exploiting  capitalist”  and  the

“exploited  worker.”  The  kindling  of  hatred  within  the  worker  against  the

capitalist, the arousal of jealousy, the use of defamation, the instigation to

murder,  etc.,  will  not  change  the  commodity  laws  of  societies  based  on

private  economy  or  state  capitalism.  The  laws  say:  “I,  the  possessor  of

capital, will pay you, laborer, farmer, technician, scientist, etc., thirty or fiftydollars a week so that you can provide food, shelter, and clothing for yourself

and  your  family,  in  other  words  reproduce  the  exchange  value  of  your

commodity, work-power. You will sell me your work-power for eight hours a

day regardless of how large the exchange value (use value) of the product

which you produce in these eight hours is, even if this exchange value is three

or five times as great as the value you must produce and use in one day to

provide for yourself and your family.” The owner of capital and the worker

do  not  enter  into  a  relationship  with  each  other  as  human  beings,  a

relationship determined by free will which they can change whenever they

please.  They  are  both  the  objects  of  a  certain  social  relationship  which

functions on the basis of historical development and dominates them both,

independently of their will.

  The  reader’s  understanding  of  the  development  of  sex-economic

sociology and mass psychology which led to the discovery of natural work

democracy  in  1939  depends  completely  upon  his  viewing  the  Marxist

analysis  of  the  laws  of  market  economy  in  a  factual,  natural-scientific

manner, without rage or love, without ethical or moral judgment. Our first

concerns must be facts and functional laws, not ideals and aspirations. Real

aspirations can only be based on real statements of fact.

  One of the main causes for the chaotic misery into which human society

repeatedly falls is the fact that politicians usually base their idealizations and

endeavors—whether  well  intended  or  not—on  irrational,  emotional  value

judgments, rather than on facts. Anyone who is acquainted with my writings

knows that I have always been aware of the importance of emotions, but only

those  emotions  and  aims  that  are  based  firmly  in  reality.  I  have  always

opposed unfounded, illusory, or irrational ideals and aims.

  The discovery of the above-described law of market economy and the

paradox peculiar to the living commodity, work-power (exchange value less

than  use  value,  as  opposed  to  dead  commodities  whose  exchange  value

equals the use value), is a scientific finding, neither good nor bad, but simplytrue. It has nothing to do with ethics or morals. The capitalist who pays for

the  exchange  value  of  the  worker’s  commodity,  work-power,  and  then

utilizes its far greater use value is not motivated by an evil intent. Personally

he may be either a scoundrel or a well-intentioned man. Usually he is not

even aware of the mechanism to which he owes his wealth. He is entangled in

the  process  and  subjected  to  all  the  consequences  of  the  laws  of  market

economy,  such  as  competition  with  other  firms  and  plants,  the  usual

economic crises, etc.

  In stating this, I neither attack nor defend the capitalist. I do not wish to

obscure the fact that I personally do not care for the character of the typical

capitalist who devotes all his thoughts, actions, and emotions exclusively to

the earning of money, who substitutes the power of money for natural love

and is an artist in taking but an amateur in giving, with no understanding of

the  joy  it  can  bring.  This,  however,  must  not  be  allowed  to  prevent  my

distinguishing between the human traits of a certain capitalist and the laws of

market  economy  whose  agent  he  has  become  through  inheritance  or

enormous effort.

  I also do not wish to conceal the fact that I consider the discovery of this

economic  law  by  Karl  Marx  one  of  the  greatest  accomplishments  ever

achieved by human thought. Although market law was discovered by Marx to

have  existed  during  the  last  three  hundred  years  of  capitalistic  machine

civilization,  it  extends  far  beyond  this  period  into  the  ancient  history  of

human society to a point in the obscure past when society gradually ceased to

produce use values and shifted more and more to the production of exchange

values, i.e. commodities. This process ran parallel to the development from a

natural economy to a monetary economy. Parallel to this, in turn, ran the

reversal from sex-affirmation, which guaranteed the natural self-regulation of

                                                                        2
sexual  energy,  to  sex-negation  and  the  emotional  plague.  Karl  Marx’s

discovery has changed the entire countenance of society on this planet. In

thousands of economists and sociologists, it has awakened a sense of thatwhich we see before us today as modern social economy. There are countless

economists and sociologists who have never read Marx, or have even rejected

him,  but  who  nevertheless  show  the  influence  and  bear  the  mark  of  his

economic and social theory in their practical work. It was not Ricardo and

Smith  but  rather  Karl  Marx  who  brought  the  laws  governing  modern

technical  development  to  the  level  of  general  human  consciousness.  The

numerous liberal and Socialist organizations would never have kept step with

this  development  had  they  not  been,  either  consciously  or  unconsciously,

under the spell of Marxist sociology. I know from experience that there are

many responsible capitalists who regard Marx highly and understand him

better than do many socialistic party politicians.

  These positive qualities of Marx’s achievement do not change the fact

that his sociology, understandably, contains serious omissions, above all a

lack  of  comprehension  of  man’s  biological  roots  and  the  fact  that  he  is

governed  by  his  instincts.  Party  politicians  replaced  these  factors  with

unscientific ethics, unfounded slogans of freedom, and formal, bureaucratic

“freedom organizations.” One cannot replace scientific insight with slogans,

ideologies, illusions, and theses without losing one’s way and forfeiting one’s

goals.  I  do  not  know  how  many  economists  in  the  Soviet  Union  are

consciously aware that, according to the strict criteria of Marx’s value theory,

a market economy still exists there with all its peculiarities, including the

paradox  of  exchange  and  use  value  of  work-power,  and  with  it  the

exploitation  of  human  labor.  It  is  irrelevant  whether  the  “state”  or  the

“individual  capitalist”  does  the  exploiting.  The  essential  issue  is  whether

society  is  determined  by  the  individuals  who  create  surplus  value  arising

from the difference between use and exchange values or by those who merely

                                                                3
use  surplus  value,  be  it  state  or  individual  capitalist.  Over  the  course  of

twenty years I have not heard one Soviet social economist mention this fact.

According  to  Marxist  principles,  Socialism,  i.e.  the  abolition  of  market

economy, does not prevail in the Soviet Union—but, rather, capitalism, to bemore precise, state capitalism without individual capitalists.

  The functioning of market economy is responsible for capitalism and not

the individual capitalist or the state. Only when this perspective has been

clearly  and  unmistakably  grasped  can  one  evaluate  the  social  effects  of

market economy on human life and proceed to the question of whether and

how a thousand-year-old market economy could be abolished and replaced

by an economy based on use values. Planned economy, into which economy

everywhere  increasingly  develops,  automatically  expedites  the  transition

from market economy to an economy of use. Commodities are produced to

satisfy needs, not merely to be sold for a profit. To the extent that the Soviet

Union had a planned economy, it developed into an economy of use, but

wherever  it  engaged  in  foreign  trade  it  necessarily  adhered  to  market

economy.  These  facts  are  neither  good  nor  bad  but  actual  processes.

Therefore it is not party politics but Marxist socio-scientific work which will

reestablish sociology and economy and enable them to move in a forward

direction.

  I must emphasize once again that the basic element of Marx’s discovery

of the value theory and, along with that, of the essence of human work in

general, is biological or biosocial in nature. This central fact evaded party

politicians. Living work-power alone (variable capital) creates values, and

not inanimate (constant) capital!

  The reader will inquire why I admit to being such a strong advocate of the

Marxist value theory. It is not out of political sentiment or the recognition of

social misery, but simply because I know of no sociology other than Marx’s

which corresponds more closely or is more relevant to my own discovery of

the laws of biological energy. Both the natural organization of work as a

biological fact (and not as a moral or political postulate) and the findings of

orgone biophysics require recognition of the actuality and distinctiveness of

the living commodity “work-power.” Facts such as these have a singularly

weighty  and  decisive  influence  when  supported  scientifically  from  twoindependent perspectives, regardless of whether they represent the views of a

mystic,  a  capitalist,  or  an  unscientific  Socialist  who  sees  himself  as  a

liberator.

  To recapitulate: The production of goods for society is collective; their

appropriation in capitalism is individual, not social. The producer of goods,

the working man, does not have the product of his work at his disposal. He is

a salaried worker, that is, he receives the exchange value of his commodity,

work-power, paid in accordance with the law. Capital as a social force is

symbolized by the private or state ownership of the means of production, of

land and buildings, and stands in contrast to salaried labor. These two, the

owners  of  capital  and  the  salaried  workers,  represent  the  two  economic

classes. Their interests are antithetical. It lies in the nature of capital to want

to realize a profit. It can be profitable only if it yields interest, and this in turn

is possible only if it acquires “surplus value” from the difference between the

exchange value and the use value of work-power. The worker, on the one

hand, naturally wishes to increase his wages; the capitalist has the equally

natural  wish  to  keep  them  low  or  even  reduce  them.  Hence  two  classes

confront each other hostilely. The socioeconomic laws of market economy

are  the  cause  of  this  situation  which  is  then  maintained  by  specific

institutions.

  Marxist  economy  unquestionably  has  the  same  significance  for

economics  as  the  Freudian  theory  of  unconscious  psychic  life  has  for

psychology.  Both  presuppose  a  certain  factually  based  view  of  the  laws

which govern contemporary human life. The functional theory of life cannot

be grasped if one is not acquainted with these preconditions.

  Marx’s  theory  manifests  all  the  indications  of  an  unabashed

boundlessness,  as  does  all  great  human  thought.  The  fact  that  this

boundlessness  yielded  to  political  narrow-mindedness  when  Marx  himself

could no longer assert his fiery temperament is in itself a problem of Marxist

sociology. Even before then, he had kept a certain distance from his pupils,saying, “I am not a Marxist!”

  I am not a Marxist either, but I do believe that I understand Marx’s vast

greatness  and  minute  shortcomings.  Let  us  return  to  his  great  ideas  and

findings. He was very consistent and had to pay for this with voluntary exile,

dire poverty, and persecution.

  It  was  formerly  believed  that  man,  the  leader,  the  genius,  “makes

history”; Marx thoroughly extinguished the spark of this illusion. Of course

man makes history, who else? Certainly not machines! However, man can

make his own history only under certain circumstances which control him.

Human will and the striving to achieve goals are dependent upon the level

which society has reached and on the current state of technological mastery

over  nature.  Daedalus  and  Icarus  had  wished  to  fly,  but  could  not.  They

simply  lacked  the  knowledge  and  technology  to  produce  gasoline  and

construct motors capable of carrying a certain weight through the air. True,

human imagination and activity are the sources of every social impulse, but

they themselves are determined and limited by their times. Copernicus and

Galileo  were  not  able  to  take  from  man  his  feeling  that  the  earth  is

preeminent and unique. They were severely punished because their era did

not know what to do with their discoveries. There were no astronomers and

stratosphere pilots who needed the knowledge of the earth’s revolving around

the sun. Anyone who values his life had better not be too far ahead of his own

time. We shall see that only through Marx himself are we able to grasp the

reasons for his inability to achieve success during his lifetime and for the

crushing  defeat  of  his  movement,  because  of  complete  irrationality,  fifty

years after his death. Without Marx we can comprehend neither Marx nor

Marxism and, consequently, the extreme reaction of metaphysics, Fascism.

  All vital, effective human beings are interested in improving life. If, then,

the repeated claims of metaphysicians are correct that man makes history “of

his own free will,” we should have been living in a paradise for a long time.

The fact that we are far from paradise and, on the contrary, are suffocating inthe opposite realm, verifies the correctness of scientific sociology. Humans

have created among themselves “unconscious” relationships and conditions

which now control them. They built machines to produce greater quantities

more easily. Now they are being decimated, driven to starvation, and ravaged

by the same machines. Man discovered the technology of the motion picture

and scores of actors lost their jobs. Silent films yielded to sound films and

thousands of cinema musicians became unemployed. The faster and easier it

becomes to build houses, the closer people have to crowd together in their

apartments.  The  more  wheat  or  coffee  that  is  harvested,  the  faster  it  is

dumped into the ocean and the less millions of people have to eat. This is an

absurdity  which  certainly  demands  most  intensive  scientific  scrutiny.

Capitalist economy is a profit economy. It produces commodities but not

primarily  necessary  commodities.  The  economy  does  not  serve  the

satisfaction of needs; rather, the needs are created, suppressed, or shifted in

keeping with the laws of profit economy. World economy does not ask how

many  Chinese  or  Africans  are  going  barefoot,  but  it  does  hold  yearly

conferences to effect slight changes in gentlemen’s and ladies’ footwear and

then advertises “new shoe fashions” as indispensable, vital necessities. The

film industry does not consider which educational, medical, or technological

problems  of  humanity  might  be  presented  in  order  to  “raise  cultural

standards.” Instead it provokes perverse, sadistic feelings within people to

make its product more salable. There is not one film which has really solved

a human problem. Very few even touch upon vital issues and most simply

provoke  pathological  desires.  Films  do  not  serve  man  but  the  purpose  of

profit making.

  Profit economy thrives on overpowering its competition. Competition, so-

called free private enterprise, destroys small ventures and consolidates the

larger ones into concerns or trusts which continually increase in strength. In

this way “capital becomes concentrated in the hands of the few” and the

impoverishment  of  the  masses  progresses.  Shoe  factories  have  ruined  theshoemaker, as have agricultural machines the farmer with his plow. The more

powerful capitalist destroys the smaller capitalist who has already crushed the

artisan. The erstwhile class of free tradesmen is transformed into a host of

technologically specialized employees and predominantly untrained manual

laborers.

    Rationalization of the economy then produces unemployment instead of a

reduction of work-hours. If business is good and the demands high, more and

more is produced, without limit. Every capitalist in the world functions in this

way in order to earn more money, to keep in step and not be left behind.

When demand is exhausted, the trend begins to slacken and the capitalists are

left with their stockpiles, which become increasingly difficult to dispose of.

This, in turn, produces an economic recession and the whole process moves

in a vicious circle. The entrepreneurs lay off workers, causing the buying

power of the population to drop. Banks fail because commerce in money and

goods breaks down. This destroys small capital and reduces buying power

once again. The already lowered buying power of the populace increases the

stagnation of distribution, which necessitates further layoffs, and so forth.

Wages  are  cut,  work-hours  may  even  be  increased  without  monetary

compensation, or decreased with commensurate salary reduction, and neither

labor nor industry really understands the process. That was the status of the

economic situation in 1930.

  Society is not merely an aggregate of individuals living and working side

by side. Life in society is determined by the resultant activity of all forces

within and among men, and mutual interdependency is the decisive factor.

The “well-ordered, legal state” is not a reality but a dream, an illusion exactly

like  the  “harmony  of  the  consummate  personality”  in  antiquated  ethical

psychology.  Since  man  is  aware  of  only  a  minute  fraction  of  his  own

interrelationships, he is unable to govern or change them. Thus interpersonal

relationships assume the character of inescapable destiny. The average person

views his social position as such. Those who see through this network ofsocial  dependencies  and  the  exploitation  mechanisms  become  “class-

conscious,” the bourgeois with his capital and the laborer with his work-

power alike. The former can exploit better and more cunningly, whereas the

latter is better able to resist exploitation successfully. Thus ran the theory of

the Marxist parties. This contradiction cannot be resolved within the capitalist

system. Either producers control the means of production, or the owners of

capital do. Simultaneous control is unthinkable. The desire to exploit other

people’s work-power is under no circumstances reconcilable with the desire

not  to  submit  to  exploitation.  Any  attempt  to  unite  these  concepts  would

result in awareness of the exploitation process. Capital and labor can coexist

“peacefully” only when exploitation is concealed from the awareness of the

exploited party. Anyone who does not admit this but struggles against it is

labeled a “Communist agitator.” Marx was the greatest Communist agitator

to date because no one demonstrated as clearly as he the manner in which the

value of the commodity work-power was created.

  But Marx did not pose the question of how those who were exploited and

suppressed would react to the exposure of their own condition. The Marxists

never doubted that the suppressed individuals would welcome the awareness

and the message of liberation; and this mode of thought was rational and

entirely correct. Unfortunately, however, man’s thoughts and actions are not

always rationally determined. Irrational, impracticable, and distorted thinking

and acting also come into play. Freud had already proved this, but at the time

no one could foresee that the workers’ movement would ever be confronted

by this question as a pressing, cardinal issue. Two antagonistic camps formed

around Marx and Freud and competed with each other for recognition of their

interpretations of life in society. My attempt to combine those theories—

which later, of course, was frustrated—began at this point.

  Marxist sociology pointed out the economic processes which determine

interpersonal,  i.e.  social,  relationships.  Freudian  psychology,  in  contrast,

demonstrated that the unconscious forces which control human thought andaction are, in the final analysis, instinctual biological forces. The result was

the  coexistence  or,  more  correctly,  the  confrontation  of  natural-scientific

sociological  and  natural-scientific  psychological  interpretations  of  human

existence.

  Karl Marx claimed: “Objective socioeconomic conditions and processes,

independent  of  conscious  human  will,  determine  your  thoughts  and

existence.”

  Sigmund Freud claimed: “Psychic instinctual forces, which in the final

analysis originate in as yet unknown biological sources of energy and are

independent  of  conscious  human  will,  determine  your  thoughts  and

existence.”

  The socioeconomic conditions, namely the Marxist productive forces, are

active outside man’s biopsychic apparatus in such things as technological

development, work conditions, family conditions, ideologies, organizations.

Freud’s psychic instinctual forces, on the other hand, are active within the

depths  of  the  biopsychic  apparatus  and  are  removed  from  the  sphere  of

conscious human volition, as are Marx’s socioeconomic productive forces.

  The two scientific interpretations of human existence appear to contradict

and  mutually  exclude  each  other.  Consequently  the  sociological  and

psychoanalytic  schools  of  thought  were  in  sharp  conflict.  Marxist  social

economists who had exerted a profound influence on public life in Germany

and Austria viewed psychoanalysis, and psychoanalysts viewed Marxism, as

undesirable and “dangerous” competition in the interpretation of social and

individual existence.

  Both schools, however, had in common their search for and description of

an objective process, unknown to man, which was active behind the surface

phenomena of ideology, value judgments, ethics, social demands, etc. In this,

both employed a genuine natural-scientific method, similar to physics, which

seeks behind the phenomenon of motion the laws of motion, or behind the

spark  of  a  battery  the  functional  laws  of  invisible  electrical  energy.  Bothremoved the psychologisms and ethicisms which cling merely to the surface

phenomena in psychology as well as in economics.

  It was an enormous achievement of the human intellect to progress from

empty,  factually  unfounded  although  well-intended,  demands  and  moral

judgments to the essence of actual processes. From such facts alone, not from

empty demands, was it possible for a reality-adjusted, non-utopian, practical

experiment in the improvement of individual and social existence to develop.

  The economists, philosophers, and psychologists of Marx’s time held to

the metaphysical theory that man determined his destiny through his “free

will.” They were unable to free themselves because this view offers illusory

comfort  within  the  chaos  of  natural  events.  As  we  know,  illusions  have

always  attracted  human  sensibilities  more  than  tangible  reality  has.  The

illusion  of  determination  by  man’s  own  free  will  or  by  the  supernatural,

namely  fate  and  providence,  serves  two  irrational  purposes:  first,  these

illusions place man above his helplessness in relation to nature (including his

own drives), and second, they veil his feelings of impotence and his anxiety

by making him feel Godlike. This last illusion found its highest expression in

the Hitlerian outbreak of the emotional plague. As we know today, but did

not know in 1928, this was the achievement of irrationalism in the masses

and  not  that  of  an  individual  who  had  failed  utterly  in  every  attempt  to

function rationally.

  The second function of the free-will theory has a rational core, although it

is ultimately deceiving. This is the function of imbuing man, when he feels

helpless, small, and impotent, with enough courage to continue his existence

even  when  knowledge  of  processes  and  procedures  is  lacking.  Man  must

exist, with or without knowledge; for this he requires the emotional strength

of illusion. Illusions are not merely irrational impressions but also strength-

giving  attitudes.  The  proverbial  faith  that  can  move  mountains  originates

here.  The  success  of  Hitlerian  mysticism  demonstrated  clearly  that

mysticism, which has its basis in human emotions, is capable of producinggreater social effect than scientific knowledge.

  Hence we recognize the illusion as justified and necessary but only where

man has not progressed to real knowledge. If we absolutely and automatically

condemn  illusion  as  such,  we  can  easily  slip  into  an  intolerant  and

unproductive  attitude  toward  achievement  based  on  illusion.  The

accomplishments in the Soviet Union, for example, in regard to economic

reconstruction and removal of the crassest social injustices, resulted from the

illusion of “building Socialism.” The illusion of mechanistic natural science

in its struggle against the efforts of religion and mysticism to discover the

“essence of the soul,” led to great achievements in the fields of physiology

and colloid chemistry.

  But the danger and harmfulness of illusion are far greater than the real

gains it yields. Achievement stemming from illusion never equals practical

achievement generated by real knowledge of processes and procedures. From

the beginning of time, illusionary world-views have appeared repeatedly in

opposition to man’s rational striving to limit the realm of the unknown and

expand the field of knowledge. Illusions lead, with inevitable regularity, to

reactionary and regressive social institutions. This has been demonstrated by

developments  in  the  Soviet  Union  as  well  as  by  the  inhibiting  influence

exerted  by  mechanistic  natural  science  upon  efforts  to  understand  living

functions. Hence, if I have demonstrated here a rational function of illusion, it

does not imply that the arduous struggle for scientific expansion of the sphere

of human power need not be ceaselessly carried forward. If I cannot walk on

a leg, I will use a crutch if necessary in order to move about. But by the same

token I will certainly discard the crutch as soon as I have regained the natural

use of my leg.

  Now, the metaphysicians and mystics of all sorts, owing to the emotional

gratification  of  their  self-esteem  gained  through  illusions,  vehemently

opposed Marxism and Freudianism. The cries of “I am so very free, superior,

so God-like, master of myself and nature” did not alter in the slightest theirdependency upon psychic irrationalism on the one hand and socioeconomic

processes on the other. This tragic dependency found expression clearly and

unmistakably in the world catastrophe of the last decade. Marx and Freud

were indispensable forerunners of serious progress in mastering these two

types of human dependency. They also parallel each other inasmuch as both

erected their scientific edifices upon yet undiscovered biological or biosocial

principles.

  Marx’s entire concept of socioeconomics was based on the living nature

of human work-power as a basic biological activity peculiar even to primitive

living  organisms.  Man  does  not  differ  in  his  work  function  from  other

animals by the fact that he works; all living creatures do this or they could not

exist.  He  differs  from  other  animals  in  his  attempt  to  improve  his  work

function by inventing tools. We already know, through Karl Marx, that man’s

misfortune  lay  in  this  social  differentiation  from  other  animals,  that  he

became a slave of the tools he himself invented. Most Marxists, to judge by

their  publications,  have  overlooked  the  fact  that  it  is living  work-power

which,  through  the  difference  between  its  use  and  exchange  values,  has

determined  the  social  mechanisms  of  patriarchal  civilization.  In  his

philosophical writings, Marx stressed repeatedly that man with his biological

organization is the final “precondition of all history.” Marx, of course, knew

nothing of the concrete nature of this “biological organization,” nor could he

have known, inasmuch as the science of biology itself was not aware of it and

the  specific  biological  energy,  the  cosmic  orgone,  was  only  discovered

between 1936 and 1939.

  The two objective, basic, biological functions of living matter, “work”

and “sexuality,” or the “pleasure process,” were each treated at the beginning

of  the  twentieth  century  in  separate  scientific  systems,  i.e.  in  Marxist

sociology  and  in  Freudian  psychology.  The  sexual  process  led  a  pitiful

existence  in  the  Marxist  system  under  the  misleading  heading  of  “family

development.” The work process, in turn, was relegated to an equally pitifulposition  in  Freudian  psychology,  likewise  under  misleading  headings  of

“sublimation” and “hunger drives” or “ego instincts.” Far from contradicting

each other in principle, the two scientific systems actually met (completely

unbeknown to their founders) in the biological basis of all living matter, the

biological energy of all living beings, whose activity splits, in accordance

with our energetic-functional method of thought, into work on the one hand

and sexuality on the other.











WORK SEXUALITY

 

    
  

Gscillation of

  

social manifestation:
family conditions
and education

sociol manifestation:

work conditions
and production

Biological energy
laws of living matter
    Elaborating on this functional, simultaneously identical and antithetical

character of biological energy was reserved for sex-economic research. Of

course, I had no idea of this at the time. My attempts between 1928 and 1930

to reconcile two scientific systems led me, by means of the logic of factual

research,  to  the  method  which  finally  triumphed  in  the  discovery  of  the

orgone, the specific biophysical energy, in 1939. I doubt that I would ever

have  succeeded  in  discovering  the  orgone  had  I  not  applied  sociological

criticism  to  Freud’s  psychology  in  hard,  everyday  practical  work  over  a

period of years, and if I had not discovered the gap in Marxist socio-economy

and filled it with the concept of “character structure.”

  The  laws  of  biological  energy,  of  the  orgone,  encompass  the  basic

mechanisms  of  both  work  and  sexuality,  and  thus  the  emotional  forces

within, without, and between human beings. These laws underlie rational as

well  as  irrational  endeavor,  the  urge  to  do  scientific  research  on  the

unexplained as well as the mystical belief in the existence of an unknown all-

powerful being.  The basic biological mechanisms of life are not simply a mechanical sum

of  sexual  and  work  functions.  They  constitute,  rather,  a  third  factor

simultaneously identical and antithetical as well as more fundamental. Sex-

economy and orgone biophysics are therefore not the sum of Marxist and

Freudian  concepts  but  new  disciplines  based  on  sociological  and  depth-

psychological insights, which led, from the incompatibility of these concepts,

to the discovery of a third concept common to both.

  Although this is clear today, it was far from clear in 1928. But let us

return to the experiences which constituted the milestones in the course of

this development.

  Following  that  July  15  which  so  tragically  demonstrated  the  basic

mechanisms of class society, I began to study Engels in addition to Marx. It

was only natural that a psychoanalyst should find his book The Origin of the

Family  extremely  interesting.  The  contradiction  between  Marxist  and

Freudian explanations of the family was painfully obvious. Although they

appeared to be correct on decisive issues, both could not be simultaneously

valid. Engels led me to Bachofen and Morgan; I pored over Das Mutterrecht

and Urgesellschaft. Since these works were in sharp contradiction to Freud’s

views,  I  felt  constrained  to  delve  into  the  most  important  ethnological

writings. For four years I found myself in a chaos. Then light was shed upon

one of the central enigmas of primitive human history. This I described in the

context of another book, Der Einbruch der Sexualmoral (1st ed. 1932, 2nd

          4
ed. 1936).

  The  actual  secrets  of  the  social  function  of  sexual  suppression  were

revealed in the practical experiences afforded me by my sexological work

among  Viennese  adolescents.  The  years  between  1927  and  1930,  when  I

moved to Berlin, were years of great doubt. During this period I gathered

material  for Der  Einbruch  der  Sexualmoral.  In  1929  the  short  work

Sexualerregung  und  Sexualbefriedigung  was  published  and  in  1930

                                                    5
Geschlechtsreife, Enthaltsamkeit, Ehemoral. Also during these three years Iformulated the sociological critique of psychoanalysis. A Russian version of

my paper “Dialektischer Materialismus und Psychoanalyse” was published in

1929 in the Journal of the Academy of Sciences in Moscow. It appeared in

German  in  the  periodical Unter  dem  Banner  des  Marxismus,  and

subsequently in the Austrian edition of the periodical Imago, 1930.

  In  1928,  I  founded  the  Socialist  Society  for  Sex-Counseling  and  Sex-

Research  with  several  Viennese  physicians.  Based  on  sex-economic

principles,  it  established  the  first  sex-counseling  centers  for  workers  and

business  employees  in  Vienna.  Over  the  course  of  these  years  I  became

acquainted with the inner functioning of the revolutionary movement of that

time. [“Revolutionary” is not to be considered identical with “communistic.”]

Not a single line of what I wrote later is conceivable without this experience.

The  basis  for  my  parting  with  Freud  was  also  laid  during  this  period  in

connection with the formulation of the most important sex-economic insights,

including “character analysis” (in the form of various clinical articles), and

the clarification of the question of masochism, with which I was able to refute

his death-instinct theory. Until that time I had opposed it without a counter-

theory. Several decisive social experiences also occurred in these years which

later formed the basis for my book The Mass Psychology of Fascism. Since

they exerted a most profound influence on my socio-psychological work, I

shall begin by describing them.

  I  made  the  decision  to  commence  sociological  work  following  a

conversation with Freud. I explained my plans and asked him for his opinion.

Sex-counseling centers were to be opened and psychoanalytic insight applied

on  a  mass  scale  in  the  form  of  social  sex-economy.  In  this  way  it  was

designed to serve the general public. Freud agreed wholeheartedly. He knew

as little as I where this would lead. When I explained the necessity of treating

the family problem rigorously, he replied: “You’ll be poking into a hornet’s

nest.”  (“Hier  greifen  Sie  in  ein  Wespennest.”)  His  attitude  toward  the

“Russian  experiment”  was  critical  but  sympathetic.  Correct  sociologicalviews  had  already  begun  to  call  into  question  the  psychoanalytic

interpretation  of  primitive  history.  While  the  psychoanalytic  ethnologist

Roheim  was  uncritically  and  unscrupulously  interpreting  this  and  that,

Malinowski’s warnings were heard in London. In 1926 Malinowski’s paper

on the Oedipus complex in matriarchal societies appeared. He and Jones were

engaged in a dispute over the question whether the family was a biological or

a  socio-historical  institution.  Jones  contended  that  the  biological  Oedipus

complex  was  the “fons  et  origo,”  the  source  and  origin  of  everything—

society,  law,  rights,  culture,  etc.  Malinowski  claimed  that  the  Oedipus

complex took on a different form in matriarchal societies due to variations in

the  social  structure.  Freud  remained  neutral  in  this.  Everyone  sensed  that

these questions were not merely an academic pastime. They touched upon the

great Russian revolution in a very definite, but as yet not very tangible, form.

Freud mentioned in conversation that it was conceivable that the “light would

come from the East.” Quite a statement from an academic professor! Freud

asked  me  whether  I  would  be  able  to  handle  the  extensive  work  in  the

technical  seminar,  at  the  Polyclinic,  in  private  practice,  and  in  the  sex-

counseling centers, all at the same time. We agreed that one could only wait

and see whether it was possible. He thwarted an attempt made by leading

functionaries of the psychoanalytic association [in particular, Paul Federn] to

use this opportunity to oust me from my position as leader of the seminar. It

was not to be taken out of my hands if I desired to continue leading it (letter

dated November 22, 1928). For a long time I did not see through this concern

for my excessive work load. The conflict within psychoanalysis in regard to

its social function was immense long before anyone involved noticed it.

  Seen in today’s light, the fall of the Austrian Social Democratic Party did

not  signify  just  the  fall  of  one  political  party;  its  decline  was  rather  the

symptom of a social process which was drastically revealed in the rise of

Hitler’s National Socialist Party and over the course of the next ten years

produced  the  extraordinary  insight  that  politics  is  altogether  unfounded,unscientific, irrational, and an expression of biopathic human structure and

thought. In essence, politics is organized gratification of the party followers’

biopathic emotions, formulated into a political platform. There is no such

thing as good politics in one place and bad in another. In essence, politics

always  proves  that  certain  social  situations,  owing  to  a  lack  of  concrete

knowledge, cannot be mastered scientifically. With attention fixed upon the

differentiation between good and bad politics, one is unable to approach the

matter  of  politics  itself  and  of  what  is  concealed  from  our  sight.  Three

decades (1914–45) of bloodshed were needed to discover the quiet, rational

work process and natural work democracy behind the tumult and turbulence

of politics.

  From 1927 to 1934 I myself was in the midst of this turbulence. Since the

sciences were not socially oriented and social chaos nevertheless seeped into

the smallest crevices of daily life, all hope was placed in “good politics” and

not in natural science. The following accounts serve to prove that I—along

with  millions  of  others—put  my  hopes  in  political  activities  instead  of

anchoring them to my work on human beings.

  It is incorrect to accuse the Austrian Social Democrats of pursuing “bad

politics.” They were trapped in the irrationalism of politics just as were the

English  Conservatives  under  Chamberlain  who  signed  a  pact  with  the

German Fascists to “save the peace.” Political reactionaries always openly

acknowledged the general nature of politics, realistically and unequivocally

—the lying, fraudulence, irrationalism, and naked violence. The practice of

conceding or appeasing is, in the strictest sense, neither “bad” nor “good”

politics but an admission of factual insecurity in the face of strong political

reaction for which the irrational character structure of the masses serves as

firm support.

  Truth cannot prevail through politics. Politics and truth contradict each

other. If the advocates of truth attempt to compete with politics, they are

unquestionably condemned to perish. This was the fate of the Austrian SocialDemocrats  between  1927  and  1934  and  also  of  the  English  under

Chamberlain.  Genuine  democratic  politics  are  and  can  basically  never  be

anything but radical, merciless exposure and abandonment of every kind of

politics.

  Here we encounter enormous difficulties. Day-to-day human existence

demands a myriad of practical solutions. It is the essence of natural science

that  it  can  make  only  slow  progress  in  furnishing  practical  answers  to

questions of existence. Mysticism and politics fill the gaping fissures with

illusions  and  promises  of  satisfaction.  This  means  that  natural-scientific

regulation of social life cannot dispose of political, illusional mass leadership

overnight. Personally I have no solution for the dilemma between realistic

and  illusional  leadership.  But  it  is  my  responsibility  to  expose  such

difficulties and not to conceal them. This at first arouses the erroneous belief

that one can quickly fill the gaps in understanding. However, I do believe that

it is possible to replace politics with a different form of mass leadership. The

road which led to these decisive conclusions was tortuous and full of pitfalls.                                            4




                                This Is Politics!




After  the  crushing  moral  defeat  on  July  15,  the  mighty  Austrian  Social

Democracy  slowly  but  surely  lost  ground.  The  former  Social  Democratic

Foreign Minister, Renner, uttered prophetic words: “The Austrian working

class is so strong that it cannot be conquered; it can only fall through its own

mistakes.” The mayor of Vienna, Seitz, said in his concluding speech at the

party convention following July 15, “We are so convinced that democratic

developments will lead to our goals that we do not need to assist them with

violence.” I shall chronicle the subsequent events briefly.

  On  November  1,  1927,  the  Social  Democratic  party  convention

unanimously  accepted  a  “resolution.”  Political  reactionaries  had  armed

Fascist groups but the Socialist Party had saved Austria from civil war. From

1923 onward, it had emphasized that it was “ready at any time for serious

negotiations on disarmament.” They said the Linz Program had recognized

class cooperation in the form of a coalition government, but a coalition would

not be possible as long as the Catholic and nationalist bourgeoisie wished to

dissolve  the  Socialist  Party.  The  Social  Democrats,  however,  wanted  to

prevent a civil war and were ready to cooperate with anyone willing to help.

They said they would employ force in one case only—namely, if the political

reactionaries attempted to overthrow the democratic republic or usurp the

rights  of  the  working  class  which  the  republic  had  guaranteed.  Stricter

discipline was necessary: “No demonstrations without the concurrence of all

concerned. No strikes in vital industries without consent of the entire laborunion association!” The republic was to be transformed into a “true republic

of working individuals in town and country.”

  And this is what happened in the process of appeasement:

  In  August  1927,  the  Christian  Socialist-controlled  National  Assembly

passed a number of reactionary school laws without prior debate.

  In the same month, the leader of the Social Democratic Schutzbund and

the workers’ athletic clubs canceled their August 7 meeting in Graz, which

had been in preparation for months.

  At the beginning of August, Seitz ordered the dissolution of the Social

                                        1
Democratic Gemeindeschutzwache, organized after the massacre of July 15.

  At the end of August, the election of staff representatives of the Vienna

police force resulted in five Christian Socialists and one Independent Trade

Unionist as opposed to five Independent Trade Unionists and one Christian

Socialist prior to this.

  In  September  1927,  the  National  Assembly  resolved  to  reduce  the

unemployment  benefits  of  older  workers.  A  proposal  of  amnesty  for  the

accused of July 15 was defeated by the Christian Socialist government.

  In October 1927, Otto Bauer publicly confirmed a weakening of Social

Democracy before a convention of the metalworkers’ union. He suggested

“peaceful  democratic  development.”  The  union  leader,  Domes,  advocated

technological  rationalization.  Pitzl,  the  representative  of  the  International

Association of Trade Unions, was excluded.

  In the same month, Dr. Renner demanded a coalition government with the

Christian Socialists, who rejected this, however, through Dr. Schmitz.

  On  October  16,  1927,  the  election  of  soldiers’  spokesmen  resulted  in

9,000 Socialist votes yielding 118 mandates and 6,000 Christian and German

Nationalist votes yielding 220 (!) mandates. The Socialist Party lost 2,000

votes and the conservatives gained 3,000 through internal gerrymandering.

The  army  staff  commission  was  now  composed  of  two  Socialist  Party

representatives instead of nine, and seven conservatives instead of none.  On November 21, 1927, the Styrian assembly nullified the immunity of

assemblyman  Wallisch,  a  courageous,  honest,  forthright  man.  He  was

executed in 1934 by the Christian Socialist Dollfuss government.

  On December 11, the Social Democrats were severely defeated in the

federal police elections.

  On January 18, 1928, in the official elections of the Tyrolean legislative

assembly, the Social Democrats were excluded.

  On  February  20,  the  landlords  scored  a  parliamentary  victory  in

presenting a bill to reduce rent control, which was greatly favored by the

populace. Later, they succeeded in having it passed and the Social Democrats

proclaimed it a “victory for the Socialist Party”—a victory inasmuch as the

outcome was not worse!

  On  March  3,  the  Social  Democrats  were  completely  defeated  in  an

election of police staff representatives.

  On March 16, the election of plant representatives in the Donawitz steel

mills  resulted  in  a  gain  of  Socialist  votes  from  1,991  to  2,404,  a  loss  of

Communist votes from 706 to 227, and a gain in government votes from 131

to  951!  Donawitz  later  became  a  bastion  of  the  semi-fascistic  Heimwehr

organization.

  On  March  18,  representatives  of  the  labor  boards,  together  with

representatives of the chambers of commerce and agriculture, founded an

“Economy Commission” to accomplish a mutual rationalization of industrial

leadership. One year later this rationalization aggravated the economic crisis

which had such horrible effects in Austria.

  Between April 5 and 10, there were mass layoffs in the mines owned by

                                  2
the Alpine Montangesellschaft in Seegraben, which were designed to purge

the company of Socialists. Although the employees demanded a strike, the

council  of  employee  representatives  rejected  their  demands  as  a  result  of

pressure from party officials. (On February 14, 1934, not one major industrial

firm struck, while the Social Democratic Schutzbund bled to death.)  On  May  11,  the  Christian  Minister  of  the  Armed  Forces,  Vougoin,

announced that any soldier who had participated in May Day celebrations

would be discharged.

  On  May  12,  there  was  a  spontaneous  protest  strike  in  the  Hüttenberg

mines  against  political  terror  in  the  operations  of  the  Alpine

Montangesellschaft. The union leaders were against the strike.

  Between May 16 and 22, numerous partial strikes occurred in the Styrian

and Carinthian mining and steel industries. The movement was so powerful

that the union directors felt constrained to “spearhead it.” [Red Fascist talk.]

There were mild threats, negotiations several days later, and the strike was

called off, but the workers struck again.

  On June 3, a strike began among female jute workers in a large factory

near Vienna. They worked ten hours a day for the miserable wage of sixty

schillings a month. Their traveling time to and from work was three hours a

day. Children were actually dying of hunger. Together with several friends of

mine, I took some of the children in. The strike ran aground because there

was neither strength nor courage behind it.

  The  founder  of  the  Heimwehr,  Steidle,  announced  that  the  first  large

Heimwehr demonstration would take place on October 7 in Wiener-Neustadt,

a town with a population composed strictly of industrial workers, having a

Social Democratic majority. Following the events of July 15, 1927, he had

very  quietly,  and  under  the  protection  of  the  Christian  Socialist

administration, begun to organize his Heimwehr in the Tyrol. In those days,

had  a  member  of  the  Heimwehr  ventured  into  a  working-class  district  in

Vienna he would have been soundly beaten. The Socialist Party said that one

should  not  bother  them,  that  they  were  not  dangerous  but  merely

exhibitionists, and that the best way to prevent their gaining power was to

ignore them. (On February 14, 1934, in the same working-class districts, the

Heimwehr demolished the workers’ homes with cannons.)

  A  year  of  defeats  had  so  embittered  the  members  of  the  SocialDemocratic Party that its leaders could no longer afford to simply tolerate the

extreme provocation of the political reactionaries. That would have sealed

their fate within their own ranks. Therefore they called for a demonstration to

counter Steidle’s, on the same day and in the same town, Wiener-Neustadt.

They had striven to avoid a confrontation but had continually weakened their

own  position  only  to  be  forced  to  proceed,  devitalized,  against  the  entire

platform—until February 14, 1934, when they were defeated.

  The Christian Socialist government was so sure of a victory and yet so

fearful of Heimwehr competition that as a security measure it ordered the

army, the local police, and federal police to Wiener-Neustadt for that same

date.

  The  Communists  also  did  not  want  to  tolerate  the  situation.  (On

December  21,  1927,  the  Communists  had  organized  their

                        3
Rotfrontkämpferbund, fashioned after the German model. Thälmann, later

head  of  the  German  Communist  Party,  had  come  to  Austria  for  the

        4
occasion.)  They  “mobilized”  their  Arbeiterwehr  for  October  7  with  the

express objective of disturbing the demonstrations of all three antagonistic

groups  in  Wiener-Neustadt.  Thus  an  organization  of  approximately  250

unarmed men set out, with all the earnestness of revolutionary courage (I say

this  without  sarcasm),  to  “disturb”  organized  troops  numbering

approximately 40,000, or, more accurately, to prevent their demonstration;

and this with utter seriousness, deep conviction, and absolute determination

to win. I can testify to this because I was one of those 250 people. On that

day I became aware of the power of ideology independent of its economic

basis  and  learned  to  evaluate  it  correctly.  On  that  day  I  first  began  to

understand  the  misuse  of  that  power:  how  the  psychologically  inept  and

therefore  futile  mass  labor  movement  misused  the  workers’  righteous

earnestness and desire for freedom. On that day I saw clearly that the socially

suppressed individual is entirely different psychologically from the way the

rigid sociology of class antagonism describes him or would like him to be. Isaw that the socioeconomic structure of a given society in no way coincides

with the mass-psychological structure of its various social strata; that people

in  the  same  socioeconomic  situation  stand  in  opposite  camps,  grouped

together  by  irrational  ideologies  bearing  no  relation  whatsoever  to  the

practical aspects of their lives. The decisive issues of life which meld these

antagonistic camps of socioeconomic equals into one large community are

not even expressed in politics, let alone treated justly. I saw, in short, that the

real life of the working masses is lived on a completely different level from

that on which the tumult of politicians and party politics rages. The present

position  of  political  psychology  was  born  on  those  days:  Down  with all

politics! Let’s get to the practical demands of life! Nevertheless, ten years

passed before this position matured consciously into the concept of work

democracy.

    Excitement over the demonstrations of armed organizations in Wiener-

Neustadt  was  limited  to  political  circles  which  constituted  only  a  minute

fraction of the entire working population. The Communist Party of Austria

issued an “order” that the Arbeiterwehr was to proceed to Wiener-Neustadt in

small  groups  without  “attracting  attention.”  The  three  physicians  in  the

                                                    5
Arbeiterwehr were to join the Kampftruppe with rucksacks full of first-aid

supplies. I packed my rucksack, said goodbye to my wife and children (it was

questionable whether I would ever return), and left to join a very courageous

woman doctor with whom I was acquainted.

  It  was  Saturday  and  I  was  convinced  that  rucksack  and  tourist  attire

would not attract attention. Everything was to be highly “illegal.” We were so

brimming  with  rage  over  the  “fascistic  provocation”  and  the  “impending

betrayal  by  the  Social  Democratic  Schutzbund  leaders”  that  we  had  no

difficulty in stifling the question of what we were actually going to do. All

we knew was that “it is a Communist’s duty to set a good example in the

class struggle” and “rise to lead the proletariat in case of civil war.” And

indeed there were in Wiener-Neustadt, on that Sunday, approximately 15,000armed members of the Schutzbund, the champions of labor. We devoted no

thought to how we should actually manage to “spearhead” them. There had to

be a way, if we only showed enough courage. I must emphasize that we were

no  fools  but  respected  physicians  with  lucrative  practices  and  numerous

influential connections; we were skilled workers. A doctor I was treating at

the time was to “conquer” Wiener-Neustadt with a different troop.

  I met my female colleague in the hall of South Station. We both looked

very “innocuous” and our rucksacks “attracted no attention.” The vast hall

resembled  an  army  camp.  Hundreds  of  Schutzbund  members  stood  about

waiting  to  be  searched  for  weapons  by  the  police.  Numerous

plainclothesmen, called “bulls” for their typical facial expressions, mingled in

the  crowd  “inconspicuously,”  eyeing  the  “elements  threatening  national

security.” We recognized them immediately and they recognized us. We were

all  so  inconspicuous  we  could  not  possibly  overlook  each  other.

Approximately  fifty  equally  inconspicuous  members  of  the  Arbeiterwehr

were standing around too, but we studiously avoided looking at one another.

Therefore  every  detective  knew  we  belonged  together.  The  police  and

gendarmerie were being loaded into trains by the hundreds. They left first,

followed by the Schutzbund. We, the revolutionary leaders of the proletariat,

ordained to sway the enthusiasm of 15,000 Schutzbunders the very next day,

inconspicuously bought third-class tickets for the local train to Pottendorf, a

small  village  near  Wiener-Neustadt.  From  there  we  hoped  to  approach

Wiener-Neustadt  without  attracting  any  attention.  We  were  even  clever

enough not to ride directly into the city after hearing that civilians would not

be allowed through. We felt reassured while sitting in the railroad car with

several  dozen  comrades.  We  spoke  in  banalities;  no  one  mentioned  a

suspicious  topic.  Secret  police  were  among  us  and  we  recognized  them.

Several  were  stared  at  so  long  that  they  finally  left  on  the  pretense  of

reporting something to the gendarmerie. Friends told us that someone very

inconspicuous would be waiting for us in Pottendorf and when we arrived,there was actually someone waiting on the platform, a worker, recognizable a

mile away as a functionary. Needless to say, there was instant recognition. He

whispered quietly that we should follow him to a certain inn. The Social

Democratic mayor of the town was as incensed as the Communists and had

offered his inn as quarters for the night. When we got there, hundreds of

Schutzbund members were sitting around. We drank some beer and then the

innkeeper led us to a large dance hall, where we were to spend the night. As

time  passed,  small  groups  of  Arbeiterwehr  members  arrived  from  all

directions. Some had not been able to afford the train fare and had left Vienna

the day before to walk the forty kilometers to Pottendorf. We ate lightly and

anticipated the next day’s events. What would the outcome be? None of us

knew what was supposed to happen, but we had learned that in times of civil

war every Communist advances to be a leader of thousands; the results would

tell the story. We lay on the floor, using our rucksacks as pillows. Sleep was

impossible.

  During  the  night  a  small  group  arrived  from  Vienna.  One  of  them,  a

young unemployed worker, lay down beside me and we immediately struck

up a conversation. He lived with his old mother and wanted to fight for her

sake. The situation, he said, could not go on this way; that mob had to be

beaten to a pulp; together with the Schutzbund we could do it; the day of

reckoning had finally come. He had been unemployed for two years and was

barely  subsisting  with  his  mother  on  unemployment  benefits.  Only

infrequently could he find odd jobs and if he were caught his benefits would

be cut off. And now they were even beginning to reduce the benefits. In a

short time they would stop it altogether, and that would mean hunger and

breadlines. Even his shoes were worn through at the soles after the long hike,

but  this  didn’t  bother  him.  Tomorrow  would  straighten  things  out.  We

became  good  friends  and  shared  bread  and  bacon.  Several  hours  passed.

Approximately a hundred people were sleeping or talking quietly in the hall.

All were waiting for the big day. It dawned.  Around  7  a.m.  someone  looked  out  the  window.  The  building  was

surrounded by gendarmerie with fixed bayonets. Confusion broke out. What

now? Someone shouted, “Let’s beat them up!” Others said, “Let’s wait and

see what’s going on.” Then a gendarme with two men entered the room and

said in a genial Viennese dialect, “Children, pack your belongings, the train

to  Vienna  is  waiting  for  you.”  Cries  of  protest  were  heard:  “We’ll  go

wherever we want to,” and the like. The officer said he knew only that orders

were orders and he had been assigned to transport the entire group in these

quarters to the railroad station. I was delegated to negotiate. I told the officer

that we first wished to discuss the matter among ourselves. He left and we

held a short conference. Some were in favor of yielding; others shouted that it

would be cowardly to submit to arrest so easily. If that were the case, it

would be better to fight. Someone called out, “With what?” We decided that

each position should be “upheld” by one speaker and then a vote taken. And

so it went. The “reasonable” speaker said it was senseless to attempt anything

under these conditions. We had fallen into a trap—period. He said we had to

feign going home and then try to force our way back. The other speaker

answered  that  revolutionaries  simply  didn’t  do  things  that  way.  It  was  a

disgrace to the revolutionary spirit. What would people say? They would just

laugh. And he wasn’t far from wrong. No one knew how the vote would turn

out. I thought with horror of the impending bloodshed. The memory of July

15 was still fresh, and we were unarmed. Were we to defend ourselves bare-

handed, surrounded by heavily armed gendarmes? At the same time, I felt

rage welling up within me over the disgrace being inflicted upon us. I didn’t

vote. The situation was hopeless; the majority voted for surrender. It was

really degrading.

  Later, we discovered that the Social Democratic innkeeper had discussed

the matter with the gendarmes the night before. He had lured us into a trap.

    Someone went out and informed them. We packed our rucksacks and

walked out into the courtyard. We were arranged in rows of four flanked oneither side by gendarmes and marched off. The cry went up, “We should at

least  sing.”  We  sang  the  “Internationale”  loudly.  Sleepy, indifferent faces

could be seen in the windows of this working-class suburb. We could almost

hear  them  saying,  “They’re  just  leading  some  Communists  off.”  The

Communists were not in good standing with the majority of workers. They

only disturbed the deep-seated, peaceful development of Socialism.

  At the railroad station we entered the row of empty cars awaiting us. Two

expressionless gendarmes were posted on every platform with fixed bayonets

on their loaded rifles. The train began to move. In a few minutes it came to an

abrupt stop; someone had pulled the emergency brake. It was released and we

were  on  our  way.  Again  the  train  stopped  and  then  finally  started  up.

Everyone was in a miserable frame of mind. One man suggested that we beat

up  the  few  gendarmes  on  the  platforms,  but  most  were  opposed  to  this.

Suddenly it occurred to us that the police would be expecting us in Vienna.

To be put on their “list” meant the loss of a job for many. This must not be

allowed to happen. But how to prevent it? Someone had a marvelous idea:

Just outside Vienna we would simply get off when the train stopped. Would

the  gendarmes  shoot?  That  was  uncertain!  When  the  train  stopped  at  the

appointed station, the word was passed along, “Everybody out.” We took our

rucksacks and got off. The gendarmes were dumbfounded. “Where do you

think you’re going?” they asked. “To Vienna,” we all called out. We walked

off and they watched us leave, astounded. They didn’t know what to do. The

engineer also watched us. One worker made a kind of speech and said we had

been “illegally” arrested, that we had wanted to go to Wiener-Neustadt, that

this was the rule of the bourgeoisie. And that it was! Nevertheless, the Social

Democratic engineer only gave us a blank stare. The railroad workers, who

had been the most revolutionary group of Austrian workers in 1918, were not

interested  in  lending  support.  We  walked  the  rest  of  the  way.  The  third

physician,  with  his  troop,  was  actually  met  by  the  police  when  his  train

arrived in Vienna, but we passed the police like a group of harmless tourists,which we actually were.

  Only very few members of the Arbeiterwehr reached Wiener-Neustadt.

When  they  tried  to  pass  out  pamphlets  among  the  Social  Democratic

Schutzbund, they received a terrible thrashing. In Wiener-Neustadt absolutely

nothing  happened.  With  field  artillery  and  machine  guns,  15,000  sons  of

farmers and workers in state uniform kept an equal number of farmers’ and

workers’ sons in green uniform apart from the same number of farmers’ and

workers’ sons in gray uniform. All this ran under the heading of high politics

and class warfare, defense of country, and defense of the working class. No

one saw it in that perspective at the time, but everyone must have sensed in

some way how ridiculous it all was; otherwise, millions of German-speaking

workers  could  not  possibly  have  become  the  victims  of  Hitlerian

                    6
Volksgemeinschaft  fantasies  several  years  later.  How  many  victims  were

needed merely to demonstrate that in reality the “war of the classes” is not

fought between capitalists and workers but among the oppressed themselves?

Removal  of  the  mental  inhibition  which  keeps  this  insanity  from  being

recognized immediately would be in itself a tenfold reward for the struggle

against  it!  From  that  time  onward,  my  understanding  of  this  insanity

remained  one  of  the  most  substantial  factors  in  my  striving  to  find  the

meaning of “freedom.”

  Other lessons were learned as well which took many years to mature.

  Two  hundred  unarmed,  genuinely  revolutionary  individuals  set  out  to

storm 40,000 armed and uniformed non-revolutionary individuals of the same

society. That is absurdity raised to the twentieth power. How was it possible

nevertheless? I have already mentioned that we were no fools. We fancied we

knew more than the masses, and we did know much more, but not nearly all

the indispensable facts necessary to gain a victory for human freedom instead

of simply making ourselves ridiculous. These 200 souls (myself included)

honestly  believed  that  if  they  were  subjectively  for  freedom  and  thought

logically, the others would also “soon have to see the light.” Furthermore,according to “party” theory “the others” had already seen the light. It was

only  force  that  prevented  them  from  turning  their  knowledge  into  action.

These  200  Communists  were  convinced  that  if  the  economy  broke  down

objectively, if wages were reduced objectively, and the most basic strivings

for  freedom  objectively  suppressed,  the  population  would  naturally  and

automatically be roused to indignation. This line of thinking was the basis of

all  revolutionary  politics  in  Germany  and  Austria  until  1933.  But  the

conclusions  were  wrong  and  caused  the  workers’  movement  to  collapse,

wherever  it  did  not  flee  back  into  the  establishment  it  had  previously

attacked. Every possible compromise was made and every correct principle

of the socialistic movement sacrificed, every single one. And all for this one

reason: the complete inability, amid the confusion of daily tasks, to keep

one’s head clear for correct insight into living reality. This reality, this life in

its infinite variations, which was yearning for freedom, lay in the gutter and

was  trodden  under  foot  until  it  decomposed.  The  representatives  of  the

concepts of freedom were themselves not free; the social suppression they

were  struggling  against  existed  in  themselves.  They  were  afraid  to  think,

afraid to confront life’s realities. I have the right to speak as I do. I was one of

the few who, year after year, in complete devotion to the cause of human

freedom,  pointed  out  the  practical  realities.  But  we  also  were  not  free,

although we wrote about it, formulated it, and tried to make those responsible

comprehend. We too were bound by antiquated concepts and were unable to

understand  much  of  what  we  felt.  With  feelings  alone,  however,

indispensable as they may be in a struggle, one cannot transform a world of

rigidified custom. Life seems to have great difficulty in becoming aware of

itself.  Awareness  means  reflecting  on  one’s  own  origin,  structure,  and

desolation.  The  human  will,  which  undertook  to  order  life  according  to

rational  laws,  was  itself  a  conglomerate  of  irrational  feelings.  The

psychoanalytic movement, with hundreds of specialists all over the world,

rejected the thesis that psychic health is possible only if love is fulfilled.Marxism  rejected  the  fact  that  the  psychic  function  constitutes  the  actual

dynamic  force  of  history  even  if  preconditioned  by  the  historical  and

economic  framework.  Both  theories  were  reflections  about  life,  for  the

purpose of bettering our mastery of life’s requirements. But they occurred

simultaneously and were bound to their time. The times were against life.

This world existed only by devastating life. But no one yet knew what life

was.

  The complete triumph of organized political irrationalism, the collapse of

economistic  rationalism,  and  the  threat  to  the  national  existence  of  vast

human masses by the emotional plague, were further catastrophes necessary

before the intellect could apply itself to the freedom problem. Until 1934 it

was suffocated in formal, bureaucratic, mechanical “freedom devices.” [SO:

Those forms of “liberation” would never attain true liberty. Twenty years

later an imperialist Russia, led by a son of the working class, would threaten

to conquer the world under the guise of liberation. In place of government by

the toiling men and women in all professions, a minority of political crooks

and  spies  and  armed  gangsters  would  destroy  even  the  last  possibility  of

freedom—the freedom to talk about freedom.]

  Part of the human animal’s tragic fate is that it does not learn to think

logically in peaceful times and that it must be provoked and threatened with

extinction before it realizes its dangerous errors in thought and action and

stops suffocating rational, vital thinking in itself. The triumph of scientific

thought lies in the fact that it always remains correct over a long period of

time  despite  its  lack  of  social  power  and  influence  amid  the  tumult  and

confusion  of  everyday  politics.  It  is  a  genuine  guideline  and  the  only

perspective which guarantees social progress practically.

  I can formulate my own experiences as follows: During the confusing

years between 1927 and 1937, my writings on social psychology and mental

hygiene were a mixture of natural-scientific fact finding and political notions

I had borrowed from the organizations in which I worked professionally. HadI not blended the natural-scientific facts which I discovered with ideological

party  catchwords  I  could  not  have  presented  them  in  any  of  the  political

organizations. Nevertheless, real facts and processes inevitably come to light

sooner or later.

  1. Blending natural-scientific facts with political phraseology was to no

avail. When the hard facts began to effect social changes the party politicians

intervened sharply.

  2. Today, not one political catchword is still valid. They were lost forever

amid the social chaos.

  3. My natural-scientific findings of 1928 are still correct; more, they have

achieved great significance. On the other hand, all party-related expressions

in my writings at that time have proven false and useless and have had to be

struck from my works on mass psychology. All this occurred not by my own

or someone else’s choice but exclusively as a result of the permanence of

natural science and the transience of political slogans.

  Unfortunately,  natural-scientific  thought,  either  in  physical  or  social

areas, has not managed to provide an international organization capable of

sparing the helpless, naïve working masses the bloodshed of trial and error in

the  day-to-day  tumult  of  politics—an  organization  capable  not  only  of

recognizing irrational action in time but also of eliminating it. One of the

greatest  mysteries  of  man’s  irrational  structure  is  why  vital  functioning,

including rational thinking, is so feared.


          MASS PSYCHOLOGY AS SEEN FROM “BELOW”


In reading newspaper reports of parliamentary committees, or government

reports on social conditions, one often has the feeling that the social existence

of the human animal takes place and is exclusively regulated in diplomatic

meetings, federal budget conferences, parliamentary election speeches, and

the drafting of bills. When social catastrophes occur periodically, the ensuing

social  chaos  brings  concrete  problems  of  life  to  the  surface.  One  is  thenastonished to see that there was no mention of these social processes in the

newspapers,  debates,  conferences,  and  resolutions.  “National  politics”  and

“social existence” suddenly appear to stem from two different worlds which

have absolutely no connection with one another.

  I would like to contrast the Austrian parliamentary debates held after July

15,  which  were  described  earlier,  with  a  segment  of  social  reality  as  I

                                7
experienced it from “below.”

  One of the basic tenets of social sex-economy is that the chaos of human

society results from irrational psychic mechanisms which arise out of the

biopathic structure of the human animal. Had I not participated naïvely in

these social irrationalisms, I would have remained imprisoned in economic

sociologisms or academic interpretations of the “social unconscious.” The

economic process is the basis, but not the vital content, of social existence;

furthermore, society has neither an unconscious nor a death instinct nor a

superego. Here is an example of reality:

  The  Communist  Party  in  Vienna  organized  demonstrations  of  the

unemployed  on  certain  occasions.  With  untiring  effort  party  officials

announced the demonstrations in the newspaper Rote Fahne and organized

them as well as possible through the distribution of leaflets in unemployment

offices and in the working-class sections of the city. Since I was a well-

known physician in Vienna, my collaboration in the form of moral support

was  heavily  relied  upon,  and  justifiably  so.  I  was  known  to  the  various

unemployment committees, spoke on problems of hygiene at meetings, and

participated in almost every demonstration although I never had a specific

political function. I was offered a chair on the Executive Committee and was

nominated  for  the  post  of  national  assemblyman,  but  I  declined  as  I  had

neither the time nor the inclination. The demonstrations, however, impressed

me  as  being  extremely  instructive;  they  were,  so  to  speak,  sociological

schooling in practical life. I did not participate for the purpose of “studying”

from an elevated position, but because, as a physician, I was accustomed tomaking no statements and forming no opinions without having been able to

“view the matter from a bedside position.” It was truly clinical work in social

pathology.

  Our society could be greatly improved if leading social economists would

form  their  opinions  not  at  their  university  offices  but  at  the  sickbed  of

society, on the streets, in the slums, among the unemployed and poverty-

stricken. Ethnologists have long learned to rate the scientific results of “field

work” more highly than academic investigation. But official sociology is still

compiling dead statistics. Accordingly, I would like to suggest that social

economists gain their knowledge through six years of practical experience as

“social workers,” just as physicians gain theirs through six years of hard work

in  laboratories  and  clinics.  Many  “clever,”  “superior”  people  viewed  my

practical course in social economy and mass psychology as “pure madness.”

  I marched in the ranks of the unemployed but not without a terribly guilty

conscience about living in a six-room apartment with two servants. Through

my  own  guilt,  I  became  acquainted  with  the  bad  social  conscience  of

economically  secure  intellectuals,  from  which  stems  their  active  “party

fellowship.”  I  compensated  for  my  guilt  feelings  toward  these  cruelly

mistreated victims of a cruel, disordered society by regular, and occasionally

sizable, monetary donations. These people simply had the right to demand

money. One would have to have known the unemployed of Vienna at that

particular  time  to  understand  this;  one  would  have  to  have  personal

experience of their marvelous human traits in the face of enormous misery,

their  childlike  hopes,  their  primitive  brutality,  the  humor  they  showed  in

suffering, their physical neglect, their patience and impatience, but above all

their  decency  toward  one  another.  This  did  not  change  the  fact  that  they

manifested all the characteristics of people in material need. Theft, drunken

brawls, and sexual brutality were frequent. In relation to the misery in which

they lived, however, they were much more decent, moral, willing to be of

assistance,  more  honest  and  perceptive  than  the  conceited,  overweight,snobbish, good-for-nothing gluttons and cliché-mongers who showed not a

trace of humaneness and were sexually far more pathological but less honest

about it. One of these reactionary parasites ought to put himself in the place

of an individual who has been unemployed for years and attempt to support

an entire family on sixty schillings (about twenty dollars) a month, without

stealing or robbing regularly; never, literally never, being able to be alone

with his woman; never having money to spend on sexual necessities; despite

sexual  vigor,  constrained  to  spend  years  in  abstinence  or  to  masturbate;

forced to stand around in bureaucratic employment offices for hours, in the

cold, without an overcoat, to receive five schillings; allowing himself to be

pushed around by every person in uniform and still having to say “thank

you.”  The  beautiful  cars,  with  well-dressed  women  and  fat  faces,  drive

quietly by and the unemployed are expected to stand for this and not smash

the windows whatever the consequences may be. Are they to live on potatoes

and stale bread and then look into the lighted windows of food stores without

stealing what they see, simply taking it, come what may? [Observing the self-

control of poverty-stricken people was one of my most profound experiences

as a physician. Later I realized that character armor makes this self-control

possible.] Thus I understood the “unpaid purchases” in the fully stocked food

stores when the winter of hunger, 1929–30, with its vast suffering, closed in

on these people. There were 100,000 unemployed literally starving in Vienna.

In  all  of  Austria  they  numbered  almost  400,000  in  1930—out  of  a  total

population of six million. An overcoat was rarely seen at the demonstrations.

Many of the people had holes in their shoes and they had no gloves or woolen

clothing.  It  would  have  been  ridiculous  and  provoking  to  appear  at  a

demonstration with a winter overcoat and gloves, so I always marched with

them in a leather jacket and slacks.

  At first I expected the unemployed to express their demands vigorously

and people in the street to stop and be moved to some social reaction. After

all, that was the purpose of these demonstrations. The first one ran a pitifulcourse.  There  was  hope  that  the  second  or  third  would  produce  results.

Neither did.

  It is difficult to put clearly into words the futility of these demonstrations

by the poor. Starving people in ragged clothing were marching in the streets,

not  the  state  politicians’  “economic  factors.”  Three  or  four  thousand

unemployed in a city of two million inhabitants were demonstrating, not the

social economists’ “rebelling productive forces.” The “conquest” of the city

depended upon the impression the demonstrations made and this, in turn,

viewed  from  the  Marxist  standpoint,  determined  the  dialecticians’

“immutable course of history.” I would like to describe as best I can these

demonstrations as they were experienced by the unemployed themselves.

  The demonstrations were registered with the police and authorized. There

were  prescribed  places  to  assemble.  There  were  sometimes  “illegal

demonstrations” as well, in which a party of unemployed would, for example,

call for a “mighty rally against the Fascists and Social Fascists at 3 p.m. in

front of City Hall.” But the police would already be there at 2:30 and would

send the “illegal” demonstrators home one by one. Was all this idiocy? No, it

was a surfeit of belief in “the inevitable collapse of capitalism,” and “the

immutable course of history” as well as the feeling of being “the leaders of

the  proletariat.”  [SO:  This  feeling  was  illusory,  compensating  for  an

emptiness which would lead to a bloody imperialism surpassing that of Peter

the Great.] The “legal demonstrations” always followed the same pattern:

they marched down Lastenstrasse to Wollzeile and waited for all groups to

arrive; then they walked along the Ring to the Votive Church, where the

group dispersed. Occasionally cries of “Down with capitalism!” or “Freedom

and bread!” were heard. The populace grew accustomed to this and soon

hardly even looked their way. Everyone had his own worries. Absolutely

everybody was afraid of riots, including the demonstrators. Hotheads were

calmed down by the people around them.

  These individuals had been mistreated by society and excluded. Althoughthey laid claim to leadership of society, during their demonstrations “against

hunger  and  the  system”  they  felt  like  the  outcasts  they  really  were.  The

people passing by were indifferent, or pitied them. Some turned their heads

away in guilt. Others, in secret meetings, strengthened the defenses against a

possible  rule  of  the  poor.  Employed  workers  did  not  participate  in  these

demonstrations. Those who had work were fearful of being identified with

those already unemployed. This was obvious at the May Day demonstrations.

Hundreds of thousands of industrial workers marched along the Ring. The

unemployed workers hailed their “Social Democratic comrades” with “Three

loud cheers for the red front,” but the Social Democrats did not even look up.

It was a tragedy. The Social Democratic members of Parliament stood at the

windows watching the demonstration. The unemployed shouted “Down with

the Social Fascists!” or “Down with Seitz!” or “Down with Otto Bauer!” or

“Give us our unemployment benefits.” They shook their fists threateningly,

                                                              8
they  sang  the  “Internationale”  or  “Red  Wedding.”  I  felt  their  rage  and

sympathized  with  them.  The  parliamentary  hairsplitting  and  graft  during

those times were absolutely exasperating. Police barricades had been erected

between the representatives of democratic Socialism and the unemployed.

Hundreds  of  fascistic  students  stood  at  the  University  and  sang  heckling

nationalistic songs during every demonstration of the poor. They sang better,

were  better  dressed,  and  were  not  as  blue  from  the  cold.  They  had  also

occupied the University, the source of the power of knowledge. The workers

considered the University the bastion of political reactionaries; the students

mocked the workers. There was no trace of the democratic rebel students of

1848.  In  one  such  demonstration,  the  marchers  broke  through  the  police

cordon when the nationalists began heckling, and stormed the platform. The

police cordon broke, several students were severely beaten. But most of the

column continued to march by unperturbed. The police began to club the

demonstrators right and left. Many ran off and this, in turn, encouraged the

police.  A  trivial  incident  provided  me  with  further  insight.  I  happened  to  be

caught in the midst of a group of men who were brawling. A huge policeman

began  to  club  the  speaker  for  the  unemployed.  The  man  fell  down

unconscious and had to be carried away. The policeman then came after me. I

stood perfectly still, as there was nothing else I could do, and looked him

straight in the eye. The uniformed human animal became embarrassed and

did me no harm! The power derived from an identification with the state,

through a uniform, suddenly broke down. I have witnessed numerous melees

but have never been beaten myself. Bullies feel strong and brutal only toward

the weak. If one displays the slightest bit of courage, and does not provoke

them,  they  become  human  and  show  sympathy.  Human  and  tyrant,  both

reside within them and appear according to the circumstances.

  This made me realize that by drilling people to hate the police one only

strengthens police authority and invests it with mystic power in the eyes of

the poor and helpless. The strong are hated but also feared and envied and

followed. This fear and envy felt by the “have-nots” accounts for a portion of

the political reactionaries’ power. One of the main objectives of the rational

struggle for freedom is to disarm reactionaries by exposing the illusionary

character of their power. This presupposes that, as a freedom fighter, one has

stifled all tendencies toward violence and greed for power within oneself and

developed no hatred of individuals or social classes but only hostility toward

the reactionary conditions which generate social misery.

  As a result of these experiences at the demonstrations, I attempted, in the

social-hygiene meetings, to present as vivid a picture as possible of police

officers as human beings, fathers and husbands at home, no different in their

simplest bodily functions from ourselves. In doing so I tried to counteract the

helpless masses’ fear and irrational hatred of authority which the incorrect

propaganda  techniques  of  the  Communists  had  merely  intensified.  By

describing the chief of police or a government leader as a brutal, autocratic,

despicable tyrant worthy only of their hate, they simultaneously sowed horrorand feelings of inferiority and weakness among the people.

  One of the secrets of the success of the National Socialists in Germany

lay in the fact that hate for political opponents was derived not from the

latter’s superiority but from their weaknesses and blunders. This hatred was

subsequently implanted in the minds of the opponents’ followers; to be ruled

by stupid and corrupt weaklings is an insult to human dignity and natural

self-respect. This, coupled with a sense of “national greatness,” was destined

to become an invincible power. In contrast, drawing attention to poverty and

need alone could not foster self-esteem and generate power. Man is ashamed

of poverty; he feels less secure in shabby clothing than when he is decently

dressed—and a uniform awakens his pride in himself. The situation had to be

remedied, but no one knew how. One sensed the paltriness of established

power in comparison with the high goals of the social revolution, and yet

nothing  could  be  done.  Hence  the  Communists  and  Socialists  outshouted

each  other,  developing  a false  sense  of  power,  a false  heroism,  and  an

annihilating asceticism. This attracted no one.

  Solving real problems, whether large or small, is far more radical and

convincing than “revolutionary” tirades which foster inferiority feelings in

the socially demoralized and generate only scorn, hate, and brutality among

the ranks of those better situated.

  In practical social work it is unnecessary to give up a single scientific

principle.  On  the  contrary,  the  essence  of  all  practical  work  is  its  basic

principles; only ideologies and political slogans can be both true and false at

the same time. In the social-hygiene meetings everyone saw clearly which

social  conditions  foster  human  well-being  and  which  ones  are  socially

pathogenic; and it automatically became evident—with little radical dialogue

—which conditions needed to be remedied.

  Several years later, this type of social approach was so highly developed

in Germany that even policemen, government officials, and other custodians

of  order  came  to  our  counseling  centers  in  droves  and  assisted  theunemployed,  whom  they  had  previously  considered  useless  rebels.  At  the

same time no secret was made of the fact that there existed both privileged

and disadvantaged classes, and that injustice and social murder were rampant.

However, emphasis was always placed upon the necessity of despising the

pathological conditions rather than the representatives of such conditions.

  The course of our work simply compelled my colleagues and me to play

off the human qualities which all people held in common against the divisive

official  poses.  This  basic  principle  not  only  brought  about  a  rush  of

individuals from every level to the organization, which I directed without

presidents,  vice-presidents,  secretaries,  honorary  presidents,  etc.,  but  also

gave birth to one of the most essential tenets of what was later termed “work

democracy”: “Help yourself and fight for the means to enable you to help

yourself. Do not beg for liberty and bread; do not accept them from economic

oppressors or political pirates. Achieve them through resolute, rational work,

on yourself, on your environment, and on your fellow beings. And above all,

do not shift responsibility onto others but learn to bear it yourself.”

  The systematic distraction of oppressed individuals’ hatred away from the

representatives of desolate conditions and toward the conditions themselves

proved to be a rationally effective measure. This hate on the part of the poor,

and the neurotics of all classes, lost its aimless, irrational character and was

transformed into logical thought processes and realistic endeavors. This, in

turn, awakened the sympathy of many individuals who had previously been

indifferent or disdainfully inimical. Senseless shouting and complete lack of

responsibility were replaced by purposeful, responsible, cooperative work.

The young people, for example, did not submit petitions to parliamentary

hygiene  commissions,  but  assisted  each  other  and  organized  the  vital

necessities themselves, in a rational manner. Their practical success caused

many hygienists to follow of their own accord. It may sound unbelievable but

it is true that in Germany it was not the state apparatus but the “freedom

parties,” to which the youth belonged, which took action against such self-help. That was an impressive lesson: The freedom parties themselves thrived

on the helplessness of their members.

    Frequently,  even  police  officers—who  had  previously  been  physically

assaulted and, justly or unjustly, were considered homicidal executioners—

actually championed the cause of the social outcasts. In numerous social-

hygiene meetings police officers were present with orders to break up the

meeting as soon as “the power of the state” was verbally attacked. This was

routine procedure in political gatherings. But their stern, antagonistic faces

grew softer and they displayed active interest when I did not even mention

the  issue  of  oppression  by  law  and  executive  power,  but  delineated  the

problems which the unemployed, the factory workers, the youth, the women,

etc., had to solve by themselves. (For instance, it was entirely within the

realm of possibility for the people themselves to organize children’s clinics

for  the  poor,  or  establish  sex-counseling  offices,  or  take  various  practical

measures regarding housing problems.) Then the “human being” that resided

in the “custodians of law and order” emerged. And when I began to speak of

the misery in the lives of children, in marriages and families, awareness of

the presence of “protectors of class interests” vanished completely. It became

strikingly  obvious  to  all  present  that  these  officers  and  policemen  were

themselves  employees,  despite  their  uniforms.  They  had  children,  wives,

marital problems, and housing and child-raising difficulties. Viewed in this

way, from a practical, psychological perspective, class boundaries appeared

entirely different from the way they were portrayed in purely economistic

party  programs.  [SO:  Only  much  later,  in  America,  did  I  realize  that  the

police can also be democratic. Naturally, in saying this, I am not overlooking

the fact that the emotional plague prevails in America also.]

  After  establishing  the  sex-counseling  centers,  I  witnessed  the

overpowering role played by irrational mechanisms which oppose conscious

goals  in  the  masses.  These  centers  formed  a  focal  point  for  a  group  of

workers who, for a brief period, were important to the movement. I knew thatdemonstrations  and  calls  of  “long  live  this”  or  “down  with  that”  could

accomplish nothing in themselves. There was a need for constructive work

that would set an example. The workers’ movement could not lay claim to

leadership of society if it did not grasp and attempt to solve, from the very

beginning  and  step  by  step,  all  problems  created  by  the  splintering  of

bourgeois society.

  Initially, after the upheaval in July 1927, I was not satisfied with my

activities.  Different  organizations—Arbeiterhilfe,  Free  Thinkers,  groups  in

high schools, universities, and factories—invited me to lecture. I spoke here

and there on psychoanalysis, the Oedipus complex, the castration complex,

etc. Soon, however, it became apparent that my listeners could not put these

ideas to use in daily life or for social change, nor did they need to learn any

theories. They needed insight and knowledge to assist them practically in

their  arduous  tasks.  I  was  already  aware  of  some  theoretical  connections

between  psychoanalysis  and  Marxism,  but  they  were  of  no  practical

significance.  They  were  more  useful  among  students,  especially  medical

students. I gave my first lecture to a group of Socialist students on “the sexual

misery of the masses under capitalism.” It was very well received. Since I

knew that psychoanalytic theory as it had been formulated was not suited to

lectures before active Socialist groups, I shifted my theme to the problems of

sexual  life  among  the  masses.  My  experiences  in  the  Psychoanalytic

Polyclinic now served me well. Although the psychology of repression and of

the  unconscious  was  of  no  interest,  sexual  disturbances,  the  rearing  of

children, and the question of the family proved to be burning issues. I soon

realized  that  the  Oedipus  complex  was  applicable  in  the  context  of  “the

family.”  After  my  very  first  lecture,  during  the  question  period,  I  was

confronted  with  the  task  of  explaining  why  the  family  so  consistently

suppresses the sexual activity of children. This was the same question which

had confronted me in my medical practice. No one had the answer as yet. The

revolutionary Socialists rejected the family as an instrument of suppression.But their concept of suppression was, in keeping with current views, merely

economic—that is, the father, who is economically stronger, subjugates his

wife and children. Hence they demanded the “abolition of the family” and

gave  it  no  further  consideration.  [They  could  not  possibly  have  solved  a

single problem of family life.]

  Socialist theory had confirmed the sociological origin of the family and

awaited the collapse of private ownership of property to solve the problem

spontaneously. My background was psychoanalysis, where the family per se

did  not  pose  a  problem  but  where  the  emotional  relationships  within  an

already existent family constituted the central issue. A bridge between the

two viewpoints was yet to be built.

  Before  a  second  large  student  gathering  (1928),  I  spoke  on  “the

relationship  of  psychoanalysis  to  Marxism,”  and  attempted  to  clarify  the

sociological role of the Oedipus complex. The pro-Communist students had

invited a “red professor” from Moscow for the occasion. In the discussion he

declared unequivocally (in a manner resembling a party resolution) that the

Oedipus complex was un-Marxist, nonsense, and simply nonexistent. Those

were his words! Most of the students sided with me, but Moscow’s authority

was  enormous  because  of  the  1917  social  revolution,  and  I  had  no

satisfactory answer to the question of where and how the function of the

family is established sociologically. [SO: Since that time, the Communists

have  never  ceased  fighting  my  views,  obviously  fearing  the  competition

between Marx’s economism and psychology.]

  My medical and scientific activities were not interrupted in any way by

my political activities, although I soon felt the sharp contradiction between

science and politics, a contradiction which was ever-present and unavoidable

during those times and which I later tried to resolve with the concepts of

scientific politics and political science. I must describe the path which led me

in my own field of endeavor to a reconciliation of these sharp contrasts. I had

no idea then, in 1928, that I would one day recognize social irrationalism inparty politics. I was still far from realizing the sharp distinction I later made

between what is social and what is political.

  [SO: The Sexpol of 1927–37 is dead. Together with all human endeavors

based on political thinking, it had no future. It died with the old patterns of

life in the Second World War. It was well meant, but wrongly executed, as

were all other human hopes in the 1920’s. Nobody knew it then. Now we

have learned from such mistakes that:

  No  political  arrangement  of  human  problems  will  ever  accomplish

anything.

  The  politician  stands,  and  must  stand,  against  every  positive  human

endeavor, since his existence depends on unsolved problems.

  The politician will try to exploit the unsatisfied sexual needs of people in

the future as he exploited other needs in the past.

  Society must be rebuilt according to human needs, beginning with babies’

needs.]

  It  was  considered  insane  for  a  respectable  physician  and  scientist  to

participate  in  demonstrations  of  the  unemployed,  hand  out  pamphlets  on

social hygiene in working-class areas, and become involved in clashes with

the police. The intellectuals could not understand why I would risk my social

position by doing such things. As sociologists, they wrote about problems of

society, but in doing so they behaved like a physician who writes a learned

book on typhoid without ever having seen a single case. For this reason most

sociology textbooks, until now, have not influenced the forward development

of  society.  The  same  holds  true  for  sexology  and  sexual  reforms.  The

sexologists at that time based their writings on their experience in private

practice.  The  sexual  problems  and  neuroses  of  the  masses,  however,  are

completely different and pose problems essentially unlike those encountered

in private practice, and especially in a psychoanalytic practice. The years

shortly  before  and  after  July  15,  1927,  were  characterized,  for  the

psychoanalytic movement, by an influx of Americans who came to Vienna tostudy. Whereas a Viennese patient or pupil could pay five to ten schillings an

hour  (only  exceptional  cases  could  afford  twenty  schillings  an  hour),

Americans had to pay at least five dollars (thirty-five schillings) per hour.

Many paid ten or fifteen dollars and even more. But one did not need to pity

them. Either they were very wealthy or they were learning psychoanalysis

and would later receive payment a thousandfold for their own services. Still,

the rage for Americans had a basically corrupting influence.

  In 1928 a young doctor from New York came to me for training. Today

he is a respected psychiatrist and psychoanalyst. One day he saw me in a

demonstration march of the unemployed—the one which ended in the riots at

the University. The next day he arrived at my office wearing a red tie. I

noticed this although he himself seemed unaware of the connection. When I

drew his attention to the fact, however, he remembered that he had seen me

the day before. He was not a Socialist, but my marching had not particularly

upset him; on the contrary, I was able to prove to him that he was not quite

able to completely suppress his admiration for me.

  I lived in constant fear for my practice, as any move could have destroyed

me. Strangely, though, both activities prospered, the medical as well as the

political.  I  did  not  understand  it,  for  one  could  clearly  see  how  in  my

professional  circle  fear  of  losing  one’s  practice  could  inhibit  any  sincere

involvement with social problems.

  Among the workers in a party chapter in the twentieth district, where I

was active, there was a young married lathe worker with whom I became

friendly. His name was Zadniker and he was a splendid person. Through him

I learned to know and to appreciate the workers’ unique way of thinking.

Precisely because of this I never fell prey to the blind idolization of workers

seen in many hyperradical intellectuals who hastily join the labor movement

[as  stooges  of  red  imperialism]  and  then  disappear  again  just  as  quickly.

Zadniker  was  simple,  straightforward,  without  manners  but  also  without

guile. When he said something he meant it; when he was angry he showed itopenly and soon afterward we were good friends again. He possessed great

natural dignity which was not at all affected. His handshake was firm. He was

able to talk factually about general human sexual problems—not just those of

the  workers—without  a  trace  of  cynicism  or  prurience.  Although  he  had

never read anything by Freud, it was obvious to him that children have sexual

desires toward their parents and that hate can develop from this. There was

no  issue  in  my  sex-economic  viewpoint  that  he  did  not  comprehend

automatically,  i.e.  intuitively,  without  book  knowledge.  He  was  having

difficulties with his hysterical wife, spoke about it with reason and clarity,

understood the sexual etiology of a neurosis, and knew that people are not

neurotic  when  sexually  satisfied.  Through  him  I  discovered  exceptionally

important details about life among the proletariat: the sordid and the sublime,

the filth and dirt as well as the beauty in the behavior of these individuals.

More and more, he brought me into contact with circles of unpretentious

working  people  who  convinced  me  that  knowledge  of  sex-economic

processes  and  laws  is generally  and spontaneously  present  in  the  silent,

toiling, down-to-earth strata of society.

  He was amazed that a bourgeois intellectual could grasp the situation so

thoroughly.  Then  I  told  him  about  Freud  and  my  experiences  in  the

Psychoanalytic Polyclinic. His understanding was immediate and direct. With

estimable human naturalness he grasped facts which decades of discussion

and thousands of articles were unable to teach psychiatrists and culturati.

  I  had  attempted,  at  the  time,  to  make  myself  useful  in  the  different

workers’  organizations.  I  gave  lectures  on  the  Oedipus  and  castration

complexes and from this perspective arrived automatically at the question of

the family and sexual hygiene. Once Zadniker remarked, “You know, this

Oedipus complex seems right to me when you are discussing it, but how are

we  to  use  it  in  our  struggle  for  a  better  life?  After  all,  we  can’t  analyze

everyone  in  order  to  make  them  healthy.  First  we  must  change  social

conditions. We must have something to say before people will listen to usand we can put an end to the misery. We workers would gladly learn even

though many of us are lazy and dejected. But you intellectuals must also

learn to express yourselves more simply and present scientific issues in a way

everyone can understand. Today, only the questions everyone can understand

are important.” He spoke from the heart. In my first cautious attempts with

psychology in the workers’ movement, I had seen for myself that little could

be done with psychoanalytic concepts. The topics were understood but could

not  be  put  to  practical  use.  The  theories  that  the  family  is  a  biological

institution, that civilization is based on sexual repression, that mental health

can only be achieved through renunciation of the instincts and sublimation,

all  sounded  ridiculous  in  these  circles,  really  completely  ridiculous.  I  felt

stupid trying to tell a strapping machinist or construction worker that he had

to sublimate his sexuality in order to become “capable of culture.” If he was

healthy he embraced his girl lovingly, with no complications. If he was ill he

behaved just as any other average person would under similar circumstances.

Is it not said that work is based on sublimation of pregenital impulses? I

learned how to observe a stonemason. Year in and year out he broke up large

stones into smaller ones and fit one against the other to pave the streets. Did

this represent instinctual sublimation? If so, what type of sublimation? Anal?

Sadistic? Ridiculous! Very soon I realized the mechanical character of this

work which had nothing to do with “narcissistic elevation of the ego.” The

problem seemed, rather, how a manual laborer or a bookkeeper could endure

work with no psychic gains for such long periods of time. I personally would

not have been able to do it at all, or perhaps only if I had extinguished all life

within myself and become a machine. Then, all at once, the missing link

appeared: character armor enables the worker to bear the psychic tedium of

this  kind  of  activity.  Quickly,  I  grasped  even  more:  Freud’s  theory  of

sublimation was correct for research scientists or engineers; it was poorly

suited to the average doctor or technician, and altogether unsuitable for work

done by the masses.  Zadniker told me that the condition of the unemployed was especially

bad. They were always ruined psychically, sooner or later. He did not adhere

to the opposing theory of the Comintern, namely that hunger alone—and not

sexual repression—was the cause of neurosis. He said that the unemployed

were inactive for months and even years, that they were debilitated. Thinking

about it, I concluded that this is because the biological energy with no active

outlet first causes nervousness and then gradually devitalizes the organism.

Zadniker  explained,  as  well,  that  it  was  virtually  impossible  for  the

unemployed to stay physically healthy and that this led to the destruction of

the family and the relationship between man and wife. He became a beggar.

When a working-class family is exposed to hunger for a long period of time,

all  the  unconscious  sources  of  hate  begin  to  overflow.  Ordinarily,  under

better economic conditions, they are covered over by conventional attitudes.

Zadniker also revealed to me the deepest secret in the function of marriage

and  the  family.  He  was  a  politically  aware,  clearheaded  worker;  his  wife

needed him and he needed her as well. However, since he was healthy and

she  was  sexually  disturbed,  he  suffered.  He  sought  out  other,  healthier

women. She was jealous, although she could not give him what he needed,

and tried to prevent him from going to meetings where he might easily make

the acquaintance of other women. That was undoubtedly her reasoning. He

knew  it  and  expressed  it  in  simple  terms.  And  men,  he  remarked,

Communists  included,  rattle  off  slogans  like  “proletarian  class-

consciousness” and “mutual comradeship between husband and wife,” while

they still chain their wives to the kitchen stove. They fear, likewise, that their

wives may meet other men. He told me much more and I learned to see a

great deal that is not described in any political or scientific text. I began to

feel  acutely  the  worthlessness  of  academic  science.  Much  of  what  I  had

previously  valued  began  to  collapse.  To  be  this  kind  of  scientist  meant

practicing a subterfuge. How was I to remain a scientist, i.e. work honorably

in science, and yet overlook these realities? It appeared to be one of the mainfunctions of many scientists to negate such realities by ignoring them.

  The events in Austria were so confusing at the time that academic science

seemed unbearably remote from life itself. Communist prognoses seemed to

be  correct;  the  Soviet  economist  Varga  warned  of  a  renewed,  serious

economic crisis in capitalism. This was certain to cause world revolution,

which,  in  turn,  would  bring  rationality  into  the  lives  of  men.  Although  I

immersed myself even more deeply in politics [which to me meant social

work], some presentiment restrained me from following the usual path to a

career of a political party functionary. I would have had to give up what to

others might seem to be my senseless profession and devote myself entirely

to party activity. But I was heart and soul in my scientific work. I sensed the

beginnings of a productive criticism of bourgeois psychology without, as yet,

being able to formulate it. Leaving an upper-class bourgeois existence behind

would  be  a  significant  step  to  take  but  even  the  threat  of  serious

consequences had so far never prevented me from taking risks.

  During this period I entered a phase which every awakening individual

passes  through:  I  began  to  feel  the  barrenness  of  social  amusements  and

conversation.  I  had  already  left  behind  me  the  “dancing  and  discussing

Goethe” stage. I was still frequently invited to the homes of my colleagues

for an evening, but accepted these invitations less and less often. It all seemed

such a farce and I had lost the ability to converse in a light vein. On the other

hand, my friend Zadniker had inspired me with an idea from which I could

not free myself. I was a psychiatrist and sexologist and could exert far less

influence  as  a  politician  than  as  a  physician.  Hence  I  devoted  myself  to

whatever medical and educational assistance I could give to youth and to the

female workers. In January 1929, the leftist newspapers carried the first brief

notices  about  the  Socialist  Society  for  Sex-Counseling  and  Sex-Research,

which had opened several sex-counseling centers for workers and salaried

employees. After several months of preparation and at considerable personal

expense, I had founded this organization with several younger psychoanalyticcolleagues who were my pupils, and three gynecologists. The title was rather

pompous,  but  it  was  customary,  at  the  time,  for  organizations  to  equip

themselves thoroughly with rubber stamps and letterheads.

  We sent out announcements that sexological specialists had formed an

organization to provide, in the various districts of Vienna, free counseling on

sexual problems, the rearing of children, and general mental hygiene to those

seeking advice. Lectures were to furnish information on sexual hygiene and

the causes of and possible remedies for emotional difficulties. The society

took the position that sexual misery was essentially brought about by social

conditions  rooted  in  the  bourgeois  social  order  and  that  it  could  not  be

removed entirely but at least could be alleviated by aid to the individual. In

addition, information on sexual matters was to be widely circulated among

working  people.  The  knowledge  underlying  this  information  would  be

broadened by social work and research on individuals. I reserved the position

of  scientific  director  for  myself.  Six  counseling  centers  were  opened

immediately,  each  directed  by  a  physician.  Three  obstetricians  placed

themselves at our disposal to assist with problem pregnancies. A lawyer also

participated.

  [What was new about our counseling centers (sex-hygiene clinics) was

that  we  integrated  the  problems  of  the  neuroses,  sexual  disturbances,  and

everyday  conflicts.  It  was  also  new  to  attack  the  neuroses  by prevention

rather than treatment. This depended basically on the handling of sexuality in

children and young people. At this point, I wish to claim priority and full

responsibility for the introduction of the sex-economic view of children’s and

adolescents’ sexuality and the sex-economic view of natural genitality. No

attention had been given previously to this central realm of mental hygiene,

and whatever consideration was later given to the neuroses in Germany, in

Scandinavia, and finally in America, bypassed the problem of the genitality

of  children  and  adolescents  with  moralizing  ideas.  Here,  it  is  not  only  a

matter of my claim to priority, it is the advocacy of a social question asforbidden as it is basic, a question which led to the source of the emotional

plague.]

  The centers immediately became so overcrowded that any doubt as to the

significance of our work was promptly removed. During my own counseling

hour there were always approximately ten people waiting, so that I had to

arrange a second hour. My colleagues were in a similar position, and once the

lectures  began,  the  situation  intensified.  To  consider  each  case  with

reasonable care required about half an hour. At first, the majority of those

who  came  were  girls  and  women  who  had  become  pregnant  through

clumsiness or ignorance. We sent them to the city birth-control clinics, but

we  ourselves  instructed  them  in  the  use  of  contraception  and  in  the

physiological function of the genital embrace. Among them, there was not

one  single  case  where  advocating  a  continuation  of  pregnancy  would  not

have  been  inhumane,  unethical,  base,  and  cowardly.  Literally,  not  one  of

these women and girls should have been allowed to bring a child into the

world. In comparison to this reality, all the empty talk about various medical

and  eugenic  indications  for  abortion  (social  indications  were  never

mentioned) soon appeared as utter insanity and to the great shame of those

individuals who for decades debated whether, and to what extent, a medical

evaluation  could  be  viewed  as  valid  and  permissible  in  addition  to  the

consideration  of  eugenics.  No  decent  physician—or  anyone  else—would

have sanctioned for himself one iota of what he demanded for “the people” to

ensure “the safeguarding of morals” and an “increase in population.” These

issues were treated so extensively in my book The Sexual Revolution that I

may  be  brief  here.  The  problem  was  no  longer  the  indications  for  the

interruption of pregnancy, but the kind of thinking which created the cruel

anti-abortion laws and enforced them mercilessly. The immediate problem,

however, was the views and thinking of the reformers who did not disclose

what I saw and continued to describe, but rather negotiated on various issues

with the representatives of the law. [SO: Mothers did not count. Infant miserydid not count. What counted was a sick moralism that was to break down

only a few years later when “planned parenthood” became a matter of course.

How  many  lives  were  lost  in  this  instance  alone  …  ]  I  was,  as  yet,

unacquainted with their true convictions but was soon to feel the impact of

them. They debated whether or not tuberculosis, mental retardation, or flat

feet in a family constituted indications for abortion. Only the extreme radicals

advocated  the  woman’s  “right  to  her  own  body.”  They  defended  their

position with the pacifying arguments that only in this way could women

bear their children happily, that the population would increase despite this, as

in the Soviet Union, and that the introduction of Socialism would prove that

women like to have children but first need to be freed of material need. This

was doubtless true, but was only a small part of the problem. Something

much more important and encompassing determined my position, namely:

even if material provisions were made, and for some women they were at

hand, these women whom I was seeing simply should not have children.

Aside from all other questions, socioeconomic and medical, I began to see

the  problem  in  a  new  light,  that  of  the  emotional  state  of  the  expectant

mothers.  Finding  a  reason  on  which  to  base  a  medical  diagnosis,  in  the

context of current mores, was rare indeed. But to take this as a precedent, to

use it as an excuse not to see the main issue, was actual stupidity and a crime

against the women. These mothers, and women, and girls, were able to bear a

child but incapable of rearing it, caring for it, or keeping it alive. All of them,

without exception, were seriously neurotic and had a very poor relationship

with their husbands, if any relationship at all. They were frigid, careworn,

covertly sadistic or overtly masochistic. They were latent schizophrenics, or

morbid  depressives;  vain  little  women,  or  wretched,  disinterested  work

animals.  If  they  were  married,  they  hated  their  husbands,  or  they  slept

indiscriminately with anyone, without feeling. Many lived with from five to

eight other people who shared the same room and kitchen. From dawn till

dusk they slaved on piecework at home to earn twenty-five schillings a weekor even less. They had three to six children of their own and sometimes raised

others as well. Drunken husbands beat them and demoralized them. Because

the children they already had were causing them nothing but torment and

want, they harbored deadly hatred against them and against the unborn child.

Idle talk of “holy mother love,” in the face of this subhuman misery, could

almost have provoked one to draw a gun on the speaker. Even if the worst of

the misery had been removed, there would have remained at least as much to

be rebuilt if there had been a genuine desire to realize one-hundredth of all

the chatter about children and culture. All of these mothers were hysterical or

compulsive; their children were either cute little dolls or beaten puppies. Such

women  should  not  be  allowed  to  bear  children!—quite  apart  from  the

inhuman material existence of most.

  For these reasons, I advocated, from the beginning, the unquestionable

right of every woman who was pregnant against her will to have an abortion,

with or without all the various indications. At the time we were able to refer

to laws passed in Russia, although I already knew [as early as 1929] they

were not genuinely intended; in fact, five years later they were repealed. I

sent every woman who had become pregnant unknowingly, or against her

will, to doctors who performed the abortion. I knew exactly what I was doing

and considered it a matter of course to assume the risk. I always saw before

my eyes the well-known hatred of such mothers for their children and did not

trouble myself with the concerns of population politicians. I was familiar

with their equivocation and the sociological formulations of their attitudes as

well. At that time, I had already become involved in a silent argument with

the  Communists  who  were  against  Malthusianism  because  Marx  had  not

entirely understood Malthus, who contended that the misery would disappear

if the birth rate was reduced. Malthus overlooked the origins of the social

dilemma. Marx, on the other hand, had discovered these origins and rejected

the Malthusian theory because it could easily distract from the real objectives

of class struggle and lead to illusions. But since Marx did not clarify thiscompletely,  the  theory  of  the  necessity  for  birth-rate  restriction  led  a

miserable existence and soon disappeared altogether in the Soviet Union. The

solution  was:  social  struggle  to  eliminate  the  misery  of  the  masses and

selective birth control!

  For two years I was so overwhelmed by the people’s sexual misery that

the  conflict  between  the  scientist  and  the  politician  within  me  grew  even

more intense. It increased especially when I came into contact, through sex-

counseling, with the average Viennese working teen-ager. Although I had

become  acquainted  with  pubertal  needs  much  earlier,  the  cases  in  the

Polyclinic  and  my  private  practice  seemed  pathological  exceptions  to  the

rule,  in  the  light  of  contemporary  psychoanalytic  thought,  this  rule  being

based on the “normally adjusted adolescent who has overcome his Oedipus

complex and complied with the demands of reality.” Almost no one reflected

upon  the  concept  of  a  “normal,  healthy  adolescent,”  and  even  less  upon

compliance “with the demands of reality.” The status quo was simply taken

for granted and accepted as unchangeable. It was not questioned, in print or

elsewhere. But in the sex-counseling centers, and especially afterward in the

sex-political youth meetings, the picture changed entirely. Here I was faced

with  adolescents  who  were  considered  healthy;  most  of  them—on  the

average,  between  ages  fourteen  and  twenty—came  only  for  advice  on

contraceptives. Immediately, the question arose whether one should give a

fourteen-  or  fifteen-year-old  contraceptives.  This  question,  in  turn,  led

consistently and relentlessly to the whole problem of adolescence. The usual

                                                                          9
procedure was not to occupy oneself with this age group at all, or to send the

youngsters away with the comforting advice to wait until they have matured

somewhat. This, of course, was impossible if one wished to prevent neuroses.

  Before formulating an answer to the question, I reviewed all the psychic,

physical, and social factors. These teen-agers were actually adult individuals.

They were employed as apprentices in factories, messenger boys, or domestic

help. Many of the young men were members of the Workers’ Youth Guardand the great majority of these young people were members of the Social

Democratic Youth Association. Either they already had boy friends, or girl

friends, or they came to me with the question of how they could “find a way

out of their loneliness.” My first naïve answer was: “Aren’t you in a youth

group?” “Yes, but that’s—that’s not what I mean,” came the reply. There was

no need for further questioning. The matter was perfectly clear. Gradually I

learned  to  understand,  to  affirm,  and  to  remove  the  deep-seated  and

completely  justified  mistrust  that  youth  places  in  everything  pertaining  to

authority and adults. I simply told them they were correct. There was not one

who did not immediately grow more confiding after that. They knew the facts

and wanted “a happy love life.” They did not believe a word of the attempted

indoctrination.  Many  had  simply  run  away  from  home.  There  was  deep

hatred of their parents for suppressing their love life. Those who had partners

appeared to consider making love, frequently in doorways or hidden corners,

perfectly natural; they also accepted as natural the fact that they were dressed,

that they had to be quick and were afraid of an unwelcome surprise, or of

pregnancy.  They  had  no  idea  of  the  relationship  between  their  nervous

disturbances and this wretched manner of “orderly” adolescent sexuality. The

connection between a disorderly genital love life and shattered psychic health

was unknown in the political organizations, walled off by false concepts and

evasion.  There  was  no  eye  for  the  pallor,  depression,  nervousness,  work

disturbances, quarrelsomeness, criminal tendencies, and perversions in these

young  people.  Homosexuality  flourished,  usually  in  the  form  of  mutual

masturbation. Correct understanding existed side by side with the most idiotic

subterfuges of bourgeois culture-gibberish or party slogans. However, a brief

explanation  of  the  connections  was  all  that  was  necessary  to  enable  the

adolescents to grasp the facts immediately. The false morals and hypocritical

concepts  disintegrated  like  decomposing  matter.  At  first  I  could  hardly

believe  it  was  possible,  especially  since  the  “strict  superego  is  so  deeply

rooted in the biological id.”    Changing the basic sexual attitudes from the negative to the positive does

not,  of  course,  have  any  significant  effect  on  the  psychic  structure.  If

castration or defloration fears were deeply embedded, the situation remained

basically  unchanged.  Nevertheless,  the  younger  the  male  or  female

adolescents were, the faster and more completely their direction was reversed

after  just  a  few  remarks.  It  was  as  if  they  had  been  long  awaiting  the

information, as if they had been marching lethargically under a yoke without

understanding its meaning. They knew everything about their sexuality; they

knew they needed love and stagnated without it. But they were completely

unaware of the obstacles which blocked its fulfillment. They led double lives

with no idea of the contradiction or of the social prerequisites and conditions

for  a  satisfactory  love  life.  All  the  girls,  regardless  of  how  firmly  they

demanded  their  sexual  rights,  were  steeped  in  conscious  or  unconscious

sexual anxiety. The boys suffered mainly from masturbational guilt feelings,

hypochondriacal anxiety, or premature ejaculation.

  Within a few short months, I learned more, about sexology and sociology

than I had in ten years of analytic practice. It was a period of transition for

me. I had been taught, and had convinced myself as well, that premature

ejaculation is based on urethral-erotic fixation and on the Oedipus complex.

That is correct, but in addition I now realized that if sexual intercourse is

attempted,  or  carried  out,  in  haste,  with  the  partners  fully  clothed,  then

ejaculation is also premature and occurs before sufficient excitation has been

achieved. This leads to neurotic symptoms due to sexual stasis. I researched

the genesis of the disturbance and found that these youths had been more or

less  neurotic  at  the  onset  of  puberty  but  that  the  actual  neurosis  only

developed after several years of pubertal conflict. Fixations created by the

sexual taboos of childhood had always been present as a retarding factor, but

it was the drastic obstruction of the final step to a healthy love life during the

years of maturation which caused a complete regression to infantile conflicts.

Hence I felt constrained to make one important correction of psychoanalytictheory. On the one hand, it is true that the revival of the Oedipus complex

during puberty causes conflicts, but the conflicts are now much more the

result of the social denial of sexual needs at that time. When the forward path

toward normal healthy love is blocked, the adolescent reverts to an infantile

neurosis which is intensified through increased and simultaneously denied

genital desire. Psychoanalysis had completely overlooked this or, better said,

chosen to overlook it, as was later demonstrated. Other schools of psychiatry

did not even dare to mention the problem.

  As a youth counselor, I was unable to rattle on about “cultural puberty”

nor was I able to comfort the young people with future rewards. This struck

me as a medical crime which one could commit only through ignorance or

narrow-mindedness or fear for one’s livelihood. I had to choose among three

possible answers to their questions: I could advise abstinence, recommend

masturbation, or simply affirm the adolescent desire for sexual intercourse.

There seemed to be no fourth possibility, although I confess I sought one, in

my  predicament,  for  quite  some  time.  Fear  of  public  opinion,  which  was

adamant and relentlessly cruel on this issue, prompted this search.

  I  would  like  now  to  relate  how  this  enormous  danger  to  my  entire

endeavor was overcome. Had I been alone in my scientific work, I would

most certainly have been defeated. Perseverance and firmness of conviction

were taught to me by young workers struggling for freedom and clarity about

their  very  existence.  Young  members  of  the  Schutzbund  from  the

                      10
Arbeiterjugendwehr came to my counseling center with various difficulties

concerning  their  girl  friends,  sexual  disturbances,  etc.  There  was  an

immediate rapport, making it unnecessary for me to give them reasons for my

advice. They grasped it structurally. I did not wish to evade the issue of the

extremely tense political situation, nor could I. On the contrary, it was the

intertwining of political life, on a large scale, with the minutiae of personal

life which interested me. How often had I seen a labor functionary become

politically inactive through entanglement in personal conflicts! From suchcases, the political movement drew the false conclusion that politically active

workers could have no personal conflicts. I could only view this as pious,

wishful  thinking  comparable,  politically  speaking,  to  an  ostrich  hiding  its

head from its own kind. The individuals involved shared my views. Many of

them came to me with an express desire for help in solving their personal

problems in order to be better equipped for the political struggle.

  Among  these  members  of  the  Arbeiterjugendwehr  there  were  two

especially outstanding individuals. One was seventeen, the other twenty-one.

They told of the unrest among the Social Democratic youth. At this time,

emergency legislation had begun to dismantle all the social accomplishments

of the Republic, and something had to be done. Schober, the newly elected

President, who was concurrently chief of police, had been taking rigorous

action. The crisis began to grow in ever-widening circles. The young men

told me that the Schutzbund in Ottakring was prepared to do anything at all,

and asked me to attend a meeting with them. I went along and spoke with the

district  Schutzbund  leader,  an  old  soldier  and  labor  functionary.  No

reasonable worker was in accord with the party platform. Nevertheless, it still

represented the unity of the Austrian, as opposed to the German, Socialist

movement and no one wanted to sacrifice this at any cost. On most issues the

Communists were correct, but the workers would have nothing to do with

them.  Their  shouting  was  too  loud  in  comparison  to  the  leadership  they

displayed and the results they produced. [They were not practical enough,

and they slandered people so profusely.]

  A young married machinist had organized a secret machine-gun division.

When the last push of emergency legislation came, he and his men planned to

occupy the inner city and shoot everyone down right and left. These people

had nothing to lose, they lived only for a better tomorrow, waiting for their

great chance to make contact with the movement of social life once again.

Society  had  excluded  them  and  now  they  were  ready  to  punish  it.  I

understood their arguments so well that no objection to their plans occurredto me, nor did I wish to raise any. Had I been as mistreated as they, my

thoughts and desire to act would have resembled their own. It was simple and

entirely rational. The workers themselves voiced the correct reservations: The

masses would not assist them because their leaders had chosen a course of

peaceful  infiltration,  which  actually  resulted  in  fatal  compromises.

Nevertheless, they wished to hold a large caucus.

  Through  my  efforts,  the  Schutzbund  conferred  with  the  Communists

without actually joining them. The convention hall at Stahlehner’s in Hernals,

which held approximately two thousand people, was rented for the occasion.

I contributed the money and at their request gave the main address before an

overflowing audience. Those in attendance were, for the most part, active

members  of  the  Schutzbund  and  employed  workers.  I  enumerated  past

failures  and  demonstrated  the  point  that  the  current  path  would  lead

unfailingly to disaster. [The events of 1934 confirmed this view. The Social

Democratic organization was not destroyed by Hitler in 1938, but by the

Christian Socialist Party under Dolfluss in 1934.] There was much shouting;

the  atmosphere  was  explosive.  The  audience  was  waiting  for  a  positive,

productive answer to the question of what could be done. I had no answer

except that proposed by the Communist Party: the working class must fight

for leadership in society. That was all I could offer, and it was far from

satisfactory. Today, in retrospect, it is understandable that the people were

not willing to agree with this general formulation. Everyone knew that the

Communists were correct in principle, from a Marxist-scientific standpoint.

But on practical everyday issues, the Social Democrats seemed to be in the

right.  And  everyone  was  fearful  of  the  civil  war  the  Communists  were

fomenting. Now I realize that they were also afraid of the responsibility of

social power. The Social Democrats were repeatedly able to prevail with their

parliamentary  theories.  They  merely  relied  on  the  revolutionaries’  fear  of

revolution.

  At  this  meeting  I  became  acutely  aware,  for  the  first  time,  of  theemotional content of party membership. The membership agreed with me,

but as soon as the situation began to sound threatening for the Socialist Party,

someone  who  apparently  had  been  assigned  this  task  shouted,  “The

Communists  are  only  trying  to  split  us  and  spread  discord.  All  Social

Democrats will now leave the room.” And with that, the opposing Socialists

walked out in a solid bloc. About four hundred Communists who had just

come to terms with the Schutzbund, as well as several courageous Social

Democratic  functionaries  and  liberals  of  different  organizations,  remained

behind. Although the meeting was continued, our cause had been lost. At the

time  we  thought  that  the  Social  Democrats  had  once  again  “betrayed  the

cause  in  the  service  of  the  bourgeoisie.”  I  was  still  far  from  seeing  the

common principle of all these tangled matters: the helplessness of average

people in the face of the political plague. However, I must first lead up to this

in a comprehensible manner.                                            5




    The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality into


                  Innately Free Primitive Society




In Berlin my work immediately combined with the great freedom movement.

When  one  is  carrying  alone  the  heavy  burden  of  solving  a  crucial  social

problem, an opportunity to join such a movement is important. Above all, it

protects the psychic apparatus which, due to special experiences in life, has

grasped,  formulated,  and  found  a  solution  to  the  problem.  The  wider  the

scope of a concept, the more intricately it is interwoven with the personal life

history  of  its  supporter  and  the  greater  his  responsibility  not  to  allow  its

structure to contain overly irrational blunders. The most significant index for

a concept’s reality content is the reaction it produces in its socal environment,

whether positive or negative. If a valid idea cannot find an adequate form of

expression, this is an indication of insanity or may induce it. In this context I

am employing the term “insanity” in the correct sense, i.e. the perceiving of a

basic vital problem of life while lacking the ability to withdraw from it, to

solve it, or at least to anchor it in rationality. I was well aware of my own

personal  equation  which  threatened  from  within.  The  suspicion  of  mental

illness did not alarm me, but I was aware that if I did not achieve an adequate

degree of success I might become the victim of an old insecurity acquired in

childhood, namely the sexual guilt feelings which are destroying the world.

  Since I felt firmly convinced that my views were correct and my thoughts

logical, although I was not “adjusted” in the usual way of thinking, I felt the

need  to  seek  confirmation  of  the  correctness  of  my  approach  in  myimmediate  environment.  At  first,  psychoanalysis  appeared  to  yield  the

confirmation I sought. It became evident that this was partially the case but

also that psychoanalysis was unwilling to assume any responsibility for my

viewpoint.  There  was  nothing  to  do  but  accept  this.  Then  I  hoped  the

Communist Party would accept my position. Its platform contained all the

prerequisites  and,  additionally,  some  elements  I  had  extracted  through  a

different  approach.  This  explains  why  I  did  not  set  forth  my  views

independently from the very beginning, free from organizational affiliation,

but  rather  pleaded  my  cause  in  the  name  of  psychoanalysis  or  Marxism.

When the situation grew serious, the Marxists joined with the reactionaries

on this question. For the purpose of agitation, the reactionary world attributes

to both Marxism and psychoanalysis ideas they neither accept factually nor

advocate on an organizational-political level.

  The incorporation of sex-economy into the psychoanalytic and Marxist

movements had been a first important step. Now, between 1934 and 1938, the

second, more decisive step was undertaken, namely the complete dissolution

of ties to both movements. This resulted in a new concept of the relationship

between the people and the state. It included the best elements of both parent

movements but introduced additional insight which contained the solution to

the problem of Fascism.

  The  problem  of  “the  people  and  the  state”  may  be  subdivided  in

accordance with its development:

  1.  Ethnological  proof  that  sex-economy  is  correct,  demonstrated  by

Trobriand society as investigated by Malinowski.

  2.  The  development  of  the  sex-political  (as  opposed  to  sex-reformist)

movement in Germany into the independent Sexpol.

  3. Confirmation of my sociological and sex-political views, through new

problems  raised  by  German  Fascism  and  Russian  Stalinization,  while  no

explanations of these phenomena could be found in the old movements. And

finally,  4.  Recognition  of  the  natural  organization  of  work  as  the  basis  of  a

cultural movement focused on a practical and socially secure affirmation of

sexual happiness for the masses.

  In addition to the sex-economic findings and arguments which may be

allowed to speak for themselves, the manner in which they evolved is also

very important because it proves that nothing could have been “thought up”

or  contrived,  and  that  it  is  not  a  “new  system  of  political  psychology”

originating within my own brain. My theories only came to life when vague

ideas or confused thoughts were suddenly confirmed by events. This caused

them to mature, revealing new aspects which, in turn, found confirmation.

For  example:  the  ethnologist  Malinowski,  unexpectedly  and  with  no

knowledge  of  my  views,  contributed  material  which  could  be  entirely

assimilated into my work; I sensed in 1929 that the Russian sexual revolution

was only a doomed first attempt and I was confirmed in this in 1935 by the

Soviet Union’s total legislative and ideological retrogression; at the first sight

                1
of German SA formations, I felt that they represented the usurped German

revolution in reactionary terms; I was convinced in 1930 that the battle for

the German and Austrian workers’ movement was definitely lost because it

could  not  compete  with  the  opposition’s  mass-psychological  methods.

Political reaction dominates the working masses and those individuals who

are  educated  to  subservience  by  means  of  life-negation.  The  Socialist

movement did not advocate an affirmative life attitude for the masses but

merely  various  basic  economic  prerequisites.  There  was  no  organization

which dared to formulate the sexual core of life-affirmation, and since the

uncomplicated human masses know only their own yearning for happiness

but are not interested in the preconditions, political reactionaries everywhere

were bound to be victorious.

  Their  success  was  based  on  an  ideology  which  made  the  stability  of

society, civilization, and culture directly dependent upon the abnegation of

sexual happiness. I had long since established clinical proof of the opposite.Malinowski’s  ethnological  material  signified  a  major  triumph  for  my

scientific  position  because  the  political  reactionaries  founded  their  line  of

reasoning on the notion of a chaotic, barbarian state of primitive peoples. The

unquestionable conclusion to be drawn from Malinowski’s research was that

the culture of which the philistines dream is not only in accord with sexual

freedom but actually depends on it.

  In  November  1930,  I  received  for  review  an  English  edition  of

Malinowski’s The Sexual Life of Savages. It formed a logical continuation of

his earlier Crime and Custom in Savage Society and Sex and Repression.

Bachofen  had  already  discovered  “free  sexual  life”  and  matriarchy  in

classical  myths.  Morgan  had  deduced,  through  class  relationships  in  the

“primal society” of the Iroquois (among whom he had spent decades), that

brother and sister were originally natural mates. Thus incest, far from being

unnatural, was the very basis of the first human social organizations. It was

self-evident that matriarchy was the natural state of human society after the

first primitive epoch. Engels had based his political theories on this in his

                                              2
renowned Der  Ursprung  der  Familie.  If  one  consolidated  the  theoretical

trend from Bachofen through Morgan and Engels, to Malinowski, a unitary

picture  of  human  development  emerged.  Malinowski  had  succeeded  in

actually  investigating  the  relationships  of  societies  which  were  primarily

matriarchal  and,  through  this,  in  confirming  the  conclusions  of  his

predecessors.  The  fact  that  he  himself  was  unaware  of  this  confirmation

increased the value of his documentation which demonstrates irrefutably that

common  property,  matriarchy,  a  lack  of  rigid  family  organization,  sexual

freedom for children and adolescents, openness and generosity in character

structure, are just as interrelated as private property, patriarchy, asceticism in

children  and  adolescents,  enslavement  of  women,  rigidity  in  family  and

marriage, character armoring, sexual perversion, and mental illness, all of

which are the ever-present symptoms of sexual suppression.

  After studying the English edition, I obtained the book in German andread it closely twice. Most of his delineations were not new to me. From my

experience  with  numerous  youth  groups,  I  was  well  acquainted  with  the

atmosphere Malinowski was describing. Despite all the moral condemnation

voiced in the reports of missionaries and in culturally oriented ethnological

pronouncements, I had long sensed the simple naturalness of sexuality, its

inherent morality, and the depth of natural sexual experience which makes

the very thought of prurience impossible. And yet, I felt an inconsistency in

Malinowski’s portrayal which I was unable to explain at first. In the midst of

Trobriand society, with its obedience to natural law, there lay wedged the

demand for moral asceticism. To the extent that this demand was fulfilled,

sexual  and  moralistic  misery  prevailed  and  was  no  different  from  the

conditions in our own capitalistic system. This sector of Trobriand society

was governed by different laws and ideologies. They could be grouped under

the  heading  of  “moralistic  regulation”  as  opposed  to  “sex-economic  self-

regulation.” There had to be an extremely important reason for both of these

opposing principles to exist in one and the same social organization. Careful

examination of the findings gradually revealed the historical development of

contemporary moralistic compulsion from natural sexual organization. I had

found  traces  of  this  buried  deeply  in  the  neurotic  structures  of  modern

individuals.  The  structure  of  the  “genital  character,”  as  it  is  revealed  in

successful  character  analysis,  proved  to  be  identical  with  the  average

structure of a Trobriand Islander in the sector of society that was still free.

The parallels were so striking that I was skeptical for a long time, fearing I

had fallen victim to a delusion. My doubts were finally overcome only when

Roheim,  a  strong  opponent  of  Malinowski  and  myself,  unknowingly  and

involuntarily, by means of a different ethnological approach, confirmed my

views that the origin of the sexual suppression of youth is socioeconomic. It

has been established through historical development; it is not biologically

given. Thus, it is possible to create a culture with free sexuality for children

and adolescents.  Three  distinct  elements  impressed  me  in  Malinowski’s  findings:  the

demand for sexual abstinence in a certain group of children and adolescents,

the intricate and seemingly purposeless marital system among the tribal clans,

and the rite of dowry.

  Children who had been pledged for a certain connubial relationship were

strictly  prohibited  from  engaging  in  sexual  activity.  Childhood  asceticism

was to make them capable of marriage. Sexually unrestricted children are

unable to meet the strict requirements of lifelong monogamy in its patriarchal

form. The same facts were revealed to me through Barash’s statistical surveys

in the Soviet Union: the earlier adolescents engage in sexual intercourse, the

shorter their marital relationships are later.

  The  connection  between  the  demand  for  sexual  asceticism  and  the

institution of permanent, monogamous marriage was clinically, statistically,

and  ethnologically  verified.  It  now  remained  to  inquire  further  into  the

economic  function  of  the  entire  issue.  From  the  attitudes  of  bourgeois

ideology toward natural sexuality, one could easily infer that it served the

purpose of safeguarding economic interests. The paralysis of will and resolve

in great masses of the population, through continuous suppression of physical

excitation, had already been known to me for a very long time. However, the

relation between this psychic paralysis and the economic interests of those

who benefit from it was still obscured. No capitalist has any idea of why he

advocates “morality for the masses,” nor does the vice squad, the clergy, or

the district attorney. Sexual ideology has assumed its own lawfulness and

become an independent material power separated from its origin. In addition

to this, human beings themselves cling to it and continually reconstruct it due

to  organic  pleasure  anxiety.  Stated  briefly,  the  economic  function  of  the

demand for asceticism cannot be directly grasped in our contemporary social

mechanisms.  Thus  it  was  all  the  more  gratifying  that  the  developing

conditions  of  economic  exploitation  in  the  primitive  communists,  the

Trobriand Islanders, demonstrated this connection directly.  The  Trobrianders  differentiated  between  “good”  and  “bad”  marriages.

Marriage between the daughters of the sisters and the sons of the brothers—

so-called  cross-cousin  marriage—was  considered  “good.”  All  other

marriages were considered “bad,” to a greater or lesser degree. But where did

these  values  originate?  They  were  in  such  crass  disharmony  with  the

Trobrianders’ general psychic behavior that they formed part of the foreign

wedge (described above). The following diagram will illustrate this.
















Chief Chief's sister

Chief's  Chief's Chief's  Chief's
doughter son niece  nephew
Figure 1. The “legal” marriage (I) and the “illegal” marriage (II), according to Malinowski. I = cross-

cousin marriage


  Three basic economic mechanisms resulted. Figure 2 shows the course of

mandatory dowry in a “good” marriage. It was the brother’s obligation to

provide this dowry for his sister’s husband. If her daughter later marries the

brother’s  son,  the  girl’s  family  and  her  brother  in  particular,  namely  the

nephew of the mother’s brother, must again supply a dowry. In this case the

dowry (originally bestowed) returns to the mother’s brother, who—if he is

simultaneously a chief and enjoys the right of polygamy—can consequently

amass  wealth  because  all  the  brothers  of  all  his  wives  must  grant  him  a

dowry.  In  this  light,  the  reason  why  marriages  are  considered  “good”

becomes understandable, as they provide material advantages for the man.

The children chosen to secure these advantages, through later marriage, arecompelled to live ascetically. They are not allowed to engage in sexual play

as are the other children. For the first time in history, negative sex-morality

invades a human society. For the first time, economic interests begin to form

a social ideology and the morality created in the process begins to influence

the children’s structures. Through the blocking of their sexual energy, they

are inwardly and outwardly enslaved.
















Chief's wives Chief's Sister's

G § T

Wives! brothers

      

Chiefs
nephew
Figure 2. How the cross-cousin marriage benefits the chief by returning to him the marriage tribute he

gives his brother-in-law, thus making possible the accumulation of wealth


The  two  diagrams here  demonstrate  the  disadvantages  of  other  types  of

marriage.

  A “bad marriage” brings the greatest economic disadvantages. In this, the

mother’s brother loses wealth on three occasions: First, he must furnish his

son with a dowry to care for his sister from an unrelated clan. Second, he

must supply the dowry for his own sister who marries a man from a different

clan. And finally, he loses the inheritance which passes to his sister’s son.

  Only the “good” cross-cousin marriage avoids all three disadvantages.

The inheritance returns to the nephew and the wealth granted the other clan is

temporary and is returned in full.‘‘‘‘‘‘‘‘‘‘‘

(((((

 

 
Figure 3. Economic disadvantages for the chief if his niece marries whom she will. (Arrows indicate

the flow of the marriage gift)













 
Figure 4. The “bad” marriage (between the chief’s daughter and the chief’s nephew). The fortunes of

the chief’s sons, too, leave the chief’s line


  The institution of the marriage tribute, from the clan of the wife and her

family  to  her  husband,  soon  proved  the  key  to  understanding  the  most

important questions of aboriginal society. I am only reporting results. For

further information the reader is referred to the explanations in The Invasion

of Compulsory Sex-Morality.

  A survey of ethnological literature showed dowry, and the cross-cousin

marriage as well, to be generally accepted phenomena in primitive societies.

After difficult calculations I succeeded in constructing a diagram based on

the research of Lewis Morgan. In this, the Iroquois’s intricate marital system

was  logically  analyzed  as  nothing  more  than  a  complex  of  “cross-cousin

marriages.” Iroquois organization was already completely patriarchal. Afterhis return from Australia, I told Roheim of my little discovery. He replied

that it was “nothing new,” for this marital system had existed in Australia as

well. But worthy Roheim did not realize that he had made an unguarded

statement; he did not grasp the significance of these facts. If, indeed, a dowry

paid  by  the  brother  to  the  sister’s  husband  was  a  generally  accepted

phenomenon,  then  I  was  correct  in  assuming  that  this  was the  social

mechanism responsible for transforming matriarchy into patriarchy. Several

facts were revealed simultaneously:

  1. Dowry granted the sister is an expression of the duty to provide for her.

This corresponds to the fact that in the naturally organized primal hordes

brother and sister were mates and produced children. Logically, the sister’s

son (i.e. nephew) was the legal heir of her brother. There was certainly no

one else to compete with him.

  2.  The  subdivision  of  matriarchal  tribes  into  clans,  with  intermarriage

between  clans  and  prohibition  of  marriage  within  clans,  is  a  universal

phenomenon  of  primitive  society.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  dowry

flows from one clan to another within the tribe. The division into clans (each

with its own history of rituals and heritage) could only be interpreted as a

manifestation  of  a  previous  merger,  into  one  tribe,  of  several  naturally

organized hordes with an incest system (it could not be otherwise). The later

clans are the original hordes, each traceable to one primal mother. This led to

the inevitable hypothesis that the prohibition of sexual intercourse between

brother and sister and the institution of interclan marriage (i.e. between the

primal hordes) occurred with the unification of different hordes who were

originally hostile and later became friendly. Therefore, the origin of the incest

taboo was social, and a problem of primitive society found a sociological

solution  which,  until  then,  had  been  interpreted  biologically  or

psychologically. Attempts had been made to explain the origin of the incest

taboo as an instinct for “natural selection” (Engels), or as guilt following

primal patricide (Freud). After the merger of the hordes, the brother still hadto support his sister but had to forgo a sexual partnership with her.

  3.  The  dowry  was  not  produced  as  a  necessity,  but  already  had  the

character of a commodity. It was the surplus which the brother and his family

had to produce over and above their vital needs. In this manner, the marriage

tribute made the brother and his clan economically dependent upon the clan

of his sister’s husband. Since the first clan to subjugate another retained its

advantage in the form of a chieftainship, and since this chief, in turn, was

allowed to “marry” several women, a material preponderance was created,

first in the clan and subsequently in the family of the chief, in contrast to the

rest of the tribe. This forced the lower clans, over the course of centuries, to

be  subject  to  the  upper  clans,  especially  to  the  chief’s  family.  The  chief

simply had to name his son as his heir, instead of his nephew, at a certain

level of his material dominance, and the entire organization automatically

switched  from  a  matriarchal  to  a  patriarchal  system.  It  then  became  less

attractive, and even a burden, to care for the nephew (the sister’s son) if he

passed the wealth to a different clan. The cross-cousin marriage led to the

legal establishment of a condition long present in dowry practices in tribes

subdivided into clans. The son now became the heir! The road from chief of a

matriarchal  tribe—who  was  not  vested  with  any  particular  powers—to  a

patriarch in a patriarchal tribe—with exclusive power over all members of the

tribe—and from there to a “prince” or “king” of a tribe or “nation,” is only a

sequence of developmental steps clearly described by Engels in his book on

the origin of the family.

  A  naturally  organized,  or  matriarchal  society,  is  still  free  of  sexual

negation. During the transition to patriarchy, there arises in society a sexually

moralistic sector which proceeds to encompass all of society when patriarchy

has  been  completely  established.  Whereas  the  family  was  previously  an

economic unit within a clan, and subject to it, it now gains superiority over

the blood relationships in the clan, which finally leads to the disappearance of

the clan altogether. From the temporary marriage for mating purposes, whichcharacterizes matriarchy, monogamous permanent marriage then develops.

This  is  firmly  anchored  in  economic  laws,  social  mechanisms,  and  moral

precepts.

  The transition from free clan society to the bondage of family society also

changes human character. A society just a few kilometers from the Trobriand

Islands already had strict family organization. In contrast to the openhearted

and candid Trobrianders, these people were shy, withdrawn, and plagued by

neurosis  and  perversion.  This  was  absent  among  the  Trobrianders,  who

despised masturbation and could not understand homosexuality.

  Thus  the  Western  European  traders  and  missionaries  who  invaded  the

primitive  societies  encountered  natural  processes  which  they  could  put  to

their own use. It was so very simple to barter with worthless glass beads in

exchange  for  valuable  natural  products  because  genitally  structured

aborigines act in good faith and are naïvely decent; they have no word for

thievery, while hospitality almost literally flows in their veins. This type of

character  structure  cannot  help  posing  a  provocation  for  the  degenerate,

corrupt,  and  impotent  white  trader.  Exploitation  soon  begins,  while  the

missionaries finish off the job by thrashing the children for their innocuous

sexual games and sowing the seeds of psychic distress and compulsion until

the  soil  has  been  prepared  for  colonization.  There  is  good  reason  for

missionaries  always  constituting  the  advance  guard  of  colonial  armies.

Nowhere  is  the  function  of  compulsory  sex-morality  as  clear  as  in  this

example.  Aboriginal  peoples  are  becoming  extinct.  In  earlier  days,  they

inspired  great  romantic  yearnings  in  white  men,  but  today  we  record  the

service they rendered humanity through their demonstration of the laws of

natural morality and dignity. There is no room here for cheap romanticism. It

must  be  replaced  by  the  struggle  for  human  organization  on  a  higher

technological level, a structure which will never allow itself to forget the

process  of  humanization.  This  new  organization  will  rectify  the

misdevelopment of several thousand years and allow us to view the picture ofa lecherous, obese, and brutal colonialist, himself a victim of our disgraceful

culture, as the nightmare it is.

    Ethnological proof of sex-economic regulation of sexual life gave me as

much confidence in the conclusions I had drawn from clinical experience as

did  sex-political  work  with  youth.  Clinically,  sociologically,  and  also

ethnologically, I now dared to form, in broad strokes, a picture of the genesis

of sexual forms of existence.

  First,  it  was  necessary  to  differentiate  clearly  between individual  and

social sex-economy. We now know that regulation of sexual energy in the

organism of a single individual depends upon his degree of orgastic potency.

This, however, is in turn determined by the social organization of sexual life.

Originally, individual and social sexual organization did not conflict; on the

contrary, the society of primitive peoples took great care to assure sexual

happiness. Affirmation of sexuality prevailed, and not merely tolerance. With

the invasion of compulsory sex-morality, however, this affirmation shifted

rapidly to sexual negation, and in this way sexual culture embarked on the

path to decay. Restraint of natural sexual pleasure created all the phenomena

currently termed “sexuality”—neurosis, perversion, enslavement of women

and  children,  and  antisocial  sexual  attitudes—and  these  can  only  be

considered  worthy  of  condemnation.  The  process  of  sexual  suppression,

which was socially, not biologically, founded, introduced the second social

process,  which  we  have  already  examined,  i.e.  the  division  of  a  united,

homogeneous society into two classes, the owners of the means of production

and the owners of work-power. This ushered in progressive concentration of

social power in the hands of the few, such as we encounter in the princes of

antiquity and the Middle Ages. Class division maintained and strengthened

sexual suppression once again. With the Christian era, sexual suppression

was organized in a special form.

  In the first social revolution of the twentieth century, which took place in

Russia, for the first time a shift from sexual negation to affirmation could beobserved.  Although  the  process  was  discontinued  after  several  years,  this

does not alter the fact that a social movement commenced which represented

the  exact  opposite  of  the  shift  in  the  other  direction  that  occurred  at  the

inception of the patriarchal system.

  The  principles  of  economy,  namely  the  system  of  satisfaction  of  vital

material needs, had been investigated by Marx. There existed, however, no

economy of sexual energy because no social movement had yet raised this

question. The Russian Revolution was the first social upheaval to broach the

question of social sex-economy. Primarily, this took the form of legislation,

but numerous obscure issues remained. The problem appeared to me to be

divided into three parts:

  1. What is the natural metabolism of sexual energy?

  2. What is the specific structure of society? Does it correspond to, or

contradict, a sex-economic system of sexuality?

  3. Which obstacles do conservative ideologies and economic difficulties

place in the path of a shift from sexual disorder to sexual order?

  The question of sexuality now came forth from the sphere of privacy,

where it had led a pitiful existence despite the efforts of various sexologists,

and  moved  into  the  realm  of  the  full-fledged  issues  of  social  politics,

assuming a position of primary importance alongside the economic questions.

It  belonged  neither  to  the  “superstructure,”  as  the  Marxists  contended  in

consistent  misunderstanding,  nor  to  the  “conditions  of  production,”  i.e.

“production  of  progeny,”  as  Engels  had  formulated  it  from  an  economic

perspective. When sexual energy was differentiated from the forms in which

it functioned and these, in turn, were separated from human structure and

ideologies  regarding  sex,  the  following  facts  became  evident: Human

structure is determined by the way the various manifestations of a social

organization at any given time influence the biologically determined sexual

energy. Structures thus formed, produced by the social process, themselves

reproduce  moralistic  views  of  sexuality,  whence  spring  all  concepts  of“good” and “bad.” All ethics are basically anti-sexual. This claim has nothing

to  do  with  anarchism.  Sex-economically  organized  human  structure  will

necessarily  develop  essentially  different  views  on  sex  than  the  ravaged

human structure which is completely unaware of its sexual energy. To prove

its existence justified, the reproduced, anti-sexual morality refers to factors

which  are  responsible  for  its  origin,  namely  the  unnatural,  pathologically

distorted sexual expressions of patriarchically educated individuals. Sexual

suppression  preceded  compulsory  sex-morality,  calling  it  into  existence.

Likewise,  sex-morality  preceded  that  which  it  attempts  to  suppress,  the

secondary drives, and ushered in sexual disorder. For this reason, the removal

of moralistic regulation of sexuality, and its gradual replacement by natural

regulation,  is  also  the  first  prerequisite  for  achieving  the  goal  which

compulsory sex-morality justifiably seeks to attain, namely the removal of

antisocial sexuality and perversion, sexual violence and degradation.

  I soon discovered that I meant something different by “sexuality” than the

clergy with whom I had to debate. They meant that which is visible and

active today, i.e. sick sexuality, whereas I meant that which lies obscured in

the  depths  of  the  human  organism.  I  was  in  agreement  with  the  clergy’s

condemnation of current sexual manifestations, but did not believe, for one

moment, that they would agree with me in affirming natural manifestations of

sexuality. [This began to change in the United States around 1950.]

  At this point, I was able to integrate the patriarchal-capitalistic mode of

sexual regulation into the social process as a whole. Allow me to summarize

what is already known:

  Sexual suppression supports the power of the Church, which has sunk

very deep roots into the exploited masses by means of sexual anxiety and

guilt. It is also the most important prerequisite for contemporary family and

marital structures, which require the atrophy of sexuality for their further

existence. At the same time, however, a yearning for sexual satisfaction is

created and reflected in those sexual disturbances and perversions which, inturn, undermine marriages and families.

  Sexual  suppression  engenders  timidity  toward  authority  and  binds

children to their parents. This results in adult subservience to state authority

and to capitalistic exploitation. [Soviet Russia is a capitalistic, monopolistic

state.]

  It  paralyzes  the  intellectual  critical  powers  of  the  oppressed  masses

because it consumes the greater part of biological energy.

  Finally,  it  paralyzes  the  resolute  development  of  creative  forces  and

renders impossible the achievement of all aspirations for human freedom.

  In this way, the prevailing economic system (in which single individuals

can easily rule entire masses) becomes rooted in the psychic structures of the

oppressed themselves.  When  I  became  aware  of  this,  I  had  no  idea  how

thoroughly Hitler’s dictatorship [and the developments in Russia] would bear

out my statement.

  All  these  interrelationships  led  naturally  to  the  sex-political  activities

which I then set into motion in Germany. This had to be strictly differentiated

from  the  older  sexual-reform  movements,  which  were  apolitical.  The

objective was the integration of the struggle for sexual emancipation into the

general struggle for freedom. Furthermore, it was to gather the experiences of

the vital struggle in the various practical efforts at that time and constantly

readapt  them  to  the  situation.  And  finally  it  was  to  combat  all  factions,

whether of the left or the right, which opposed conscious guidance of the

process of sexual liberation. [My work was always directed forward.]

  However, the scientific foundation was still much too inadequate, despite

the  copious  insight  already  gained.  It  was  not  yet  clear  how  deeply,  and

above all in what manner, human pleasure anxiety is rooted. This would,

necessarily, hamper work on the solution, regardless of the intense positive

yearning I encountered everywhere. The path from yearning to fulfillment is

a long and arduous one. I also felt strongly that I had no proper answer for the

arguments and misdeeds of that “school” which claimed to be the “science ofgenetics.” Hitler’s racial nonsense was already in the air, and although the

Socialists’ arguments against it were logical, the issue had no connection

with  logic  and  even  less  with  phrenology.  However,  I  could  quiet  my

political  conscience;  for  the  moment,  there  was  sufficient,  well-founded

experience to set the movement on a solid scientific basis. It would have been

a mistake to strive for too much at once.

  Work in Germany did not proceed according to carefully calculated plans

and  objectives.  The  field  was  too  broad  for  that,  and  too  little  practical

experience had been gained. I could rely on the fact that sex-politics would

be received as before, at every step of the way, so there was no need to

“agitate” for it or to resort to indoctrination. It soon became evident that

social conditions and the errors of Socialist Party politics themselves elicited

the correct answer. It will be the task of the following chapters to elucidate

this.                                            6




                      Everyone Is “Enraptured”





                                    (1930–33)



In  1933  I  was  denounced  by  the  Communist  Party,  and  in  1934  I  was

expelled  from  the  International  Psychoanalytic  Association.  [It  should  be

noted that both organizations had already ceased to exist in Germany.] These

were  catastrophes  which  threatened  my  personal,  professional,  and  social

existence and, additionally, called into question the further development of

sex-economy. Suddenly I found myself in a vacuum, so to speak, far removed

from  the  life  of  the  people.  The  slanderous  attitude  of  the  Socialists,

Communists,  and  psychoanalysts,  which  was  resolutely  directed  toward

destroying  my  work  and  existence,  contradicted  in  a  peculiar  manner  the

recognition  which  the  same  individuals  and  organizations  had  previously

given to my theories and achievements. When I first came to Berlin, in 1930,

I  was  still  unaware  of  what  was  in  store  for  me,  despite  earlier  bad

experiences in Vienna. Only after all organizational ties were broken did I

have enough leisure time to allow people’s attitudes to affect me. Through

this, I learned my best lessons about politics. Much would have developed

differently had I possessed the necessary foresight at the time. Each change in

my  scientific  position  exacted  unavoidable  and  costly  sacrifices.  They

represented indispensable labor pains at the birth of crucial knowledge about

mass psychology, and also functioned to produce the iron resolve necessaryfor me to carry on: never to yield to the pressure of erroneous public opinion.

  In  Berlin,  my  first  close  affiliation  with  German  psychoanalysts  was

established.  They  were  far  more  progressive  on  social  issues  than  the

Viennese.  The  young  psychoanalysts  could  breathe  more  freely,  and  my

orgasm theory was better received. Marxist sociology was little discussed

systematically. Among the analysts, Fromm was the only one considered a

Marxist sociologist. At the time, he was publishing his Analysis of the Christ

Dogma, an exceptionally valuable work, although unrelated to either sex-

economic issues or actual politics. In an extensive conversation which we had

shortly  after  my  arrival  in  Berlin,  Fromm  listened  to  my  sex-economic

interpretation and said he realized that only the concept of sexual energy was

adequate to explain mass-psychological dynamics. For example, it is true that

the mental conception of father and mother was the central content of every

religion. Indeed, the sociological character of a religion could be viewed only

in the context of its own time. However, the fact that people produce and

need  religious  mysticism  at  all  would  remain  an  enigma  without  the

knowledge of sex-economy. Above all, the emotional content of religious

experience, as well as the doctrines of original sin and asceticism, was in

need of interpretation from the standpoint of sexual energy.

  In my apartment on Schwäbische Strasse, I expounded my basic views to

three  young  analysts,  Erich  Fromm,  Barbara  Lantos,  and  Otto  Fenichel,

emphasizing especially the method of integrating psychoanalytic theory into

Marxist  sociology.  I  often  spent  hours  discussing  the  basic  psychological

principles of the social movement with Fenichel, whom I had met before in

Vienna.  He  was  not  a  member  of  any  party,  had  read  little  sociological

literature, and had never participated in a street demonstration or in social

field work. I understood his desire to keep away from this, and he understood

and  accepted  my  dialectical-materialistic  criticism  of  psychoanalysis.  He

gladly  agreed  to  the  proposal  that  he  help  me  organize  the  younger

psychoanalysts for practical social work. He did this for approximately twoyears,  and  since  I  soon  had  a  large  work  load  outside  the  professional

organization, I was glad to leave it in his hands. I was not yet aware of the

trap I had set for myself in doing so. Everything appeared to be in order. Only

two things displeased me slightly: first, his disinclination to participate in

practical social work, which is essential for a true understanding of people,

and  second,  his  complete  lack  of  comprehension  of  the  irreconcilable

contradiction  between  materialistic  dialectics,  [my  embryonic

                1
functionalism,] and abstract logic. Siegfried Bernfeld, who was a Socialist

and considered himself a theoretical Marxist, occasionally took part in our

discussions. He, too, did not understand the reality of the dialectic process.

He felt that dialectical materialism was just one mode of thinking, and that

abstract logic was another. I soon gave up trying to convince them.

  [SO: In Germany, at that time, Marxism held an academic position similar

to “Deweyism” in the United States. Marxism was not yet so badly soiled by

its confusion with plain murder of the Dzhugashvili type. The mass murders

in the process of the Russian collectivization of farming were just ahead of

us.  So  were  the  infamous  trials  in  Moscow,  the  revocation  of  sexual

legislation, and the uniformed, bemedaled marshals of the U.S.S.R.

  The fight against the red Fascist political plague in the United States in

the  1950’s  suffered  gravely  from  several  gaps  in  understanding  the

development of red Fascism and Fascism in general from democratic freedom

organizations in the lower strata of the population. Until about 1932, at least

in  the  Central  European  and  Western  European  countries,  no  Communist

Party member, even if very rabid, would have thought seriously of seizing the

government  of  a  country  by  force  against  the  will  of  the  majority  of  its

citizens.  Such  tendencies  or  actions  were  disclaimed  in  all  Socialist  or

Communist circles as “Putsch.” Whenever such Putsch attempts were made

by small and insignificant political groups, the Socialists and Communists

would disassociate themselves completely from them. The policy always was

to  attain  power  in  society  by  majority  vote  in  Parliament.  This  was  theoriginal idea of the democratic Communist movement. Lenin’s distribution of

land to the Russian peasants, which so sharply differed from the later Stalinist

collectivization and nationalization of the agricultural enterprises by force,

was a clear-cut manifestation of this policy.

  In sharp contradistinction to this democratic Communism with its rule

from below, e.g. its elections instead of the appointment of functionaries, etc.,

stands  red  Fascism,  which  has  turned  every  democratic  feature  of

Communism into its opposite:

    Sneaking into power by way of terrorism on the part of a minority.

    Sneaking into power through conspiracy and underhanded maneuvering

instead of by open public choice.

  Using force, the strength of the Communist Party, and reliance on the

military power of Russia, which by 1936 was a clear-cut, imperialist state

having only one thing in common with democratic Communism: the reliance

on the people’s hope for a better existence. The red Fascists exploited this

hope to the nth degree and abused it as never before in history.

  These  distinctions  are  sharp  as  well  as  indispensable  for  a  successful

conquest, with the fewest possible victims, of the red Fascist political plague.

The  inner  dynamics  of  this  change  from  democratic  Communism  to  red

Fascism is the reluctance and inability of the people to govern their own

lives.]

  The Association of Socialist Physicians invited me to give a lecture on

my special field, the prophylaxis of neurosis. In the presence of two hundred

physicians  and  students,  I  was  able  to  explain  successfully  the  social

objectives  of  serious,  psychoanalytic  work.  They  responded  with  great

understanding and even enthusiasm.

  Socialist  and  Communist  student  groups  held  a  mass  meeting  on  the

theme “The Fiasco of Bourgeois Morality.” The Fascist student organization

                                                                                          2
was  also  represented  as  well  as  a  company  of  the  Rotfrontkämpferbund.

After the lecture I had to answer numerous questions of nationalist-orientedstudents,  especially  on  such  issues  as  “self-control,”  “dignity,”  “loyalty,”

“character,” etc. The atmosphere was good and the discussion continued until

5 a.m. Communists, Socialists, and Fascists discussed the issues heatedly, but

never violently. The proletarian participants seemed especially well satisfied

                                                                                    3
because, as I left at 1 a.m., they called out loudly, “Kräftige Rotfront!” three

times.  This  was  usually  not  customary,  especially  following  intellectually

oriented lectures.

                                                          4
  The Marxist Workers’ University (MASCH), held courses on “Marxism

and Psychology” and “Sexology.” In the spring semester of 1931, I gave a

course in a school on Gärtnerstrasse, and again in the fall. Attendance rose

with each lecture, peaking in the sexology course at 250 individuals from all

levels of society. The first course, which was more difficult, was attended by

approximately 80 to 100—political functionaries, students, teachers, etc. My

writings  were  distributed  throughout  the  country  by  the  MASCH

organization.

  After a few weeks, I was speaking at meetings on an average of twice a

week. These lectures were highly instructive for me, because I not only felt

constrained to present my material in simple terms but also had to learn to

answer  the  numerous,  diverse  questions  and  objections  correctly.  German

youth demanded a great deal, above all absolute clarity and simplicity. In

these meetings, cultural-political aspects of the subject began to dominate the

discussion more and more. Economic policy, as it is commonly discussed,

receded, only to return in a new and different form. Statistics were used for

illustration only and questions were posed in a more personal manner, e.g.

“Are the housing-project designs sufficiently advanced to meet the hygienic

needs of the masses as quickly and easily as possible?” The fact that the

system  of  private  ownership  of  houses  would  never  allow  for  hygienic

conditions was too self-evident to require special emphasis. “Will not the

already impaired structures of the majority of today’s teachers and those in

charge  of  small  children  oppose  the  aims  of  sexually  affirmative  childeducation?” “How should the distribution of goods be organized to ensure a

firm basis for a steady rise in the cultural level of the working masses?” We

were not speaking of the “principles of socialization.” These principles were

meant to fulfill a definite purpose, without which they were worthless. They

represented the means of ensuring happiness for all who create social values!

We approached economic issues from the standpoint of human needs and not,

as did the Marxist economists, from historical or economic theory, which was

of no interest to the masses. Such encounters called for scrupulous personal

honesty. Any hedging or pompous authoritarianism brought a speedy and

blunt rebuttal. A young worker once asked me why I was devoting myself to

this social work in the first place, when I occupied a good social position,

earned  a  good  living,  and  had  a  successful  career!  Something  had  to  be

wrong with that picture. He accused me of trying to make sure of a place for

myself  after  the  social  revolution.  I  could  only  tell  him  what  I  felt:

Personally, I really do not need to do this, but I am learning a great deal of

value  for  my  scientific  work.  “Then  we  are  just  your  guinea  pigs!,”  he

quipped. To be quite frank, I continued, when I am eating a ham sandwich

with  butter,  it  spoils  my  pleasure  to  have  hungry,  grimly  envious  people

watching me. Since the economy is rich enough for everyone, or could be if it

did not serve life-destroying purposes such as war, I work gladly to make it

possible for everyone to have his own “ham sandwich.” Someone said, “That

is a primitive idea of class-conscious Socialism.” Then from somewhere in

the  audience  came  the  response,  “You  know  where  you  can  put  your

historical Socialism! First let’s take care of ourselves. Then your Socialism is

more likely to come than if you just keep shooting your mouth off all the

time!” That was the tone, and gradually, from this, my deep convictions arose

regarding  correct  attitudes  toward  social  matters.  It  was  only  after  the

collapse,  in  1933,  that  I  could  consolidate  them  into  a  larger  framework:

Necessities first, economic theories later. Develop social views from practical

fulfillment of human needs instead of abusing human needs for purposes ofpolitical power.

  In  practical  work  among  the  uneducated,  and  usually  politically

disinterested,  members  of  these  organizations,  only  one  type  of  approach

could possibly lead to success, namely, gaining human confidence through

personal warmth, avoiding all theorizing, and awakening an awareness of

personal  needs,  whether  large  or  small.  Once  this  was  accomplished,

socialistic objectives became a foregone conclusion. From the very beginning

I recognized the uselessness of the political brochures of party organizations.

I  comforted  myself,  as  did  many  others,  with  the  hope  that  through  the

personal approach we would gradually succeed in bringing the lowly party

members to the high political levels at which the parties themselves were

operating. The illusion was shattered completely by the catastrophe which

occurred two years later. Viewed in today’s light, the social efforts of that

period seem absolutely ludicrous. The party functionaries actually tried to

“educate” people through highly political speeches and economic reports. I

cannot recall a single group meeting where the members did not have to fight

off drowsiness. And these were confirmed Communists. How far removed

from this kind of living and thinking must the masses have been!

  I remember one enormous meeting in a sports stadium where Thälmann

addressed about twenty thousand industrial and white-collar workers. Shortly

before,  there  had  been  fatalities  at  a  demonstration.  The  atmosphere  was

highly charged. The opening by the flag bearers was impressive. Tensely, we

waited  for  the  address.  Thälmann  deflated  our  high  spirits  within  half  an

hour; he nullified them by outlining the complicated budget of the German

bourgeoisie. It was horrible. The effect of this pseudo-scientific “education to

class-consciousness”  with  the  aid  of  high-flown  politics  was  particularly

catastrophic in the youth organizations. [It was always astonishing to witness

the respect paid by intellectuals and the bourgeoisie to these weak and empty,

fraudulent mass deceptions.]

  I concentrated on visiting the most typical youth gatherings—just to listenin and get the feel of them. In the Communist youth cells, there was strict

organizational formality; among the Fichte sport groups, it was somewhat

better.  The  youths,  accustomed  to  discipline,  bravely  bore  the  hour-long

report  to  show  their  goodwill.  The  youth  leaders  had  some  contact  with

working  youth  on  a  broader  scale,  but  only  on  the  days  of  large

demonstrations. These leaders were constantly tormenting themselves with

the question of how to “approach” youth. They distributed brochures and

leaflets from house to house. They painted slogans in red on walls and on

paved streets at night, risking the danger of arrest. It was all in vain; the youth

stayed  away  and  in  the  youth  groups  themselves  there  was  a  perpetual

turnover of members and functionaries. For a long time, I participated in the

enlistment efforts. The lack of success with this manner of recruiting, and

even its harmfulness, made an indelible impression on me. Recruiting was

usually done on Sunday, even in the most beautiful weather. This reflected

the ideology of heroic self-denial. A Communist functionary could have no

private life. Officially, there were no sexual issues. In private, an attitude of

camaraderie prevailed, with no smug narrow-mindedness. However, strictly

ascetic attitudes were also common, and since the sex-political platform of

Communist youth was not officially represented, the dried-up ascetics of the

“class struggle” could rule the field. In discussions on socialistic morality,

there was much talk of new moral attitudes but no mention of the thousands

of concrete situations one encounters in daily life. There were no brochures

on sex-politics for mass propaganda, only fancy ones on political economics

and  theory,  e.g.  “the  position  of  the  worker  under  capitalism,”  “plant

socialization in the Soviet Union,” “women in industry,” etc. With a stack of

such brochures they went from door to door, handed them out, and tried, if at

all  possible,  to  strike  up  a  conversation  and  provide  information  on  the

distress of the masses. Communist voters who were known within the groups

bought the brochures. Social Democrats furiously slammed their doors at the

sight of a Communist brochure, and the indifferent brusquely declined. Saleswere poor and depressing; soliciting in rural areas had no less deplorable

results. Brochures for these areas were loaded with figures and suggestions

for  collectivization  based  on  the  Russian  model.  Once,  I  was  selected  to

speak to a meeting of rural workers and farmers just outside Berlin. I was

well acquainted with Russian collectivism and the Soviet agricultural system.

I also succeeded in presenting the topic well. When it was over, there was not

a single question asked pertaining to the topic, not one positive contribution.

Several farmers did ask, however, what would happen to the Church in the

event of revolution!

  My  first  deep  impression  of  the  gap  between  politics  and  practical

knowledge was gained while soliciting farmers. A functionary had described

the advantages of Soviet agricultural collectivization very well, but received

an embarrassingly negative response. One farmer, who had been listening

quietly,  took  a  handful  of  grain  out  of  his  pocket,  held  it  under  the

functionary’s nose, and asked him, “What is this?” The functionary had no

idea. Recruiting was over for the day.

  For rural recruiting, divisions of the Rotfrontkämpferbund were also sent

out and they were often quite impressive with their singing and their military

appearance.  They  aroused  curiosity,  but  the  feeble  curiosity  was

overwhelmed by a deep-seated fear of the military. The National Socialists

were more successful in this because they had their own local groups in the

villages; also, they were far more brutal, and in addition clearly represented

the reactionary rural ideology, especially the National Socialist “Family and

Fatherland” ideology. The latter was so conspicuous that I was amazed at

how little attention our people paid it.

  In rural political meetings, one saw that the Communist, Social Democrat,

and National Socialist speakers all belonged to the same social class and were

frequently even in the same trade. I wondered how this could be possible. It

was not generally noticed that farmers were called “revolutionary” when they

favored  the  Communists,  “reformists”  when  they  spoke  up  for  the  SocialDemocrats, and “reactionaries” when they leaned toward National Socialism.

Any opinion (and most of them changed opinions rapidly) was sufficient to

classify the person advocating it. But how was it possible for individuals at

the same social level to be split into such different political factions, all of

which were advocated with equal zeal?

    Demonstrations  in  Berlin  were  much  more  tightly  organized  than  in

Vienna.  One  marched  in  military  formation  and  sang  revolutionary  songs

lustily.  Attempts  were  made  to  attract  people’s  attention  by  shouting

“Rotfront!”  or  some  other  slogan.  However,  the  populace  had  grown

accustomed to this. Since I participated in all the larger demonstrations, I was

able to see that they served the purpose of encouraging the demonstrators

rather than gaining the favor of the people. Each one showed his own courage

and  even  his  honest  resolution  to  die  for  the  cause,  but  the  masses  were

indifferent. A few thousand demonstrators made no particular impression in a

city like Berlin. Also, defamation through the expression “Communist” had

its effect.

  The large May Day demonstrations were better. The Communist Party of

Germany  was  able  to  muster  about  eighty  to  a  hundred  thousand  at  the

Lustgarten, and the Socialist Party somewhat more. The routes which the

demonstration march was allowed to take were strictly marked. The police

were tense. On May 1, 1931, I volunteered for monitor duty. The monitors

wore identifying red armbands and were assigned the task of flanking the

marching columns and protecting them from police attacks. My troop and I

accompanied a children’s column. The children simply sang forth happily

and brightly without considering whether this was permitted or not. Some

songs were strictly prohibited, such as “Red Wedding” by Erich Weinert.

When this song rang out, dozens of policemen suddenly sprang from their

cars  and  struck  blindly  into  the  children’s  group.  At  the  last  minute,  we

succeeded in locking arms so tightly that all the police were not able to break

through. We tried to talk with them. I was amazed at the machine-like qualityof these police assaults. On such occasions, I repeatedly had the impression

that  an  automatic  reaction  functioned,  in  place  of  living  thoughts  and

feelings: Forbidden song—reach for the club!

  The gun of each policeman hung loosely in its holster. There was hardly a

meeting at which shots were not fired. I never saw the participants at the

meetings attack the police, although it did indeed happen that Socialist youths

called them ugly names. I thought I noticed that the police grew nervous

when referred to as “capitalist lackeys.” Still, there were frequent clashes

when a typically Prussian police lieutenant began to order his men around

just  to  flaunt  his  power.  The  mounted  police  took  particular  pleasure  in

demonstrating its official authority by riding through a crowd and demanding

that  the  people  move  aside.  Again  and  again,  this  emphasis  on  official

authority and the training of its subordinates! These were provocative actions

and  the  participants  of  the  meetings  were  conscious  of  them  to  no  small

degree.

  Arrogant police lieutenants were greatly despised, but hate for their troops

was no less intense. No one gave thought to the fact that they were the sons

of workers and farmers. They fired their weapons and used their clubs and

therefore they were hated. Again, it was not capitalists versus workers, but

rather uniformed workers versus workers out of uniform.

  Whereas  practical  social  work  in  Vienna  had  already  provided  the

foundation  for  an  empirical  mass  psychology,  Berlin  now  offered  me

splendid opportunities, not only to define my concepts more precisely, but

also to complete their restructuring in my personal thoughts and feelings. The

atmosphere of sterile academic book knowledge finally became unbearable. It

was even more painful when encountered in the midst of organizations whose

goal it was to establish a new foundation for German society. I was asked to

join the circle responsible for the scientific organization of the party, headed

at  the  time  by  Karl  August  Wittfogel,  a  clever  and  academically  very

productive man. There were several economists and a great many (too many)philosophers. In the discussions, a certain fear of expressing one’s thoughts

candidly was evident. There was disagreement, but always within the strict

intellectual framework demanded by the party. It was dangerous to overstep

the “party line.” The party was indeed capable of indicating a general trend of

thought,  but  it  could  do  no  more.  There  could  not  be  a  party  answer  to

specialized  questions  in  all  instances.  This  depended  entirely  upon  the

presiding  functionary.  If  he  was  not  opposed  to  psychology,  then  the

problems of psychology in the socialistic movement could be discussed under

his tenure. A different functionary might have been uninformed in this field

and  consequently  hostile  to  it,  as  though  psychology  played  no  role  in

politics. I soon understood that this attitude was not merely stubborn narrow-

mindedness. If a people’s party is confronted with issues such as those that

rocked  Germany  at  the  time,  and  does  not  have  sufficient  independent

scientific minds and the necessary free thinkers at its disposal, and if the few

intellectually  trained  individuals  waste  their  mental  powers  in  trivial

academic issues while the masses are clamoring for answers that no one can

supply,  it  is  understandable  that  a  small  group  of  pioneers  fighting  for  a

difficult  cause  would  cling  to  a  “party  line”  as  they  would  to  a  life  raft.

Obviously,  however,  one  can  never  learn  to  swim  freely  in  this  way.

Therefore  it  would  appear  better  to  solve  a  small  number  of  problems

reasonably  well  than  to  allow  clear  thinking  to  fall  prey  to  intellectual

acrobatics. I consciously used the word “appear,” because without serious

and  extensively  organized,  radically  inclined  scientific  research,  the

thousands of problems which a people’s movement poses cannot be properly

mastered. Although this must be admitted, the manner in which the party

attempted to overcome its difficulties could only lead to ruin. It did not have

a choice between a “line” and intellectual acrobatics, but had the task of

allowing the masses themselves to ask the questions. The correct answers

would then have been found, because the honest young scientifically trained

minds would have come forth, joined the movement, and perhaps saved itfrom destruction. The party did not allow the masses to speak, and that was

the reason it disintegrated. I experienced its downfall, and the reason for it,

step by step, over the course of two and a half years. During the struggle

against  this  fear  of  the  masses,  I  evolved  not  only  my  subsequent Mass

Psychology  of  Fascism,  but  also  many  of  the  practical  organizational

principles which I am presenting to the world only now, many years later.

  In the academic section of the party, I encountered again all the worst

qualities of academicism, only this time glorified as “revolutionary.” There

was  one  philosopher,  Kurt  Sauerland,  who  later  published  a  book  on

“dialectical  materialism.”  In  it  he  represented  Stalin  as  the  greatest

contemporary philosopher. This individual contaminated and dominated the

entire party intelligentsia with dogmas which he claimed were dialectical-

materialistic philosophy. In his ignorance, he actually confused the slogans of

the  day  with  the  results  of  scientific  research.  Several  young  economists

struck upon the idea of visually portraying the Marxist value theory, thus

making it accessible to the uneducated. I was among those to preview the

film; we found it splendid. But the top-level philosophers would not allow it

to  be  shown  in  public  (although  the  rank  and  file  praised  it)  because  it

supposedly contradicted some word, here or there, in Marx’s theory. In such

“top level” discussions, one could observe, in action, all the irrationalisms

which distort people. Uprooted individuals heatedly gave full vent to their

conceit, but always within the framework of the “party line,” which they

never overstepped. Frequently this was seriously discussed among friends of

mine.  With  horror  we  watched  all  initiative  being  suffocated.  My  friend

Neugebauer, the parliamentary delegate of the Communist faction, a brilliant,

scientifically trained sociologist and a decent fellow, once remarked, “What

shall we do? Actually, they should be thrown out, but will those who replace

them be any better? What we lack is trained intelligentsia. For the moment

we can only grit our teeth and bear it.”

  I could still work unhampered alongside the philosophers. It was only                          5
when my book on youth came up for discussion that a conflict ensued.

  None of the notable party members had read Hitler’s Mein Kampf. Only a

few, Wittfogel and Duncker among others, were concerned with analyzing

the works of opponents. The SA was already marching the streets in ominous

groups. No one noticed that these were the same types who had formed our

own  militant  troops—laborers  and  employees  whom  we  now  considered

reactionary mercenaries.

  In July 1931, the gigantic bank crash occurred in Germany. Everyone

waited for the Communists to speak a decisive word. The first comments

came eight days later. From that time onward, the serious workers in the

party knew the cause was lost. Only now did the National Socialists, whose

numbers  had  increased  in  1930  from  eight  hundred  thousand  to

approximately  eight  million  voters,  become  really  active.  “Marches  on

Berlin”  became  increasingly  frequent.  In  the  cells,  groups  of  protective

guards had been formed, together with members of the Arbeiterwehr. I was

appointed to the so-called Red Housing Block on Wilmersdorferstrasse. Rage

over the casualties we had suffered, and deep-seated conviction about the

good  cause  we  were  advocating,  together  with  our  inability  to  slow  the

momentum  of  the  reactionary  landslide,  often  led  to  grotesque  but

courageous behavior. The SA had announced another practice march in July

1931. Afterward, it was rumored that Berlin was to be occupied. The party

mobilized. Our group, about thirty individuals, among them women and girls,

stayed in the cell quarters. This was supposed to ward off a possible attack on

the apartments. There were three pistols in the group and only four men with

combat experience. The rest were brave in distributing leaflets and pasting

them onto walls, i.e. brave in spirit. But now it was a question of dealing with

violence. We filled bottles with water and stood them by the hundreds along

the window and door ledges, ready to drop them on the heads of the SA

below. This will provide just one picture, among many, of the “situations

surrounding  the  class  struggle.”  Fortunately,  nothing  happened  that  night.Had the SA really attacked, the result would have been a stupid slaughter

between individuals living under the same working conditions, in the same

material situation, and even sharing the same determination to “do away with

the capitalistic machine.”

    Newspapers and books were full of stories about inimical political groups,

programs, capitalist and anti-capitalist interests. In the cells, on the streets,

demonstrating or pasting up posters at night, it was a different story. Class

struggle  was  taking  place  among  members  of  the  same  class.  When  I

discussed this with friends in the youth organizations, they understood. “How

is  it  possible,”  I  asked,  “that  laborers,  employees,  small  merchants,

housewives, domestic help, split into such diverse groups and develop such

contrary  political  sympathies,  despite  sharing  the  same  economic  status?”

The answer came: “We have not yet convinced them of the correctness of the

class  perspective.  We  have  not  yet  won  them  over;  they  are  still  held  in

ignorance by the capitalists.” In my cell, there was a mechanic who also

worked as a chauffeur. He participated vigorously in the discussions, was

inquisitive, and wanted to increase our activities, but he was not satisfied

with the difficult theoretical answers he received and subsequently joined the

Nazis. During the presidential election in 1932, his former cell comrades spat

in  his  face.  He  was  a  “traitor.”  But  how?  Why?  He  was  not  especially

different from the others.

  It  was  not  possible  to  present,  in  party  circles,  the  answer  which

experience in practical work had given me. Several hesitant attempts to do so

had convinced me that I would only make myself disliked. (I do not mean

among friends, in private, but in the official cell meetings.) Finally, I gave up

trying to persuade people, and concentrated on sex-political work with the

masses. This had developed rapidly from the first months of 1931. I became

convinced that mass psychology and sex-politics contained the answer to the

question which Fascism posed to German society.


                ORGANIZING THE SEXPOL IN GERMANYDevelopments in sex-political work between 1931 and 1932 demanded an

analysis of fascistic ideology. I had not sought a connection between the two,

nor  had  I  started  a  movement  with  the  direct  aim  of  “destroying,”  or

“ideologically mastering,” Fascism. The problems I encountered in Germany,

and  earlier  in  Austria,  were  the  same  as  those  on  which  fascistic  mass

manipulation centered, namely marriage, family, race, morality, honor. From

the very beginning, numerous members of the middle class, semi-intellectuals

and high school students, joined my groups, bringing with them the great

interest  of  the  middle  classes  in  precisely  these  problems.  This,  in  turn,

broadened the scope of my endeavors, which then encompassed youth, the

existing  sexual-reform  organizations,  the  free-thinker  and  culture

organizations, children’s organizations, and the women’s groups.

  For several months I visited the youth groups in various districts of Berlin

to absorb the general atmosphere. I declined to lecture, saying that I knew

these young people too little and they knew nothing of my theories.

  Based on experience gained in Vienna, I drafted a “sex-political platform”

containing, essentially, the themes of my lecture at the convention of the

World  League  for  Sexual  Reform  in  1930.  The  cultural  adviser  of  the

Communist Party Central Committee approved it and I then presented it for

approval to the World League commission in Berlin. J. H. Leunbach, later a

leading pioneer of Sexpol, was also present at the meeting where the decision

was  to  be  made.  All  present—the  chairman  of  the  Association  for  Birth

Control,  the  secretary  of  the  World  League,  and  Leunbach—vetoed  the

platform.  They  felt  it  was  “communistic”  and  that  the  sex-political

organizations wanted nothing to do with Communist views. Although they

did admit that my views were correct, they did not wish to “provoke” anyone.

The  organizations,  they  said,  had  to  remain  “apolitical”  and  could  not

incorporate into any specific party. Later, it was revealed that this was as

wrong in principle as it was correct in practice. Afterward I was also obliged

to  assume  a  nonparty  (although  not  an  apolitical)  stand,  because  theaffiliation  of  the  cause  with  party  interests  had  ended  in  a  fiasco.

[Unfortunately, at that time, I had not yet distinguished between “social” and

“political.”]

  In 1930, there existed approximately eighty sex-political organizations in

Germany. Each was structured differently, under independent leadership, and

there was frequent antagonism among them. Their total membership of about

three hundred and fifty thousand was greater than that of any of the large

parties. To be sure, most of the functionaries in these organizations were

simultaneously members of the Christian, Social Democrat, or Communist

Party. However, there was no connection between their roles as functionaries

in the sex-political groups and membership in their political parties. Many of

those who were enthusiastic about their own party opposed the incorporation

of these groups into the party organizations. The parties also paid no attention

to the sex-political organizations, even though they published announcements

of the meetings in their newspapers. Each sex-political organization had its

own newsletter, and many of these were illustrated to attract the public, in

keeping with the current trend. They were not pornographic, but they were

not  clearly  enough  separated  from  pornography.  They  contained  no  basic

views on sexuality, and even less on socio-political orientation. Still they

advocated  unrestricted  birth  control  and  legalized  abortion  and  spoke  out

against  compulsory  child  bearing  and  against  penalization  for  sexual

deviations,  especially  homosexuality.  They  tried  to  protect  marriage  more

than  did  the  bourgeoisie  themselves.  There  was  no  mention  of  youth

problems; these were avoided instinctively. Magnus Hirschfeld’s incorrect

views  dominated  both  theory  and  practice.  Many  valuable  details  were

elaborated, but all measures to ensure consolidation and the achievement of

goals were scrupulously avoided.

  Over the course of decades, thanks to the self-sacrificing efforts of people

                                                                              6
like  Helene  Stöcker  (who  directed  the  Bund  für  Mutterschutz  and  also

                                                    7
published  the  newspaper Neue Generation),  Germany  was  covered  by  anetwork of birth-control centers. Although they did not reach even a tenth of

the population, they did constitute a powerful voice for social hygiene. Those

accused  in  abortion  trials  were  given  legal  and  moral  support.  Regular

lectures  acquainted  members  with  the  social  implications  of  sexuality,

although the information provided was often incorrect and overburdened with

questions of eugenics and population politics. The dealers, who infiltrated the

groups and made their profits from the demand for contraceptives, constituted

one of the greatest evils. There were numerous bad characters among them;

but this could not be held against the organizations. They were dependent

upon them because official government agencies took no interest in this facet

of the problem and only caused difficulty.

  My  plan  was  to  form  a  united  association  from  these  separate

organizations. Through the introduction of consciously directed effort and

affiliation with the Communist Party, the individual sex-reform factions were

to be welded together to form a unified sex-political association. Following

consultation in the physicians’ division, the medical program was turned over

to  the  IFA  for  preliminary  strategy.  The  IFA  was  an  organization  which

comprised all cultural subgroups in the party. Three doctors (myself among

them), a parliamentary delegate, and two leaders of the IFA were elected to

lead  the  national  sex-political  program.  The  latter  two  were  assigned  the

organizational  and  party-political  leadership  and  I  was  allotted  the  sex-

political program on a nationwide level. Opinion on the usefulness of my

platform was unanimously favorable and everyone expected positive results.

A sex-reform group in Düsseldorf printed the platform and this immediately

brought it to public attention. Thus the work in West Germany began quite

spontaneously.

  In  1931,  the  first  West  German  congress  was  held  in  Düsseldorf.

Surprisingly,  it  mobilized  about  twenty  thousand  members  from

approximately eight different groups. I delivered the main address, merely

elaborating  upon  what  the  platform  contained  in  brief.  Not  a  singlenonpolitical  group  present  was  in  disagreement.  In  Berlin  and  vicinity,

various local groups were founded where none had previously existed, or

existing  organizations  were  consolidated.  Here,  unification  was  more

difficult. Until that time, the Communist Party had had no organizations for

sexual reform, and also had taken no stand on sex-politics, except toward

Soviet  legislation.  Hence,  I  enjoyed  great  recognition  from  the  party

leadership. In the course of a year, unified organizations were also founded in

Leipzig, Dresden, Stettin, etc. The movement spread rapidly. Within a few

months  it  had  doubled  in  size,  comprising  approximately  forty  thousand

members.

  As  the  movement  grew,  the  demands  placed  upon  us  also  increased.

Three  clearly  delineated,  extremely  difficult  problems  arose.  I  could  not

neglect them because they had developed logically in the course of the work.

On the other hand, I was also unable to solve them, as any practical solution

would  have  required  going  against  the  party  leadership  and  that  was

impossible. The three problems were:

  1. Practical training of the leaders of the movement. In the party there

existed  no  theory  of  sexuality,  or  only  incorrect  views.  The  groups  and

masses which were now included had no trained personnel to contribute. As

simple as sex-economic principles were, there was no hope of being able to

train, even hastily, a sufficient number of functionaries. Today the situation

has improved, but at the time the problem remained unsolved.

  2. The  inclusion  of  youth.  The  sex-reform  groups  had  avoided  the

question of adolescent sexuality so meticulously that they had no contact with

middle-class or working-class youth. The groups consisted predominantly of

the middle-aged. In 1931, Communist youth numbered approximately forty

thousand, Social Democrat youth about fifty thousand, and National Socialist

youth  also  about  forty  to  fifty  thousand.  The  Christian  Center  Party  had

almost two million young people in its organizations. This party, in contrast

to  the  others,  had  consistently  pursued  sex-politics  and,  as  a  result,  waslargest in number, indicating that only youth could carry on the sex-political

movement.

  3. The inescapable transformation of views on all politics, which resulted

from  the  inclusion  of  psychology  and  sexual  issues.  Although  I  saw  the

beginning of this transformation everywhere, I deliberately avoided setting it

in motion. First of all, one could only take the position that sex-politics had to

be included in the overall political efforts of revolutionary Socialism. No

party functionary could oppose this, despite the fact that the effects of sex-

political  work  among  the  people  were  so  strong  that  the  party  leadership

could  only  view  them  helplessly  and  uncomprehendingly.  My  cautious

formulation was useless. Instinctively the functionaries sensed “danger” for

party politics and doggedly claimed I was attempting to “replace economic

politics with sexual politics.”

  I  shall  now  attempt  to  illustrate  the  three  basic  problems  of  the  sex-

political movement with separate, typical examples which are still valid today

and will remain so for a long time to come.

  The lack of training was manifested as follows: As long as I was present

in the Ruhr district, the meetings went smoothly. Several months after my

departure, however, the functionaries began to complain that sex alone was

being  discussed,  and  that  interest  in  the  questions  of  class  struggle  was

decreasing. Some women had spoken out against this trend. The united front

politics could not be maintained in some organizations. What had happened?

The  platform  and  the  reports  presented  at  the  first  congress  had  aroused

people and had immediately stimulated thousands of questions in need of

answers.  The  party  functionaries  who,  until  that  time,  had  worked  with

slogans,  and  who  were  far  removed  from  the  actual  class  struggle,  were

helpless in the face of the demands. In addition to this, women from the

National  Socialist  and  Christian  parties  had  joined  the  organizations  in

droves, and the functionaries had never learned how to handle them, how to

make  human  contact,  and  how  to  deal  with  their  complicated  emotionalreactions. The “population politics” they had expounded until then had now

become even less interesting. The people simply wanted practical advice and

help with their marital and child-raising problems, their sexual disturbances,

and their moral pangs of conscience. Then the clergy put in its appearance,

but their old arguments were useless now that they were confronted face to

face. The functionaries interpreted manifestations of sexual anxiety as proof

of the harmfulness of sex-political work. They were unable to grasp the fact

that the masses had finally been successfully stirred into action. They became

afraid!

  It was impossible to explain this to all the psychologically untrained party

members. I tried as best I could to maintain my position; for example, by

taking younger youth functionaries and teachers along to my evening youth

session  and  demonstrating,  in  a  practical  way,  how  overwhelmingly

interested the young people were and how easy it was to approach the great

social issues. Fear of the movement and of the people’s demands spread to

Berlin. When the IFA leaders, Bischoff and Schneider, began to sabotage our

efforts,  I  quietly  resigned  from  the  national  control  board  and  arranged

training courses in various districts of the city. And with great success! In

Charlottenburg, I concentrated my best efforts on forming a model group, and

informed the party leadership of this. All other groups were to profit from the

experiences  of  this  one,  which  was  under  my  direction.  I  was  sure  that,

gradually, the uncomplicated principles of the movement, together with their

practical  application,  would  gain  ground.  But  the  rush  of  demands  was

overpowering  and  there  was  simply  no  time  for  quiet,  thorough  work.

Meanwhile, the nervousness of the untrained functionaries increased with the

growing  strength  of  the  movement.  Instead  of  educating  themselves,  and

preparing  on  a  long-term  basis,  they  began  to  arrange  “unification

conventions” and wanted to quickly consolidate all the sex-reform groups in

Germany.  This  was  taken  as  provocation  by  all  the  opponents  in  these

groups, and resulted in a total fiasco. The movement for a unified groupbecame deadlocked in discussions on fundamental politics and organization.

In addition to this, the police began to intervene. On May 23, 1932, they

broke up the Workers’ Cultural Congress, and on May 24 the unification

convention of our organization. I simply allowed matters to run their course

and took no further part in the negotiations. Instead, I continued work in the

organizations at lower levels, particularly through training. I selected the best

students from my current course at MASCH and distributed them among the

organizations.  This  enabled  me  to  maintain  my  position  when  the  party

bureaucracy lashed out against me. I believe I experienced, on a small scale,

the  later  general  course  of  events  in  the  Soviet  Union: The  contradiction

between  the  demands  springing  from  the  people  and  the  organizations’

incapacity  to  resolve  the  problems  causes  a  hierarchically  structured

machine to resort to acts of terrorism against the very individuals who had

encouraged the masses to question.

  In  the  meantime,  through  my  medical  activities,  I  had  met  numerous

young people from various circles. All of them encouraged me to write a

book for youth. I prepared a manuscript in several weeks and distributed

copies of it. They were returned to me full of comments and suggestions,

which I then incorporated into the final version, which was presented to the

Central  Youth  Committee,  accepted,  and  sent  to  the  youth  committee  in

Moscow. The Youth Publishers there were to print it. From Moscow came

the reply that the book was indeed good, but that it “would be better not to

assume responsibility for it.” It was to be printed by the Workers’ Cultural

Press, which was less official. However, the director of this press sabotaged it

for a whole year. I had presented the book, The Sexual Struggle of Youth, in

the summer of 1931 and it had not yet been published by March 1932. I then

founded my own publishing house for sex-politics, Verlag für Sexualpolitik,

which  subsequently  published  this  book  and The  Invasion  of  Compulsory

Sex-Morality.  [It  was  crucial  to  be  completely  independent  of  these  petty

politicians.]  Following a suggestion by me, one sex-political pedagogical team had

                                                                8
drawn up a small children’s book, Das Kreidedreieck, as well as a brochure

                                                          9
for mothers entitled Wenn dein Kind dich fragt. I financed the printing of

both.  These  two  small  works  had  been  studied  and  discussed  earlier  in

children’s and women’s groups—the first one mainly in a Fichte children’s

group in Charlottenburg. It was read by my wife to an audience of eight- to

twelve-year-olds. Whereas the group meetings were ordinarily attended by

about thirty children, this time approximately eighty youngsters sat there with

beaming faces. And what questions and demands were heard! “You’ve got to

write more about parents!” “Let our teachers have it too!” “Why didn’t you

say anything about the whores we see walking our streets?” The leader of the

Fichte group was both pleased and perplexed. He had never seen the children

like that before, and remarked, “We’ll take this to the Christian Party. They

always talk such nonsense. They should really hear something for a change.”

My daughter attended a school in the northern part of Berlin. After several

weeks, the school was in an uproar. Children who ordinarily discussed sex

among themselves and kept it a secret from adults out of fear, now felt in

league with the adults. It was no longer a taboo subject and had taken on new

directions. We were enormously successful with functionaries who were in

direct contact with children. They were now able to share, in confidence, the

children’s best-kept secrets. The book for working mothers, on explanations

for children, was equally successful. My cleaning lady distributed dozens of

copies among the women of her milieu. Thousands of copies were literally

snatched from my hands. The youth book was printed in an edition of ten

thousand copies, and four thousand were sold within six weeks. It cleared the

path for our youth to reach the youth of all circles—high school students,

Social  Democrat,  Christian,  and  National  Socialist  youth  included.  From

these  experiences  I  drew  the  strength  to  persevere  later,  and  to  resist  the

impressive rhetoric of the party Socialists.                                            7




              Irrationalism in Politics and Society




        THE INCONSISTENCY OF NATIONAL SOCIALISM


Much  that  sounds  commonplace  today—1938—was  new  territory  and

difficult to comprehend in 1930, e.g. the subjective Socialist character of the

SA, and the resultant schism in National Socialism; the strength it derived

from the latent determination of the masses; the novelty of this determination

and the power of the mystical devotion to a leader. The average politician

could  not  understand  the  Führer’s  power  over  the  manifest  will  of  his

followers. The deep cleavage separating the hopes of Germany’s people from

the reality of Hitler’s barbarism confused people’s thinking. The collapse of

bourgeois democracy shattered liberalistic ideas. The measures which Hitler

no  doubt  intended  “socialistically”  bewildered  anti-Fascists.  They  did  not

comprehend  the  welding  of  these  measures  with  an  equally  intentional,

predatory, imperialistic expansion; nor did they grasp the similarities between

the Soviet Russian and the National Socialist ideology and mass leadership.

In December 1932, when the German National Socialists, together with the

Communists  and  Social  Democrats,  called  a  strike  of  the  Berlin

transportation workers, it was labeled a “maneuver.” In 1930, I saw Berlin

SA columns marching through the streets; their bearing, facial expressions,

and  singing  were  no  different  from  the  Communist  Rotfrontkämpfer

divisions.  Leading  representatives  of  the  Communist  Party  declared  it

“counterrevolutionary”  to  claim  that  the  SA  was  a  troop  composed  of

laborers  and  white-collar  workers.  German  Fascism  was  considered  a“political  reaction,”  as  was  Horthy’s  dictatorship  in  Hungary  and  that  of

Dollfuss later in Austria. Even long after 1933, it was impossible to convince

a member of the Communist or Socialist Party that German Fascism was

essentially different from all other political reactions because of the mass

support which bore it to power. Everyone knew that conditions in Germany

were intolerable. Everyone wanted change, but no one knew what needed

changing. The National Socialists alone had a program everyone could easily

understand, namely revision of the Treaty of Versailles, at any cost and by

any  available  means.  Hitler’s  reactionary  and  imperialistic  aims  were

unequivocally set forth in Mein Kampf and still each new election brought

him the support of additional millions. When the Communists realized that

their revolutionary slogans were losing appeal, they began to compete with

Hitler in advocating “national and social liberation.” [They later surpassed

Hitler.]  In  1932,  in  league  with  the  National  Socialists,  they  took  action

against Braun’s government in Prussia. But as early as July 1931, after the

great bank crash, many individuals in the party knew that the cause was lost.

Those  with  the  most  insight  sensed  that  the  subjectively  aroused,

revolutionary masses were, for the most part, following Hitler because they

wanted an upheaval but, at the same time, feared genuine revolution. Hitler

freed them from the responsibility for their own fate with which they had

been  burdened  by  the  German  revolutionary  movement.  “Hitler  can—and

will—do everything for us,” they said. He was able to do everything, and

accomplished  unbelievable  feats,  because  he  was  aided  by  mass  fear  of

revolution. Simultaneously, he provided illusory satisfaction for the people’s

revolutionary, anti-capitalistic, and socialistic yearnings. It was impossible

for  German  Socialists  to  see  such  contradictions.  They  believed  that  if

economic exigency alone motivated the desires and actions of the working

class, then the people could not help but want social revolution and could not

simultaneously fear it. In this case, Hitler’s attraction could only be attributed

to “mystification” and “demagogy.” In the precipitating events between 1930and 1933, it was inconceivable that people could imagine themselves to be

leaders of a better Germany without, for one moment, being disquieted by the

fact  that  “mere  mystification  and  demagogy”  could  have  such  an  effect.

Although they stood at the edge of an abyss, they didn’t want to think about

it,  and  we  shall  soon  understand  why.  Even  in  1938,  I  ran  across

“representatives  of  labor”  who  still  were  talking  about  mystification  and

demagogy, just as in 1930. Their comfort then, as before, was the fact that the

price of butter had just gone up and that here and there “criticism was already

being  voiced  in  the  factories.”  Reviewing  those  last  eight  years  from  the

standpoint of present-day events, one must marvel at the kind of mentality in

which  millions  of  people  once  placed  their  trust!  This  highly  naïve  and

extremely dignified mentality attempted to reduce the gargantuan problems

of German society to the rising price of butter and the comments of a few

discontented individuals in the factories. Not only that, but they wanted to

attribute the problems to these phenomena and, moreover, refused to tolerate

any other explanation.

  None of the “leaders of the workers” I knew had seriously studied Hitler’s

Mein Kampf and other writings for the masses. None had asked themselves

how this arch-reactionary hoax perpetrated by a group of bandits could seize

and poison millions of warm, honest German hearts. The race theory, they

said, was “nonsense,” merely “imperialistic chatter” and “nothing new” in

principle. The attack against the Jews was just “an old technique for diverting

attention from the class struggle.” At one time Socialism had prided itself on

being the first social movement to function on a serious scientific basis. But

no one seemed able to ask himself the simple question of why millions of

individuals  allowed  themselves  to  be  so  influenced  by  nonsense  and  idle

chatter. They even flew into a rage when such questions were posed. In order

to defeat a strong opponent, one must examine his methods and motives most

carefully. Recognizing them as facts is a far cry from agreeing with them.

However, it was considered preposterous to take Hitler’s mass-psychologicaladeptness seriously. Members of the Socialist Party in Germany took it as a

personal affront if one contended that essential, unrecognized processes in the

masses had to exist in order for Hitler to be so successful.

  Prior to 1933, there could be no mention of coping seriously with the

problem of Fascism. Even the most basic inquiries were pointedly rejected

and, consequently, no answer to the questions could be found. As was later

demonstrated, these answers were so horrifying, far-reaching, and, in a sense,

revolutionary that at first they only increased one’s powerlessness in the face

of onrushing events. Fear of this sensation of helplessness accounts for part

of the adherence to empty phrases which still gives the workers’ movement

the illusion of security today. It is simpler to place one’s faith in the healing

powers of useless medication than to admit that one is caring for a dying

patient  who  is  beyond  help,  even  though  one  is  beginning  to  grasp  the

reasons for his death.

  The main statements of Fascism’s opponents were correct in principle.

Fascism threatened “democratic freedom of speech,” but millions endorsed

this threat to free expression of their opinions. Fascism spoke candidly of

war, even clothing wholesale murder in portentous words such as “duty,”

“sacrifice,”  and  “obedience,”  yet  millions  rallied  to  duty,  obedience,  and

sacrifice with life and limb. It divided human beings into “natural leaders”

and  those  “born  to  be  led,”  and  again  millions  rallied  to  the  class  of

                  1
Untermenschen. Fascism promised capitalists it would secure their control of

industry and promised the workers they would share this control—and both

accepted. Complete military mobilization of the people was announced, and

the people affirmed it. In short, every political attitude in Fascism should

have caused flaming rebellion, but had the opposite effect. Many Socialists

fled from the insanity of the situation, renouncing their belief in the value of

mass will and mankind’s ability to think. Many were willing to proclaim the

old basic thoughts of the freedom movement invalid, insofar as they were not

party  employees  who  were  literally  forced  by  circumstances  to  give  lipservice  to  “freedom.”  Their  advocacy  of  freedom  in  the  face  of  the

unrestrained brutality of Fascism, which concurrently promised the longed-

for  national  independence,  was  extremely  sad,  harmful,  and  degrading.

Freedom’s  enemy  struck  wherever  he  could,  and  freedom’s  advocates

complained about his blows to the police. But the enemy’s function was to

strike, and to complain was senseless. So they imitated his slogans while

simultaneously preaching a people’s democracy long since inoperative due to

misuse.  Hitler’s  strength  lay  in  the  people’s  disappointment  in  “scientific

Socialism”  and  in  the  futility  of  parliamentary-democratic  and  reformist-

socialistic  ideology.  Neither  the  freedom  offered  by  Socialism  nor  the

freedom they had experienced under bourgeois democracy was enticing, and

we  must  bear  in  mind  that  these  working  masses  included  almost  seven

million unemployed. As the year 1933 demonstrated, not only were people

unwilling to defend their established liberty but, on the contrary, the masses

willingly and enthusiastically submitted to the authoritarian yoke of Fascism,

which negated all liberty. Granted, the concept of freedom offered by Hitler’s

opponents  was  barren,  but  this  mass  reaction  posed  the  question  whether

people desired freedom at all, or whether they simply preferred to exchange

personal freedom for freedom from responsibility. The people’s confidence

in democratic and socialistic leadership had sunk to zero, if indeed it had ever

existed.  The  Communists  arranged  “spontaneous  mass  demonstrations”  in

which their own party groups were enjoined to participate. On the decisive

election day (March 5, 1933), forty thousand workers, some armed, waited in

Berlin’s working-class districts for the “spontaneous mass demonstrations,”

hoping thus to prevent Hitler from seizing power. No one stirred. No one

seemed eager to defend his own liberty. In Germany, with its very strong

tradition  of  Socialism  and  trade  unions,  this  was  incomprehensible  to  the

rationalistic thinking of that time: “The economic crisis is pauperizing the

population; therefore it desires Socialism and socialization of the means of

production. Hitler is a representative of big business; therefore the people willoppose  him.”  Exactly  the  opposite  occurred.  The  entire  body  of  Socialist

theory, the work of generations of brilliant intellects and pioneers, seemed to

collapse at one stroke.

  Expressed  in  most  concise  terms:  Marxist  theory,  which  directed  the

German workers’ movement, demanded, as the result of a deep and enduring

economic crisis, a revolutionizing of the people’s sentiments. In reality, the

German crisis had caused not only mass paralysis but a clear popular swing

to the right as well. Thus a split occurred between economic and ideological

developments,  or,  better  said,  the  latter  was  in  direct  contradiction  to  the

former. One could not bemoan this; it had to be understood. Only then could

a practical solution be found. Once again, scientific, unsentimental thinking

proved its consistency. While party representatives of Marxism hid behind

thick clouds of illusion, political psychology logically combined staggering

facts to form a composite view. I felt more like the transmitter of a certain

logic than like a wise thinker drawing scientific conclusions in a “superior”

manner. The consolidation of all problems into one basic question took place

for  me  through  the  experience  of  the  reverse  mass  reaction  to  “freedom”

propaganda, although I had been prepared for this by long years of practice in

handling  the  problem  of  freedom  and  witnessing  man  caught  up  in  the

political machine. I was well acquainted with the mechanisms of irrational,

unconscious emotions discovered by Freud. My own experience in correctly

integrating mass-psychological questions into the social processes enabled

me  to  give  close  attention  to  one  decisive,  basic  issue:  If  the  events  in

Germany during those years were possible, then, within the emotional life of

the  masses,  there  had  to  be  important  processes  at  work  which  were

unrecognized  or  misinterpreted  by  the  participants.  “What  is  occurring

among the masses? How do they experience the social process to which they

are  subjected  and  which  they  themselves  determine  by  their  reactions?”

Questions such as these suddenly became so crucial that I became more and

more amazed at how inaccessible they were to the leaders of the masses.Hitler’s Mein Kampf showed that the National Socialist movement had come

closest  to  understanding  (even  if  unconsciously)  the  psychic  reactions  of

people in 1930. Marxists presumed a fully developed “class-consciousness”

in the working masses, one which needed only to be organized. In day-to-day

political life, I had seen people in a different light. Their feeling for justice,

for  capitalistic  contradictions,  and  for  life  in  general  was  infinitely  more

diverse  and  richer  than,  and  above  all  different  from,  that  embraced  by

Marxist  concepts.  Therefore,  two  kinds  of  “class-consciousness”  existed,

namely “consciousness” of social exigency and “consciousness” of what is

required  to  change  it.  The  one,  held  by  the  leaders,  included  intellectual

knowledge of large historical perspectives and economic processes; the other,

that of the people, understood nothing of these issues and did not wish to

understand,  but  was  full  of  the  details  of  daily  life,  primarily  sexual  and

cultural worries—where actual hunger did not suffocate all else. In Germany,

an estimated two million people were actually starving. Approximately sixty

million suffered from the general pressure of social disorder. A youth group

leader  from  Neukölln  impressed  upon  me  briefly  and  factually  what  this

meant:  As  soon  as  the  average  teen-ager  has  even  partially  satisfied  his

hunger, he immediately begins to think of his girl friend, if he has one, and

the amount of money they need in order to go out and enjoy themselves. If he

has no girl friend, he wants personal independence and the means to find a

girl and make her happy. Cinema, theater, books, decent clothing, and a room

for oneself are elementary desires of every human being from adolescence to

middle age. The driving factor here is yearning for sexual happiness, both in

the narrow, sensual sense and in the broadest cultural sense. Future historians

will comb the Socialist Party literature of those decades in vain for references

to  this  overpoweringly  obvious  fact.  To  the  extent  that  they  were  not

depraved or demoralized, people desired a social system in which the needs

of all would determine economic production. Contrary to this, a high party

representative  told  me  that  such  views  were  “reactionary”  and  that  the“development of the means of production” was the sole concern!

  The average individual was suffering from a contradiction: he wanted the

world changed but the change was to be imposed upon him suddenly from

above, just as the exploitation and suppression had been imposed upon him.

With the exception of very knowledgeable workers, the masses could not

conceive  of  a  change  in  their  lives  different  from  that  which  they  had

previously experienced, i.e. by force. No leaders entertained the thought of

telling them the truth, namely that they had to think and act in a responsible

manner for their freedom. On the contrary, the Communists, for example, did

everything in their power to make the masses subservient. The events that

occurred  later  in  the  Soviet  Union  and  in  Spain  proved  the  truth  of  this

statement. Therefore, Hitler had to succeed. He resolved this contradiction.

He replaced the hazy, inconceivable freedom to determine social life with the

age-old, easily conceivable illusion of national freedom. He demanded no

responsibility; on the contrary, he promised that everything would come from

above and that he would alter the system single-handed. And the upheaval

took place, induced almost single-handed by an ignoramus like Hitler. The

greater the scope of the problem, the more successfully the passivity of the

masses could be exploited.

  It was not Hitler’s economic program which gained him the masses. In his

daily propaganda, it was the strengthening of German self-esteem through

intense race propaganda, the war he proclaimed against “world Jewry,” and

the strong advocacy of the authoritarian family which brought him victory.

At first sight this was incomprehensible, and even today Marxists do not

understand it. The masses of workers are not anti-Semitic, and yet hatred of

Jews was effective. The masses are never proud of their race; on the contrary,

they are decidedly cosmopolitan and inclined toward international humanism.

Yet race propaganda was effective. The vigorous family and clan propaganda

was not essential, because people were already for the authoritarian family,

yet it too was extremely effective. Each of these three pillars of NationalSocialist mass propaganda had its own special mechanism. Starting in 1930, I

followed every important step the National Socialists took, and by 1932 I

could claim complete understanding of their methods. In my book The Mass

Psychology of Fascism, written between 1931 and 1933, I established the

most important facts in such detail that I shall be brief here.

  The  concept  of  “race”  influenced  the  unconscious  emotional  life  of

human  beings  through  its  similarity  to  the  word rassig,  i.e.  purebred,

powerful,  strong,  unique.  This  concept  brilliantly  compensated  for  the

people’s deplorable sexual and general self-image stemming from the world

crisis. Since everyone, without exception, suffers more or less consciously

from hypochondriacal fear of syphilis, and since syphilis implies poisoning of

the  blood,  the  promise  to  protect  “purity  of  blood”  struck  a  deep  chord.

Hitler’s description of syphilis in his book Mein Kampf is quite explicit. The

concept of the Untermensch is inseparably connected with the “underworld”

and this, in turn, with “proletarian,” “ragged peasant,” and “criminal.” The

unconscious,  however,  must  equate  “crime”  with  sexual  crime.  No  one

wishes  to  be  an Untermensch,  proletarian,  criminal,  sexual  criminal,  or

Negro, in this sense of the word, or even a “Frenchman” for that matter. Fear

                          2
of the “French disease” is too deeply rooted in vulgar imagery, even among

proletarians. For this reason the average worker does not enjoy being called a

Prolet. Despite all well-meant interpretations and explanations, it still simply

connotes “depraved,” i.e. “syphilitic.” If we consider, in addition to this, the

raising  of  self-esteem  which,  through  illusion,  assists  in  overcoming  real

misery, the circle of necessary emotional reactions is closed. Hitler revealed

the social impact of fantasy.

  The race problem connects logically with the “Jewish problem.” Jews

were  viewed  in  general,  and  especially  under  pressure  of  the  relentless

propaganda of a pervert like Streicher, as “kosher butchers,” i.e. people with

long knives who butcher Christian and German children at Passover. Because

of the practice of circumcision, fear of Jews is intensified through age-oldcastration fear which is universally present. Only a person desiring to steal all

pleasure  for  himself  (especially  sexual  pleasure)  could  engage  in  such

practices. Thus Jews, having castrated the men, proceed to rob the Aryans of

their women. Jews are always taking something away. Since, in addition,

they  suffered  the  misfortune  of  having  to  practice  trade,  due  to  previous

persecutions, they are robbers of money. Carried just one step further, they

become the prototype of the “capitalist.” Thus, through highly skillful use of

the sexual fear of the “kosher butcher,” the entire emotional mass hatred for

usurers, in other words “capitalists,” can be transferred onto the Jews. Thus

Jews become the object of both socialistic hatred of capitalists and ingrained

sexual anxiety. Marxists, and Jewish Marxists as well, frequently oppose this

logical  train  of  unconscious  conclusions,  but  in  vain.  It  explains  all  the

irrational  phenomena  which  left  their  stamp  upon  Germany  since  the

beginning of Nazi rule. The fact that this diverts all energies from the real

mastery of difficult life problems only completes the picture and the effect of

the emotional plague in Germany. A thousand-year-old, degenerate human

character structure serves as its background.

  The problem of the family is somewhat different. Here, bourgeois and

Marxist mass education not only missed the mark completely, but actually

paved the road for Fascism. In a different context, The Sexual Revolution, I

have already described the family problem in great detail and shall thus limit

myself here to establishing the relationship of the family problem to Fascism.

  The problem of race and the Jews was nothing other than an eruptive

human reaction, incomprehensible to the average person. It was determined

by irrationalism and sexual anxiety and resulted from sexual depravity in

human structure. Primitive sex-economy, its transformation into a patriarchal

form, and its further development into the form of an absolute state, first

explained the social basis upon which the grotesque manifestations of human

irrationalism could prosper. The family, as we already know, constitutes the

central element of social sex-economy. Even the pre-Fascist period had leftno doubts as to its function, social sources, and structural consequences. The

strict clan ideology which was introduced by Fascist family politics was, in

itself, no innovation but merely a culmination of age-old factors, intensified

to the highest degree. The patriarchal state is reproduced in the patriarchal

family. Therefore an absolute state, or a total dictatorship, must affirm family

ideology and defend it rigorously. It is the most important transmission belt

between the demands of dictatorship and the sources of structure formation.

This holds true wherever we encounter dictatorship which, in addition to the

terror  it  employs,  is  supported  by  powerful  emotional  forces  within  the

people. Bourgeois sex-economy, and prior to that, patriarchal sex-economy,

transformed  natural  sexual  impulses  into  grotesque,  distorted,  socially

intolerable secondary drives. Sexuality became a horrifying apparition, the

actual  content  of  social  chaos.  Social  revolution  contemplates  regaining

sexual freedom within the framework of a general reordering of existence,

but neither the advocates of revolution nor the people themselves are capable

of imagining the true nature of this freedom. They fear it, irrationally and

intensely.  As  a  result,  fascistic  “preservation  of  family  and  state”  from

“bolshevistic cultural chaos” strikes a responsive chord within the masses,

and  two  birds  are  killed  with  one  stone:  first,  revolutionary  thinking  is

destroyed,  and  second,  Fascism’s  own  tyranny  receives  massive  support.

“Pollution and contamination of emotional life” are realities, not fantasies.

No organization had opposed them prior to that time. The doors were wide

open for rampant pornography, perversion, and sexual prostitution; no one

had attempted to stamp out the “sexual plague”; and no one conceived of a

sharp  distinction  between  natural  and  pathological  sexuality  as  a  positive

solution to the problem. Science strictly avoided the issue and the parties had

no idea of what was going on. Outside of a limited social circle, the birth-

control  programs  of  the  Communists  and  sexual-reform  groups  were

considered within the framework of the general plague and could serve only

as  a  brilliant  excuse  for  a  “purification.”  Thus  the  flight  from  the  sexual“bolshevist plague” joined with a sexually emphasized enthusiasm for Hitler,

uniforms,  marches,  and  liberation  of  German  girls  and  women  from  the

sensual Jewish swine. National Socialism drew its greatest strength from this

source. These general reactions were prepared by the family. In addition,

many very healthy manifestations and premonitions of the force of natural

sexuality appeared in the flight from the sexual plague. In National Socialist

youth circles, views emerged to which there could be no objection, not even

from the most strict sex-economic standpoint.

  Even though these views were smothered in a mystical veiling of healthy

sexual  attitudes,  they  aroused  the  concern  of  government  leaders,  and

occasionally  led  to  conflicts  and  to  the  prohibition  of  mixed-group  youth

outings. The tables were turned when the National Socialists, who had set out

                                                                                      3
to eliminate the sexual plague, coined the expression “Bubi drück mich” for

          4
the BDM. Social Democrats, Communists, and Christian Democrats joined

in  accusing  National  Socialism  of  immorality.  In  1935,  the  French

Communists claimed they could save the family far more effectively than the

National  Socialists.  In  short,  there  existed  a  tangled  chaos  of  events  and

ideologies.  Fascism  built  itself  a  firm  foundation  through  rigid  family

ideology while simultaneously abetting the young in their demands upon the

older  generation,  thus  drawing  masses  of  youth  away  from  home  and

collectivizing their lives and, consequently, their sexuality. All this was done

without  the  slightest  knowledge  of  the  processes  it  set  into  motion  and

without  any  concept  of  the  positive  precautionary  measures  necessary  to

control the development of such a tumultuous movement. I contend that the

same forces which elevated Fascism to its power over the people had to lead

to  its  downfall.  Fascism  is  anti-sexual,  although  it  thrives  on  the  masked

sexual yearning of the population. Its authoritarian family ideology, and its

encouragement  of  pronounced  expressions  of  life-affirmation,  are

incompatible. In this, Fascism involuntarily made valuable contributions to

future  developments,  contributions  which  will  be  felt  long  after  its  owndownfall.  It  destroyed  democratic  illusions,  awakened  vital,  vegetative

longing for life, emancipated youth, and overthrew the exploiters of sexual

misery. However, it lacks the means to harvest even a single fruit of the seeds

it sowed because it is undermined by its own political, social, and psychic

structure. It would be impossible to intensify the organization of human life

around  the  family  beyond  the  present  fascistic  level  because  the  vital

contradictions contained within the family have already reached their peak.

Suppression of spontaneous manifestations of life has reached a point where

it  can  only  boomerang—and  precisely  with  the  help  of  the  same  anti-

capitalistic, sexual, cosmic yearning which bore Fascism to power and which

Fascism could never understand or satisfy.

  Many  people  grasped  these  grotesque  contradictions  in  1938.  Hitler’s

opponents, however, overlooked them in directing propaganda to the masses.

They  not  only  considered  these  contradictions  irrelevant  nonsense,  but

advocated the same principles although in a milder and less stimulating form.

Viewed  factually  and  unsentimentally,  these  individuals  were  not  Hitler’s

opponents but the forerunners who paved the way for him. Race theories and

mystical genetics were already regnant schools of thought before Hitler, even

among Communists, including those in the Soviet Union. German geneticists

were later enraged at Hitler’s race practices because these ruined their own

concepts of race and aroused justified hatred for the expression ‘“hereditary.”

All this simply fit logically into the current course of events.

  Between 1930 and 1933, not all aspects of these processes were visible

yet.  I  had  no  premonition  that  my  politico-psychological  views  would  be

confirmed as they were in subsequent years. Nevertheless, sex-political work

among  various  classes  of  the  population  allowed  occasional  insight  into

relationships which, despite all the misery, offered a glimpse of freedom.

Until Hitler’s time, Socialism had been dealing with an approximately three-

hundred-year-old problem, namely the capitalistic phase of patriarchalism in

its  economic  function  alone.  Hitler  forced  a  general  consideration  of  theproblem—thousands  of  years  old—of  suppression  of  human  life  through

patriarchy.  This  could  no  longer  be  avoided  and  Hitler  represented  the

grotesque climax of this development. He forced the relationship between

psychic and socio-political processes to be accounted for. Never again would

the thoughts and emotions of the masses be neglected and overlooked as they

were before his time. Until Hitler, the people in general had always merely

tolerated tyranny. During his time they stepped forth irrationally, in active

support  of  tyranny,  against  their  own  vital  interests.  For  the  first  time  in

history,  the  hitherto  unknown  significance  of  irrationalism  in  the  social

process  was  revealed.  In  order  to  gain  support  from  the  damaged  human

structure, National Socialism had to imbue the masses with so much new

vitality,  and  elicit  such  great  energies,  that  the  reactionary  content  of  the

movement clashed with its own revolutionary spirit in a conflict which defied

solution.  All  further  developments  depended  upon  which  forces  would

emerge to comprehend this gigantic process, to direct it, to supply the clarity

necessary to allow it to follow the path it was urgently pursuing, unbeknown

to all. It was already clear in 1932 that any movement to defeat Hitler could

only spring from within the ranks of National Socialism itself, through the

factual  solution  of  those  crucial  questions  which  Hitler  had  unwittingly

raised.  Such  insight  shielded  one  from  the  illusion  that  Chamberlain  and

Daladier could “save” Germany.

    Observations of fascistic mass propaganda thus confirmed the assertions

of  the  young  discipline  of  political  psychology  at  every  step.  Briefly

summarized:

  1.  Objective  social  processes,  and  the  subjective  experience  of  those

processes, must be carefully differentiated. Each follows its own laws and has

separate sources of energy.

  2. Leaders are always an expression of the popular will, i.e. a reflection of

average human structure. Their thoughts and actions are self-contradictory

and correspond exactly to the contradictions in the average human being,whose structure is simultaneously progressive and reactionary. This structure

is prepared within the family and continues its effect in the structure of the

state. Therefore, the problem of the family, i.e. of sexual conditions, is older

and more significant in every respect than the problem of technology. This is

still  true  despite  the  fact  that  a  change  in  family  organization  is  entirely

dependent upon a change in human technological mastery of the world.

  3. Economy and ideology do not bear a simple, direct relationship to one

another.  In  principle,  the  former  can  determine  the  latter,  or  vice  versa.

Furthermore, they can be in contradiction to one another in their development

(divergence).

  4.  Considered  technically,  the  moving  force  of  history  is  vegetative

      5
energy, which is expressed as sexual feeling and as the desire for happiness.

These  expressions  are  subject  to  the  limitations  of  political,  social,  and

economic conditions.

  5. If a community’s bio-energetic expressions exceed the limits set by

these conditions, then regression, as seen in Russia, is inevitable. In Fascism,

the  vital  energy  of  the  masses  regressed  to  abject  spiritual  and  material

misery because it was unaware of its own intentions and objectives. Thus an

ancient statement is confirmed, namely that a society can only accomplish

those  tasks  it  has  consciously  set  for  itself  and  those  which  it  is  able  to

complete within the framework of the available resources of its own social

organization.

  6.  Despite  their  lack  of  awareness  of progressive  processes  within

German  society,  both  conservatism  and  political  reaction  were  brilliantly

aware of how to harness the energy of the masses and direct it in their own

interests. This, and only this, constitutes “Fascism.” It follows that Fascism

can only be overcome through the conscious guidance of the same processes

it has set into motion.


  ALL POLITICIANS UNITE AGAINST SOCIAL PSYCHIATRYI can only hope I have succeeded in demonstrating the importance of the

sexual life of the masses. It is a general human, and consequently social,

issue. The sexualization of political life in our time ought to be replaced by

the  politicization  of  sexual  life  based  upon  the  scientific  mastery  of  the

deterioration  in  private  life.  Communists,  Social  Democrats,  National

Socialists, psychoanalysts, and the police all, in turn, claimed to be able to

bring about a new social order. Let us observe the experiences encountered in

our  work  when  it  was  no  longer  applied  merely  in  academic  and  private

circles but put to purposeful and meaningful use, namely among the people

themselves, who, in the last analysis, determine the further development of

society.  These  experiences  made  me  think  of  a  stage  set,  with  Fascism

holding  its  victory  march.  This  set  contained  not  only  the  magnificent

trappings of Fascism’s ideological power but also the confusion and rubbish

which the brilliance of the stage obscured. And in the midst of the rubbish

there were simple, uncomplicated people with uncomplicated, natural desires.

For  example,  there  was  a  fourteen-year-old  girl  who  had  come  from  the

            6
Hitlerjugend to join a youth group under my supervision. She had become

pregnant  and  had  heard  that  “the  reds”  had  reasonable  doctors  who

                                                                                7
understood such matters. She came seeking help, and I provided it. On that

evening  I  had  explained  to  the  youth  group  the  social  conditions  which

threatened to plunge that girl into dire misery. Had she not, by chance, come

to me but to the usual kind of physician, she would have been sent to an

institution which would have destroyed her. I shall never forget the burning

expression in that girl’s eyes. Her thoughts and emotions were those of a

million others like her.

  After the meeting a girl about ten years old approached me. For a long

time she simply stood there thinking. Then, with tears in her eyes, she stroked

my  arm  silently.  Although  no  word  was  spoken  we  knew  what  we  both

wanted. We understood how close, how desperately and precariously close

our  sentiments  and  work  were  to  the  filthiest,  most  abject  realms  ofcontemporary  human  experiences.  But  we  also  both  understood  that  one

cannot remove a dunghill if one fearfully avoids contact with the dung.

  During those years, among young people and adults of various parties and

political persuasions, it became clear that my work in the “lower regions” of

society was gradually providing an answer to National Socialist ideology, an

answer to the problem of “mankind, culture, and nature.” I zealously avoided

indulging in philosophical thinking on the subject. It required ten times the

Hitlerian grace of the gods for me to even stick it out. What happened to me

and to my work in the following six years could be borne only by keeping

before  me  the  mental  picture  of  these  people  whenever  a  situation  arose

which  seemed  to  indicate  defeat.  I  am  not  shrewd  by  nature;  quite  the

contrary. But the picture of these people taught me shrewdness. I could have

withdrawn from politics, as many others had done, but the crimes committed

everywhere  against  children  and  adolescents  restrained  me  and  made  any

other path impossible.

  In 1937, while I was in exile in a foreign country, I was visited by some

young  members  of  the  Hitlerjugend  who  had  come  to  fetch  several

expurgated  copies  of  my  youth  book  for  their  comrades.  It  had  been

necessary to delete only those portions of the book which bureaucratic party

members  had  influenced  me  to  insert.  Logically,  after  a  five-year  span,

everything  the  dehumanized  party  line  had  considered  correct  had  been

falsified  and  was  useless.  Everything  capable  of  offering  adolescents  an

answer to their existential questions had remained valid.

  It is audacious to lay claim to having answers to the entire problem of

National Socialist ideology. Thus I shall have to describe how the events

between  1932  and  1938  confirmed  my  views  and  how  my  opponents’

objections  at  the  time  were  nullified  and  the  views  which  they  opposed

successfully  put  to  the  test,  independent  of  me.  It  is  imperative  to  do  so

because this confirmation was possible only under the pressure of Fascism,

which  was  pauperizing  the  world  and  which  these  opponents  did  notunderstand, did not want to understand, and carried within themselves as a

basic attitude. Fascism had placed three great questions before the world, to

which I gave the following answers:

  1. How is sexual misery to be eliminated? The answer was, in principle:

through restoration of natural sexual life and differentiation between this and

the distorted sexual manifestations of the present, which were opposed by

everyone.

  2. How is man’s borrowed, false, and illusional self-esteem to be replaced

with natural self-confidence stemming from a satisfying life? The answer was

provided  by  clinical  and  mass-psychological  experience.  It  would  be

necessary to create unarmored, unrestricted, productive, sexually affirmative

character structures.

  3. How is dictatorship of the masses by an individual to be prevented? By

establishing man’s capacity to determine and govern his own life, i.e. by

genuine social democracy.

  Socialists, Social Democrats, and Communists, on the other hand, offered

these answers:

  On  December  5,  1932,  two  months  before  the  great  bank  crash,  the

                        8
newspaper Rot  Sport,  sponsored  by  the  Fichte  organization,  published  a

notice strictly prohibiting further distribution and sale of my publications.

Among them were The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality, The Sexual

Struggle of Youth, When Your Child Asks Questions, and The Chalk Triangle.


                                    Stop Distribution!

  All brochures by Reich, handled by the literature distribution division of the KG for the Verlag

für Sexualpolitik, are to be withdrawn and further distribution is to cease.

      Distribution activities were assumed due to a misunderstanding. Reich’s brochures treat the

  issues in a manner contradictory to the revolutionary education of children and youth. (Detailed

  commentary to follow in the next edition). [It never followed!]


    Thereupon,  my  sex-political  organization  spontaneously  demanded  a

meeting of functionaries from Greater Berlin. This and all further actionswhich were undertaken under difficult circumstances in behalf of my work

were  always  spontaneous.  I  made  it  a  principle  never  to  “lead”  or  “start

campaigns.” If the issue was valid, it first had to prove itself independently

through the verbal support and actions of those concerned. This was their

only  means  of  having  the  bitter  experience  of  steering  their  own  course,

despite  their  meager  or  nonexistent  factual  training.  A  letter  from  the

Charlottenburg  group  to  the  party  leadership  (dated  December  10,  1932)

stated: “The directors of the cultural division have sabotaged, through the

basest intrigues, the distribution of literature necessary for our movement,

and are still attempting to suppress this literature, contrary to the resolutions

of the Greater Berlin faction of the organization.” The organization proposed

a  motion  to  remove  the  leaders  of  the  German  cultural  division  of  the

Communist  Party.  In  December  1932,  shortly  after  the  banning  of  my

writings,  representative  Grube,  director  of  the  Berlin-Brandenburg  Fichte

sports  organization,  called  a  conference  of  functionaries.  He  justified  and

defended  the  ban  with  the  worst  kind  of  distortions  and  sharply  worded

threats, saying it was simply “counterrevolutionary” to expose youth to such

trash  and  that  it  weakened  their  fighting  spirit  and  was  irrelevant  to

“proletarian class morality.” He stated further that adolescents had recently

approached the leaders of the Fichte sports organization and demanded that

the  organization  supply  clean  rooms  so  that  they  could  have  undisturbed

sexual intercourse. Supposedly they had claimed that such deficiencies were

damaging  to  the  organization  and  had  “referred  to  Reich.”  Reich,  he

continued,  had  written  to  the  directors  of  Fichte  when  he  heard  of  the

“scandal” and claimed that the youths were absolutely correct but had simply

written  to  the  wrong  address;  society  was  responsible  and  not  a  sports

organization. Unheard of!

  Afterward a friend of my work visited me and told me that 80 percent of

all functionaries—otherwise faithful, obedient party followers—had opposed

the director of the organization and that there had been great commotion. Thefollowing day I was visited by some young workers who informed me that

my publications would continue to be distributed despite the ban. And so it

went!

  One day there was excitement in the Communist parliamentary faction. In

Dresden, a resolution of the socialistic youth organizations, dated October 16,

1932, was being circulated among adolescents of every political affiliation.

This resolution was, in their opinion, a gigantic scandal which jeopardized

the “party image” and sullied its greater political objectives. It was shameful;

the opponents could “capitalize on it politically” at any moment. They felt

that the slogan “A room of his own for every adolescent” was “incredible”

and  that  they  were  losing  every  opportunity  to  “conquer  the  Christian

Democrats.”  (In  1936  they allied  with  the  Christian  Democrats!)  The

instigator of the resolution was to be immediately expelled from the party.

When they discovered that the resolution had been drawn up following a

youth conference to which I had been invited, there was great embarrassment.

They could not expel me at the time. The Communist, Social Democrat, and

bourgeois youth organizations had already distributed thousands of copies of

my writings. There would have been outright rebellion. Shortly before this,

the  Berlin  Communist  youth  organization  had  succeeded  in  holding  a

meeting, together with Socialist youth, for the first time since the inception of

the unification movement. Their objective in this was to discuss the personal

and,  subsequently,  the  general  social  state  of  youth.  I  had  spoken  at  this

meeting and had been received enthusiastically. They had finally overcome

their differences and found common ground to work on. In addition to this,

                                                                              9
the  organization  had  originally  requested  me  to  write  my  book  and  had

officially accepted it. It was not a pretty picture! An earlier adamant opponent

of my work with young people had attended a meeting in Neukölln and was

extremely  surprised  at  the  interest  young  people  showed,  at  their  active

participation in the discussion, and at the fact that even “highly political”

issues were brought up. The work had spoken for itself. The former opponentwas  transformed  into  a  friend.  The  text  of  the  Dresden  resolution  of

combined revolutionary and other young groups read as follows:


                                        Resolution

  passed at the Conference of Representatives of Proletarian-Revolutionary Youth Organizations

of the U.B. Dresden, October 16, 1932.
                                                                                      10
    The assembled representatives of the proletarian youth organizations (KJV, IAH, SJV)

  have resolved to incorporate all endeavors in the field of sex-politics into the general endeavor

to  defeat  capitalism,  and  to  do  so  for  the  purpose  of  the  broadest  possible  mobilization  of

  working youth. They have arrived at clear recognition and are unanimously of the opinion that

  the neglect of youth’s sexual problems until this time has had an extremely adverse effect upon

  the revolutionary work of the youth organizations. The dissolution of groups, great fluctuation

in membership, political passivity, etc., are intimately related to disturbed and unclarified sexual

  life. This confusion and obscurity in the question of adolescent sexual activity is, in itself, a

  result of the kind of sexuality that exists in the capitalistic system. It serves the purpose of the

  Church and the ruling classes through intellectual subjugation of all youth. Sex-political work,

as an essential element of all revolutionary endeavors, must first concentrate on the following

  issues:

    1. Clarification of the question in the party itself, and within its organizations; correlation,

  and not separation, of personal and political questions, i.e. complete politicization of all sexual

  activity.

    2. Abolition of the one-sided truce between bourgeoisie and proletariat still prevailing in this

  domain (only the bourgeoisie is fighting for its own interests in all areas of sexuality). This

  entails declaration of war on the bourgeoisie by means of proletarian strategy in this area as well

  (e.g. action against laws governing morality such as that proposed by Bracht, etc.).

    3. The mobilization of youth of all political convictions on the basis of a clear, affirmative

  attitude  toward  adolescent  sexuality,  while  proving  the  impossibility  of  creating  the

  prerequisites  for  healthy  sexuality  under  capitalism.  Penetration  of  the  Christian,  National

  Socialist, and Social Democrat organizations through complete exposure of the contradictions

  between the members of these organizations and their leadership.

    4. The precondition for the above is ideological clarification of the difficulties in the youth

  organizations (ratio of boys to girls, enlistment of indifferent adolescents from dance halls with

  the aid of sexual issues, etc.).

    The conference is aware of the enormous difficulties which must be overcome in this field,

  but is equally convinced that the question of adolescent sexuality is one of the most significant

  issues of class struggle in regard to mobilization of youth for overthrowing capitalism. Youth is

  not only allowed to starve, but is also downtrodden through deprivation of its right to a sexual

  life, by means of legislation, persecution, and education. Reactionary bourgeois sex-politics of

  every hue, by which working youth is enslaved to capitalism (e.g. the Center Party with its one  and a half million youth), must be opposed by clear, sex-affirmative, revolutionary sex-politics

in order to reinforce powerfully the proletarian struggle against the bourgeoisie. Its defeat and

  the institution of a workers’-council government will subsequently solve the burning question of

  adolescent sexuality within the general framework of the social revolution.

                            Long live the proletarian revolution!


“Well-meaning  friends”  had  always  advised  me  to  “act  tactfully  and  less

aggressively.” In the Dresden region, operations were directed by a twenty-

one-year-old friend of the cause who hardly knew me. Several excerpts from

the reports in his letters are quoted below:


I would like to relate some of my experiences and point out the difficulties which may arise in

  treating these questions in youth groups.… Of all places, in the youth group the secretariat is

  giving me trouble about discussing these questions, and intends to prohibit me from speaking. I

  treated  the  questions  clearly  and  factually  and  was  even  understood  by  the  boys,  with  the

  exception of a certain few, namely those standing at the political head of the organization who

  should have been able to grasp what was happening in the organization; they were the very ones

  who opposed me. I can only tell you it was a joy for me to see youth defending its rights. I had

  the  impression,  figuratively  speaking,  that  those  young  people  were  struggling  against  the

  suppression of their own bodies. Thirty-eight of the forty present agreed with me … just those

  two, the political youth director and another director, took a different stand.… I wanted to

  withdraw but the youths refused to have anyone else discuss these questions and insisted that I

  return. I now have to face the question of whether to fight my way through on valid issues and

  discredit the political leaders, or submit. It is a very difficult decision.…


  The moral is: it is impossible for today’s human beings, even adolescents,

to  hold  a  political  position  without  becoming  sexually  intimidated.

Contemporary  organizations  demand  “dignity”  from  their  leaders. Rigid

dignity  and  sexual  health  are  incompatible.  Therefore  man’s  existential

questions  cannot  be  solved  with  these  leaders.  Bureaucracy  and  life  are

deadly  enemies.  We  shall  encounter  the  deep  significance  of  this  issue

repeatedly, as it constitutes the essential problem in all serious impulses for

innovation. It is sustained by the masses’ need for authority. They wish a

simple  sexual  life  for  themselves  while  demanding  that  their  leaders  be

authoritarian, i.e. bureaucratic, which implies “chaste.” The leaders who areforced  into  chastity,  in  turn,  take  revenge  upon  the  masses  by  likewise

demanding chastity, morality, and good conduct from them instead of finding

a positive answer to the question of sexuality. This is wrong! A forthright

leader will tell people, “I am only a human being and thus must also love and

embrace women (or men, respectively) like everyone else. Anyone who is

incapable  of  understanding  this  is  equally  incapable  of  understanding

revolution in our lives. How am I to grasp life if I am immobilized or am

forced  to  satisfy  my  desire  for  love  on  the  back  steps?”  This  is  the  way

genuine  leaders  of  social  groups  speak.  All  else  is  Hitlerism,  i.e.  divine

impotence!  Thus  Hitlerism  was  embedded  in  the  party  leadership  which

strove to secure a “new, better, and freer future for Germany.”

  On January 29, 1933, four weeks before the impending catastrophe, a

conference  of  the  German  National  Association  took  place  in  Berlin.  It

proved Hitler incorrect in accusing the Communists of “cultural bolshevism.”

A physician, Dr. Friedländer, who had warmly recommended my youth book

when everyone else had favored it, led a dull discussion on the subject, “The

Political Situation and Our Objectives.” The following excerpts were taken

from the stenographic minutes:


  Sexual pleasure is not, as Reich claims, a moving force in history.…

    Reich’s theory is a concession to the petty bourgeoisie … [who were at the moment flocking

to Hitler with colors flying and hearts aflame!].


  The leader of the Communist culture organization of Germany:


  Why, then, are only hunger and sexuality considered moving forces in history? One might just

as well also say that the need to breathe is a decisive historical factor. All this nonsense only

  distracts the masses from the struggle against the economic basis.


  (The good fellow, who alas was hindered in becoming a future protector

of culture, could have had no idea of what he was saying when he mentioned

the masses’ need to breathe. I myself was only able to confirm this sentenceclinically three years later.)


  Reich’s  contention  that  sexual  repression  includes  both  classes  is  equally  outrageous.  This

  denies the existence of class antagonism. Worst of all, however, is his claim in The Sexual

  Struggle of Youth that there is antagonism between the generations. This implies that the class

  struggle is shifted to the family sphere instead of all forces being concentrated upon the political

  struggle against exploitation and misery.


  E., the director of the German sex-political association:


  The great majority of our members do not come to us with sexual problems. Our organizational

  statistics prove that most of them are unemployed. [Logical!]


  A functionary from Essen:


  We have observed that one can enlist the interest of otherwise inaccessible individuals with

  sexual  issues—not  merely  the  Christian  Democrat  or  Christian  Party  women,  but  National

  Socialists  as  well.  We  have  even  been  successful  in  getting  them  to  participate  in

  demonstrations.


  D., directress of the West German organization:


  We too have established the fact that one can approach otherwise inaccessible strata of the

  population through sexual topics. A first meeting [on sex-politics] in a strategic defense plant

  which we had not yet infiltrated was attended by sixty women. We now have groups in that

  plant advocating “special social-hygiene demands.” [But of what importance was this to these

  organizations?]


  A Communist physician:


  Reich is trying to turn our organizations into “fucking clubs”! This is a crime against youth, and

  the future lies in their hands! [Protests from the majority of those attending the conference.] I

  have never in ten years had difficulties with sex-political work. [How very much I envied this

  cheerful class warrior!]


  The  situation  could  not  be  smoothed  over.  A  vote  taken  among  the

national functionaries on a resolution against my work, resulted in thirty-ninevotes cast for the party representative and thirty-two cast for me. (I must add

that the party leadership had been preparing for weeks, whereas I had not so

much as raised a finger to solicit votes for myself, due to my continuing

conviction  that  persuasion  and  suggestive  measures  are  senseless.  Only

individuals who defended their own standpoint were useful in this struggle.

Proceedings continued on February 18 and 19, 1933. This time “the party”

itself spoke through its cultural representative, B., in “A Political Report and

Our Objectives.”


  Reich’s publications are intentionally or unintentionally—for the moment I shall assume the

    latter—counterrevolutionary.… The Central Committee of the Communist Party has confirmed

  our views completely. A detailed examination of Reich’s falsification of Marxism will follow.

  [This never appeared.] The Berlin faction’s decision to distribute Reich’s works runs contrary to

  the decision of the National Directors.… Reich’s writings constitute an attempt to discredit

  Marxism. Anyone who believes that he can pursue sex-politics in our organizations [N.B.: sex-

  political organizations] is mistaken. We are pursuing politics, not sex-politics!


  At this, the same female functionary who had previously boasted of her

positive experiences in sex-political work suddenly reversed her position:


  One should not report anatomical details and “unaesthetic trivialities.” It was wrong to give

  precedence to sexual issues in the training of functionaries. [Then why have sex-political groups

at all?] Our members show greater interest in the strategy and tactics of the class struggle.


  The party representative of Marxism, B.:


  Reich’s claim in The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality that the productive force, work-

  power, is sublimated sexual energy, is monstrous. This is an outright contention that dialectical

  materialism is false. According to this, Marx’s Capital is also sublimated sexual energy. [What

a shame for “Communists”!]


  The  Communist  physician  Marta  Ruben-Wolff  stated  that  no  orgasm

disturbances existed in the proletariat. Such phenomena were to be seen only

in  the  bourgeoisie.  Furthermore,  it  was  the  fault  of  the  Communist  Party

faction that Reich had gained so much influence. He had done serious work,whereas the faction of Communist physicians had made no efforts in this

direction.  She  stated  that  substantial  changes  in  practical  work  were

necessary, although Reich’s theoretical basis had to be discarded.

  Thus  it  was  permissible  to  steal  the  people’s  hearts  but  perfidious  to

guarantee  their  independence  from  such  representatives  of  dialectical-

materialistic theory and revolutionary freedom. A young physician who had

been enthusiastic about my work for years stated innocuously that my theory

was  to  be  discarded,  as  the  questions  had  to  be  asked  in  a  “political”

reference. Psychology in Russia, he said, was “materialistic,” as opposed to

mine.

  Following an emphatic remark by the party representative that a schism

would develop if the resolution was not accepted unanimously, fifteen votes

were cast for the party leadership, seven for me, with three abstentions. This

was an enormous victory, since I had no organizational power behind me.

[My only weapon was truth about life.]

  At the same time, critiques of my youth book began to be received in the

organization:

                          11
  Neue Lehrerzeitung, Berlin, February 1933:


  The  book,  by  an  author  well  known  through  his  numerous  psychoanalytic  and

    psychopathological  works,  is  written  from  a  special  standpoint,  compared  to  other  similar

  works, inasmuch as it views questions of sexuality from the perspective of the class character of

  prevailing contemporary opinion. Hodann, for example, despite the clear factual explanations in

his writings, shows a distinct weakness in regard to demonstrating modes of solving sexual

  problems. Reich, however, offers a thorough analysis of the social origin of sexual misery and

  demonstrates the fact that we may hope for sexual emancipation only through a change in the

  economic and political foundations of society. The book is written in a popular style so that it

  will function as a guideline, especially for the proletarian youth for whom it was intended. It is

  also recommended for all teachers and educators desiring an introduction to the sexual question

  from a Marxist perspective.


  The opinion of a female stenotypist:


  Absolutely  nothing  can  be  said  against  it.  The  book  is  clearly  and  understandably  written.  Everyone ought to have a look at it. The format is also excellent.


                      12
  Die Rote Fahne, Vienna, December 14, 1932:


  This book was written in 1931. However, it is still of great current interest because Comrade

  Reich demonstrates clearly and without reserve the inseparable relationships between sexual

  distress and the ruling system. But the author also takes pains to give proletarian adolescents as

  much advice in their sexual misery as is possible within this system. To quote his finest counsel

to them, “Fight against this system; then you will also be fighting for your sexual freedom and

  dignity.”  For  these  reasons  this  informative  book  must  be  recommended  for  struggling

  proletarian youth. [That was embarrassing for the party leadership!]


  Critique of a youth in a Charlottenburg plant:


I  read  the  book  together  with  several  other  fellows.  They  were  enthusiastic  and  said  that

  something like this had always been lacking until now. The contents are great. You went into

  everything we had on our minds. We have already become clear on a lot about ourselves just by

  reading it.


  From a youth group leader in Neukölln:


I read your Sexual Struggle of Youth with great interest and noticed that it by far surpasses the

  brochure Sexual Excitement and Satisfaction in both content and style. It must be particularly

  emphasized that almost every chapter is discussed on a Marxist basis [here that means “true”

  basis] and provides a brilliant field of discussion for proletarian youth organizations, especially

  since practical examples were selected from KJV and Fichte groups. These examples also reflect

  the sexual needs of youth in youth organizations.

    Although I have no objections in general, I would like, nevertheless, to exercise the right to

  comment on, or supplement, several questions touched upon in the book. We do hope the book

  will appear in our youth organizations very shortly. It is the first publication which answers the

  question “When are adolescents actually mature enough to begin having sexual intercourse?”

    The  sexual  problem  is  so  clearly  and  understandably  solved  that  it  would  aid  not  only

  proletarian adolescents but many others as well. In my opinion, the final sections seem too much

  like Communist propaganda. If one were to select a more general approach in these chapters, it

  would certainly be read by wider circles, as not all youths are Communist. However, I feel that

it is most important for the book to reach as many adolescents as possible in order to gain youth

for the cause of sexual emancipation.

                                                                        (signed) Zeltlager  Let  us  pause  for  a  moment  to  review  the  questions  raised  by  such

conferences,  resolutions,  betrayals,  etc.  They  are  not  localized  questions

pertaining only to the field of sex-politics. They are the basic questions of all

human organizations, and if they remain unanswered there can be no real

change but only the illusion of freedom. The infinite difficulties of human life

have undermined, until now, every attempt to solve the basic problem of our

society, namely the division of its members into classes. The fiasco of the

Russian Revolution leaves us in no doubt in this respect. In the conferences

and disputes which I have described, one was able to observe the following

phenomena:

  The people’s fear of stepping out of line, of leaving the solid ranks of the

masses, regardless of how revolutionary their behavior. This holds true in all

circles and realms of life.

  The people’s pettiness, which stems from a guilty conscience and which

is  practiced  completely  unconsciously,  as  their  self-image  does  not  allow

them any alternative. The Soviet Russian espionage and sabotage trials which

filled  the  following  years  were  full  of  these  mechanisms  and  therefore

incomprehensible.

  The people’s attraction to ideas about human freedom, but simultaneous

helpless  collapse  when  the  first  serious  difficulties  arise.  Once  again,  the

contradiction between yearning for freedom and the capability of being free

comes to the fore.

  The domination of official political functions by private, highly personal

moods and attitudes and hence the utter senselessness of all politics.

  The childishness of mass expectations as soon as authoritarian influence

is exerted, regardless of the nature of that influence.

  The  irresponsible  willingness  of  former  socialistic  organizations  to

support  correct  ideas  as  long  as  they  do  not  understand  them;  and  their

equally  prompt  readiness  to  destroy  correct  ideas  once  their  effect  is

perceived.  The deep unbridgeable chasm separating the life of the masses from that

of their representatives, whom they themselves organized and invested with

power.

  The forced “bureaucratization” of every mass leader, once he rises above

the  mass  level;  the  sexual  core  of  every  bureaucracy;  the  irreconcilable

contradiction of bureaucracy and natural sexual activity.

  The  seeming  faithlessness  of  the  masses  which  stems  from  the

insurmountability of real problems; the disdain for the masses on the part of

individuals who never took the trouble to trace a social problem to its roots.

  Frequently I was on the verge of giving up the entire mass-psychological

effort and devoting myself strictly to medical and clinical work. I could have

overcome  the  social  guilt  feelings,  as  achievements  founded  on  social

conscience are of little permanence. My deep convictions on the correctness

of Marxist sociology would also not have restrained me; on the contrary, the

unscientific methods of the Marxist party would rather have implemented

rapid severance. It was my fervent interest in the peculiar human reactions

which bound me. Urgent research depended upon my understanding them,

and for this reason I did not resign from any organization or work group with

which I had finished, but simply let subsequent events take their necessary

course. This provided inestimable insights and I might say strength as well.

First, I overcame my personal sensitivity; second, I gathered experience for

the future; and finally, I gained mass-psychological insight. If one wishes to

combat the plague one must expose oneself to it. Beyond all doubt, neurosis

and  politics  did  constitute  a  plague  of  humanity,  but  all  this  appeared  as

“unproletarian” or “unscientific adventurousness” to established politicians

and to my professional colleagues.

  There were some precarious situations. In several districts, the Socialist

                      13
Reichsbannerjugend had united with Communist youth. The parties’ leaders

were engaged in disgraceful struggles. For example, in December 1932, the

Communist Party issued orders for members not to march with the SocialDemocrats in a large demonstration, but merely to line up along the sidewalk.

Against the will of the party, the masses intermingled. People of all classes

and professions wanted to fight Fascism. I had put myself and my car at the

disposal  of  an  armed  formation  consisting  of  the  Reichsbanner  and

Arbeiterwehr.  I  drew  up  a  leaflet  for  the  combat  formations  in  which  I

advised separation from the parties and common action against the planned

Fascist attack at the March elections in Berlin. Several hundred thousand

copies were distributed.

  The meetings held in Leipzig, Stettin, Dresden, etc., were crowded. On

February  24,  1933,  I  went  to  Copenhagen,  where  the  Danish  student

organization had invited me to lecture on the problems of Fascism and race.

On the ship, I was interviewed by Politiken, the largest Danish government

newspaper. I was also to speak at a meeting that Politiken wanted to hold.

After the first evening with the students there was great enthusiasm, but after

the  second,  when  I  spoke  on  Fascism  and  Germany  before  a  workers’

meeting, Politiken backed off. It had been too much for the government paper

to  take.  Early  on  February  28,  I  returned  to  Berlin.  That  evening  the

Reichstag was set ablaze and the next morning fifteen hundred functionaries

and intellectuals were arrested. I escaped arrest only because the Fascists’

lists  had  been  drawn  up  according  to  the  official  positions  held  by  those

arrested, and I had never held an official position.

  The six days following the mass arrests were horrible. The organizations

were paralyzed. No one could be found. On March 1, 1933, I accidentally

met a Communist Reichstag deputy at a colleague’s home. We discussed the

question  of  what  to  do  on  March  5,  the  election  day  set  by  Hitler,  as

Chancellor appointed by Hindenburg. The Communist representative told me

that the remaining party leaders had ordered workers’ living quarters to be

protected and the Fascist columns to be broken up. A worker in the defense

formation had informed me that the forty thousand armed workers at our

disposal would have been only too glad to intervene if mass demonstrationsoccurred. But there were no mass demonstrations. The last took place in the

middle of February, when one hundred thousand people, in the bitter cold,

silently  and  earnestly  marched  past  the  Karl  Liebknecht  house,  where

Thälmann and the Central Committee stood in review. The people expected

the  party  to  begin  the  fight.  The  party  knew  the  masses  were  passive.

Nevertheless it gave orders to the defense formations to break up the Fascist

columns.  Meanwhile  the  formations  waited  for  the  masses,  making

intervention dependent upon their actions.

  Three good friends of mine, workers who had led defense formations,

were among those arrested. Two of them were murdered in the SA barracks

on  Pape  Strasse.  Possession  of  arms  and  distribution  of  leaflets  (or  even

aiding in this) were punishable by death. Four days prior to the election I was

visited  by  youths  who  needed  my  car  to  transport  arms  and  leaflets  to  a

Berlin suburb. We agreed that, in case of arrest, the driver would claim the

car had been stolen. As they drove off, it suddenly occurred to me that we

had not discussed the address from which the car had supposedly been stolen.

If they were caught, all would be lost. They were to bring the car to a certain

place in the inner city by 1 A.M., at the latest. If they were not there by the

appointed time, this would indicate that matters had gone amiss and I was to

report my car as stolen. Six hours of dread passed. The individuals who had

set out were outstanding men and would have lost their lives had the leaflets

been found. I waited at the appointed place. Time passed; it was one o’clock

and the car was not in sight. I assumed they had been arrested. What was I to

do? I could not report a stolen car because the first questions would surely

have concerned where the car had been parked, and that would have exposed

the whole plot. There was no escape. I could have fled, but I had neither

money  nor  identification  with  me.  I  could  not  go  home,  because  my

apartment was being watched. The SA had already been there. At the time, I

was living in various hotels where I registered under a false name. Two days

before, my children had been sent to Vienna to their grandparents. My wifewas living with friends. On the other hand, not reporting the car as stolen also

meant  certain  catastrophe.  I  was  stricken  with  fear  and  soon  thereafter

overcome by a peculiar icy chill. I decided to wait a bit longer. Another half

hour  passed  and  no  car.  I  felt  miserable  and  was  about  to  leave  when

suddenly I saw the car in the distance. Everything had gone smoothly except

that they had had a flat tire on the way back. We went into a bar and had a

drink to celebrate. They had also thought of our stupid forgetfulness.

  The next day an article on my youth book appeared in the Völkischer

Beobachter. It was clear that I could not remain in Berlin any longer. Two

friends  from  the  sex-political  organization  urged  me  to  flee  at  once.  But

where was I to go? I had no money. We decided I should first journey south

with my wife and cross the border as a tourist in ski clothes. We departed at

night. There were several friends on the train but no one greeted anyone else.

In a small Bavarian town just before we reached the border, we got out, not

knowing whether the border was open or not. We held Austrian passports but

no one knew whether lists of people to be arrested had been drawn up. To

find this out, we spent two days with an older couple who were enthusiastic

about the Nazis. Although Bavaria had not yet been conquered and was still

ruled  by  Held,  the  SA  could  be  seen  everywhere.  Newspaper  reports

indicated that a return to Berlin would be ill-advised. With trepidation we

crossed the border. Everything went smoothly with our Austrian passports

and we got off the train on the other side. My wife was then to go back to

Berlin and let me know whether it was safe for me to return as well. A letter

soon arrived telling me not to return under any circumstances. Nevertheless, I

crossed the border and went back to Berlin. I had no clothes, underwear, or

even  the  barest  essentials  for  the  eventuality  of  permanent  emigration.  In

Berlin my friends thought I was insane (that was not the first time!). Giving

my full name, I registered in a hotel for transients. This seemed the safest

thing  to  do.  An  Austrian,  correctly  registered  under  his  full  name  in  a

transient hotel, with his passport deposited at the desk, could not be anythingbut  a  harmless  foreigner  who  did  not  know  his  way  around.  I  sent  an

innocuous-looking person to my apartment to ascertain whether I could still

go there and fetch my clothes. I had heard that the SA had been there again

and taken a watch and some books, among them the Kamasutra (the manual

of  Indian  love  techniques)  and  one  with  Japanese  woodcuts.  This  was

precisely in line with my diagnosis of the psychic roots of the enthusiasm

engendered  by  National  Socialism.  The  maid  had  innocently  reported  the

theft to the police and some of the articles were returned. One evening, after

dark,  I  stole  into  my  apartment  and  packed  some  clothes.  The  furniture,

library,  and  car  had  to  remain  behind.  An  invaluable  card  catalogue  and

archives  with  numerous  manuscripts  had  already  been  taken  to  safety  in

various regions of Germany, by friends, prior to my first flight. I was able to

have acquaintances send my library to Copenhagen several months later. I

stayed  on  for  a  few  days  but  could  not  locate  anyone.  Nonpolitical

acquaintances showed me clearly—although in a friendly manner—that they

did not wish any embarrassment. Thus I left for Vienna with only a few

marks in my pocket. There I was able to resume my medical practice with no

difficulty. Strictly speaking, I was not an “emigrant.”

  In Vienna the situation was not especially promising. After three years of

absence I no longer had contacts and it was necessary to establish myself

anew. I lived with friends who were exceptionally helpful but who obviously

had no proper perspective on the events in Germany. “Something like that

could never happen in Austria.” “It would be a shame to leave without a

struggle.” “In Austria things are making headway.” “A revolutionary division

of the Schutzbund has just been organized within the Social Democrat Party.”

“One can learn something from the events in Germany.” “The Austrians will

defeat Fascism.” No one anticipated February 1934, and even less March

1938. Since I did not wish to discourage them, I remained silent, although I

did not foresee victory in the near future. The student organization of the

Austrian Socialist Party invited me to give a lecture on Fascism. I explainedall I knew about it as well as I could, but did not draw any consequences for

politics; this could have served no purpose. It was too deep a matter to be

understood  and  mastered  practically  in  a  short  time,  although  everyone

understood  the  contradiction  within  social  development.  When  several

friends who were aware of the political consequences asked me to explain

them, I declined—not because the police were present, but rather because I

refused to rattle off phrases without the prospect of accomplishing anything

by doing so. Many illusions about politics, the nature of a party, and the

“class struggle” would have to be eliminated before sex-politics and mass

                                          14
psychology could be taken seriously.

  Early in the summer of 1938, Freud, robbed of his possessions by the SA,

had to leave Vienna and flee to London. Most other Viennese psychoanalysts

also became homeless emigrants. They had been “apolitical scientists” who

did not wish to mix politics and science.

  In  January  1932,  Freud,  as  editor  of  the  psychoanalytic  journal,  had

attached a prefatory note to my paper on masochism, in which I clinically

disproved the death-instinct theory. Thanks to the efforts of German Socialist

psychoanalysts,  this  note  was  not  published.  It  had  read:  “Special

circumstances  constrain  the  editor,  at  this  point,  to  remind  the  reader  of

otherwise self-evident facts, namely that this journal allows every author who

entrusts  it  with  a  manuscript  for  publication  the  full  right  of  freedom  to

express his opinions—within the context of psychoanalysis—and does not

assume any responsibility for its contents. In the case of Dr. Reich, however,

the reader must be informed that said author is a member of the Bolshevist

Party. Now, it is known that Bolshevism places restrictions on the freedom of

scientific research, similar to those of the Church. Obedience to the party

demands that everything be rejected which contradicts the prerequisites of its

own doctrine of salvation. It is left to the option of our readers to clear the

author of this paper of such suspicions. The editor would have been moved to

the same comment had he been presented with a manuscript written by amember of the Society of Jesus.”

  I knew that Freud’s remarks on the Communist Party were correct, but I

also knew he was avoiding the same question as the Communists and was,

                                                                                          15
additionally, undertaking nothing against the bureaucratization of the IPV.

To take such action one must first have suffered under the bureaucracy one

wishes to overcome. I also did not wish to obscure the fact that I had learned

much among the Communists, as well as in all other organizations, about

evaluating social existence. Hence I refused to rescind my article, or even

revise it to avoid embarrassment. Finally it was decided to have Bernfeld

write a counter-paper, which was published in the journal, together with my

article on masochism. Freud’s foreword was omitted. Bernfeld did himself

great harm with his rejoinder, but my article was universally well received.

However, factual ties and organizational ties are two different things. This

too  is  a  part  of  social  psychiatry: An  individual’s  organizational  ties  are

injurious  to  his  factual  convictions  when  the  organization  begins  to

contradict the facts. In my reply to the editors of the journal, I maintained

that:

  1. My criticism of the death instinct has no relevance to any party and is

clinically based.

  2. I was at complete liberty to give courses on psychoanalytic psychology

within the party. In contrast, I had been ordered by the president of the Berlin

Psychoanalytic Association to refrain from introducing sociological topics in

the professional organization.

  3.  The  direction  of  my  analytic  research  involved  certain  social

consequences. The death-instinct theory had been formulated to avoid these

same consequences. I had already been critical of this theory at a time when I

was not yet politically active.

  4. Restrictions such as this had never been placed on the philosophically

cumbersome articles by the Rev. Pfister or the metaphysician Kolnai. Hence

the judgment against my article was biased.  5.  My  refutation  of  the  death-instinct  theory  had  never  been  treated

factually. The issue was still open.

  Eitingon, president of the Association, had already asked me in October

1932  not  to  admit  any  candidates  to  my  technical  seminar,  which  was

attended by approximately twenty practicing Berlin psychoanalysts. I rejected

this  unjustified  request  and  he  vetoed  my  election  to  membership  in  the

Berlin Training Institute. Nevertheless, I gave lectures at the Institute which

were very well attended.

  In  January  1933,  I  contracted  with  the  Psychoanalytischer  Verlag  to

publish my book Character Analysis. When I arrived in Vienna, the director

of the house told me that it had been necessary to cancel the contract due to

the political situation. Despite my protest, the decision remained unchanged.

Since the galley proofs had already been run off, the book could only be

“published  by  the  author”  and  then  taken  on  commission  by  the  IPA

publishing house. I had prepaid the printing costs. The action was meant to

decrease the influence of my book. They wanted no embarrassment through

the use of my name, and this organization of which I was still a member in

good standing showed no consideration for my work, my expenditures, or my

situation. I could only maintain the principles expressed in my letter of March

17, 1933:

  1. The political reaction cloaks psychoanalysis with the term “cultural

Bolshevism,” and justly so, because the science of analysis endangers the

existence  of  Fascist  ideology.  The  sociological  and  cultural-political

character of psychoanalysis can be neither denied nor concealed. This could

only  harm  scientific  work,  but  could  never  prevent  reactionary  political

powers from recognizing danger wherever it appears.

  2.  The  cultural-political  character  of  psychoanalysis,  in  addition  to  its

medical value, has been admitted by every professional organization. Any

concealment  of  this  fact  is  senseless  self-sacrifice.  A  strong  group  of

psychoanalysts  exists  which  is  willing  to  continue  the  cultural-politicalstruggle.  The  existence  of  this  group  will  remain  politically  embarrassing

regardless of whether it is active within or outside of the IPA.

                                                                                    16
  3. In this struggle, psychoanalysis can only side with the worker. It is

not the personal existence of analysts which must be secured at all cost, but

rather  psychoanalysis  itself,  as  a  research  method.  It  recognizes  but one

criterion,  namely  progressive  social  movement,  which,  in  Germany,  is

currently paying for its lessons in blood. “The historical process will by no

means end with Hitler. If proof of the historical justification of the existence

of psychoanalysis and of its sociological function was ever necessary, the

current phase of development must furnish it.”

  I knew that the letter would change nothing, but wished nevertheless to

separate myself at all cost from the behavior of the profession. No one could

know what fate would bring. I harmed myself personally in doing this. My

letter could not help but create guilty consciences and thus cause irritation.

But this could not be avoided.

  The letter did not fail to produce results. Following the lecture which I

delivered to Socialist students, I received a letter from the chairman of the

Vienna  Psychoanalytic  Association.  Politely  but  laconically,  he  demanded

that I give no further lectures for Socialist or Communist organizations. This

gentleman was a member of the Austrian Social Democratic Party. It always

happened  that  way.  For  a  long  while  the  Social  Democrats  retarded  the

progress of decent work, until the advance of Fascism finished off the task. I

replied that I was unable to accept this demand unconditionally, but would in

any  case  consult  the  board  of  directors.  Thereupon  I  was  informed  by

telephone that my promise to consult with the board was not sufficient and

that it was incumbent upon me to agree. In reply to my request for written

confirmation, the chairman explained that he had made the request at the

suggestion  of  Freud.  I  repeated  that  I  could  not  accept  this  restriction,

whereupon he forbade me to participate in the Association’s meetings. He

told my wife that if he were in my position he would long since have left theAssociation. I suggested a consultation with the Vienna executive committee

of the IPA, which took place on April 21, 1933. In this meeting I proposed to

refrain from all publishing and lecturing activities until the IPA had officially

come to a decision as to whether or not my views were compatible with my

membership. Until then it had not taken an official stand and worked against

me only from behind the scenes. Thus I hoped at least to clarify my position

before the profession. This move could not be avoided, and five years later it

was shown to have been correct.

  For a long time, I had been aware of the fact that my views were my own,

although psychoanalysts claimed them as analytic theory while omitting the

most  significant  aspects.  This  had  to  be  avoided  under  all  circumstances,

because the IPA was not willing to bear the consequences. If my opinion was

correct that psychoanalysis, by virtue of its very nature, would necessarily be

opposed by political reaction, then I had to be allowed complete freedom to

express myself. However, if the organization did not wish to identify itself

with my viewpoint, then I wanted to bear full responsibility for the issue

entirely alone. Anna Freud remarked during the meeting that the tide was

against me, but that one could not know whether it would someday turn. For

the moment, nothing could be done. The secretariat was to inform me of the

organization’s  position.  The  information  never  arrived  and  the  situation

remained the same until the termination of my membership. I had not been

able  to  obtain  a  single  official  comment.  They  did  not  wish  to  give  up,

altogether, the possibility of winning laurels as a result of this philosophical

conflict, and I was determined not to give them to anyone if the burden of

practical responsibility and sacrifice lay on my shoulders.

    Embarrassing events accumulated. A young physician from Copenhagen

had come to me in Vienna for training. As was the custom, he also visited

several prominent colleagues. They advised him not to work with me; I was a

Marxist and my pupils would, under certain conditions, not be recognized.

Bernfeld, a “Marxist,” emphasized this particularly. But the physician cameto me in spite of this and is a practicing vegetotherapist today. It was his idea

that I come to Copenhagen. He said there were several candidates for analytic

training there. This impressed me as being a good solution, so I requested

information  from  Copenhagen  on  a  work  permit,  and  asked  Eitingon,  the

director  of  the  training  committee,  whether  my  teaching  in  Copenhagen

would be recognized. His reply was quite contorted and stated that, due to the

differences  in  opinion,  my  candidates  were  to  be  subjected  to  stricter

examination.  Leunbach  wrote  that  they  were  not  willing  to  grant  me

permission to work because of my lectures. However, I could remain there

for  six  months.  Since  the  agitation  about  me  in  Vienna  was  making  the

situation distasteful, I decided to go to Copenhagen in any case. Thus it was

not the police or a lack of work which caused my emigration from Austria,

but my professional colleagues. I knew that Anna Freud, secretary of the IPA,

secretly sided with me because she valued my efforts. I wrote her several

times but she did not wish to become involved—nor did anyone else in those

days. There I stood, without means or a home, and in a highly precarious

position professionally. In addition, it had been necessary to borrow money to

cover  the  printing  costs  of Character  Analysis.  I  had  almost  decided  to

withhold it, but the publishers convinced me that it absolutely had to appear.

For years to come it safeguarded my existence.

  I borrowed the money for the journey to Copenhagen and left Vienna on

April 30. My papers were in order; there were no difficulties. I traveled via

Poland on a freighter. On the first of May I arrived in Copenhagen, where I

registered at a hotel. There had already been numerous inquiries and on the

following day a number of people requested appointments for treatment. It

was not possible to handle this situation at the hotel, and after two days I

rented a small apartment and began to work. I particularly wanted to publish

The Mass Psychology of Fascism. The manuscript needed only to be prepared

for the printer, but I was forced to wait until I had earned enough money to

finance the printing. Several German emigrants helped me to transfer myVerlag für Sexualpolitik to Copenhagen. Meanwhile, Character Analysis was

published in Vienna. The book on Fascism appeared in August. Two pupils

from Berlin joined me and several others registered in Copenhagen. I was

even able to provide for a pupil who later let me down horribly.

  I had contacted the Danish Communist Party because emigrants with their

wives  and  children  were  starving  in  the  streets.  I  organized  contributions

from friends, but there were simply too many in need. The Rote Hilfe only

supported those who had been recommended by the party in Germany, and

gave  no  help  to  the  others.  I  began  to  encounter  increasing  numbers  of

desperately shabby individuals. One day, while taking a walk on the Lange

Linie,  I  saw  a  young  man,  completely  destitute,  sitting  on  a  bench,  half

starved,  without  money,  a  place  to  stay,  or  hope.  He  was  considering

drowning himself. I took him home and supported him for a while. Some

time later he wrote a marvelous novel about vagabonds, which I published.

  I  went  to  the  Danish  party  and  demanded  to  see  the  German

representative, but the Danish party official refused to put me in touch with

him. I declared that I would not leave the premises under any circumstances

until he had accommodated me. He wanted to usher me out, but I protested in

such forceful terms that a second party official had to come in and quiet

things down. They said I would receive information the next day, which I

did.

  I met the representative of the German party in the following fashion: In

great secrecy they led me into a room. There sat a heavyset man with a stern

face who told me to take a seat. He inquired whether I had “party permission”

to leave Germany and why I had made such a scene with the Danes. This was

a breach of discipline, he said, and merited suspension. He spoke in a strict,

overbearing  manner.  Suddenly  I  shouted  at  him  to  stop  being  such  a

bureaucrat and then I would talk with him. I told him to behave decently.

Immediately  he  changed  his  tone—cowards  that  bureaucrats  are—and

became cordial. I did not trust the fellow and later discovered that he was oneof the lowest types. They had nothing to say, had driven a party with lofty

goals into the ground, and then impertinently claimed to be the future leaders

of Germany. The man explained that the information from the Danish party

official was correct and that the German party had “offices everywhere to

issue party border passes.” This was too ridiculous. I declared that it was a lie

and that the emigrants had to be cared for immediately regardless of whether

they  were  recognized  by  the  party  or  not.  They  could  not  be  allowed  to

starve. I felt it would be time enough later to see what developed. He was not

willing to accept this, so I threatened to raise hell if it were not done. He

promised to do whatever he could, as scandals had to be avoided at that time.

  I knew their mentality. The results of my protest were not particularly

profound, but I did hear that more was being done for the refugees. However,

my actions gained me the deep hatred of the Danish Communist bureaucrats.

[Since then, the red Fascists have slandered my work wherever they could—

in Norway, England, the United States, etc.]

  I soon experienced the irrationalism of politics. The German “emigrant

representative”  requested  the  manuscript  of The  Mass  Psychology  of

Fascism. The first sentence of the book read: “The German working class has

suffered  severe  defeat.”  I  was  called  to  account  for  this  single,  opening

sentence. The Comintern resolutions during those months had stated that the

German working class had not suffered defeat. The catastrophe in Germany

was “merely a transitory defeat in the course of revolutionary progress.” An

eighteen-year-old mechanic’s helper who had just left Germany told me that

the Communists still remaining behind had told him that all this was only an

interruption, and that the Hitler era would not last six months. Completely

convinced, he expected to return in a few weeks.

  My expulsion from the Comintern occurred as follows: Prior to my arrival

in  Copenhagen,  the  Communist  journal  of  Danish  intellectuals, Plan, had

                                                                          17
published  my  essay  “Wohin  führt  die  Nackterziehung?”  which  had

originally appeared in 1927 in the journal Psychoanalytische PädagogischeZeitschrift, and had been translated and published with my permission. The

Danish Minister of Justice, Mr. Zahle, was a very ascetic gentleman whose

daughters were somewhat less abstemious. For this reason, he vehemently

despised  everything  tinged  with  the  terms  “sexual  enlightenment,”

“psychoanalysis,” etc. He had had great difficulties with his children, and

consequently had the editor of the journal accused of pornography. As usual,

the indictment was based on words which were not quite correctly used. In

                                          18
this  case  it  was  the  word Wipfi.  The  translator  had  not  taken  into

consideration  that,  for  the  layman,  sexology  is  dangerously  close  to

pornography and had translated one or two passages carelessly. In response

to an inquiry by Extrabladet, I truthfully stated that although the translation

did not correspond precisely to my original manuscript, there could be no

question of pornography and that the indictment was a serious error. The

large magazine Kulturkampf published a detailed article by me entitled “Was

ist Pornographie?” In a second article I expressly took up the cause of the

indicted editor. He was sentenced to serve forty days. Following this, the

Danish Communist Party declared that I had betrayed the editor and deserted

him. A small Moscow-type trial was set in motion. No one could comment on

the issue itself because no one was in the habit of advocating any subject.

  On  November  21,  1933,  the  following  article  was  printed  by

              19
Arbeiterblad, with a large spread:


                              COMMUNIST PARTY

            SECRETARIAT OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE

                        Exclusion from the Communist Party of Denmark

 

In agreement with the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Germany [which had

  ceased to exist in March], we announce that Dr. Wilhelm Reich has been excluded from the

  Danish Communist Party [of which I was never a member]. The reasons for this include: His

  un-Communist  and  anti-party  behavior  in  a  succession  of  cases;  his  publication  of  a

    counterrevolutionary book; his establishment of a publishing house without party sanction, and

  additionally, his statement, published by the Danish government press, wherein he renounces his  own article published in Plan, thus facilitating official and police action against the editor of

  said Plan.

    Dr. Reich lives in Denmark and, as the newspapers show, has been granted an immigration

  visa. [The visa had just been canceled at that time.]

                                                                      The Party Secretariat


  On  December  1,  1933,  a  lengthy  review  of The  Mass  Psychology  of

Fascism was published in Arbeiterblad. It contained the same statements I

had heard in the discussions in Berlin, almost word for word. Among others,

the following were added:


    With the cowardice that appears to be the most predominant trait of the author (we recall his

  behavior in the Plan affair), he attempts to obscure the orientation of this book, which in reality

  constitutes an attack on revolutionary politics. Only a few passages reveal the facts and refer to

  “the Communist parties” by name—otherwise Reich prefers to aim his blows at a concept he

  himself has created, namely “vulgar Marxists.” …

    Sexuality is the driving force of the human psyche,—in capitalism no normal sexual life

  exists at all.…

    Reich and his followers will, of course, deny that which is most certain, namely that they are

  attempting  to  break  down  the  former  basis  of  Marxist  propaganda.  However,  the  book

  represents, objectively, such serious undermining of the doctrines of Communist propaganda

  that it must be termed counterrevolutionary. It is twice as dangerous because there is not a trace

of  proof  that  Reich’s  idea  would,  in  reality,  reinforce  the  Communist  struggle,  even  as  a

  supplement.  When  he  cites  as  proof  the  interest  with  which  his  concepts  were  greeted  by

  women, children, and the bourgeoisie, it can only be termed naïveté. Every form of discussion

  and enlightenment pertaining to sex awakens the interest of politically uneducated elements

  precisely because of capitalistic education!


  I did not understand how I could have belonged to this party for so long;

but I did understand that the sharp reactionary position toward sexuality it

now maintained was prompted by the need for a clear answer demanded by

the times, an answer the party was unable to supply. If one reads the above

statements  carefully,  the  question  arises  as  to  what  function  this  party

organization had assumed in the world, since it had completely forgotten to

whom it owed its existence.  [SO: The manner in which WR committed grave mistakes in this official

break with the red Fascists in 1933 should be carefully observed.

  1. He did not say that he had never belonged to the Danish Communist

Party and therefore could not be excluded from it. (The German Communist

Party had ceased to exist in March 1933.)

  2. He did not immediately state publicly that:

    a. the red Fascists had no right whatsoever to control the publishing house of his Institute;

    b. the red Fascists plainly lied when they claimed that he had renounced his article in Plan;

    c. they lied again when they wrote that he had been given permission to stay in Denmark,

      thereby insinuating that this was a reward for his betrayal of the editor of Plan. His visa

      had been withdrawn precisely at that time.

Here, as he had done before and would do often again, WR manifested one of

his most serious weaknesses seen from a militant point of view. He let the

plague talk and act without contradicting it, in spite of the existence of clear

evidence that the pestilent character was lying, cheating the public, falsifying

records, turning upside down and distorting right and left what was actually

the  truth.  He  did  not  deny  such  public  statements  simply  because  he  felt

himself above such filth. He did not deny them because he was convinced

that  the  truth  would  sooner  or  later  win  out  spontaneously,  exactly  as  so

many  American  liberals  believe  today,  thus  allowing  the  politicking

scoundrel to go on doing his mischief unopposed. WR also had too much

practical work to do, while the political scoundrel did nothing but pestilent

politicking. It is this same scoundrel who attacked in Korea, 1950, and then

accused the gullible American of being the attacker.]


  On  April  13,  1935,  the  following  notices  were  published  in  the

                    20
Reichsgesetzblatt:


  Number 213—April 13, 1935

                                21
In  accordance  with  the  VO  of  February  4,  1933,  the  publications Was  ist
                    222324
    Klassenbewusstsein by Ernst Parell, Dialektischer Materialismus und Psychoanalyse, by

  Wilhelm Reich, Volumes 1 and 2 of the political-psychological series which were published by

  the  Verlag  für  Sexualpolitik  (Copenhagen,  Prague,  Zurich),  as  well  as  all  other  subsequent  publications in this same series, are herewith to be confiscated by the police and withdrawn

  from circulation, as the works are liable to endanger public security and order. 41230/35 II 2B 1.

  Berlin,

                                                                    April 9, 1935 Gestapo

 

  Number 2146—May 7, 1935

In  accordance  with  the  VO  of  the  President  of  the  Republic,  of  February  28,  1933,  the

  distribution of all foreign publications of the political-psychological series of Sexpol (Verlag für

  Sexualpolitik, Copenhagen, Denmark; Prague, Czechoslovakia; Zurich, Switzerland) has been

  prohibited within Germany until further notice. III P 3952/P 53. Berlin, May 6, 1935 RMdj


  On  January  7,  1934,  the  following  article  appeared  in  the  Comintern

organ in Prague, Der Gegenangriff:


                            The Results of Association Mongering

  … In addition to overworked Freudian slogans which are exemplified in National Socialism but

  could also be equally well applied to all other forms of cultural reaction, we find reiterated

  confirmation of two facts which are already well known to us: first, that Hitler’s transitory

  success has engulfed numerous members of the petty bourgeoisie, among whom there are also

  individuals—like  Reich—who  consider  themselves  “Communists”;  second,  that  there  are

  certain natural-scientific half-truths which have already been dogmatized within science in the

  direction of mysticism. When these are applied to social conditions, they assume the sectarian

  character  typical  of  the  propagation  of  decadent  bourgeois  phenomena  within  the  workers’

  movement since the days of the deceased Eugen Dühring. In this they fall into the closest

  proximity to Fascism.…

      [According to Reich] the workers’ movement sinned by placing the material need of the

  exploited in the center of its propaganda, while neglecting the “central issue on the cultural

  front, namely the question of sexuality.” But, again according to Reich, one only wins the

  already leftist industrial proletariat with economic and political solutions. The indifferent masses

  are to be won over through the demonstration of their sexual need and through the description of

a “cultural-bolshevistic” state of unrestricted freedom. We understand very well that bourgeois

  disintegration is the psychological source of this, but its propagation by Reich, a “Communist,”

  plays perfectly into the hand of Hitler’s propaganda. In all earnestness, we are told that Christian

  workers are best won—as a detailed example illustrates—through proof that their Church is an

  organization founded for the purpose of blocking their sexuality.


  Shortly before this, the journal Weltbühne had published a very favorable

article  on  the  book.  That  was  embarrassing!  This  journal,  published  byintellectuals  dependent  upon  the  Comintern,  later  reversed  its  position

completely.  Meanwhile,  the  first  edition  of  the  book  was  sold  out  and  a

second had to be printed. I heard that it was circulating widely in Germany

and was highly regarded. I have letters from underground workers in which

they expressed complete understanding and appreciation. The book is still

being bought today, six years after the catastrophe. But who still reads the

Comintern resolutions of that era? Who even read them at the time? This is

directed against those individuals who are incapable of looking beyond the

present and their immediate environment and who are constantly tied to the

apron  strings  of  their  organization.  Organizations  come  and  go;  valid

concepts have a development and a future. Today The Mass Psychology of

Fascism is a recognized book in the struggle against all forms of dictatorship.

  Against my better judgment, I myself clung fast to the organization to

which I had belonged and for which I had fought. The party became my

second home, and it becomes a second home for all who renounce bourgeois

security in favor of the struggle for a better future. For many, it becomes the

only  home  because  they  lose  sight  of  the  goal  beyond.  This  destroys  the

organization and transforms it into an apparatus. I clarified these matters for

myself in the following way:

  I did not doubt for one moment the correctness of the great thoughts and

deeds of the founders of the Socialist movement. Every phase of my work,

every experience had confirmed their theories. And still the events of almost

a decade showed a deep contradiction which I could not resolve, namely the

contradiction between the goal and the reality of the movement leading to

that goal. Was the goal still valid at all? If so, why was the movement in such

contradiction  to  it?  If  not,  why  was  it  used  to  justify  every  action  of  its

representatives? Brandler, the former leader of the German Communist Party,

paid  me  a  visit  in  Copenhagen.  We  discussed  the  disaster  for  hours.

Everything he said was correct, in principle; but then why was Hitler the ruler

in Germany and not this sympathetically human, intelligent man whose viewswere so very applicable to the problems of society? Trotsky was also correct,

in principle; but why was Stalin in power in the Soviet Union and not he?

Was  I  also  to  become  a  furious  antagonist  of  the  Communist  Party?  In

principle,  I  too  was  correct,  and  not  the  inhuman  and  problematic

bureaucrats! Why were they able to lean on powerful organizational support,

and not I? What is the essence of human organization? Not one had kept its

promises to date, neither the great Christian world-community, nor the first or

second Socialist International, and now also not the third. All of them had

betrayed  their  objectives  and  become  instruments  of  suppression.  It  was

obvious that there was no sense in founding a new organization to remove the

misery of the old. Trotsky’s fourth International seemed to me to have been

stillborn and senseless. The nature of organization itself seemed puzzling.

Soon I would be able to include the organization of psychoanalysts as well. A

number of years had to pass before I felt ready to grasp this enigma.

  [1950: Basic Tenets on Red Fascism:

  1. Communism in its present form as red Fascism is not a political party

like other political parties. It is organized emotional plague.

  2. This politically organized and militarily armed emotional plague uses

conspiracy and spying in all forms in order to destroy human happiness and

well-being, just as does every biopath. It is not, as is usually assumed, a

political conspiracy to achieve certain rational social ends, as in 1918.

  3. If you ask a Liberal or a Socialist or a Republican what his social

beliefs are, he will tell you frankly. The red Fascist will not tell you what he

is,  who  he  is,  what  he  wants.  This  proves  that  hiding  is  his  basic

characteristic. Only people who hide by way of their character structure will

operate in and for the Communist Party. It is conspiracy and hiding for its

own sake and not a tool to achieve rational ends. To believe otherwise will

only lead to disaster.

  4. As a special form of the emotional plague, red Fascism uses its basic

characterological  tool,  hiding  (“iron  curtain”),  to  exploit  the  identicalpathological attitudes in ordinary people. Thus, the politically organized EP

uses  the  unorganized  EP  to  gratify  its  morbid  needs.  Political  aims  are

secondary and are primarily subterfuges for biopathic activities. Proof: The

political ends are shifted according to the “political,” i.e. emotional plague,

need to hide and cause trouble from ambush.

  5. The hiding, conspiring, conniving are there before any political goals

are conceived to veil them.

  6. The sole objective of the conspiring is power with no particular social

ends. Subjugation of people’s lives is not intended, but it is a necessary and

automatic  result  of  the  lack  of  rationality  in  the  organization  and  of  the

existence of the emotional plague.

  7. The organized EP relies upon and uses consistently what is worst in

human  nature,  while  it  slanders  and  tries  to  destroy  all  that  threatens  its

existence. A fact to the EP is only a matter of convenience; it does not count

in itself. Accordingly, there is no respect for facts. Truth is used only to serve

a certain line of procedure or to maintain the existence of the emotional filth.

It will be discarded as soon as it threatens or even contradicts such ends. This

attitude toward fact and truth, history and human welfare, is not specifically a

characteristic of red Fascism. It is typical of all politics. Red Fascism differs

from other forms of politics in that it eliminates all checks and controls over

the  abuse  of  power,  thereby  enabling  the  nuisance  politician  to  achieve

utmost  power.  To  believe  that  “peace  negotiations”  are  meant  as  such  is

disastrous; they may or they may not be, according to the expediency of the

moment. Red Fascism is a power machine using the principle of lie or truth,

fact  or  distortion  of  fact,  honesty  or  dishonesty,  always  to  the  end  of

conspiracy and abuse.

  8. No one can ever hope to excel the pestilent character in lying and

underhanded tactics. Espionage and counterespionage may have their place in

present-day social administration. They will never solve the problem of social

pathology. Using truth in human affairs will serve to overcome the seeminglyunsolvable entanglement created by spying and counterspying. It will also be

constructive in establishing a foundation for life-positive human actions.]

  Although I had experienced enough of the power of state organizations, in

Denmark  I  saw  one  of  their  basic  principles  clearly  for  the  first  time:

Representatives of various public interests who are supposedly elected by the

common people, enjoy excessive power in their capacity as agents of the state

—an  illusional  but  very  effective  power.  The  same  individuals  who  elect

officials  to  represent  their  cause,  tacitly  invest  these  officials  with  power

against themselves. In this instance it was demonstrated through a Minister of

Justice and two psychiatrists. A Minister of Justice is an individual whom

society (and a social-democratically ruled society at that) has invested with

the task of safeguarding justice. Psychiatrists are individuals whom society

has selected to protect the mental health of the populace. This is the way

justice is upheld and health protected:

  I had been asked to practice psychoanalysis in Denmark. One of the first

persons I saw was a young girl suffering from hysteria. She had already made

numerous suicide attempts and now desired treatment from me because no

one else had been able to help her. I did not accept her as a patient. However,

she visited me again and threatened suicide, so I promised to keep her under

observation for four weeks and then to give her my opinion. After the four-

week period, in which she progressed well, I discontinued seeing her and

advised her to wait until one of my Danish pupils was advanced enough to

treat her. She seemed to agree to this. Several days later I heard that she had

been placed in a psychiatric ward because of a suicide attempt. She had done

this because she wanted treatment and was not able to get it. As is customary

in such cases, the psychiatrists claimed that this was “the result of treatment”

and  reported  the  case  to  the  police,  to  whom  I  wrote  a  detailed  letter  of

explanation.  Those  very  psychiatrists  were  to  decide  upon  my  further

activities. The Health Department declared officially that my request for an

extension  of  my  residence  permit  was  to  be  denied.  Numerous  importantpersonages refused to subscribe to this nonsense, but the Minister of Justice

connected the issue with the pornography affair. A meeting of doctors and

educators was held and no one wanted me to yield, as they were all interested

in my work. However, the bureaucratic machinery won the battle. Since my

visa was not extended, I was compelled to leave Denmark. Even the Chief of

Police, who was personally deeply interested, declared that nothing could be

done. That is apparatus!

  I wrote the following letter to the psychiatrists, Clemensen and Schröder:


                                                                          October 20, 1933

 

                                                                      Dr. Wilhelm Reich

                                                                                Stockholm

                                                                          Vanadisvägen 42

  Professor Schröder and Dr. Clemensen

  Copenhagen

  Psychiatric Clinic, Commune Hospital

    It was your clinic from which a report to the police was made stating that I was supposed to

  have practiced medicine in Copenhagen. I clarified the case and your misunderstanding of it, as

  well as your lack of psychoanalytic knowledge, by proving I was unable to cope in any other

  manner with a hysterical woman who was pressing me. In spite of this, you were able to prevent

  my stay in Denmark from being extended. In the meantime, you surely will have realized that

  your  actions  were  contrary  to  the  ethical  principles  which  unite  the  medical  profession

  throughout the world, and that these actions stemmed from a hatred of psychoanalysis, with

  which  you  are  completely  unacquainted,  and  from  other  obvious  motives  which  cannot  be

  mentioned here. You have harmed neither me nor the psychoanalytic movement. You have,

  however, promoted charlatanism in Denmark and robbed a number of individuals who were

  seriously interested in and dedicated to science, of the opportunity to acquire knowledge and a

  scientific technique which could shed a beam of light into the darkness surrounding psychiatry,

  my professional field. You may pride yourself on having been the first to have undertaken such

  action against psychoanalysis. The history of science and its struggles will record this as a

  minute curiosity, and otherwise silently pass it by. It is not worthwhile for us to linger on this

  subject  when  even  clinical  psychiatrists  like  Bleuler,  Pötzl,  and  Schilder  find  it  difficult  to

  reconcile themselves to your tactics.


  Usually, the average conservative psychiatrist is simply a policeman who

must guard the mentally ill and also make sure that no reasonable sexologicalpsychiatrist  comes  too  close  to  them.  The  actions  of  these  individuals

extended far beyond the confines of Denmark, their effect maintained by the

law of inertia, as it were. Hence I was provided an example, in my own life,

of what occurs when one is caught in the nets of formal bureaucracy.

  For the moment, I took leave of my pupils and arranged to continue with

them after the New Year (four weeks hence) in Malmö, Sweden, across the

sound from Copenhagen. They wanted to hire a boat and allow it to drift into

no-man’s-land, outside the three-mile limit, in order to continue their studies.

And this despite the fact that Freud, in reply to an inquiry, had expressly

stated  that  he  had  not  sent  me  to  Denmark  as  a  teacher,  because  of  my

“communistic creed.” Thus “logical arguments” accumulated. In Freud’s eyes

I was a Communist; to the Communists, I was a Freudian. In other words, I

was “dangerous.” I journeyed to London, not without arousing suspicion at

the border (a German!). They were about to make difficulties, but when I

explained that I intended to have my car sent after me so that I could tour

Europe in the spring, they became friendly. My car was of inestimable value

in the future as well.

  The  analysts  who  most  feared  my  work  lived  in  London,  so  it  was

impossible to settle there. Still, I wished to speak with Jones, the president of

the IPA. In Copenhagen—which I had been forced to leave—there remained,

as  highly  respectable  representatives  of  the  analytic  discipline,  the

philosopher Neesgard, an outsider and a so-called “wild analyst,” and one

depth psychologist especially revered among doctors, a gentleman who had

spent fourteen days with Groddeck. In London, I met pupils from Berlin and

also made my first personal acquaintance with Malinowski. We immediately

had  a  good  rapport.  He  had  recommended  my  book The  Invasion  of

Compulsory Sex-Morality in America and thought highly of it, saying that I

was  the  only  one  whose  understanding  of  his  book The  Sexual  Life  of

Savages had been productive. I felt comfortable among his group of pupils;

there was a simple camaraderie. I felt less at home at an ethnologists’ meetingwhere a lecture was given on something concerning the Middle Ages. On this

occasion,  with  no  previous  warning,  Malinowski,  after  having  spoken

himself, announced that his friend Reich now had something to say. (We had

actually become friends, although I could have clouted him for calling on me

unexpectedly.) Since I was trapped, I had no alternative but to speak—and in

English at that. I stated what I had just been thinking on the topic at the time

and, to my surprise, it went well. I can no longer recall what I said, but

Malinowski was satisfied.

  The  English  psychoanalytic  group  was  odd.  I  attended  one  meeting,

which was conducted with rigid formality. In Jones’s home, a meeting with

the members of the board of directors was held at which I explained my

current views. In principle, there was general agreement, especially with the

social  origin  of  neurosis,  but  actually  they  wanted  nothing  to  do  with  it.

Politics and science, they said, did not belong together. However, despite all

my  insight,  I  still  did  not  quite  comprehend  why  research  on  the  social

origins  of  neurosis  should  be  considered  “politics.”  Jones  was  cordial  as

usual, but always the gentleman—in other words, no involvement at any cost.

Still, he declared that he would vehemently oppose my exclusion from the

IPA.  I  was  unaware  at  the  time  that  my  exclusion  was  already  a  settled

matter,  of  which  Jones  must  have  been  cognizant.  He  also  knew  of  my

relationship with Malinowski, who was the first to reject the biological nature

of child-parent conflicts and replace it with a sociological interpretation based

on his investigation of matriarchal tribes. In opposition to this, Jones had

stated  years  before,  in  his  caustic  polemics  against  Malinowski,  that  the

Oedipus complex had no connection with sociology and was the universal

“fons et origo.” It was also the English group of the IPA which contended

that neurotic anxiety in children was biologically based in the weakness of

the child’s ego as it struggled against the instincts. That was correct thinking

for a society which makes children ill and “capable of culture” at the age of

six months through strict toilet training.  At this time I was occupied with plans for experimental work. I intended

either to confirm or to refute my earlier idea of the electrical nature of the

orgasm. In Copenhagen, on the basis of known physiological facts, I had

formulated  in  writing  the  hypothesis  that  the  orgasm  was  an  electrical

discharge.  Now  I  wanted  to  hear  the  opinion  of  a  physiologist.  I  visited

Wright, director of an institute at the University of London. When I asked

him  about  the  available  technical  possibilities  for  conducting  electrical

charges from the skin and measuring them, he replied, “You are crazy! That’s

impossible!” He was as unaware as I of the fact that there were stacks of

research  papers  on  the  Tarchanoff  phenomenon  in  scientific  archives.  I

assumed his experiments pertained only to muscle contractions.

  With the exception of Malinowski, everyone I met impressed me as being

helpless in the face of events. This atmosphere became universal only after

the “Munich Peace” in 1938. People sensed the baseness, the injustice, the

political fiasco and human insanity in which they had become ensnared. A

paralyzing  passivity  immobilized  even  the  young  Communists  who  had

emigrated  to  London.  All  that  remained  of  the  grand  gesticulations  and

rhetoric was a lack of comprehension of events.

  I  went  to  Paris,  where  several  leading  functionaries  visited  me  in  my

hotel. They were members of the Trotsky party and the SAP (Socialist Party

of Germany), which were still associated at that time. All of them had read

my Mass Psychology of Fascism and were in agreement with my views—

theoretically! A few questions sufficed to show me that they were willing to

admit the role of irrationalism in politics but refused to formulate the question

in practical terms. They agreed that social sexual suppression enslaves and

dulls people and thus counteracts rebellion against suppression in general, but

the practical answer offered by sex-politics was foreign to them. As human

beings  they  were  enthusiastic,  but  as  “politicians”  they  were  completely

removed. For the first time I experienced the sharp contradiction between the

human being  and  the functionary  in  politicians.  It  was  evident  that  theywished to enlist me in the party organization, but at the time I was undecided

as to the value of a new party connection and a vague feeling restrained me

from committing myself.

  I  attended  several  meetings  of  German  emigrants.  Nothing  seemed  to

have  changed.  The  discussions  on  the  “categories  of  class-consciousness”

and  the  “role  of  the  avant-garde”  continued  blithely.  I  shuddered  when  I

asked myself what kind of psychic structure could experience Hitler in 1933

and not feel that these scholastic discussions were unthinkable. In one of

these conversations I interjected an innocuous question: could anyone name

five  concrete  elements  of  “class  consciousness”?  One  man  mentioned

“hunger” and that was the extent of the response. After returning to my hotel,

I drafted an outline for an article entitled “What Is Class Consciousness?”

Two weeks later, in the Tyrol, I finished it, and it was subsequently published

under the pseudonym Ernst Parell. It dealt with the structural contradiction

within  the  mass  individual,  the  necessity  for  mass  politics  to  be  oriented

toward needs instead of categories, and related experiences from sex-political

work  in  Germany.  In  this  brochure,  I  assumed  a  position  in  favor  of  the

Communist movement, but by then I was already against the Communist

apparatus.  I  felt  I  belonged  to  the  party,  but  my  position  was  that  of  a

mistreated and misunderstood member in opposition. The consequences of

criticizing the “party” and “politics” in general had not yet been felt. Thus I

sought a new social revolutionary organization which was willing to learn

productive lessons from the catastrophe. Many of my political-psychological

essays of that time were based on this. Further experiences were needed to

free  me  from  these  illusions  completely  and  to  make  me  realize  that  the

problem of human organization per se was at issue and not merely that of a

different  organization  fashioned  after  an  old  pattern.  Reactionary

developments in the Soviet Union became clearly visible only in 1934. Today

I know that, in addition to these factual motives, a deep fear of having no

organization, i.e. being without a home, restrained me. More than a decade ofinvested energy and effort in a political organization cannot be relinquished

overnight.

  The Soviet Union still existed as an ideological prop, but this had long

since ceased to be a reality. I enjoyed the atmosphere of Paris for a few more

days and then left for Basel. Max Hodann had arrived there, having had the

good fortune to escape after spending six months in a concentration camp.

We made plans for future work, but I noticed that he did not wish to commit

himself  and  was  even  further  removed  from  awareness  of  the  current

catastrophe than I. I told him I intended to publish a journal dealing with

political  psychology,  and  organizational  collaboration  with  him  seemed

possible. But it did not materialize.

  In  Zurich,  I  visited  Fritz  Brupbacher.  This  sexologist,  weathered  by

experience, never ceased to fascinate me. For decades he had lived through

all the joys and sorrows of the workers’ movement, and his book Vierzig

              25
Jahre Ketzer, which was published two years later, is a brilliant account of

pettiness  in  that  movement.  The  conclusion,  however,  spells  resignation;

Brupbacher had lost all hope. I countered this by explaining that science had

by  no  means  spoken  its  last  word  and  that,  essentially,  retrograde

development was impossible. Although I did agree with his criticism, the

question remained whether or not we would live to see the outcome.

  In the Tyrol, I visited my children and former wife after seven months of

separation. There were no signs of the miserable events and human reactions

which would devastate our lives less than half a year later. In Vienna, six

weeks prior to the catastrophe in February, everything was running its usual

course. The Communists were preparing the revolution, the Social Democrats

were  making  further  concessions  in  the  interests  of  democracy,  and  the

political reaction made quiet progress while people took no further notice of

“historical powers” and the “conflict of productive forces.” They were simply

depressed  and  hungry,  had  their  family  tribulations,  and  occasionally

discussed politics. I wanted to travel to Sweden via Prague, where I hoped tomeet  friends.  I  was  interested  in  the  reaction  of  my  acquaintances  to  the

events  of  the  times.  Nowhere  did  I  find  a  trace  of  willingness  or

determination to understand. There was nothing but illusion about the support

to be expected from the Church, the Western powers, the German Army, and,

naturally,  from  the  increasing  awareness  of  the  factory  workers.  Belated

efforts  for  a  unified  front  between  Communists  and  Social  Democrats

occupied current thought. The concept of a Socialist people’s front, together

with the bourgeoisie, had not yet been born. In conversation, I cautiously

attempted to direct attention to irrational mass reactions. Mass Psychology

had been well received but no hint of understanding could be discovered.

Talk of politics itself seemed to be a part of society’s irrationalism. This

question now came to mind for the first time. I was not willing to recognize

as valid the comfortable answer that politics was not supposed to interest

scientists. Politics was a fact upon which everything depended; but what was

it,  really?  How  did  it  function?  Thus  I  sought  the  rational  core  of  leftist

politics, using as a criterion the understanding of the adverse mass reaction in

Germany. There was no understanding, and what is more, the question was

successfully rejected.

  I was very much surprised that a previously enthusiastic adherent of my

work in Germany, who had even been an opponent of party leadership, had

completely  swung  about.  Later  I  understood  that  following  one  problem

continuously becomes a severe mental strain and that a flight home to the

party momentarily relieves that strain.

  To spare myself the long detour across Poland, I wanted to travel through

Germany. People said this was madness, but I felt that if no lists were kept at

the  borders,  I  might  risk  it.  Actually,  this  was  not  justified  because  the

possibility of being arrested existed everywhere. Nevertheless, when I was

informed that no lists were being kept, I decided to try it. I was a bit uneasy at

the border but nothing happened. In Berlin, I had a three-hour stopover. The

scene on the streets was distressing. There were soldiers everywhere; peoplelooked  depressed;  their  movements  were  lethargic;  there  was  nervous

loitering. A female acquaintance had been notified of my arrival and we spent

some time sitting in the first-class restaurant at the station. As I was boarding

the train for Denmark, a man passed by who looked at me as if he were

startled. I thought I recognized the face but could not place it and did not

know whether I should greet him. Many Communists had turned Fascist.

Entire Arbeiterwehr squads had enlisted in the SA. No comrades were left.

What was conviction worth? How was it possible to risk one’s life for one

idea for years and then, suddenly, risk it just as enthusiastically for another?,

Allusions to corruption, lack of conviction, etc., were meaningless. Was not

the nature of the parties in general a systematization of various contradictory

sentiments? Was it not merely a case of world-views at war with each other,

apparently  in  the  interest  of  material  things?  But  tens  of  thousands  had

changed from championing one view to advocating its opposite. Everything

was in a state of flux, nothing seemed constant, and, meanwhile, old friends

and acquaintances innocently continued to cling to organizations amidst the

chaos. How to explain all this? Impossible! Perhaps I was only imagining it.

The existence of classes, and class struggle, was beyond all doubt! But the

individuals whose well-being was involved drifted from one side to the other,

without direction, as though unconscious. I knew that on both sides of the

German border there were workers in various fields who maintained illegal

ties to party groups and risked their lives in doing so. However, when I read

their reports in official publications, I was convinced that this was not reality

but  fantasy,  or  overvaluation  of  reality  by  individuals  starved  for  social

liberty.  There  is  a  deep  schism  between  these  individuals  and  the  great

masses; the two are unrelated. On the one side, there is death-defying loyalty

and  enthusiasm  and,  on  the  other,  apathy  and  the  capability  of  being

influenced by the comfortable concepts of medieval ideology. How is this

gap to be closed—and when? Is it solely dependent upon the self-sacrificing

political activity of a group of revolutionary enthusiasts? Are the doubts ofself-satisfied intellectuals in regard to this nerveracking struggle justified?

Certainly not! They have nothing with which to replace it. Where does the

answer lie? Only the course of events itself will show—and only those who

are free of illusion will be able to perceive it. For those who doubt because of

fear, it will remain a mystery. The train passed through the familiar German

countryside.  Externally,  nothing  appeared  to  have  changed,  and  yet,  a

continent was quaking.

  In Trälleborg, I reached Swedish soil accompanied by Elsa Lindenberg,

who had joined me in Berlin. I planned to settle at first in Malmö and then

decide where to go. Malmö was not especially enticing. I could have stayed

in London, but my German pupil Dr. Käthe Misch had told me that Jones

usurped the work of all well-known colleagues. Furthermore, London was

puritanical and I was living with my companion without benefit of a marriage

license. Neither of us had the desire to marry. We were very happy together

without  a  marriage  certificate  because  we  knew  that  it  was  more  than  a

formality;  it  conferred  the  right  to  exploit  and  subjugate  another  human

being. We did not want this. In addition, there were Danish pupils waiting for

me, among whom I had a feeling of well-being. They had gradually begun to

comprehend  my  work  and  were  extremely  loyal.  Letters  arrived  from

colleagues and former pupils in Berlin saying that Malmö, which was closer,

was better than far-off London. In short, I preferred a state of dull asylum to a

new career in a cosmopolitan city. Nor was I to regret my decision, although

once again it seemed to the conventional mind a “mad” reaction.

  A pupil from Copenhagen awaited me in Malmö. He had reserved two

separate rooms for Elsa Lindenberg and me in a small hotel on the market

square. As I entered the town I became afraid. It was common, everyday,

ungrounded fear. Malmö is one of those little towns in which boredom breeds

Fascism. I was to stay there for six months; at least it was better than a

concentration camp. The hotel was horrible: stiff, cold, and full of older,

unattached women who observed us with prying eyes. Several elderly, well-dressed gentlemen, some equipped with monocles and walking sticks, made

civilized  conversation  with  the  ladies  who  were  knitting.  We  ate  supper

quickly, each of us concealing our fear of the town and the hotel. It was

exactly  the  opposite  of  the  atmosphere  in  which  we  had  previously  been

alone and able to breathe freely.

  We clung to the letters we received and to our connections with people all

over the globe. In October 1933 (two months earlier) the editor of Weltbühne

had written a letter full of unshakable confidence and without the slightest

insight  into  the  future.  Two  years  later  he  was  mentally  and  politically

destroyed. Several doctors in Copenhagen were interested in my work, but

the neurological association canceled an invitation for me to give a lecture

when it became known that the Minister of Justice was personally opposed to

                                              26
me. The Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung in Frankfurt had been forced to take

refuge in Paris and I reestablished contact with it there. The director of the

University Institute for Psychology in Norway wrote me a letter referring a

female pupil for treatment. My book Character Analysis was beginning to

exert some influence. Four years later, when character analysis had developed

into vegetotherapy, this same director became an enemy. A female analyst in

Oslo had recommended a very well-known man to me for study and was to

visit me shortly in Malmö with him. I received a letter of recognition from

Friedrich Kraus, a famous internist in Berlin.

  There was much to be done. I arranged my room as an office, and since

my library was in Copenhagen, my friends agreed to bring me whatever I

needed. My companion, to whom I was very grateful for the attitude she

displayed during these times, was afraid she might be unable to continue the

work she had begun in Copenhagen. Then it occurred to a friend of mine that

my  pupils  could  take  her  across  the  border  as  a  Dane.  This  arrangement

worked successfully during the six-month period when she was not permitted

legally on Danish soil. I was always alone four days a week and had ample

free time for scientific work. My pupils had arranged to visit me every otherday for one and a half hours. The journey across the sound and back took

about three hours. The ship’s crew, the police on both sides, professors, and

hygienists knew exactly what was going on. News of our activity had spread

rapidly. People were amazed but did not understand.

  Leunbach had brought my car over from Copenhagen. On our free days

we made long excursions into the countryside of southern Sweden. Late one

Sunday night, we saw two girls walking down the road exhausted. I stopped

the car and offered them a lift. Soon a conversation developed on the value of

marriage. They were unmarried but hoped to have a home of their own soon.

Living with their parents was difficult because there was so little they were

allowed to do. On the other hand, it was pleasant to have their mothers take

care of the entire household. I asked whether we could meet again and they

replied that it would be a pleasure. Since I was always alone, my companion-

wife suggested that I phone them. Perhaps this would help me overcome my

loneliness. One day I did call, and although one of them was busy the other

said she would be glad to meet me at the station. We met and wandered

together  through  the  streets,  conversing  in  English.  Suddenly  she  grew

uneasy. “Someone is following us,” she said. I turned around to look. She

was right; a tall distinguished gentleman with a walking stick and derby was

following us at a distance of approximately ten paces. She recognized him as

her uncle. After a short while, I stopped and asked her to introduce me. Our

conversation ended then, but the uncle was of greater interest to me. When he

caught up with us this gentleman was quite embarrassed. We invited him to

join  us.  After  about  ten  minutes  of  conventional  pleasantries,  he  excused

himself and left. Then she began to complain: it was always that way; she

could not even take a walk alone; no doubt her mother had asked him to

protect her; he had been present when I had called; but she was no longer a

child, she was twenty-three years old and attending the university. She began

to cry and asked me to excuse her. I tried to find out whether there would be

unpleasantness at home. She would be able to bear it, she said, although thesituation was really no longer tolerable. (This was not a bolshevist, but an

apolitical woman!) She would have liked to talk with me at greater length

because she never met people other than those she already knew to the point

of boredom. She asked to be remembered to my wife and said she would

perhaps call me sometime. Every small town is like Malmö, and from that

time on I abandoned all attempts to make friends. It was more dangerous than

criminal activity.

  My publications were known in the small university town of Lund. The

student organization Clarté had even translated some of them. Discussion

groups on my work were held regularly. When the wife of a history professor

heard that I was living in Malmö in exile, she invited me to visit them at

home.  I  soon  established  a  good  rapport  with  her  husband;  university

professors are quite amiable people in their homes. They had an eighteen-

year-old daughter, full of modern ideas, but the mother watched her closely

and the ideas were soon stifled. They had read The Invasion of Compulsory

Sex-Morality, Character Analysis, etc., and were extremely interested. We

made  several  excursions  into  the  country  and  then  I  suddenly  thought  I

noticed the first indications of a problem in our relationship. So I allowed the

relationship to cool, professing that I was inundated with work. I did not

always act with such foresight.

  The police could not bear the situation. Those two foreigners who had

been living in a hotel for six weeks were unmarried—and yet “married.”

Every day visitors came by ferry from Denmark. Now, in Malmö the police

had little to do. It was a calm, undemanding town, lacking even prostitution;

a town in which civilization could doze in “peace and quiet.” There was no

crime. At ten o’clock in the evening the youth walked the streets separated

into groups of the same sex and merely giggled at each other, feeling bold in

a bashful way. Men in their twenties stood on the corners and made remarks

about  the  girls.  Thus  the  police  had  nothing  to  do  and  it  had  to  attract

attention that two German-speaking people had been living in a hotel forweeks, that they received regular visitors, that they possessed valid passports

but were living in Malmö nevertheless, that they gave no one any trouble and

were  properly  registered  with  the  police.  This  was  too  conspicuous;  the

couple had to be put under surveillance. Therefore a detective was hired to

observe them from behind the curtains in an office on the opposite side of the

street, which did not go unnoticed by me. Then an undercover man—easily

recognizable  as  such—was  posted  in  front  of  the  entrance  of  the  hotel.  I

walked past him every day and looked him innocently in the eye. He acted as

if he did not know who he was and what he was doing there; he even acted as

if he had not noticed that I knew what he was doing. This attracted even more

attention and suspicion. This German quietly walks past our detective and

acts as if nothing had happened. They would take more severe measures.

They began to intercept my pupils at the door, take them to the Chief of

Police, and ask them what they were doing. (“Democracy”!) What was this

German doing in Malmö living “up there with a lady” out of wedlock, and

the visitors lying on the sofa? Psychoanalytic training? What strange thing is

that? Another one of those bolshevist affairs! My pupils quietly answered

their questions. Finally they called me in also and asked the same questions. I

could only react by posing the question “What am I accused of?” “Nothing!”

“Then,  why  the  questioning?”  Embarrassment!  Yes,  why  were  they

questioning me, actually? Further questions. My reply: ‘“I would like to state,

expressly, my willingness to provide any information you may want. But first

I  must  know  what  your  accusations  or  suspicions  are!”  “Who  is  being

questioned  here,  you  or  me?”  the  uniform  replied.  “So  you are  asking

questions! What am I accused of?” Great embarrassment! Then they became

friendlier. “Well, it’s nothing serious,” or something similar. I told them, “Do

what you like. You may see my papers whenever you wish,” and left. That

aroused even more suspicion; peculiar fellow, that German. Once when I was

taking a walk along the harbor I was stopped. “Your passport, please!”

  In  May,  my  time  had  expired;  I  could  no  longer  remain  in  Swedenwithout  special  permission.  I  requested  an  extension.  A  request  for

permission to return four weeks prior to the end of the six-month period of

mandatory absence had already been submitted to the Danish Minister of

Justice and had been denied without any explanation. Meanwhile, neither the

police nor the psychiatrists had been idle. I could not understand what I was

accused of according to their laws. In April, the police in Malmö attempted to

search my quarters. It happened in this way: My colleague Philipson was

with me for an analytic session. Suddenly, there was a brisk knock at the

door. “Police, open up.” Two typical detectives quickly entered the room.

“We have to search this room! And who is this man?” I controlled my rage at

this manifestation of anonymous power and invited the gentlemen to inspect

                                                                                          27
my desk. The manuscript of Über den Urgegensatz des vegetativen Lebens

was in the typewriter. They lurched for it with an incredibly naïve gesture of

curiosity, read a few lines, looked disappointed, and were about to search

further. At this, I stood in their way and demanded a search warrant. Since

they had none, they were embarrassed and disappeared mumbling something

which was supposed to be an apology. The next day I heard that Philipson’s

apartment had also been searched at the same time, naturally to no avail. Our

“criminal  activities”  were  simply  a  type  with  which  they  were  not  yet

familiar. The Danish and Swedish police had coordinated their actions. And

all this effort simply because they did not understand the meaning of the term

“psychoanalysis.”

  My request for an extension of my visa was denied by the police. This

was unpleasant even if not dangerous. It is difficult to interrupt analytic work

without complications. I protested at the Ministry for Immigration, but no one

actually knew why I had not received an extension. Bureaucratic decisions

are governed by their own laws. Once an office has made a decision, the

course which the matter then takes is no longer related to the issue involved,

but is handled according to article, paragraph, and alphabetical file. It now

became necessary to mobilize a different set of formalities to counteract this.The Chief of Police summoned Elsa Lindenberg and me to appear. A great

ceremony was enacted. The all-powerful one sat upon a podium not unlike a

judge’s bench, obviously self-conscious but striking a Napoleonic pose. To

his right and left there were stenographers and two officers as witnesses. We

had to stand in certain places. He then read the interdiction: I was to leave

Sweden by May 24. I said nothing and we left.

  Our friend Sigurd Hoel, who was in Malmö, immediately contacted a

lawyer, but as the lawyer himself was more afraid of the police and the law

than a criminal, we dismissed him. Hoel then immediately sent telegrams to

Ström, a Swedish parliamentary delegate, as well as to Freud and Malinowski

and our friends in Oslo. Two well-known journalists from Copenhagen came

to Malmö and visited the Chief of Police together with Hoel. Did he not

know, they asked, that he had a future Nobel prizewinner on his hands? The

official was deeply alarmed and was duped by the ploy—as I believed it to be

—although my friends were actually convinced that I was a potential Nobel

prizewinner. He said in a calming manner that I should put in another request

and that it would certainly be granted. Meanwhile, there had been a flurry of

telegrams to and from Ström. The matter had reached the Minister of Justice

and he wished to be kept informed. In the case of extradition, I was to appeal

to his ministry. I did not understand why he did not simply give orders to

extend my visa, but those are state secrets and incomprehensible to common

mortals. Ström informed Hoel by letter that the denial of my request was

traceable to “information” supplied by a “personal enemy” of mine. Affairs

of state! Later I was told that the psychiatrists in Copenhagen had contacted

the Swedish Ministry of Health. Thus an anti-sexual complex can influence

the functioning of government.

    Malinowski  wrote  a  cordial  letter.  Freud,  however,  wrote  only,  “I  am

unable to voice support of your protest in the matter of Dr. Wilhelm Reich.”

The whole affair was ridiculous. It made me appear dangerous, which I was

not.  It  destroyed  the  façade  of  highly  respected  institutions  and  wasdisgusting. To save face, the Chief of Police “granted” further residence until

an  official  decision  had  been  reached  on  the  appeal  which  I  was  now  to

submit  to  the  Minister  of  Immigration.  I  declined.  Without  further

negotiations,  I  remained  undisturbed  in  the  hotel  until  I  had  settled  my

affairs. Hoel and I had arranged for me to journey illegally to Copenhagen

during the summer vacation and from there to a house in the country. On

June 4, 1934, I drove to Helsingör, where I was not known. It was a Sunday,

my car had Danish license plates, and a Dane and a Norwegian were in the

car with me. We started a loud involved conversation in Danish. Everything

went smoothly and we had a good laugh on the other side of the border. In

Sletten,  I  lived  under  the  pseudonym  Peter  Stein.  All  the  official  police

officers were aware of this but they seemed secretly to be wishing me luck. I

was  expecting  a  visit  from  my  children,  whom  I  had  not  seen  in  many

months.                                            8




  The Psychoanalytic Congress in Lucerne, August


                                        1934




[SO: There are few things more tragic than man’s failure due to ignorance to

act rationally when the correct answer is right around the corner and the

ignorance is caused by fear of seeing truth in time.

  At the Lucerne Congress of the psychoanalysts the development of the

conflicts  within  the  International  Psychoanalytic  Association  reached  its

climax in the elimination of WR from the organization for depth psychology,

in the circumstances under which it was accomplished, and in the fact that

with WR the libido theory of Sigmund Freud (SF) became homeless.

  We follow WR with amazement on his tortured path in 1934. He does not

seem to know what is hitting him, why, or how. He is gullible and trusting

like  a  child,  to  a  degree  incredible  in  a  man  who  is  already  a  famous

psychiatrist. He refuses to quit SF’s organization. He wants them to throw

him out. At the time, this appears stupid, self-damaging, and unintelligible.

Things are not usually done that way. To get rid of somebody you do not like,

you must convince him that he’d better resign “of his own free will,” that he

take  a  “sick  leave,”  that  he  declare  his  loyalty  and  let  everything  run  its

course peacefully without unnecessary upheaval. WR somehow senses that

the scandal should be associated with the psychoanalytic movement for all

time.  He  knows  that  he  is  the  sole  representative  of  natural-scientific

psychoanalytic theory. He does not yet know that it will lead him to the

discovery  of  the  life  energy.  He  also  cannot  possibly  know  that  as  aconsequence of this struggle the situation in psychiatry sixteen years later in

the United States will reflect his position:

  The  death-instinct  theory,  which  was  established  as  an  evasion  of  the

grave social consequences of psychoanalysis and completely subscribed to in

1934, is dead as a doornail in 1950, except for a few powerless adherents.

  The “Marxist opposition” is gone, forgotten. All its surviving participants

are  silent.  Otto  Fenichel,  who  led  it  in  a  political  rather  than  a  factual,

scientific  manner,  abandoned  WR’s  troubled  ship  in  1934.  But  the  social

consequences  of  the  psychoanalytic  libido  theory  of  1920  are  alive  and

factually rooted in American society in the practical handling of the genitality

of children in their first puberty.

  WR’s book on character analysis, which the IPA refused to publish out of

fear of the Nazis and because of Paul Federn’s continuous machinations from

1924  through  1934,  has  become  the  most  important  textbook  on

psychoanalytic  medical  technique,  acknowledged  all  over  the  world  as  a

“classic.”  Every  psychiatrist  is  eager  to  assure  everybody  that  he  is

“practicing character analysis.” However, the psychiatric world is still afraid

to mention the words “orgasm” and “Wilhelm Reich.”

  WR’s orgonomy flourishes in the United States. The discovery of the life

energy, accomplished through the consistent pursuit of SF’s much disliked

libido theory, is on the verge of full public recognition. It has saved many

lives and will save countless more.

  WR’s book The Mass Psychology of Fascism, which was not allowed to

be  displayed  at  Lucerne  in  1934  and  was  condemned  as

“counterrevolutionary” by the red Fascists in Moscow, 1933, has appeared in

three editions and sold many thousands of copies in Europe and the United

States. It was mentioned in 1949 by the New York newspaper PM as the

book most frequently requested in the New York Public Library. It has made

a  significant  contribution  toward  establishing  the  use  of  psychology  in

sociology.  This  was  inconceivable  in  1927  when,  following  those  crucialtalks with Freud, WR started on his journey through the realm of sociology.

  Character Analysis and The Mass Psychology of Fascism, both firmly

based on SF’s libido theory, have gone a long way in precluding victories of

the ascetic and monastic trends of the Catholic Church and red Fascism in the

United States. Churches of many denominations were induced to go with the

times and to acknowledge the existence of the genital function in childhood.

Puberty is still in bad straits, handled by ignorant policemen and heredity-

oriented, anti-life court psychiatrists, à la Scharffenberg in Norway. But the

doors are wide open for future educators and physicians to secure happiness

in love for the unborn generations, WR’s “children of the future.”

  And last but not least, SF’s truly natural-scientific thinking in psychiatry,

represented  by  his  adherence  to  the  concept  of  a  “psychic  energy,”  has

become a lasting acquisition of the science of man. The recording of sexual

currents on the oscillograph by WR furnished proof of the bioelectric nature

of  human  emotions.  (Later  studies,  which  included  the  use  of  the  GM

counter, established that this energy was not electromagnetic but a new form

of physical energy.)

  These are great strides in the struggle toward clarity about and protection

of human life. Compared with them, the events at Lucerne, dramatic and

tragic as they were at the time, appear in a rather peculiar light.

  There was general surprise over WR’s exclusion. Anna Freud called it a

“great injustice.” Federn and Jones had finally triumphed after many years of

mole-like  digging.  They  would  never  have  succeeded  under  normal

conditions. SF had been misled into a major blunder, running contrary to his

insights and hopes in the 1920’s. As the truly great scientific pioneer he was,

SF had early sensed the developments which WR was to make a reality after

1934: the secure rooting of depth psychology in natural science.]

  In order to make comprehensible my exclusion from the IPA, I must first

return  to  my  efforts  in  Malmö.  Three  significant  lines  emerged  in  the

development  of  my  work:  the  founding  of  the  journal Zeitschrift  für                                                      1
Politische  Psychologie  und  Sexualökonomie,  preliminaries  to  my  conflict

with the IPA, of which I was still a member, and finally, the first concrete

beginnings of sex-economic biophysiology.

  The situation was no longer tolerable without a periodical to disseminate

my views. Numerous papers were waiting to be published and the problems

of political psychology were pressing for discussion. I knew that no journal

would  publish  articles  by  me;  moreover,  I  wanted  to  be  independent.  A

publishing house for sex-economy was therefore established in Copenhagen.

It was directed by a German immigrant, a teacher who had collaborated with

me in Berlin and had lost his job in 1933.

  At  that  time  there  still  existed  a  group  of  “dialectical-materialistic

psychoanalysts.” In Berlin, I had left the psychoanalyst Otto Fenichel the

responsibility for uniting this group. I myself had introduced him to Marxist

sociology and he seemed ready to take over the task. In 1933 he had moved

to  Oslo.  I  proposed  a  meeting  with  the  Scandinavian  psychoanalysts  for

Easter  1934.  The  proposal  was  accepted  and  Schjelderup,  himself  a

psychoanalyst,  and  director  of  the  University  Institute  for  Psychology  in

Oslo, arranged for the meeting to convene in rooms at the university. Our

friend Dr. Edith Jacobson, a diligent participant in the movement, came from

Berlin. (Her later misfortune in having to spend two years in a German prison

lies heavily on my conscience.) She was a woman of exceptional intelligence

and deep humanity. Organizational strife in the following years was unable to

alter our good relationship. [SO 1951: Unfortunately, she later succumbed to

the malignant practices of a few psychoanalysts from the Viennese circle who

continued, with a zest worthy of a better cause, to slander WR’s good name.]

She came to Malmö and we journeyed together to the meeting in Oslo, a two-

and-a-half-day drive through the Nordic countryside. All of us were full of

questions and concern because we knew that psychoanalysis, as a movement,

was not withstanding the test of time. We also felt particularly responsible for

its fate, since we had formed the radical scientific wing—if indeed that is theproper expression—as opposed to the ethical philosophers and aesthetes in

the Berlin Association. Our group was closely knit through friendship and a

common  cause.  We  realized  that  psychoanalysis  was  a  science  and  not  a

Weltanschauung—and to this we held firmly. It was, however, opposed as a

Weltanschauung,  particularly  by  the  National  Socialists,  because  it  could

have powerful sociological consequences. The fact that it did not have them

was due to the inhibition exerted by the theory of the death instinct, which

appeared to be the ideal way of evading social issues. In addition, it desolated

clinical  work,  thus  driving  the  best  young  analysts  into  my  camp.  I  had

proven  the  non-existence  of  the  death  instinct,  but  it  had  not  yet  been

replaced by a better theory.

  Anyone  who  enters  a  completely  equipped  scientific  workshop  and

effortlessly harvests its fruit can rarely understand what the loyalty of the

opposition implies. This opposition acted in the firm conviction that it was

not  advocating  a  new  direction  of  clear  insight  but,  on  the  contrary,  an

adherence to the strict natural-scientific path. We all believed the cause could

still  be  saved  within  the  international  association.  Diligent,  valid,  clinical

work was to prove its superiority; the rest, we felt, would fall into place. But

we had calculated without taking into account the political developments of

the times. The events to come confirmed our basic tenet, namely that science

is  never  entirely  objective  and  certainly  never  independent  of  political

currents. Nevertheless, we had illusions, and we still had no experience in the

role of “organization.” The comedy played by the Malmö police chief was to

repeat  itself,  although  no  one  would  have  dared  to  predict  the  events  of

August 1934. Today, I realize we were all stricken with the disease which I

call  “feeling  of  belonging”—in  that  no  one  really  wanted  to  leave  the

organization.  To  try  to  pursue  an  oppositional  cause  without  risking  this

means being a Social Democrat, i.e., acting “as if.” All I had previously felt

about the role of so-called tactics, and later experienced personally, I owe to

Fenichel’s “leadership” of the psychoanalytic opposition. But I am unable tospare myself the accusation of having been stupid and uncritically trusting.

  During  that  time  I  was  dominated  by  a  serious  characterological

weakness.  I  assumed  it  to  be  self-evident  that  all  those  who  joined  the

movement would exhibit the personal independence and willingness to run

risks  which  I  had  developed  through  numerous  painful  experiences.  My

profession  and  nature  had  equipped  me  to  sense  harmful  attitudes  in  an

associate long before they became obvious even to the individual himself. I

reacted  to  this  in  two  ways:  If  I  felt  personally  close  to  the  individual

involved, I told myself that what I perceived was untrue, i.e. I repressed the

knowledge. However, either the course of events would regularly confirm my

feelings,  or  I  would  be  unable  to  ward  them  off  and  would  sever  the

relationship in the correct conviction that the individual was “a traitor to the

cause.” My only mistake was in believing that the co-worker was already

betraying the cause at the time and in not waiting until his change of heart

revealed itself clearly to everyone. Thus I frequently broke off a relationship

at a time when no one understood the reason for my action. In the case of

Otto  Fenichel,  I  had  a  vague  inkling  at  the  beginning  of  our  political-

psychological work that he was characterologically and structurally unable to

cope with a cause which demanded forthrightness, a willingness to take risks,

and  exceptional  freedom  from  personal  and  organizational  commitments.

These are generally valid issues and they rule the developmental course of all

organizations. An organization is formed around a cause in order to secure

for it protection, the opportunity for propagation, and, furthermore, a home.

Simultaneously, however, this creates a contradiction. A new cause is vital

and continues to develop as long as it remains independent. This includes

independence from the personal involvements of its advocates. If it has a

great  number  of  advocates,  the  interference  of  personal  inhibitions  is

increased and this, in turn, inhibits the free course of development. It begins

at  first  with  retardation,  progresses  to  gentle  exclusion  of  radical,  raging

elements, and finally ends in a reversal of its direction and an adaptation tothe very issues against which it was originally created. If organizing occurs

too late, valuable co-workers are lost whose only fault lies in being unable to

work without dependence upon a home, and in being incapable of standing

alone. If organization occurs too soon, retardation and reversal also begin too

early, i.e. before the cause has had ample time to pass through the pioneer

phase. In the opposition, all forces which are critical of established order

must first consolidate their theories into new productive concepts before an

innovation is ready to risk trial as a replacement of the old. In this, the old is

first negated where it is false. Simultaneously, however, an honest opposition

will know exactly what it wishes to (or feels constrained to) appropriate from

the old and will be willing to develop this further. There are no values which

can be considered unequivocally right or unequivocally wrong; time changes

much regarding “right” and “wrong.” “Right” today can become “wrong”

tomorrow and vice versa. On the other hand, a new concept cannot, in its

function as critic, answer all questions immediately, because of the difficulty

of  the  questions  confronting  it.  It  should  not  even  attempt  to  answer  all

questions, as this would paralyze it from the start. Thus, for example, it is

impossible for a person who wishes to defeat Fascism to have at his fingertips

all the positive measures with which Fascism is to be replaced. The main

issue  is  that  criticism  must  correspond  to  the  facts  and  that  the  positive

constructs may not be utopias. But criticism must not only correspond to real

processes  in  the  world;  it  must  not  lie  only  in  forward  development.  An

opposition movement of a group within a stagnating or obsolete organization

must do more; it must seek, find, and know exactly which other forces in the

world are striving independently for the same goals. Only then is there hope

of securing unification of the group movement within the social process. At

this stage, the most important objective is to elaborate one’s standpoint as

opposed  to  that  of  the  stagnant  organization.  Since  all  innovation  is  not

merely negation of the old but also continuation of the old in certain areas,

common ground must always be given proper consideration. Anyone whoopposes a cause and claims that he only wishes to advocate common ground

in a more efficient manner, however, is a fool, because he cannot advocate it

better than the previous organization did. If he sees nothing but common

ground  within  the  movement  which  he  criticizes,  he  would  do  better  to

remain silent, because it is stronger than he. The art lies in formulating and

advocating the opposition in a manner that will secure the sympathy of the

best forces in the organization. This cannot be replaced by tactics, but is

founded on absolute honesty and consistency despite the threat of temporary

failure.  In  other  words,  one  must  have  the  strength  to  stand  alone,  never

forgetting  that  members  of  obsolete  organizations  live  in  severe  conflict.

They love the organization to which they belong and identify with it; the

organization, in turn, offers them protection and security. They themselves

are  more  or  less  oppositional  with  varying  degrees  of  clarity.  Thus  they

automatically sympathize with an individual who knows their organization

and who points out where it is ineffective and how issues could be handled

better. If this individual shows any weakness, oppositional games are played

but no serious movement is created which transcends the organization. The

members of an organization have sympathy, whether secret or overt, only

with an opposition leader who indicates that he is also ready for absolute

enmity.  For  example,  numerous  prominent  members  of  the  Social

Democratic  Party  sympathized  with  the  Communists  as  long  as  the

Communists could be taken as serious opposition. One of the strong points of

the Fascist movement was the fact that it had no such difficulties to overcome

with  an  opposition,  because  it  did  not  advocate  progress  but  rather,  the

comfort of regression. It raised no new problems but merely revived age-old

modes of life. All that was new in Fascism was the revolutionary form it gave

to old issues. Through this, it enjoyed all the advantages—at first!

  In  the  case  of  psychoanalysis,  the  situation  was  particularly  complex.

Fenichel did not comprehend that it was not a matter of a few friends who

created an opposition movement together, and that the objective was not toshow  consideration  for  individuals  but  to  clearly  establish  some  decisive

principles.  Thus  he  led  the  opposition  in  a  manner  in  which  no  one,  if

possible,  was  even  to  know  of  its  existence.  The  group  was  to  remain

“secret,” and its members were to call themselves “Marxist analysts.” The

name, however, was not important. Of importance were the issues, the critical

judgments, and the development of insight. I must give a somewhat more

detailed description of situations which are today unimportant in themselves

but  which  are  typical  and  could  be  repeated  at  any  time  within  our

movement. In addition, they are historically significant for the evaluation of

individuals who once played a role or who could again become active in the

future. These descriptions will also be useful in preventing similar processes

from recurring.

  To  make  my  exclusion  from  the  international  organization  of

psychoanalysts  comprehensible,  I  must  set  forth  my  scientific  position  in

1934.  Until  now,  it  may  have  appeared  that  political  conflicts  were  the

essential factors. Nowhere had a factual exposition of the opposition to my

work been presented. The beginnings of my theory of political psychology

were  scattered,  intermingled  with  other  people’s  views,  and  still  lacked

important  foundations  which  were  only  elaborated  during  the  following

years. The period between 1930, the year of my first conflict with Freud, and

1934, the year of the Congress at Lucerne, had effected great changes. I no

longer felt committed to the organization and had been forced into solitude.

Being alone is beneficial for the maturation of serious thoughts which one

does not seek but which, rather, force themselves upon one. The dissolution

of  ties  to  the  illusional  home  offered  by  a  professional  organization

necessitates seeking new paths, not only in one’s material existence but in

one’s  spiritual  existence  as  well.  The  description  of  some  sex-economic

problems which fascinated me at the time should illustrate the reason why, in

1934,  I  lost  literally  all  of  my  friends  in  professional  circles.  It  should

demonstrate the fact that it was not a lack of affability, but inner coercion,motivated both by clarity and by vagueness, in my attitudes toward the work.

The following five years justified me completely.

  My social work in Germany had shown me that sex-politics based on

clear scientific knowledge, and presented simply, constitute a sharp weapon

against  Fascist  irrationalism.  Fascist  mass-psychological  practices  employ

unconscious instinctual forces, especially sexual longing. I knew the mass-

psychological technique of providing the means of giving this yearning real,

instead of mystical, expression. The mechanisms which Fascism used as a

devilish means of enslaving people were the same which drove people to my

meetings. What Fascism diverted into mystical negation of life I directed

toward the goal of happiness in life, with sexual happiness at its core.

  It is harmful in working with the masses to complicate problems and to

overemphasize the difficulties involved in their solution. This paralyzes the

mass individual, who has already become fainthearted in the face of social

power. However, behind the scenes in social work, every difficulty must be

grasped, formulated, and solved according to the existent body of knowledge.

Marxism,  which  was  economics  and  not  sexology  or  psychology,  could

neither grasp the problem nor solve it. Psychoanalysis provided all the means

to comprehend unconscious mental activity. But first of all, it had bogged

down in false theories; second, it had rejected organizational social work; and

third, it did not understand economic problems. Thus, to maintain the long-

established classification of psychology within sociology and to free depth

psychology from incorrect concepts in order to employ it more effectively

became the objective. The group of so-called Marxist psychoanalysts lived

under  the  illusion  that  psychoanalysis  and  Marxism,  psychology  and

sociology, were to be united. I was not completely without fault in this. I had

described these relationships previously in various papers but had not put the

matter into any organizational framework. The Marxist psychoanalysts lived

and  worked  in  the  organizational  worlds  of  both  psychoanalysis  and  the

Marxist workers’ movement. There was no organization for my work. Hencethe attitude of Marxist analysts necessarily remained a mechanistic, eclectic

synthesis of Freud and Marx. I had already freed myself from this, but to

execute the matter correctly would have meant losing many very valuable co-

workers  who  were  not  prepared  to  support  the  beginning  of  a  third

movement. On the contrary, my work during those years bore the mark of the

difficulties created by the organizational commitments of my collaborators.

The  term  “Sexpol”  had  been  introduced  long  before  and  signified  the

“organization of sex-politics,” although it had no presidents and secretaries. I

could have suggested such offices, but a vague feeling restrained me from

making  commitments.  The  structure  of  the  old  organizations  seemed

impractical for my work and to devise a different organizational form seemed

impossible and fruitless. It would not have been consistent with the issues,

for Sexpol required something entirely new, although I did not know what.

The problem remains unsolved today. However, applying the concept of self-

government  in  forming  an  organization  was  rewarding  and  the  overall

consideration  of  the  problem  led  to  formulations  about  the  human

organizational problem per se which I shall later describe.

  I felt that the current forms of organization, as well as the reactions of

people within them, were irrational and therefore that sex-economy, which

was  someday  to  become  an  important  instrument  in  the  struggle  against

irrationalism, must not be allowed to suffocate before birth. All organizations

have goals, but our goals lay in the work itself. Deriving social consequences

from scientific insight was our first goal; the second was advocacy of those

consequences;  third,  and  most  important,  was  establishing  science  and

scientific insight as the only valid principle in guiding society. Neither the

Marxist organization nor the psychoanalytic was a suitable framework, as

both rejected my sex-economic theories. Neither wished to be associated with

my goals. They did agree, theoretically, that “politics should be scientific”

but not that sex-economic insight bore consequences. For this reason, the

tone  of  all  objections  to  me  implied  that  I  drew  political,  i.e.  social,consequences from my science. My exclusion from both groups was based on

this. In simple terms, they rejected a sex-economic ordering of infantile and

                2
adolescent life, and thus upheld everything that had its source in the disorder

of this life—among other things, Fascism.

  Sanction of my work and objectives would have implied, for Marxism,

the  inclusion  of  the  psychology  of  the  unconscious  and  sexology,  and

consequently  a  refashioning  of  Marxist  philosophy  in  accordance  with

conditions in the twentieth, rather than the nineteenth, century. Acceptance of

my work by psychoanalysis would have implied the following: compatibility

of social outlook and science, renunciation of the doctrine of the biological

nature of perversions and child-parent conflicts, acceptance of a plan for an

economic system in which corresponding cultural policies could develop, i.e.

work  democracy,  renunciation  of  the  death-instinct  theory  and  its

replacement  by  my  theory  of  the social  origins  of  anxiety  and  suffering.

Furthermore, acceptance of my clinically founded orgasm theory would have

required a radical transformation of psychoanalytic technique into character

analysis,  and  later  into  vegetotherapy.  This  would  have  led  inevitably  to

research in biophysiology. The analysts were not prepared for this. In short,

sex-economy had become a new discipline and had purged itself of theories

which, when traced to their origins, were no longer in accord with it. The

specific  innovations  of  sex-economy  germinated  during  the  period  of  the

Lucerne Congress. I shall mention only the essentials: The orgasm formula,

which could also be considered the life formula itself; the bioelectric (later

orgonotic)  nature  of  sexuality  and  anxiety;  the  comprehension  of  organic

diseases such as rheumatism (“muscular armoring”) and cancer. At the time I

had as yet no knowledge of the bions. It is understandable that my inner urge

for  intellectual  independence  was  strong.  My  friends  and  co-workers

basically understood nothing of the developments in my research. Whatever

they did know and affirm, they uncritically categorized as either Marxist or

psychoanalytic. They did not consider—nor did they wish to consider—thatthese organizations no longer cared about my work, and actually opposed it.

By allying my work with these organizations, they appeared to be attempting

to  create  the  alibi  that  they  intended  only  “improvement,”  certainly  not

rebellion.  The  course  of  events,  however,  followed  the  laws  of  all

development. The new, germinating from the old, first opposes the old with

hostility.  Following  the  resolution  of  the  conflict,  the  new  then  becomes

independent  and  begins  to  determine  its  own  direction.  If  it  is  wise  and

prudent, it retains vital elements of the old. If it feels insecure, it denies its

origins  and  intellectual  homeland.  I  attempted  to  resolve  this  problem

correctly  in  my  paper  “Überblick  über  das  Forschungsgebiet  der

                    3
Sexualökonomie.”

  This was my inner position. Outwardly, I still clung to the organizations

through  numerous  friends,  and  was  dependent  upon  them.  The  complete

separation  of  sex-economic  theory  did  not  occur  until  four  years  later,

following the monstrous campaign by its adversaries in Oslo.

  I  would  like  to  relate  another  part  of  the  history  of  the  opposition

movement  within  the  IPA.  Although,  in  itself,  of  interest  only  to

historiographers  of  psychoanalysis,  it  assumes  a  basic  significance  for  us

because  it  contains  the  universal  characteristics  seen  in  all  opposition

movements. We must expect that someday, when the pioneer phase of sex-

economy and political psychology has passed, an opposition and factions will

arise.  It  is  useful  to  provide  them  with  an  understanding  of  their  actions

beforehand  and  to  demonstrate  their  well-intended  desires  and  practical

weaknesses. If this opposition is objectively correct, then it should gain an

easier victory than we did. If, on the other hand, its advocates and factual

issues  are  weak  and  incapable  of  extending  the  lines  of  strict  scientific

research better than we, then it deserves to fail. In this case somewhat less

harm will have been done. We shall attempt to illustrate this in the picture

presented by the opposition psychoanalysts between 1932 and 1934 and in

the consequences which might have resulted had they been successful.  The basic problem of every serious opposition movement is to maintain a

balance  between  practice  and  principle.  The  former  is  determined  by  the

multitude  of  daily  events  and  human  commitments,  and  the  latter  by  the

natural course of development of the cause. Frequently they contradict one

another. As the founder of the opposition, I was unable to solve this conflict.

In  the  end  I  sided  with  the  principles  of  the  cause  itself.  The  opposition

analysts stagnated in practical and personal matters. Later they were replaced

by other scientific workers. The situation produced great excitement, literally

tears, and often it was painful.

  Let us return to the Oslo convention at Eastertime 1934. Only two reports

were given, one by Fenichel and the other by me. Fenichel spoke first and

limited himself to criticizing scientific as well as organizational conditions in

the IPA. Later he compiled them in one of the circular letters which he sent,

as the leader of the opposition, to its members. I have culled several typical

examples from that letter. In doing so, I am breaching a confidence because

Fenichel wished that his oppositional work become known to no one through

the letters except to the addressees. They were to be burned after reading. I

once asked him, “Do you really think you can keep the existence of our

faction a secret?” His reply to this (in the circular letter of April 1934) was:

  “I feel it is impossible to keep our mutual correspondence and exchange

of  opinions  a  secret,  but  it  is—and  must  be—possible  to  keep  secret  the

identity of the participants and the views expressed as well as the mode of

exchanging opinions, which is unconventional in bourgeois science.”

  This implied illegality of the Communist type. However, we were not

politicians  struggling  with  the  police,  but  scientific  workers  advocating

definite views which I always felt were well known. No member of the IPA

was unaware of my views. Naïvely, I believed Fenichel had meant to keep

the promises he made when he assumed leadership. He had not only declared

his solidarity with my views but had written positive criticisms of my papers

in the journal. There was no opposition platform in the IPA other than mine.Could he have been interested only in the “leadership of the opposition” and

not in my views? Slowly this thought took hold until finally I could not shake

myself free from it. Fenichel was attempting, with the help of my colleagues’

sympathy  for  my  clinical  and  sociological  research  with  which  they

identified, which showed them the future … with that help he wanted to …

what?…  To  be  the  “leader  of  the  opposition”?…  Nonsense!  Opposition

without  a  factual  stand  is  suicide!  But  it  did  exist,  and  not  only  in  the

psychoanalytic  movement.  Suddenly,  I  discovered  that  most  opposition

movements within parties and societies are not founded on facts. They have

no contribution to make and have nothing better with which to replace the

objects of their criticism. They simply want to be the “leaders,” regardless of

ways and means. What structure was capable of that kind of mischief? I was

soon to find out.

  Fenichel’s criticism of psychoanalysis in 1934 was correct. I had made

the  same  points  repeatedly  between  1924  and  1934,  namely  that  social

conditions  were  reflected  in  the  conflicts  of  psychoanalysis.  An  insecure

existence  and  fear  of  the  dangers  produced  by  the  revolutionary

consequences of the theory rekindle old resistance in analysts which makes

them  forget  their  analytic  knowledge.  Göring,  leader  of  the  German

psychotherapists, expected his members “to have read Adolf Hitler’s basic

work, Mein  Kampf,  in  all  scientific  earnestness.”  Künkel  (individual

psychologist,  characterologist),  Schultz-Hencke  (psychoanalyst,  ethical

philosopher),  and  Weizsäcker  were  made  members  of  the  German

professional organization and all Jewish analysts were removed from leading

positions. During one meeting, a German psychoanalyst had proposed that all

Jewish  members  hand  in  their  resignations.  Schultz-Hencke  had  become

national commissar. (He had always been a firm advocate of “value-ethics”!)

Böhm, a German analyst, went to England to see Jones, the president of the

IPA,  and  explained  that  only  through  very  adept  maneuvering,  had  he

succeeded in preventing the destruction of the entire organization and thedetention of analysts in concentration camps. According to Fenichel, Böhm

would  have  been  especially  proud  to  become  the  “leader”  of  German

psychoanalysis.  Among  other  remarks,  he  had  stated  that  psychoanalysis

“serves  the  purpose  of  educating  the  heroic  individual.”  Under  such

circumstances,  the  emigrant  members  of  the  German  Association  were  in

favor of its dissolution. Most resigned, and National Socialism undertook to

look after the further development of psychoanalysis.

  What follows is a description of a scientific organization which had once

been a center of the search for truth and had remained apolitical: In Austria,

which was not yet fascistic, some writings by the Fascist Weizsäcker were

given preference, by the Jewish editors of the journal, over papers stemming

from the radical group. In 1938 many of these editors were constrained to

flee, but there was no Weizsäcker to save them although they had, in a highly

academic  manner,  considered  it  correct  to  “build  bridges  to  previous

opponents.”  According  to  Fenichel’s  report,  Weizsäcker  had  stated  in  a

hundred-page  paper  that  an  Oedipus  complex  does  exist  but  he  had  also

emphasized  that  there  was  more  in  this  world  than  just  natural  science.

Natural  science,  he  said,  should  practice  modesty  because  not  everything

under the sun is accessible through natural-scientific methods. We might add,

for  example,  National  Socialist  mysticism.  Fenichel  wanted  to  criticize

Federn severely for recommending that children take a deep breath to avoid

erections. His critique was not allowed to be published. The editors of Imago

had rejected Roheim’s report on my ethnological research because it was

laced with personal disparagements. However, the great events in the world

determined that the report would be subsequently published nevertheless. It

contained the famous sentence in which he stated that it was not true (as I had

said)  that  private  enterprise  created  neurosis;  on  the  contrary,  he  said,

neurosis created capitalism. Papers by members of the opposition were not

accepted.

  May these examples suffice, chosen from many. They were taken fromcirculating letters and are evidence of so-called analytic gossip. We waited

for  the  forthcoming  congress  to  hear  proposals  for  concrete  measures.

Members  of  the  opposition  were  critical  of  Fenichel  because  he  was

emphasizing personal issues and neglecting the factual. There was not a word

about my constructive criticism of psychoanalysis, about the orgasm theory,

the ethnological criticism, the discovery of the social origin of neurosis, or

the mass psychology of Fascism. He even wrote, “Nothing new in the field of

sexology has been published since Freud.” At that, I suddenly understood:

Fenichel  was  determined  to  usurp  my  claims  but  to  suffocate  my  theory

through silence [a program he later carried out extensively in America]. I

therefore  defined  clearly  before  my  colleagues  the  omissions  of  which

Fenichel  had  been  guilty,  and  presented  a  synopsis  of  my  constructive

criticism: above all, prophylaxis of the neurosis, not therapy of the neurosis;

the dynamics of neurosis require an energy viewpoint, i.e. the orgasm theory;

the  standard  technique  is  inadequate  because  it  does  not  consider  sexual

stasis; etc.

  In  the  discussion  period  Fenichel  was  greatly  embarrassed  and

apologized, saying he had “forgotten” to mention the orgasm theory. From

that point on I became aware of a process which had previously escaped me. I

later detected this same process in many individuals, i.e. revolutionizing, due

to unsatisfied ambitions and a lack of originality, which easily lures people

into  joining  an  opposition.  Envy  tempts  them  to  usurp  others’  ideas  and

cowardice inveigles them into making more promises than they can keep.

The unavoidable consequence is betrayal: unconscious betrayal, obscured by

tactical theories designed to cover the personal motives.

  Sensing trouble, I wrote a letter to the group, which Fenichel published in

the newsletter. In it, I stated that the struggle between scientific and mystical

factions in psychoanalysis was an old issue which had begun in 1925 when

the  theory  of  the  orgasm  was  formulated.  I  felt  that  the  conflict  would

develop  into  a  crisis  at  the  forthcoming  congress  due  to  the  pressure  ofpolitical  events.  The  language  of  objective  science  usually  prevents

philosophical conflicts from being discussed openly in scientific circles. A

great  deal  of  experience  is  needed  to  distinguish  between  scientific

differences stemming from a lack of factual knowledge and those based on

philosophical views. Within a scientific organization, a struggle cannot be

carried on with the usual political weapons. Proving that one faction was

“reactionary-Hitlerian”  or  the  other  “revolutionary-Marxist”  was  not

important;  it  was  important  to  prove  that  scientific  knowledge  was  being

inhibited by unconscious adherence to a philosophical position. Again, it was

not  the  philosophy  but  the  attitude  toward  finding  the  truth  that  was

significant here. Only at this point is there a parting of the ways toward the

“right” or “left.” In this context it would be unimportant whether or not the

French group mistreated the emigrants, but extremely important that their

incorrect assertions had been preferred for publication over correct ones. One

had  to  be  forthright.  My  own  critical  standpoint  had  been  clinically  and

theoretically firm since 1924. All other members of the opposition should

assume  a  stable  factual  position  as  well.  It  was  impossible  to  be

“oppositional” without knowing what one was opposing or simply to oppose

purely formal organizational incidents. (It was not until four years later that I

was  able  to  formulate  this  clearly:  Sentiment  and  organization  are  not

important, but only advocacy of the cause.)

  Furthermore,  I  stated,  Fenichel’s  actions  were  disquieting.  He  always

attempted to keep Freud personally out of the conflict. It was self-evident that

we  did  not  honor  and  defend  Freud  less  because  he  had  of  late  been

advocating unacceptable views. All the scientific errors of Roheim, Laforgue,

etc., were traceable to Freud. If his work was to be rescued for posterity, then

honesty  toward  Freud  himself  was  indispensable.  Only  when  it  had  been

proven  how  and  where  Freud  the  scientist  and  Freud  the  conservative

philosopher  contradicted  each  other  could  one’s  claims  bear  fruit.  My

personal experiences with Freud had convinced me that he would also preferthis attitude.

  I also mentioned that I bore full responsibility for the entire conflict. The

differences had already been clear even when it was still generally believed

that the situation was under control and that my “aggression” alone was to

blame. It was my duty to protect my work under all circumstances. Numerous

elements of the orgasm theory had been accepted without comprehension in

order to destroy it. The work had developed into sex-economy and political

psychology,  which  did  indeed  contain  the  best  scientific  features  and

traditions of psychoanalysis but had outgrown them.

  Thus my path was laid out. Since very few opposition analysts shared my

scientific standpoint, my position, should a conflict arise at the Congress,

would differ somewhat from that of the others. My suggestion for behavior

when we convened was: no petty organizational-political criticism; advocacy

of the strictest demands of research together with factual, impersonal, but

uncompromising  criticism  of  opponents;  organizational  unification  of  all

opposition  analysts,  forming  a  tightly  knit  organization  within  the  IPA.

Additional  requirements  for  practicing  analysts  were:  an  orderly  sex-

economy  (because  of  the  catastrophic  influence  of  sexually  unhealthy

analysts); training in the correct application of psychoanalysis in sociology

and vice versa; extensive sexological training (which very few analysts had).

Priests, and those physicians and educators with reactionary sexual attitudes,

were not to be allowed to practice psychoanalysis, because this would be

inconsistent with the work.

  After a lengthy discussion there was agreement on all the essential points

I had made. (Circulating letter of April 1934, p. 6.) Let us now examine the

events of the Congress. Unnoticed by all, the leader of the opposition had

made  a  prediction  in  a  single  statement.  “In  regard  to  Reich’s  letter,  an

agreement  will  also  be  reached  that  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  draft  a

                                                                                  4
platform from which we can pursue our goals. We (i.e. Otto Fenichel) feel,

however, that this may be postponed in order not to burden, at this time(tactician!), the necessarily broad discussion of practical questions (?). Such

a platform ought not to contain theories, e.g. Reich’s position on the death

instinct and anxiety, which one would feel compelled to believe dogmatically

(!!),  but  rather  …  our  opinions  on  the  historical-scientific  significance  of

psychoanalysis, its research methods and natural-scientific tenets.” (!!) But he

did  not  mention which  tenets  he  was  referring  to;  only  “opinions  on  the

historical-scientific  significance  …  research  methods  …  natural-scientific

tenets.”

  Empty  phrases!  Words  instead  of  scientific  convictions!  High-flown

rhetoric instead of a simple statement of position! Fenichel lacked factual

conviction and thus involved several very intelligent and decent opposition

analysts in a situation which made no sense to them. When I read the lines

quoted above, I knew what lay ahead. After that, nothing the opposition did

at the Congress surprised me. Although the opposition had sprung up around

my scientific research, I was the only one to advocate it at the Congress. The

defection occurred with the most ingenuous sentiments.

  It had been decided to register as many speeches by the opposition as

possible in order to emphasize clearly “our views” and their deviation from

established theory. In the event of a sabotage of my lecture, the entire group

was to protest. In the business meeting a resolution was to be placed before

the board of directors expressing the opposition’s apprehensiveness in regard

to  the  future  of  psychoanalysis.  In  addition,  an  explanation  of  the  IPA’s

behavior during the Copenhagen pornography affair was to be requested.

  In  June,  Fenichel  gave  a  lecture  before  our  Copenhagen  group  which

revealed  to  everyone  his  complete  lack  of  understanding  of  the  orgasm

problem. He was sharply corrected; later he gained support in Prague, where

no one could contradict him. At the end of June, I wrote one more letter of

warning to the group but did not mail it. It was useless. I knew that all hoped

for the best but that they were not really willing to do anything about it. I was

still unsuspecting.  On August 1, shortly before the Congress, I received a letter from Müller-

Braunschweig,  the  secretary  of  the  German  Association.  The  publishing

house wished to print a roster for the Congress and I was not to be surprised

if I did not find my name on the list of German members. “It would please

me  if  you  would  show  understanding  for  the  situation  by  waiving  any

possible personal sensitivity in the interest of the psychoanalytic cause in

Germany, and consent to this measure. Your renown as a capable scientist

and author is so great in the world of international psychoanalytic academia

that this procedure could not harm you in the slightest way.” In addition to

this, he continued, the recognition of the Scandinavian group at the Congress

and the future appearance of my name on their membership lists would make

the  issue  entirely  meaningless.  All  this  impressed  me  as  an  emergency

measure  which  was  understandable.  Membership  in  Scandinavia  seemed

certain. Later, I marveled at my own naïveté and inexperience in political

psychology which did not allow me to interpret the maneuver correctly.

  When I arrived in Lucerne on August 25 and attended the reception on

August  26,  the  situation  appeared  to  be  in  perfect  order.  Greetings  of

colleagues from near and far were cordial, as always. No one sensed any

differences  of  opinion.  On  the  evening  before  the  Congress,  the  German

secretary took me aside and informed me, in an embarrassed manner, that the

German executive committee had resolved to exclude me from the society.

This automatically canceled my membership in the international organization

and meant that I could no longer participate in the business meeting. I asked

why I had not been informed and the reasons for my exclusion. The secretary

merely shrugged his shoulders in embarrassment. I immediately knew what

was going on. That evening at dinner I told several colleagues. They could

not believe it. It had to be a mistake. And, anyway, any other group would

naturally  accept  me  as  a  member.  The  directorate  of  the  international

organization  would  certainly  not  condone  it.  But  it  did!  More  and  more

colleagues heard about the situation. Müller-Braunschweig was overrun withquestions as I sent those who would not believe it to him, one after the other.

  The “opposition” held a consultation. What was to be done in this new

situation?

  Without doubt, the most fertile and practical mode of action would be to

advocate  the  cause  in  the  lectures.  One  female  colleague  spoke  on  the

“biological  foundations  of  Freud’s  anxiety  theory.”  She  had  already

contacted me in 1931 in Berlin and felt, at the time, that my understanding of

stasis anxiety was the correct extension of the Freudian anxiety theory into

the biological realm. She was interested in physiological experimentation and

already had some results. These confirmed completely my view that anxiety

corresponds to a state of excitation in the vegetative system and is the direct

antithesis of sexuality. We recall that Freud had rejected this theory. At the

Congress, the same colleague who had related this problem to my research,

gave a clear, accurate description of it, but mentioned neither my name nor

the titles of my works. After the lecture she came to me in embarrassment

and apologized, saying she had planned to mention me but it had “slipped her

mind.” I quieted her with a few noncommittal phrases.

  Another female analyst from the opposition, who was a good friend of

mine, spoke on “the problem of therapy in child analysis.” Since children

lack the social means to gratify their instincts, they are unable to attain the

goal of adult treatment, namely, readiness and capacity to experience genital

pleasure. Quite correct! But this theory was the very core of the differences

between the IPA and me, and neither my name nor my work was mentioned.

When I inquired why she had not mentioned my name, she asked me in

astonishment where she could have done so. I said no more. The cause had,

after all, been successfully advocated. But this comfort was self-deception.

  Fenichel spoke on the problems of anxiety. We know how pivotal a role

the  question  of  neurotic  anxiety  played  in  the  thinking  of  opposition

members. Fenichel made no reference to my theories.

  A certain analyst, Gerö, who had followed me when I emigrated in orderto study character analysis and test it on himself, spoke on “the theory and

technique of character analysis.” The following excerpt from his published

thesis  contains  the  only  place  where  my  priority  in  the  entire  issue  was

mentioned: “These formal elements have been stressed by Ferenczi, Fenichel,

and  Reich.”  Later,  he  became  an  enemy.  When  my  paper  on  the  orgasm

reflex appeared, in which the content of his thesis (originally borrowed from

me) was thoroughly elaborated, he stated that I had gone off “on a tangent.”

  It may seem petty to mention these incidents. In this context they are only

intended  as  examples  of  the  peculiarity  of  human  structure, which  takes

wherever it can and gives only when it must. This is an unconscious process,

and if fair dealing is mentioned it is taken as an insult. Above all, human

structure refuses to bear the responsibility for what it has been given.

  Meanwhile,  I  discovered  that  I  had  been  excluded a year before  in  a

secret meeting of the German executive committee. The directorate of the

international  organization,  headed  by  Jones,  enthusiastically  seized  the

opportunity to follow suit.

  I feel constrained to go into these details, as the individuals responsible

later attempted to place the guilt upon my shoulders. They spread the rumor

that  I  myself  had  requested  exclusion.  May  this  illuminate  the  backstage

activity  in  a  “democratic-parliamentary”  organization!  Dictators  simply

exclude or shoot people, but democratic dictators murder on the sly with less

courage and willingness to assume responsibility. Let us recall that Jones had

told me expressly, in London, that he would oppose my exclusion under all

circumstances.

  I  had  someone  ask  Jones  whether  I  could  still  give  my  lecture  and

participate in the business meeting. He replied that I could give the lecture as

a guest  but  could  not  participate  in  the  business  meeting.  Jones  himself

seemed  quite  concerned.  I  was  told  he  had  apprehensively  sought  advice

about what to do if I were to come anyway and throw out the president. They

actually thought I was capable of that. I must confess that I later regretted nothaving done so. I spoke to Bibring, Hartmann, and Kris about it. What would

happen  if  I  really  did  it?  I  asked,  not  mentioning  a  word  about  Jones’s

remark.  They  were  startled  and  patiently  persuaded  me  to  maintain  my

dignity.  In  this  way  I  realized  the  purpose  of  precepts  such  as  dignity,

modesty, and politeness, namely to better camouflage the impertinence of

cultivated  people.  Finally  I  quieted  them  by  saying  it  was  not  worth  the

effort.

  The situation in the executive committee was in disarray. Everyone had a

                                                                                  5
guilty conscience, but Federn felt guiltiest. He, Jones, and Eitingon spoke

caustically and disparagingly about me, saying that I seduced all my female

patients, that I was a psychopath, etc., etc. The Norwegians were furious. My

only question was: Why then had these men allowed me to live and work for

twelve years as a prominent member of the IPA? It was ugly and despicable.

  Only  the  Norwegian  analysts,  Raknes,  Nic  Hoel,  and  Schjelderup

behaved decently. They said I could become a member of the Norwegian

Association whenever I wished. I warned them that they had no firsthand

knowledge of the significance of the issue and its explosive qualities. What

they  were  currently  exposed  to  comprised  only  a  fraction  of  the  whole.

Nevertheless, they did not retreat. Schjelderup had studied character-analytic

technique  with  me  the  summer  before  the  Congress  and  wanted  me  to

continue my work in Norway. At that time, I had already made plans to

conduct my bioelectric experiments and said that if he could offer me the

possibility of carrying them out in his institute, I would come. Still, I warned

him once again. None of us could have imagined that three years later a

vicious campaign would erupt in Norway because of these experiments and

that Schjelderup would emerge as an antagonist. The reader will ask whether

I was not at fault, since so many prominent individuals joined me, only to

leave me later on. May the facts speak for themselves. They reveal the real

problem of social psychiatry.

  When my exclusion was no longer doubted, a deep gulf, filled with apeculiar respect and skittishness, formed around my person. It was almost

physically  perceptible.  Everyone  else  was  standing  on  the  other  side.  My

friends shed tears, but soon took comfort. Only a few found their way back to

me, for example Ellen Siersted, an untiring and forthright individual. Dr. Nic

Hoel also visited me in my room and brought flowers. I was very grateful to

her.

  The  formal  course  of  my  exclusion  ran  as  follows:  To  prevent  my

attending the business meeting, the executive committee decided to appoint

an international commission to meet with me privately. This took place on

the day before the actual business meeting. As had been the case earlier in

Vienna, the objective of the committee was to persuade me to renounce my

membership voluntarily; this would have made it more convenient for them. I

explained my position: From the standpoint of the death-instinct theorists, I

fully understood my exclusion from the IPA, which was already in effect. My

views  differed  so  significantly  from  those  of  psychoanalysis  in  1934  that

communication was hardly possible any longer. However, I simultaneously

emphasized that I viewed myself as the legitimate representative of natural-

scientific psychoanalytic thought and from that standpoint did not accept my

exclusion. Since strictly formal, official steps could no longer be taken, I

demanded that the reasons for my exclusion be printed in the journal. (The

chairman of the committee promised to do this but the promise was never

kept.) My orgasm theory and the views deriving from it did not contradict

clinical psychoanalysis in any way (today I realize that they did contradict it

on  essential  issues),  but  they  were  incompatible  with  the  death-instinct

theory. Compulsory repression of sexuality could only originate either in a

biological instinct or in social processes. It was inconceivable for both to be

responsible  simultaneously  unless  one  assumed  a  highly  improbable

hereditary transmission of very early social influences.

  Since the directorate of the IPA did not wish to support my views and

had, on the contrary, already secretly excluded me, I stated that I preferred tocarry on alone and call my theory sex-economy.

  Hushed  excitement  pervaded  the  meeting.  Afterward,  Anna  Freud  is

reported to have said, “A great injustice has been done here.” But, as the

secretary of the IPA, she did nothing in accord with this statement.

  In the business meeting the next day, nothing happened. My situation was

not mentioned. Fenichel’s feeble resolution came to naught. The only conflict

was between Nic Hoel and Jones.

  From then on, I resolved to maintain the following position:

  1. Always to emphasize the historical and factual elements common to

psychoanalysis and sex-economy.

  2. To strictly accentuate the existing differences in sexual theory and the

concept of anxiety.

  3. To claim what may evolve in the future as my own with the same

fidelity with which I acknowledge what we share in common.

  On the fourth day of the Congress, I gave my lecture, which was later

published  by  Sexpol  Verlag  under  the  title  “Psychischer  Kontakt  und

                          6
vegetative Strömung.”  I  began  with  the  words:  “After  fourteen  years  of

membership, I shall now address the Congress as a guest speaker for the first

time…” I was given more attention than ever before. The atmosphere that

pervaded  the  auditorium  was  the  same  as  in  the  committee  session.  One

participant remarked that this Congress had stood “under my star.” He was

correct. An organization burdened with problems, having set out to influence

the future, does not condone a farce such as my exclusion without severe

consequences. They emerged one by one. I had the feeling that the IPA had

excluded the sexual theory, the vital nerve of psychoanalysis. And now the

strict natural-scientific sexual theory was being presented in a guest lecture in

its own homeland to an uncomprehending audience. My lecture dealt with the

problems which had arisen in my medical practice during the transition from

research on character in neurosis to the basic somatic mechanism of psychic

illness. The topic of the lecture became the point of departure for establishingthe bioelectric nature of sexuality experimentally. At this Congress, and in

this very speech, the initial steps were taken toward the fulfillment of Freud’s

hopes  that  analytic  psychology  would  someday  be  placed  on  an  organic

foundation. I must add that it was the first time a large scientific audience had

heard  reflections  and  facts  which  later  combined  psychic  and  somatic

functions into a natural-scientific unity. I was not completely aware of this

myself at the time, nor did I realize that the problems of contactlessness, as

well  as  those  of  vegetative  current,  also  touched  upon  the  core  of

schizophrenia and cancer in a new [bioenergetic] way.

  At the end of the allotted speaking time, I was not quite finished and

requested permission to continue. The response was enthusiastic applause.

There  was  no  negative  criticism  during  my  lecture.  Afterward,  I  was

informed that at least half of the audience had not understood me in the least,

but that the other half had realized which path I was following.

  One of my former Viennese students, Dr. Bergler, spoke on “Thanatos” in

dreams. After the lecture, I posed the question whether he had ever seen

evidence of the death instinct. “No, certainly not!” he replied. “It is only a

theory.” “Well then, why are you talking about it?” I queried.

  The  organization  had  not  based  my  exclusion  on  either  my  scientific

views or my political sympathies. There were many in the IPA with diverse

scientific views, and many Communists as well. The incompatibility with

IPA  membership  lay  in  my having  derived  social  consequences  from

scientific findings, i.e. the development of sex-politics from scientific sex-

economy.  [Twelve  years  later,  my  socio-sexual  theories  were  generally

recognized and partially applied in America.] I did not understand why my

sex-political  views  were  more  dangerous  or  harmful  than  Communism  or

false scientific theory. I really could not grasp it. I had never indulged in

political activities in the common sense of the word; I had only done social-

hygiene work as a physician and was far from demanding political leadership

or attempting to gain power. Respect for politics was still deeply embeddedwithin  me.  My  organism  had  not  yet  comprehended  that  science  is  more

decisive than politics, that it is science, not politics, which poses the real

threat to the misery at hand, that science even threatens politics, that these

respectable  “apolitical  scientists”  had  executed  radical  political-tactical

maneuvers by excluding a serious, forthright quest for truth, that they were

actually  supporting  the  spiritual  depravity  which  had  recently  begun  to

undermine Europe. Nor did I realize that they constituted a part of the great

politically active and yet so unconscious masses which, while drowning in an

ocean of meaningless phraseology, formed the broad shoulders upon which

politics  and  diplomacy  were  riding  the  world  to  ruin.  Only  during  the

following  years  was  I  capable  of  frankly  professing  the  revolutionary

character  of  science  and  only  very  gradually  did  I  begin  to  grasp  the

significance of the connection between the vegetative sensations of human

beings,  their  lack  of  contact  and  yearning  for  a  rescuer,  and  the  political

impact of slogans such as “the surge of pure Aryan blood” or “the call of

homeland and native soil.” And this, despite the fact that I had written a

three-hundred-page  book  on  the  mass  psychology  of  Fascism.  Slowly,

however,  filled  with  my  experience  of  the  insane  events  at  the  Lucerne

Congress, I comprehended it. Fear of bearing the responsibility for so great

an insight had prevented my assuming the burden immediately.

  I  took  leave  of  my  children  and  journeyed  with  my  companion  to

Denmark via France. She had suffered greatly under the situation and had

supported me in a simple human manner without much comment, for which I

was very grateful.

  We arrived in Copenhagen late at night. It was raining and we had no

place  of  our  own.  For  several  days  we  stayed  with  friends  to  whom  we

related the events. But gradually we sensed that they were beginning to grow

cool. Coincidence and not factual necessity had driven them to me and would

also  drive  them  away  again.  Later,  this  actually  happened.  We  packed

clothing  and  books  and  left  for  Norway.  I  was  detained  at  the  Swedishborder. Allegedly I had been extradited from Sweden and was not permitted

to journey through it. I telegraphed Oslo and Stockholm immediately. The

border guard was taken aback because I had named a university professor and

a parliamentary representative. What is an exiled machinist, one employee

among millions in a German factory, to do under such circumstances? Finally

a crossing was permitted with no further complications. In Oslo we lodged in

another  of  those  horrible  small  hotels  which  seem  especially  equipped  to

crush even the strongest spirit. It was the end of October 1934.

  The Norwegian Psychoanalytic Society invited me to their meetings, but I

attended  only  infrequently,  as  I  was  fully  occupied  preparing  for  the

biophysical  experiments.  After  approximately  two  months,  Schjelderup

invited me to lecture to the faculty of the Psychology Department. Following

several lectures, an unbelievably base, harassing article was published in the

Norwegian Fascist newspaper ABC. (They even printed a purported picture of

me,  actually  the  face  of  an  idiot.)  Although  it  was  only  a  small  local

newspaper, the article reappeared four years later in the file which the police

had gathered to use against me. However, the Norwegian analysts were loyal.

During  this  time  a  conversation  with  Schjelderup  raised  the  question  of

whether I should apply for membership. The Norwegians were willing, he

said, although they had encountered great difficulties at the Congress and had

been  told  that  they  would  be  recognized  as  members  of  the  international

organization  only  on  condition  that  they  pledged  not  to  accept  me.  The

Norwegians had rejected this out of hand and replied that they would accept

no provisos. Either they would be accepted unconditionally or they would

refuse.  Here,  for  the  first  time,  I  became  acquainted  with  the  general

Norwegian  mentality,  although  during  recent  years  it  had  begun  to  make

concessions to European Fascism. I drafted a formal letter to the Norwegian

group  with  the  suggestion  that  they  first  discuss  the  question  of  my

membership with me in order to ensure complete awareness of all possible

consequences. I was in the best position to provide the necessary information.There was one man, however, who circulated from member to member and

agitated against my acceptance. To one of the members he said I had only

come to Norway to steal all his patients; to another he said I had gone mad.

This  rumor  was  started  by  none  other  than  the  “leader  of  Marxist

psychoanalysts,” Otto Fenichel himself. His behavior cost him dearly and

aroused loathing wherever he went. Finally, in the summer of 1935 he was

forced to leave Oslo because he could no longer earn a living there. I must

emphasize that I took no steps to counteract his behavior.

  When  I  noticed  that  the  members  of  the  Norwegian  Psychoanalytic

Society were becoming hesitant, I suggested that they drop the issue of my

admission. I could exist without it and perhaps it was better not to provoke

any  conflicts.  I  never  regretted  this  decision.  They  attended  the  evening

classes I held on clinical work and we remained good friends. Almost all of

them were studying the well-advanced technique of character analysis and

were at the time grappling with the problem of mastering physical rigidities.

The  experimental  biophysiological  research,  so  highly  significant  for  the

development of social psychiatry, began at this time. I dissolved all my ties to

psychoanalysis  while  simultaneously  providing  a  solid  foundation  for  its

correct clinical insights.

  My naïveté about people, however, was not yet at an end. It contributed to

the  disturbing  and  hazardous  events  which  began  in  the  Oslo  Psychiatric

Society in the autumn of 1937 and kept the Norwegian public in a state of

suspense for almost a year. As a result, it became difficult for me to appear at

meetings of the society or even in public, but almost overnight my work was

advanced  a  decade.  To  ensure  a  thorough  evaluation  of  the  political-

psychological mechanisms of the Oslo campaign against my research, it will

be necessary first to render a description of my biological work.                                            9




                            Toward Biogenesis




                  THE NORWEGIAN PRESS CAMPAIGN


After moving from Malmö, Sweden, to Oslo, Norway, in the late autumn of

1934,  my  research  was  suspended  between  heaven  and  hell,  figuratively

speaking. On the one side, friends and admirers of my work advocated at

least two Nobel Prizes, while on the other, my enemies were advocating with

equal  intensity  the  necessity  for  extradition,  police  investigation,  and

surveillance. And there were enemies everywhere: neurologists who hated

sex, court psychiatrists who believed in the hereditary nature of “criminal

intercourse in puberty,” Fascist police officials who hated “foreigners,” etc.

Viewed  from  the  present,  irrationalism  in  social  life  during  the  twentieth

century  of  “culture  and  civilization”  assumed  gigantic  dimensions  in  the

struggle  of  armored  life  against  the  discovery  of  biological  energy  (and

therewith biogenesis). Friends and remote observers lauded the discovery of

the bions as the greatest scientific achievement in centuries. The Norwegian

Chief  of  Police,  Konstad  [a  Fascist  who  later  faced  execution  for

collaboration with the Nazis], considered me a most dangerous enemy of law

and order. The discovery of the bions and of the cancer process occurred “on

the run,” so to speak, in the short intervals between emigrations. My own life

impulses must have developed enormous powers to enable me to survive the

period  between  1934  and  1944.  For  several  reasons  it  is  imperative  to

describe this period.

  The  struggle  over  the  issue  of  biogenesis  exposes  the  riddle  of  whyscience had been unsuccessful until that time in discovering the life process

itself.  It  also  demonstrates  the  horrible  effect  of  the  emotional  plague  on

human existence and it will serve the purpose of inactivating numerous false

rumors about me which circulated during this period and were actively spread

and  utilized  by  the  enemies  of  unarmored  life.  Finally,  it  illustrates  the

position of unarmored life in our social order.

  I have procrastinated for years in compiling the details of and describing

the infamous “Norwegian press campaign” against my research. Whenever I

was working with a bion preparation, observing orgone energy, discovering,

pondering, and systematizing the interrelationship of life functions, or the

place of living matter in non-living nature, the clamorous “campaign” seemed

utterly  ludicrous.  It  had  been  answered  unequivocally  in  the  events  that

followed, e.g., the discovery of the secret of the cancer cell (1938–39), the

discovery of the atmospheric orgone, the temperature difference in the orgone

accumulator (1940), the healing effects of the orgone accumulator on blood

and tissue, etc. The individuals who irrationally opposed my research in that

campaign can no longer be viewed in a heroic light. To have entered into a

debate with them in 1937 would have meant trying to shoot sparrows with a

cannon.  I  was  also  not  particularly  interested  in  burdening  the  history  of

science with the names of insignificant persons. The furious struggle against

me was very painful indeed. All manner of insult, suspicion, and calumny

was employed, but it was futile to parry invective with invective. Although in

1937  I  could  not  have  anticipated  the  momentous  events  to  occur  in  my

future research, I was already aware of an enormous responsibility. I am not

one of those individuals who hypocritically profess the virtues of clemency

and submission. I can use invective as well as anyone else and must admit

that I often felt a desire to castigate some of the advocates of pseudo-science

when they carried matters too far. I am by no means a mild-mannered saint,

but an inexplicable feeling restrained me from intervening in this type of

“scientific debate,” a feeling I recognized in amazement, only many yearslater, as the basic attitude of unarmored life—after hundreds of observations

and experiments had confirmed my first vague notions.

  The  attitude  of  unarmored  life  toward  life’s  aberrations,  toward  the

malicious  actions  of  armored  human  animals,  is  one  of  indifference  or

incomprehension, alienation, and occasionally pity. I have observed this basic

attitude  in  small  healthy  children  in  the  face  of  life’s  distortions  and

monstrosities, e.g., a young boy of four was happily playing on the street

when  several  aggressive,  obstreperous  children  approached  him  and

demanded that he bring them a glass of water. He did it willingly, but when

he handed them the water they shouted and threw it into his face, without any

provocation.  Some  of  the  children  laughed  maliciously;  others  stood  by

embarrassed, saying nothing. No one, neither a child nor one of the many

adults who witnessed the incident, interfered. The little boy stood still at first

and then walked away, tears in his eyes, uncomprehending. On another day I

saw the same child being pestered for no reason by an obviously nervous and

sadistic  boy.  But  this  time  he  turned  on  his  tormentor,  threw  him  to  the

ground, gave him a thorough trouncing, and then walked off quietly. [Kindly

life had finally abandoned its misplaced tolerance and goodwill; it had begun

to  fight.  One  day,  sooner  or  later,  all  the  kind  and  good-natured  boys

everywhere will start beating the hell out of the malicious, cowardly “big

boys” and make them run screaming.]

  During the campaign, I was a guest in a foreign country. True, I had been

invited to teach at a university there, but the false sympathy, mingled with

envy and fear of competition, always lurked behind the word “refugee”—the

stigma of every alien. The campaign aggravated this painful situation. I had

indeed fled from the German Fascists to Scandinavia, but I tried to bother my

host  country  as  little  as  possible.  During  my  five-year  stay  in  Norway,  I

lectured to university students on only two occasions. I did not write for

newspapers, although I was requested to do so. I did not found a Norwegian-

language  journal  but  voluntarily  limited  myself  to  a  German  publicationwhich was hardly read in Scandinavia because most people could not read

German. I worked quietly in my laboratory but would not allow myself to be

denied  the  right  to  invite  students  to  seminars  and  small  lectures  held

privately. After all, I was living in a democratic country ruled by a Socialist

Labor Party government.

  At  the  time  of  the  press  campaign,  I  discussed  my  withdrawal  with

friends. One of them, the poet Arnulf Överland, remarked, “I have never

heard such clamorous silence.” This comment struck the heart of the matter.

If I had simply mingled in public, pursuing the innocent tasks of daily life,

nothing would have happened. It was my very quietness which provoked my

opponents to make as much noise as possible.

  Wherever armored life presides over the scene of social intercourse, all

activity is essentially traceable to:

  1. A surfeit of words and concepts which serve only to distract from the

simple basic principles of life.

  2.  Tense  enthusiasm  wherever  armored  beings  encounter  the

uncomplicated laws of unarmored life.

  3. Complete inability of armored individuals to utilize these simple laws

in a practical manner, resulting in disappointment and hateful persecution of

everything even vaguely reminiscent of unarmored living.

  These three typical modes of behavior exemplify all the symptoms of the

emotional  plague.  It  will  be  demonstrated  that  the  natural,  truly

uncomplicated laws of existence lack social recognition and protection, that

truth  may  be  purloined  by  every  type  of  biopathic  ideology,  and  that

twentieth-century legislation has neither an interest in nor an understanding

of unarmored functioning. I did not devise these pathological mechanisms of

human  life,  but  first  experienced  them  as  one  of  their  many  astonished

victims. It was the responsibility for my great discovery which forced me to

find the winding, secret paths along which the biopathic human animal stalks,

attempting to destroy his own existence and well-being by slandering thegiver of life.

  I have already described the effect of the struggle against my work on the

life process in Germany, Denmark, and Sweden. Among the opponents of

unarmored life, the struggle was always waged under the cloak of political

slogans because, unfortunately, my work occurred during an epoch in which

the “political fugitive” was spotlighted by every police force in the world. It

was asking too much to expect a government official to keep the question of

the political fugitive separate from the question of biogenesis, when even a

professor of cancer pathology was unable to make this distinction.

  Between autumn 1934 and the beginning of 1937, for approximately three

years, my research had the necessary peace in which to develop. The great

campaign against the bion theory commenced in May 1937. It was preceded

by generally insignificant skirmishes from which I could have deduced the

impending danger had I not been overly naïve in adhering to my faith in the

objectivity  of  scientific  circles.  I  was  theoretically  aware  of  the  fact  that

mechanistic science is itself an offspring of mechanistic civilization in regard

to its methodology, but I was still unacquainted with its practices.

  Healthy children, in whom life functions freely, discover and utilize the

living process as if it were a game. By playfully setting his or her speech

organs in motion, the child learns to form words—words which at first have

no  meaning,  wrong  words,  not  words  in  the  sense  of  strict  academic

linguistics,  but  nevertheless  sounds  from  which  “correct”  words  proceed

under  environmental  influence.  Until  the  age  of  three,  children  are  the

greatest scientific discoverers. Their only tool is a lively bioenergy. Handling

a  spoon  or  a  chair,  opening  and  closing  doors,  selecting  food,  stroking,

cuddling, and playing are not due to heredity. The same children, raised in a

different cultural milieu, would derive other meaning from their activities.

Children  are  the  greatest  natural  researchers,  and  the  greatest  natural

researchers  are,  first  of  all,  children  playfully  conquering  new  fields  of

knowledge  like  infants  mastering  their  new  surroundings.  ConsiderLeeuwenhoek, Faraday, Edison, among others.

  The  bionous  nature  of  all  matter  that  is  allowed  to  swell  was  also

discovered playfully. Anyone watching me on the lonely evenings when I

“discovered”  the  bions  would  simply  have  shaken  his  head.  No  “serious

scientist” would have paid me the slightest attention. The practical effects of

cosmic  orgone  energy  on  tissues,  on  growth  in  plants  and  animals,  on

biopathic decay in cancer, etc., are the result of that biological “playfulness”

in 1935. I played in this way:

  Over  the  course  of  the  year  1935,  I  confirmed,  by  means  of  an

oscillograph, the hypothesis which I had formulated on the basis of my sex-

economic research, namely that the life process is determined by a four-beat

rhythm,  in  the  sequence:  mechanical  tension—charge—discharge—

mechanical relaxation. This system of mechanical and bioenergetic functions

did  not  exist  in  the  nonliving  realm.  The  approach  to  the  problem  of

biogenesis was to be sought in connection with this life formula—assuming

the formula to be correct. Finding such an approach to biogenesis would, in

turn, naturally confirm the validity of my formula for sexuality and the life

process. In the case that no such approach could be found, the formula could

still be correct, but it would remain sterile, for a time at least.

  In 1935 I owned only one oscillograph, which I placed in the center of my

small, fifteen-foot-square study amid a pile of books and manuscripts. I am

not  mentioning  these  details  for  the  sake  of  sensationalism,  but  rather  to

contrast sharply the beginnings of such great scientific developments with the

glory of official palaces and the monuments of politicians. I was not the first

discoverer forced to work under such conditions while the drones of social

life had millions at their disposal. I am dedicated to the living process and to

honest work, but after thirty years of hard, dangerous research on the human

organism, I do not feel obliged to bow before social absurdities.

  During  the  winter  of  1934–35  I  had  spent  almost  three  thousand

Norwegian  kroner  of  my  earnings  as  a  teacher  of  biopsychiatry  for  theconstruction of the oscillograph. This, however, was not disturbing, because I

loved  my  work  and  required  little  in  my  personal  life.  In  my  prominent

position I earned enough to support my children and myself and, in addition,

to afford the luxury of an oscillograph. But now I needed a microscope. A

pupil, Dr. Lotte Liebeck, who had come to Oslo to study with me and had

participated  as  a  subject  in  the  bioelectric  experiments,  was  intensely

interested in the work and offered to give me a microscope. Thus, at the end

of 1935, I obtained a magnificent binocular Leitz research microscope with

basic equipment for microphotography. Before using it, I first had to refresh

the  knowledge  of  microscopy  I  had  acquired  sixteen  years  before  as  a

medical student in Vienna and had long since forgotten. The instrument met

the usual requirements of magnification to 1500 ×. The day it arrived I began

to  check  my  hypothesis.  I  can  still  recall  the  evening  I  sat  alone  in  my

apartment brooding deeply over how to arrange the experiment. While I was

playing  with  the  microscope,  with  no  idea  of  what  to  do,  and  placing

everything within reach under the objective lens, it suddenly struck me that

living organisms subsist on organic substances, i.e. substances which were

once alive themselves. If living organisms continue to draw life energy from

nourishment which had been living matter itself, then, I felt with increasing

certainty, there had to be a connection. Food contains “chemical substances”

which the organism assimilates and incorporates into its body fluids. This is a

material, chemical process which has already been thoroughly investigated

by science. I knew that the chemistry of foodstuffs could not be observed

through a microscope, but I asked myself how it was possible for foodstuffs

to pass through the walls of the intestines into the fluids circulating in a living

organism. How does this occur? I had not yet considered the riddle of the

                                                                                  1
osmosis of the contents of the intestines through the intestine wall, which

physiology had not yet solved. If the human intellect could always be aware

of all the problems of natural science during its playful experimentation, a

good many questions would be more easily answered.  The simplest procedure, I thought, would be to observe various foodstuffs

under  the  microscope.  Fortunately  I  did  not  possess  any  biochemical

equipment that would enable me to study foodstuffs neatly broken down into

fats,  carbohydrates,  and  proteins.  I  say  “fortunately”  because  if  I  had

proceeded in a “strictly scientific” manner instead of naïvely and playfully, I

would never have discovered the bionous nature of all matter that has been

allowed  to  swell.  Fats  would  have  revealed  nothing  because  they  are

composed  exclusively  of  fat  globules;  sugar  would  have  dissolved  into

molecules,  and  neither  muscle  tissue  nor  egg  white  would  have  revealed

bions. My actions were not particularly well considered, but I was tormented

by  the  basic  question  of  the  relationship  between  foodstuffs  and  the

organism. It was “crazy”! I threw meat, potatoes, all kinds of vegetables,

milk, and eggs into a pot, filled it with water, boiled it for half an hour, took a

sample, and rushed it to the microscope. What I saw seemed as insane as the

entire venture. I had expected to be able to differentiate clearly between the

various  substances.  But  pure  chance—usually  called  fate—enabled  my

endeavor to take a giant step forward. The  sample  contained  nothing  but

vesicles. All were of the same type although different in size. There were also

large bubbles and shapes which I recognized as starch. The mixture I had

brewed was thus an essentially homogeneous mass. The individual vesicles

shone  in  a  blue  to  blue-green  hue.  At  first  I  discarded  this  with  the

“explanation” that it was due to a refraction of light, exactly the way strict

natural  scientists  still  “explain  away”  the  blue  or  blue-green  glimmer  of

biological colloids. My first orgone-physical conclusion was correct, namely

that organic substances, when boiled, disintegrate, i.e. swell, into vesicles. I

was on the track of the “bions.”

  I adjusted the microscope to a magnification of 1500×. Motion within the

contents of the vesicles was now clearly visible, but not clear enough to allow

me  to  draw  conclusions.  I  inquired  of  the  Leitz  company  as  to  the

magnification of their strongest objective and was informed that it was 150 ×,whereupon I immediately ordered it. Together with a 16 ×, or perhaps a 25 ×

ocular, I could achieve a magnification in the vicinity of 5000 ×. Although I

was aware that no structures are clearly resolvable over a magnification of

2000 ×, it was not seeing the finer structures themselves which interested me

but seeing the motion within the bions. Although I have often emphasized this

differentiation  between  structure  and  movement  in  the  evaluation  of

microscopic objects, the objection can still be heard that I did not know how

to  use  a  microscope  because  I  was  unaware  that  there  is  a  limit  to

microscopic observation using light. Prejudices are as deeply embedded as

lice  in  an  animal’s  fur,  and  the  greater  the  ignorance,  the  greater  the

arrogance. Since mechanistic researchers focus totally and exclusively on the

dead structures of stained tissues, they do not understand that there is also

movement and that the fine motion in a particle which is not yet noticeable at

a magnification of 2000 × is, however, visible at a magnification of 3000 ×.

  I owe the discovery of biological energy and with it of cosmic orgone

energy  to  this differentiation  between  structure  and  movement,  a

differentiation  which  appears  foreign  and  “unscientific”  to  mechanistic

thinkers. The inner motion which I discovered in my bions also solved the

question  of  “Brownian  movement.”  In  the  nineteenth  century  Brown

observed that very small India-ink particles move from place to place. He

was entirely correct in viewing this motion as an indication of life forces.

Soon, however, mechanistic physicists seized the issue, destroyed Brown’s

very fertile theory, and transformed its living quality into dead mechanics.

They  argued  that  the  movement  of  the  tiny  particles  is  caused  by

“bombardment of the molecules in the liquid.” Thus a momentous discovery

was stifled for decades; their delicate calculations of the distances traveled by

the Brownian particles could not change this. Only in the 1940’s did I realize

that  the  destructive  mechanisms  of  armored  life  had  participated  in  the

physicists’ procedures and that their attitude was due to the general evasion

of everything that merely reminds one of orgone energy.  In my bions it was not the external but rather the internal motion which

was  significant.  The  “bombardment  of  molecules”  would  not  suffice  to

explain  internal  motility  such  as  vibration,  expansion,  contraction,

convulsion, etc. Just as preoccupation with matter had limited the mechanist

to  microscopic  observations  below  1500  ×,  the  mechanistic  bombardment

theory also barricaded access to the origins of the inner motility of swollen

matter and therewith access to bioenergy.

  In  another  work  I  have  described  in  great  detail  the  development  of

protozoa  from  bions  and  that  of  bions  from  matter  and  mass-free  orgone

energy, and hence may limit myself to a brief summary at this point. It was

logical  that  I  continue  to  add  more,  and  very  diverse,  substances  to  my

mixture and then cook them. Finally there was nothing but blue, glimmering,

internally agitated vesicles. Next I began to swell various substances in water

slowly, at room temperature. The appearance of bions now occurred much

more slowly, over the course of days or weeks, depending on the hardness of

the substance. However, disintegration into bions always occurred, regardless

of the material I subjected to swelling. Gradually it became evident that the

internal motility was to be attributed to an energy freed from formed matter

during heating or swelling. For this reason I also termed the bions “energy

vesicles.” [The term “orgone” did not yet exist.] The internal motility was an

effect  of  work,  and  work  is  inconceivable  without  energy.  I  intentionally

avoided  determining  what  type  of  energy  I  had  encountered.  There  was

ample  time  for  that.  Meticulous  observation  alone  could  produce  further

clarification.

  The swelling of moss and blades of grass revealed the development of

protozoa from bions, i.e. natural organization in biogenesis. My observations

and microphotography left no doubt as to this; but to be absolutely certain, I

requested amoeba cultures from the Botanical Institute in Oslo. An assistant

there  was  very  friendly  and  said  that  the  simplest  method  of  obtaining

amoebae  was  to  make  grass  infusions.  I  then  asked  him,  momentarilycompletely naïve and unaware—that is, without ulterior motive—how the

protozoa  came  into  the  infusion.  “From  the  air,  of  course,”  he  replied  in

astonishment. “And how do they get into the air?” I asked. “We don’t know”

was  the  answer.  He  did  not  tell  me  that  as  yet  no  one  had  succeeded  in

cultivating protozoa from air. Therefore I was confronted with the task of

preparing numerous air-contamination cultures to convince myself that there

were no protozoal germs in the air.

  [During the following years I tried hundreds of times to obtain protozoa

from the air, with no success. This fact burdens the “air infection” theorists

with the task of proving their contention that protozoa develop from “air

germs.”

  Today,  before  any  student  of  orgone  biophysics  and  biogenesis  is

admitted  to  advanced  biogenetic  work  at  the  Orgone  Institute,  he  must

attempt to prove that protozoa, cancer cells, plasmatic flakes, bions, T-bacilli,

“cysts,”  etc.,  can  be  obtained  through  “air  infection.”  Only  when  he  is

convinced by ample air-culture experiments that there is no such thing as

protozoa in the air will he be able to resist the many influences exerted upon

him by his social environment, relinquish his anxieties about “impurities,”

and  study  nature  as  it  functions.  Only  then  will  he  be  able  to  judge

intelligently where air infection is actually valid. In such cases, he will adhere

to strict sterilization. But he will no longer misinterpret every microscopic

observation which clearly demonstrates biogenesis as “only air infection.”

The extent and intricacy of the evasions made possible by neglecting to prove

to  oneself  the  possibilities  of  actual  air  infection  are  unbelievable.  This

evasiveness must be completely removed, in student and professor of biology

alike, if one intends to get through the mire of “air infection” beliefs.

  The problem is more complicated in the case of rot bacteria (fusiformis,

subtilis, etc.). It is possible to obtain such bacteria from the air. However, it is

not easy to do so. And even if it is accomplished the next logical question is

“How do bacteria get into the air?” This inescapable question provokes anirrational  response  instead  of  a  factual  answer.  No  one  has  even  tried  to

answer it. Orgonomy offers the following explanation: The dust “particles” in

the air arise from all kinds of decayed organic matter. We obtain rot bacteria

from the air through hydration and decay of the dust bions just as we do in

any decaying bion preparation.

  The  air-germ  theorist  simply  refuses  to  consider  this  argument  and

sometimes resorts instead to slander. However, from now on this question

will trouble every serious biologist. It can no longer be circumvented.

  All this has nothing whatsoever to do with “spontaneous generation.” Nor

has the theory that life originates from nonliving nature ever been disproved.

Neither Pasteur nor anyone else has claimed this. What Pasteur did in his

quarrel with Bastian was to behave like a man who maintains that a certain

alive, mobile horse is not alive, contrary to all appearances. When the owner

of the horse insists that it is alive, the man takes an ax, bashes in the horse’s

head, and then triumphantly says: “Now it is obvious to anyone that the horse

is dead.” This story is analogous to the function of sterilizing living matter in

biogenetic  research.  Fortunately,  orgonomic  biology  has  broken  the  spell.

Bions  arise  from  completely  sterilized  material  through  swelling,  as  in

Experiment XX after freezing of the yellow bion water. It may take months

or years before protozoa appear in sterile preparations, but they are there. The

spontaneous decay of living tissue into bions and then into rot bacteria can be

observed microscopically and reproduced experimentally. This process goes

on  constantly  in  all  nature,  and  in  many  diseases.  The  helplessness  of

erroneous bacteriological theory in the face of such diseases as cancer will

sooner or later bring about the defeat of the adherents of the air-infection

theory.  Unseen  air  germs  cannot  possibly  prevail  against  clearly  visible

bionous processes. One wonders how many human lives will be lost before

an end is put to this incredible mismanagement of scientific matters.]

  At the time I respected mechanistic natural science and its representatives.

They  were  forthright,  diligent  men  and  women  who  carried  on  theirexperimental work with care. Only in the following years did I free myself

from a dangerous error to which I had clung, not entirely without irrational

reasons. I knew I had encountered the problem of biogenesis and that this

problem was the central issue not only of all biological sciences but of natural

science itself. It was obvious that I was not sufficiently equipped for this

problem despite more than one and a half decades of natural-scientific and

philosophic training. It was too much, far too much for one person, even

considering my capacity for work and my experience. I was as yet unaware

that  I  was  afraid  of  the  problem.  I  felt  I  had  to  gain  the  cooperation  of

established scientific institutions if I were to succeed. Phenomena which I

could not comprehend were appearing with increasing frequency, but I did

not know that mechanistic researchers also have no explanations for these

phenomena nor do they even realize they exist. I was still to be made aware

of this in a dangerous way.

  From the multitude of these momentous new facts I shall select only one

to orient the reader. The phenomenon I have chosen led later to the discovery

of  the  origin  of  cancer.  As  students  of  orgone  biophysics  know,  cancer

tumors are traceable to the general cancerous shrinking biopathy, which in

turn is traceable to a tendency toward decay in blood and tissues. Painstaking

clinical  examination  indicated  that  this  tendency  toward  decay  was  itself

rooted in a sharp decline of the pulsatory function and with it the energy

metabolism of the organism. Thus the key to the problem of cancer was the

problem of decay or, expressed more “scientifically,” the nature of bodily

degeneration and putrefaction of living tissue. When I encountered my bions

I  had  no  idea  that  decay  is  too  “commonplace”  and  “unscientific”  to  be

investigated by medicine, bacteriology, biology, and biophysics.

  Decay is a universal, natural process. All living substance ascends to a

greater or lesser height and then gradually declines, leading finally to death

and tissue disintegration through decay. There is no sterilization in nature and

no  “air  infection.”  But  mechanistic  biologists  and  bacteriologists  do  notconsider themselves scientists until they have carefully sterilized everything.

Because  of  the  fact  that  these  natural  scientists  neatly,  properly,  and

meticulously exclude all possibility of decay or “air infection” from their

preparations with the strictest precision of the mechanistic age, the greatest

discovery  in  biology  slipped  through  their  fingers,  namely  the  simple

explanation that the cancer process is rooted in the premature decay of blood

and tissues; that, in other words, the cancerous organism suffers a “living

death.” It was the “air germ” theory, rigidly and mechanically applied, and

the theorem “omnis cellula ex cellula” which caused cancer research, and all

other biogenetic research, to become sterile in the strictest sense of the word.

We shall soon see the enormous role played by the “banal rot bacteria” not

only  in  cancer  research  but  also  in  the  campaign  of  armored  life  against

unarmored  life  processes,  of  mechanistic  science  against  orgonomic

functionalism.

  At  first  I  worked  under  completely  non-sterile  conditions.  I  observed

tissues in their natural state, cooked and uncooked, using no sterilization.

Today I realize I would never have been confronted with the cancer problem

had I adhered exclusively to the observation of sterile preparations as the law

of strict biology requires. I watched rot bacteria appear in my preparations.

Under high magnification one could distinctly follow the disintegration of

tissue into vesicles and then directly into long rod-like shapes. [This process

has  been  filmed.  If  only  my  opponents  would  care  to  look  into  the

microscope  they  could  see  the  formation  of  rot  bacteria  clearly  and

unequivocally.] The observation left no room for doubt. With one blow it

overthrew a mountain of false, mechanistic, biological concepts. To convince

myself  experimentally  that  I  was  correct,  I  sterilized  an  egg-white

preparation,  kept  it  sterile,  and  discovered  that  even  the  strictest

precautionary measures could not prevent auto-disintegration of the protein

under certain internal conditions and the appearance of rot bacteria. I painted

fresh eggs with lacquer and tar, but sooner or later they decomposed. All thesubstances I sterilized degenerated sooner or later for internal, not external

reasons. I prepared a sterile mixture of substances which has since become

                              2
the famous preparation 6c. The rot bacteria appeared within a few minutes. I

heated  coal  to  incandescence  and  added  it  to  the  swelling  solution.  Five

minutes later I was able to observe and Gram-stain short mobile organisms

which were later called T-bacilli. Thus there was no doubt as to the internal

origin of the decay, although it was still entirely unclear to which energy

forces it was to be attributed.

  I now made my first “tactical” error by yielding to Dr. Odd Havrevold’s

urgent suggestion that I ask the Oslo Bacteriological Institute to identify the

micro-organisms. I must beg the reader’s understanding as to why I regard

this as a serious mistake. Despite a basic knowledge of bacteriology, I was

not a specialist. The appearance of biologically stainable micro-organisms

shortly  after  a  bion  preparation  had  been  made,  naturally  excluded  the

possibility of so-called air infection because the latter would require at least

twenty-four hours for bacteria to appear. I was aware of this fact but could

not make the decision alone as to whether the micro-organisms resulting from

my  experimentation  were  identical  with  known  forms  or  represented

essentially  new  ones.  Had  a  well-equipped  laboratory  and,  above  all,

sufficient funds been at my disposal, I would have employed a bacteriologist

to conduct the necessary tests. However, I did not have the money and had

preferred  to  wait  and  to  avoid  contact  with  “official”  science  because  of

several unfortunate experiences, which I would like to describe briefly.

  When  I  succeeded  in  producing  bions  from  preparation  6c  in  the  last

months of 1936, I asked friends in Copenhagen to request the Biological

Institute,  headed  by  Dr.  Albert  Fischer,  to  allow  me  the  use  of  its

microphotographic  equipment  in  order  to  study  on  rapid-motion  film  the

development of bions from matter which had been allowed to swell. Fischer’s

response was friendly and I went to Copenhagen to demonstrate experiment

6c. Shortly before I began, Fischer asked a cynical question about what sortof a paste I was planning to brew. This was typical of the basic attitude of

classical biology. I was tempted to walk out but then accepted his pacifying

apology  and  continued.  The  substances  were  mixed  and  the  preparation

cooked. Then difficulties arose because Fischer’s microscope magnified only

to  1500  ×  and  thus  revealed  the  shapes  themselves  but  not  their  internal

motility. This required magnification of at least 2000 ×. Fischer grew nervous

and raised the issue of the limits of useful magnification. I replied that my

objective was to observe motility and not to identify structure. [This lack of

distinction  between  the  functional  (movement)  and  the  mechanical-static

(structure)  lingered  on  for  years  in  all  discussions  of  high-power

microscopy.] One of Fischer’s assistants suggested a Giemsa stain, which

was  immediately  made,  revealing  forms  that  reacted  positively.  This

demonstration  clearly  made  a  deep  impression,  but  subsequent  events

demonstrated  that  prejudice  in  favor  of  the  “air  germ”  theory  was

overpowering.

  I returned to Oslo and asked Dr. Leunbach [a Danish physician and early

friend  of  orgonomy]  to  keep  open  the  channels  to  Fischer.  Soon  a  letter

arrived from Leunbach informing me that Fischer’s reaction had been very

peculiar.  He  had  accused  me  of  “lacking  critical  judgment”  and  of

“fantasizing,” claiming that I had requested ridiculously high magnification.

Supposedly,  I  had  described  observations  of  spindle  formations  and  cell

divisions.  All  motility,  he  said,  was  the  movement  of  the  liquid,  and  my

contentions  were  the  “old  fairy  tales”  from  the  era  prior  to  Pasteur—

untenable mixtures of psychology and biology.

  To  prevent  false  rumors,  I  refuted  all  Fischer’s  claims  in  a  letter  to

Leunbach on January 9, 1937, although I continued to believe (inexcusably)

in  the  objectivity  of  natural  scientists.  It  would  have  been  better  to  react

defensively and curtly. Fischer had simply attempted to explain away obvious

facts. He denied the Giemsa stain, paid no attention to the appearance of rods

and cocci a few minutes after the preparation had been made, and resorted toportraying the entire experiment in a ridiculous light. Unfortunately, I did not

dream of how new, how revolutionary and comprehensive my experiment

was.

  I also encountered the mechanistic natural scientists’ fear of moving life

during  an  experiment  with  coal  bions,  in  the  presence  of  the  Norwegian

cancer pathologist Leif Kreyberg. This demonstration was the direct cause of

his reversal from cooperation to hate-filled animosity. He had brought me a

cancer preparation (as he had often done before) and I asked him whether he

wanted to view the cancer cells under high magnification, which had not been

available to him previously. I had focused on a spindle formation moving

across the field slowly and jerkily. He looked through the microscope at 4000

× and did not recognize the forms as cancer cells.

  He asked to see my coal bions. I heated a fresh coal-dust preparation to

incandescence and added it to the swelling solution. Several minutes later I

took a small sample and adjusted the microscope to 3000 ×. The bions were

extremely  motile,  contractile,  and  manifested  a  blue  glimmer.  [These

characteristics are familiar today to those who have observed coal bions.]

Kreyberg looked through the microscope and was taken aback. “I would like

to  see  your  ‘broth,’”  he  said,  implying  that  he  believed  it  to  be  a

contaminated  solution.  This  astonished  me  because  he  had  seen  the  clear

solution himself. Furthermore, it is impossible to confuse a coal bion with

any known particulate matter obtained from the air. Still, I yielded to his

demands and put a drop of the solution under the microscope at the same

magnification.  Naturally  there  was  nothing  to  be  seen.  Kreyberg  walked

away obviously shaken. Previously he had asked me for a coal-bion culture to

examine at home. I hesitated slightly, knowing he would have no idea of

what to do with it. I did, however, give him a sample of the culture grown on

agar.  His  evaluation  of  this  pure  culture  clearly  demonstrated  the  verbal

idiom of bacteriology. In his later campaign against me, he claimed the bion

culture had contained “only staphylococci.” Only staphylococci! In this wayKreyberg rejected the novelty of motile cancer cells at 4000×, as well as the

incident with the coal bions. He made absolutely no mention of them—an

outrageous  crime  for  an  individual  who  called  himself  “objective”  and

“scientific.” He further omitted reporting that the “staphylococci” represented

a “pure culture,” whereas air infection usually produces mixed cultures. Nor

was he aware that during the process of killing, drying, and staining bions all

differences  disappear,  leaving  behind  only  round,  blue  forms,  which  are

indeed  similar  to  staphylococci.  Kreyberg  demonstrated  his  ignorance—

which in a typical way he attributed to me—by believing he had understood a

phenomenon when he had only known its name. [He did not understand that

the  word  “staphylococci”  says  nothing  about  the  origin  of  the  form.]  He

shared this basic mistake with all mechanistic researchers. He withheld from

the public the fact that it is possible to observe vesicles forming from matter

under a microscope, although I had published these findings. In short, this

man  revealed  himself  as  an  insolent  neurotic  who  concealed  his  own

ignorance and his inclination for intrigue by accusing me of charlatanism. He

was desperately afraid that I was actually correct. [Later, in his efforts to

discredit me, he even resorted to gross lies.] What puzzles me is not his

behavior but that of the public, including several of my close friends, who

invested this man with authority simply because he was an official in a public

cancer hospital. [In such hands rests the fate of thousands suffering from

cancer.]

  Despite these two experiences at the end of 1936, I agreed to Havrevold’s

suggestion  to  send  the  bacteriologist  Thjötta  bion  preparations  for

                              3
identification of the forms. I sent him an uncooked bion preparation 6a, in

which rods had appeared a few minutes after the mixture had been made. His

oral report to Havrevold stated that it contained simple rods, i.e. subtilis and

proteus as found in decaying matter. At the time, as mentioned above, I had

not the slightest idea of the enormous significance of these “simple rods” for

the entire cancer problem. I simply followed the development of phenomenaand sought the aid of specialists in an unpardonably innocent fashion. As yet,

nothing was known of orgone energy and therefore I was also unaware of

armored life’s deathly fear of the orgone, the life energy itself.

  The so-called air infection of the unsterile bion preparation 6 proved to be

the  key  to  the  cancer  problem.  Let  us  therefore  summarize  briefly  the

arguments  which  render  my  opponents’  theoretical  position  invalid;  they

were elaborated in the second volume of The Discovery of the Orgone: The

Cancer Biopathy.

  1. The cancer process is a long-drawn-out process of decay within the

organism due to bioenergetic shrinking of the life system. In the course of

this degeneration and decomposition of living protein, rot bacteria develop

which slowly degenerate further into T-bacilli, which can be observed in and

cultivated from the tissues, including the blood, of every cancer patient. The

cancer cell itself is a protozoon formed in animal tissues just as protozoa are

organized from decaying plant tissue.

  2. No cancer cells or protozoa of any kind can or will ever be found “in

the  air.”  Every  effort  to  obtain  protozoa  from  the  air  has  failed  in  my

laboratory, and there is no proof in the literature of classical biology that

protozoa were actually found in the air. This claim is pure invention on the

part of prejudiced scientists. It serves to maintain a defunct view of life which

sharply  distinguishes  the  organic  from  the  inorganic,  in  origin  as  well  as

function.  Orgonomy  has  proved  by  microscopic  observation  and  sterile

experiments that primordial life develops through many phases from bions,

i.e. energy vesicles. No proof to the contrary has even been adduced. No

airborne protozoa or cancer cells have ever been demonstrated. The burden of

counter-proof now rests squarely on the shoulders of the air-germ theorists. If

they wish to maintain their position, they must prove that cancer cells and

protozoa exist in the air. If they cannot prove this, it is logical to assume that

cancer cells arise somehow within the organism. It is exactly at this point that

malignant  irrationalism  enters  the  scene  in  debates  about  orgonomicobservations.  As  long  as  opponents  of  orgonomy  refuse  to  look  into

microscopes, however, their objections cannot be taken seriously.

  These opponents should be reminded that we are no longer living in the

beginning of the age of bacteriology; we are living in its decline. The theory

of infection from the air has exhausted its usefulness. It has become a barrier

which obstructs the understanding and healing of diseases such as cancer,

high blood pressure, rheumatic fever, etc. We are now facing an entirely new

set of problems grouped around the natural function of endogenous infection

and  decay.  These  afflictions  are  no  longer  parasitic  in  origin;  they  are

bioenergetic and emotional, i.e. functional. Thus, we are entering a new age

in medicine and biology. The guiding line of these new developments will, of

necessity, be the functions (still to be elaborated) of the concrete, measurable,

manageable, visible life energy, orgone energy.

  The discovery in 1940 of an energy in the atmosphere with the specific

qualities  of  life  (pulsation,  orgonomic  potential,  constant  higher  heat

potential, etc.) not only confirmed the microscopic phenomena in bions, but

put  an  end  to  all  narrow-minded,  shortsighted  prattle  about  unseen  and

unproven  “air  germs”  as  the  source  of  primordial  life,  such  as  amoebae,

trichomonads,  colpidiae,  etc.  It  eliminated  an  empty  slogan  which  had

obfuscated clear-cut facts for decades and blocked any advance toward an

understanding  of  biogenesis.  In  1945  when  Experiment  XX  revealed  the

formation of plasmatic matter from sterile, autoclaved, and frozen bion water,

it became clear that all organic life emerges from orgone energy which has

absorbed  water,  concentrated  into  bions,  and  continues  to  pulsate  within

flexible membranes. Life does come “from the air and from the soil,” not as

unseen air germs, but as cosmic life energy. 


 


  I do not know what I may appear to the world; but to myself I seem to have been only like a
  boy playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble
  or a prettier shell than ordinary whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.

                                      —Isaac Newton 
Adolescents in trouble

Nowhere to go when in love 
People watching a marriage ceremony 
Modju at work in Austria, 1915

Observe cold, cruel facial expressions of executioners and bystanders; also mild face of victim 
Reich’s photograph of Austrian workers’ demonstrations 
Reich’s photograph of Austrian workers’ demonstrations 
Reich’s photograph of Austrian workers’ demonstrations 
Reich’s photograph of Austrian workers’ demonstrations 
Wilhelm Reich in Sweden, 1934 
Psychoanalytic Opposition Congress, Easter 1934. At left, Elsa Lindenberg; third from left, Reich;

second from right, Otto Fenichel 
Reich in the laboratory with Roger Du Teil, Oslo                                      Notes






Introduction

1. 1952: “1945” here refers to a plan only, conceived in 1945, to publish all historical material up to
that  year.  Due  to  other  commitments,  only  the  period  1927  to  1939  was  actually  described
  extensively in a consistent manner. Other periods have been dealt with in separate papers.
2. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1970.


1. Wrong Directions

1. The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1971).
2. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1974.
3. This work is not to be confused with Reich’s later work published under the same title as Vol. I of
The Discovery of the Orgone—Ed.
4. 1952: The terms “social” and “political,” which today I consider opposites, were still united in my
  thinking at that time.
5. At the same time, it was enthusiastically published by Swedish Socialists.
6. The Sexual Revolution, Part I.
7. Cf. my examination of this question in The Sexual Revolution and The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-
  Morality.


2. A Practical Course in Marxist Sociology

1. Protective guard. —Trans.
2. A political organization; literally, Home Guard. —Trans.
3. Leader of the Austrian Socialist Party. —Trans.
4. SO: Why, in forty years of social misery, did not a single sound, deep-reaching thought come from
among the millions of workers? Why no action, no step toward peaceful living?
5. SO: To date, the Socialists and Communists have failed to prove that they can build a new, free
society. They have even failed to state this dry fact as a first step toward improvement.
6. SO: This is largely so to this day, 1952.
7. The same phenomenon emerged in the Second World War, 1939–44, in the attitude of the English
and American democracies.
8. International Press Correspondence. —Trans.


3. The Living Productive Power, “Work-Power,” of Karl Marx1. Work democracy is based essentially on two facts:
      a. A worker is anyone who does socially necessary work, i.e. not only the manual worker.
     b. Social responsibility rests with the society of the workers and not with private individuals or
  individual state functionaries.
2. Cf. The Sexual Revolution and The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality.
3. SO: “State” and “society” represent two basically different social facts. There is a state which is
above or against society, as best exemplified in the Fascist totalitarian state. There is a society
without a state as in the primitive democratic societies. There are state organizations which work
  essentially for social interests, and there are others which do not. What has to be remembered is that
“state” does not mean “society.”
4. The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality.
5. Part I of The Sexual Revolution.


4. This Is Politics!

1. Municipal guard. —Trans.
2. An Austrian mining corporation. —Trans.
3. Red Veterans’ League. —Trans.
4. This group was subsequently outlawed on April 27, 1928, but actually remained in existence under
the title of Arbeiterwehr. It comprised a total of 250 members, about 150 of whom lived in Vienna.
In the entire country the Communist Party had approximately 3,000 members, most of whom were
  unemployed.
5. Combat troop. —Trans.
6. National community. —Trans.
7. In 1943, when I read Wendell Willkie’s book One World, an American best seller, the contradiction
became clear once again. Unquestionably, Wendell Willkie is one of the most honest, democracy-
  minded exponents of human liberty and we can only agree with his views and intentions. However,
the weakness of his book lies in its portrayal of the problems of democracy “from above,” from
  conversations with statesmen and military leaders, from conferences and social actions above the
level of the people. Wendell Willkie did not stress the unofficial, the private, the little everyday
  aspects of the people he met, in addition to the official aspects. In reality social life does not take
place “above” but “below.”
8. Wedding was a workers’ district in Berlin.
9. In the youth organizations the question was not even tolerated; one was too occupied with “high
  politics.”
10. Workers’ Youth Guard. —Trans.


5. The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality into Innately Free

Primitive Society

1. Sturm Abteilung; literally, storm troops. —Trans.
2. The Origin of the Family. —Trans.
3. All diagrams taken from The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality.


6. Everyone Is “Enraptured”

1. SO: At that time, I ascribed my functionalism to Engels as I had ascribed my sex-economy to  Freudian psychoanalysis. My own ideas and thoughts streamed freely into a strange environment
which did not and could not absorb them.
2. Veterans’ association of the red front. —Trans.
3. “Power to the red front.” —Trans.
4. Abbreviation for Marxistische Arbeiter Hochschule. —Trans.
5. Der sexuelle Kampf der Jugend (The Sexual Struggle of Youth).
6. Association for the Protection of Mothers. —Trans.
7. New Generation. —Trans.
8. The Chalk Triangle. —Trans.
9. When Your Child Asks Questions. —Trans.


7. Irrationalism in Politics and Society

1. Subhumans. —Trans.
2. Französische Krankheit, a slightly obsolete German expression for syphilis. —Trans.
3. “Hug me, honey.” —Trans.
4. Bund deutscher Mädchen, the National Socialist organization for girls. —Trans.
5. With the discovery of the specific life energy in bions and the atmosphere (1939–40), the term
  “vegetative energy” was replaced by the terms “bio-energy” and “orgone energy.”
6. The Hitler Youth. —Trans.
7. I later enabled her to give birth under proper conditions and without fear.
8. Red Sport. —Trans.
9. The Sexual Struggle of Youth.
10. Kommunistischer Jugend Verband, Internationaler Arbeiter Hilfsverein, and Sozialistischer Jugend
  Verband. —Trans.
11. A newspaper for teachers. —Trans.
12. The Red Banner. —Trans.
13. National Banner Youth. —Trans.
14. 1952: These illusions are still widespread in America.
15.  Internationale  Psychoanalytische  Vereinigung  (International  Psychoanalytic  Association—IPA).
—Trans.
16. Within the context of work democracy, “worker” means anyone who does life-important work, and
  “Fascist” denotes any dictatorial power based on mystical and helpless attitudes in people. It thus
includes red Fascism.
17. “Where Will the Trend toward Nudity in Education Lead?” (Included in The Sexual Revolution)
—Trans.
18. A German diminutive for penis, used with children. —Trans.
19. Workers’ Newspaper. —Trans.
20. Official State Information Sheet. —Trans.
21. Volksordnung (People’s Order). —Trans.
22. What Is Class-Consciousness? —Trans.
23. A pseudonym for Wilhelm Reich—ed.
24. Dialectical Materialism and Psychoanalysis. —Trans.
25. Forty Years of Heresy. —Trans.
26. Journal of Social Research. —Trans.
27. On the Basic Antithesis of Vegetative Life. —Trans.8. The Psychoanalytic Congress in Lucerne, August 1934

1. Journal for Political Psychology and Sex-Economy. —Trans.
2. 1952: The tragic rationale in this rejection was dealt with in The Murder of Christ, to some extent at
least. The oranur experiment revealed the core of the trouble to be human bioenergetic structure
which fears and resists expansion.
3. “Synopsis of the Sex-economic Field of Research.”—Trans.
4. This and subsequent parenthetical comments in this paragraph are Wilhelm Reich’s. —Ed.
5.  1952:  Eitingon,  later,  in  a  letter  (December  29,  1935)  denied  that  he  had  participated  in  the
  procedures against me.
6. “Psychic Contact and Vegetative Current.” This paper is included in the 3rd, enlarged edition of
  Character Analysis. —Trans.


9. Toward Biogenesis

1. Cf. The Cancer Biopathy (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1973), pp. 361–64.
2. Communicated to the French Academy of Science, 1937.
3.  Instead  of  restricting  himself  to  a  simple  identification  of  the  organisms  in  the  preparation,  he
  misused this opportunity in the interest of the air-germ theory. Unasked and unauthorized, he issued
a public statement to the effect that he “had controlled Reich’s experiments” and found “nothing but
  simple  bacilli.”  His  statements  had  nothing  whatsoever  to  do  with  our  request  to  identify  the
  organisms.                                      Index






The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the

pages in your eBook. Please use the search function on your eReading device

to search for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that appear in the

print index are listed below.


ABC

abortion

adolescents

Aigner

air infection

Analysis of the Christ Dogma

Arbeiterblad

Arbeiterhilfe

Arbeiterwehr

Association for Birth Control

Association of Socialist Physicians

Austria; see also names of places in and under Social Democrats


Bachofen, Johann Jakob

Barash

Bastian

Bauer, Otto

Bergler, Edmund

Berlin; Reich and; marches and demonstrations in

Berlin Training Institute

Bernfeld, Siegfried

Bibring, Edward

biogenesis

biological energy, discovery ofbions; movement and structure in; and Brownian Movement; protozoa from

biopathy, cancer

birth control

Bischoff

Bleuler, Eugen

Bloch

Böhm

Brandler

Braun, Otto

Brupbacher, Fritz


cancer

Capital

Chalk Triangle, The

Chamberlain, Neville

Character Analysis

character analysis

Charlottenburg

children, rearing of; and neuroses; healthy; see also under sexuality

Christian Center Party

Christian Democrats

Christian Party

Christian Socialists

Clemensen, Dr.

Communists (ism); see also under Reich

“Contributions to the Understanding of…,”

Copenhagen, Reich and

Copernicus

Coué, Émile

Crime and Custom in Savage Society

cultural Bolshevism

Cunow


Daladier, Édouard

death-instinct theory

decay, and cancer

dialectical materialism

Dialectical Materialism and Psychoanalysis

Discovery of the Orgone, The

Dollfuss, Engelbert

DomesDresden, resolution and letters from

Dühring, Eugen

Duncker, Franz

Dusseldorf, conference in


economics

Edison, Thomas

Eitingon, Max

Ellis, Havelock

emotional plague

energy vesicles, and blue-green color, see also bions

Engels, Friedrich, epigraph

eugenics

Experiment XX


family

Faraday, Michael

Fascism (ists); see also red Fascism

Federn, Paul

Fenichel, Otto

films

Fischer, Albert

Forel, Auguste

“free-will” theory

Freud, Anna

Freud, Sigmund; and Reich

Freudians

Friedjung, Karl

Friedländer, Dr.

Fromm, Erich

Funktion des Orgasmus, Die


Galileo

Gegenangriff, Der

genitality

German National Association, minutes of conference of

Germany; see also Berlin, Fascism, and Hitler

Gerö

Göring, Hermann

GrailerGroddeck, Georg

Group Psychology and Ego Analysis

Grube

Gürtler


Hartleb

Hartmann, Heinz

Havrevold, Odd

Heimwehr

Hirschfeld, Magnus

Hitler, Adolf

Hodann, Max

Hoel, Nic

Hoel, Sigurd

Horthy, Miklós


IFA

illusion

Imago

International Psychoanalytic Association; Reich and; Reich’s expulsion from

“Introduction of Soviet Democracy”

Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality, The

Iroquois

irrationalism; see also under politics


Jacobson, Edith

Jews

Jones, Ernest

Journal of the Academy of Sciences


Kautsky, Karl Johann

Kolnai

Konstad

Krafft-Ebing, Richard von

Kraus, Friedrich

Kreyberg, Leif

Kris, Ernst

Künkel

KunschakLaforgue, René

Lantos, Barbara

Lebensraum

Le Bon

Lenin, Nikolai

Leeuwenhoek, Anton van

Leunbach, J. H.

Liebeck, Lotte

life, armored and unarmored

Lindenberg, Elsa

London, Reich to

Lucerne, Congress in

Ludwig, Feuerbach, epigraph


Malinowski, Bronislaw

Malmö, Reich in

Malthus, Thomas

Man, Hendrik de

marriage

Marx, Karl

Marxist psychoanalysts

Marxist Workers’ University

Marxists (ism)

masochism, Freud’s reaction to Reich’s paper on

Mass Psychology of Fascism, The

matriarchy

matter, swelling of

“meat grinder,” the

Mehring, Franz

Mein Kampf

Meng

microscope, experiments with

Misch, Käthe

Morgan, Lewis

Müller-Braunschweig, Carl

Murder of Christ, The

Mutterrecht, Das

mysticism


National Socialists (ism)

natural scienceNazi, see National Socialist

Neesgard

Neue Generation

Neugebauer

neuroses

Nietzsche, Friedrich

Norway, press campaign in; Reich in, see Oslo

Norwegian Psychoanalytic Society


Oedipus complex

On the Basic Antithesis of Vegetative Life

One World

oranur experiment

orgasm, electrical nature of; formula

orgasm theory, Fenichel and the

orgastic potency

orgone accumulator; temperature difference in the

orgone energy, see orgonomy

orgonomy

Origin of the Family, The

Oslo, Reich in; meeting at

Oslo Bacteriological Institute

Oslo Psychiatric Society

Överland, Arnulf


Parell, Ernst

Paris, Reich to

Pasteur, Louis

Pestalozzi, Johann

Pfister, Rev.

Philipson, Tage

Pitzl

Plan

PM

politics (ians); Reich and; irrationalism of; work vs.; catastrophe of; population; see also names of

parties

Politken

Polyclinic

pornography

Pötzl, Otto

psychiatry, social; see also psychoanalysis and psychologypsychic energy, concept of and Freud

“Psychischer Kontakt und vegetative Strömung”

psychoanalysis

Psychoanalytischer Verlag

psychology; political; mass

puberty

Putsch


race, theory of

Raknes, Ola

red Fascism (ists); basic tenets on

“Red Wedding”

Reich, Wilhelm, as silent observer; explanation by, for present book; and Communism; and

psychoanalysts (is); and workers’ strikes; and seminar; and Nazi ideology; prohibition on publications

of; comments on theory of; critiques of books of; danger to, in Berlin; paper of, on masochism;

pseudonyms of; travels of; see also under place names; visits of, with family; see also under items

throughout

Reichsbannerjugend

Reichsgesetzblatt

Reichstag, fire at

Renner, Karl

Ricardo, David

Roheim, Geza

Rot Sport

Rote Fahne

Rote Hilfe

Rotfrontkämpferbund

Rousseau, Jean-Jacques

Ruben-Wolff, Marta

Russia

Russian Revolution


SA

Sauerland, Kurt

Schattendorf

Schilder, Paul

schizophrenia

Schjelderup, Harald

Schmitz, Dr.

Schneider

Schober, JohannSchröder, Professor

Schultz-Hencke

Schutzbund

Seipel, Ignaz

Seitz, Karl

sex-counseling centers

sexual currents, recording of

sex-economy; and political concepts

sex-morality

sex-politics; see also Sexpol

Sex and Repression

Sexpol

sexual energy, concept of

Sexual Life of Savages

Sexual Revolution, The

Sexual Struggle of Youth, The; critique of

sexuality; suppression of; children and adolescents and

Siersted, Ellen

Smith, Adam

Social Democrats; in Austria

Socialism; and Freud

Socialist Society for Sex-Counseling and Sex-Research

Socialists

sociology

Soviet Union, see Russia

Stalin, Joseph

Steidle

Stein, Peter

Stöcker, Helene

Streicher, Julius

Ström

syphilis


Tarchanoff phenomenon

T-bacilli

Thälmann, Ernst

Thjötta

Trobriand Islanders

Trotsky, Leon


Überblick über das Forschungsgebiet der Sexualökonomie”unemployed

United States, emotional plague and police in; students from, to Vienna; and Fascism; and Reich theory

Unter dem Banner des Marxismus

Untermensch

Urgesellschaft

Ursprung der Familie, Der


value, surplus, use, and exchange

Varga

vegetative energy

vegetotherapy

Verlag für Sexualpolitik

Vesicles

Vienna

Vienna Psychoanalytic Association, letter to Reich from

Vierzig Jahre Ketzer

Völkischer Beobachter

Voltaire

Vougoin


Wallisch

Weber, Max

Weinert, Erich

Weizsäcker

Weltbühne

What Is Class-Consciousness?

“When Your Child Asks Questions”

Wiener-Neustadt, demonstrations in

Willkie, Wendell

Wittfogel, Karl August

work democracy

work-power

Workers’ Cultural Congress

Workers’ Cultural Press

World League for Sexual Reform

Wright, Almroth E.


youth, see adolescents

Youth PublishersZadniker

Zahle, Carl Theodor

Zeitschrift für Politische Psychologie und Sexualökonomie

Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung                                ALSO BY WILHELM REICH


                                The Cancer Biopathy

                                  Character Analysis

                Ether, God and Devil / Cosmic Superimposition

                            The Function of the Orgasm

                    The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality

                                  Listen, Little Man!

                        The Mass Psychology of Fascism

                                The Murder of Christ

                                Reich Speaks of Freud

                                  Selected Writings

                                The Sexual Revolution

                            Early Writings; Volume One 


Copyright © 1976 by Mary Boyd Higgins as Trustee of the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund

Menschen im Staat, Teil I copyright © 1973 by Mary Boyd Higgins as Trustee of the Wilhelm Reich

Infant Trust Fund

Earlier translation published under the title People in Trouble (The Emotional Plague of Mankind, Vol.

II), copyright 1953 by the Orgone Institute Press, Inc.

All rights reserved

Published simultaneously in Canada by McGraw-Hill Ryerson Ltd., Toronto

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Reich, Wilhelm, 1897–1957.

People in trouble.

Includes index.

1. Reich, Wilhelm, 1897–1957. 2. Orgonomy. I. Title. [DNLM: 1. Politics. 2. Psychoanalytic

  interpretation. WM460 R347p]

RC339.52.R44A313   1976   615'.85   76–39776

ISBN 0-374-51035-0 (pbk)

eISBN 9781466846982

First eBook edition: May 2013