THE FUNCTION
OF THE ORGASM

SEX-ECONOMIC PROBLEMS OF
BIOLOGICAL ENERGY

WILHELM REICH

TRANSLATED BY
VINCENT R. CARFAGNO

P
><f>t

 
THE FUNCTION
OF THE ORGASM

SEX-ECONOMIC PROBLEMS OF
BIOLOGICAL ENERGY

WILHELM REICH

TRANSLATED BY
VINCENT R. CARFAGNO

i
 


The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your personal

use  only.  You  may  not  make  this  e-book  publicly  available  in  any  way.

Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy of this

e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify

the publisher at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.                                  Contents






                                      Title Page

                                  Copyright Notice

                                        Epigraph

                              Preface to Second Edition



                                    General Survey

                      I. Biology and Sexology Before Freud

                                    II. Peer Gynt

              III. Gaps in Psychology and in the Theory of Sex

                  IV. The Development of the Orgasm Theory

          V. The Development of the Character Analytic Technique

                      VI. An Abortive Biological Revolution

                VII. The Breakthrough into the Biological Realm

    VIII. The Orgasm Reflex and the Technique of Character-Analytic

                                      Vegetotherapy

                      IX. From Psychoanalysis to Biogenesis



                                          Notes

                                          Index

                              Also by Wilhelm Reich

                                      Copyright 


      Love, work and knowledge are the well-springs of our life. They should also govern it.

                                      WILHELM REICH  PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION






The  discovery  of  the  orgone  was  the  result  of  the  consistent,  clinical

application  of  the  concept  of  “psychic  energy,”  initially  in  the  field  of

psychiatry. The present volume can be considered an extensive introduction

to the newly opened field of orgone biophysics. The results of biophysical

and physical research since 1934 were set forth in special treatises in the

International Journal for Sex-economy and Orgone Research (1942–5). In

the near future, they will be collected and published as Volume II, under the

title The Cancer Biopathy. It has been clearly shown that knowledge of the

emotional  functions  of  biological  energy  is  indispensable  for  the

understanding  of  its physical  and physiological  functions.  The  biological

emotions  which  govern  the  psychic  processes  are  themselves  the  direct

expression of a strictly physical energy, the cosmic orgone.

  The second edition of this book appears unchanged.


                                                                                    W. R.

New York

February 1947                  GENERAL SURVEY






This book comprises my medical and scientific work on the living organism

over the course of the past twenty years. It was not initially intended for

publication. Thus, I had no hesitation in expressing what I might otherwise

have left out owing to material considerations, good reputation in the general

sense of the word, and some still unresolved trains of thought.

  To  most  people,  it  is  a  riddle  that  I  can  be  active  simultaneously  in

disciplines as different as depth psychology, sociology, physiology, and now

even  biology.  Some  psychoanalysts  wish  that  I  would  return  to

psychoanalysis;  the  sociologists  relegate  me  to  natural  science  and  the

biologists to psychology.

  The subject of “sexuality” virtually cuts through all scientific fields of

research.  In  the  central  phenomenon,  the  sexual  orgasm,  we  meet  with

questions  deriving  from  the  field  of  psychology  as  well  as  from  that  of

physiology, from the field of biology no less than from that of sociology.

Natural  science  offers  hardly  another  field  of  research  that  is  so  well

equipped to exhibit the fundamental unity of everything that lives and to

guard against narrow, fragmentizing specialization. Sex-economy became an

independent discipline, having its own methods of research and its own body

of  knowledge.  It  is  a natural-scientific,  empirically  founded  theory  of

sexuality. Now it has become essential to describe its development. In doing

so, I am very happy to be able to take the opportunity to clear up what I can

claim as my own contribution, how my work is related to other fields of

research, and what is concealed behind the hollow rumors about my activity.    Sex-economy grew in the womb of Freud’s psychoanalysis between 1919

and 1923. The material separation from this matrix took place around 1928,

but  it  was  not  until  1934  that  it  was  severed  from  the  International

Psychoanalytic Association.

  The present volume is more a relation of facts and events than it is a

textbook. A systematic presentation of the material could not have shown the

reader  how,  in  the  course  of  these  twenty  years,  problems  and  solutions

followed one upon the other. Nothing could have been contrived; everything

owes its existence to the remarkable course of scientific logic. It is not false

modesty when I say that I feel myself to be merely the instrument of this

logic.

  The functional method of research acts like a compass in an unfamiliar

region. I do not know of any finer proof of the validity of the sex-economic

theory than the circumstance that the “orgastic potency” discovered in 1922,

the most important element of sex-economy, led to and found its natural-

scientific  substantiation  in  the  discovery  of  the orgasm reflex  (1935)  and

orgone  radiation  (1939).  This  inherent  logic  in  the  development  of  sex-

economy is its fulcrum in a welter of opinions. It is its citadel in the struggle

against misunderstandings and in the overcoming of grave doubts at a time

when confusion threatens to stifle clear thinking.

  There  are  certain  advantages  in  writing  scientific  biographies  in  one’s

younger years. Some of the illusions one still has during that period, namely

that people will be prepared to accept revolutionary insights, enable one to

stick  to  the  basic  facts,  to  resist  the  manifold  temptations  to  make

compromises and not to shy away from incisive conclusions for the sake of

intellectual  complacency,  peace  of  mind,  or  worldly  acceptance.  The

temptation to deny the sexual etiology of so many illnesses is far greater in

the case of sex-economy than it was in psychoanalysis. It was only with great

effort that I succeeded in establishing the term “sex-economy.” This concept

is intended to cover a new scientific field: the investigation of biopsychicenergy. According to the prevailing view of life, “sexuality” is an offensive

term. It is very tempting to wipe out its importance for human life altogether.

It will no doubt require the work of many generations before sexuality is

taken seriously by official science and the laity, probably not until the social

questions  of  life  and  death  bear  in  upon  us  the  absolute  necessity  of

comprehending and mastering the sexual process, free of social constraints.

  One such question is cancer; another is the psychic plague which gave

rise to dictatorships.

    Sex-economy is a natural-scientific discipline. It is not ashamed of the

subject of sexuality, and it rejects as its representative everyone who has not

overcome  the  inculcated  social  fear  of  sexual  defamation.  The  term

“vegetotherapy,” used to describe the sex-economic therapeutic technique, is

actually a concession to the squeamishness of the world in sexual matters.

“Orgasmotherapy” would have been a much better, indeed more correct term,

for this medical technique: that is precisely what vegetotherapy basically is. It

had  to  be  taken  into  consideration,  however,  that  this  term  would  have

entailed too great a strain on the young sex-economists in their practice. Well,

it can’t be helped. Speak of the core of their natural longings and religious

feelings and people will either laugh derisively or snicker sordidly.

  There  is  reason  to  fear  that  in  a  decade  or  two,  the  school  of  sex-

economists will split up into two mutually hostile groups. One group will

claim that the sexual function is subordinate to the general functions of life,

and hence of no real account. The other group of sex-economists will raise a

strong, radical protest and attempt to save the honor of research on sexuality.

In this controversy, the fundamental identity between sexual process and life

process could become totally obscured. I, too, could give in and deny what

was an honest scientific conviction in my younger years of struggle. For there

is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  fascist  world  will  cease  to  threaten  our

difficult  work  with  annihilation  through  moralistic,  hereditary-oriented

psychiatrists and party bureaucrats, as it has done and continues to do. Thosefriends who are familiar with the Norwegian scandal created by the fascist

press  campaign  against  sex-economy  know  what  I  mean.  Without  delay,

therefore, it is imperative to establish what is meant by sex-economy, before I

myself  begin  to  think  otherwise  under  the  pressure  of  obsolete  social

conditions and obstruct with my authority the search for truth of future young

scientists.

  The theory of sex-economy and its investigation of living phenomena can

be stated in a few sentences.

  Psychic health depends upon orgastic potency, i.e., upon the degree to

which one can surrender to and experience the climax of excitation in the

natural sexual act. It is founded upon the healthy character attitude of the

individual’s capacity for love. Psychic illnesses are the result of a disturbance

of the natural ability to love. In the case of orgastic impotence, from which

the  overwhelming  majority  of  people  suffer,  damming-up  of  biological

energy occurs and becomes the source of irrational actions. The essential

requirement to cure psychic disturbances is the re-establishment of the natural

capacity for love. It is dependent upon social as well as psychic conditions.

  Psychic illnesses are the consequences of the sexual chaos of society. For

thousands of years, this chaos has had the function of psychically subjecting

man to the prevailing conditions of existence, of internalizing the external

mechanization of life. It has served to bring about the psychic anchoring of a

mechanized  and  authoritarian  civilization  by  making  man  incapable  of

functioning independently.

  The vital energies regulate themselves naturally, without compulsive duty

or compulsive morality—both of which are sure signs of existing antisocial

impulses. Antisocial actions are the expression of secondary drives. These

drives  are  produced  by  the  suppression  of  natural  life,  and  they  are  at

variance with natural sexuality.

  People who are brought up with a negative attitude toward life and sex

acquire  a  pleasure  anxiety,  which  is  physiologically  anchored  in  chronicmuscular spasms. This neurotic pleasure anxiety is the basis on which life-

negating,  dictator-producing  views  of  life  are  reproduced  by  the  people

themselves. It is the core of the fear of an independent, freedom-oriented way

of life. This fear becomes the most significant source of strength for every

form of political reaction, and for the domination of the majority of working

men and women by individual persons or groups. It is a biophysiological

fear,  and  it  constitutes  the  central  problem  of  the  psychosomatic  field  of

investigation.  It  has  been  until  now  the  greatest  obstruction  to  the

investigation of the involuntary functions of life, which the neurotic person

can experience only in a mysterious and fear-ridden way.

  The character structure of modern man, who reproduces a six-thousand-

year-old  patriarchal  authoritarian  culture,  is  typified  by  characterological

armoring  against  his  inner  nature  and  against  the  social  misery  which

surrounds  him.  This  characterological  armoring  is  the  basis  of  isolation,

indigence, craving for authority, fear of responsibility, mystic longing, sexual

misery,  and  neurotically  impotent  rebelliousness,  as  well  as  pathological

tolerance. Man has alienated himself from, and has grown hostile toward,

life. This alienation is not of a biological but of a socio-economic origin. It is

not  found  in  the  stages  of  human  history  prior  to  the  development  of

patriarchy.

  Since  the  emergence  of  patriarchy,  the  natural  pleasure  of  work  and

activity  has  been  replaced  by  compulsive  duty.  The  average  structure  of

masses of people has been transformed into a distorted structure marked by

impotence  and  fear  of  life.  This  distorted  structure  not  only  forms  the

psychological basis of authoritarian dictatorship, it enables these dictatorships

to justify themselves by pointing to human attitudes such as irresponsibility

and childishness. The international catastrophe through which we are living is

the ultimate consequence of this alienation from life.

  The structuring of masses of people to be blindly obedient to authority is

brought about not by natural parental love, but by the authoritarian family.The suppression of the sexuality of small children and adolescents is the chief

means of producing this obedience.

  Nature  and  culture,  instinct  and  morality,  sexuality  and  achievement

become incompatible as a result of the split in the human structure. The unity

and congruity of culture and nature, work and love, morality and sexuality,

longed  for  from  time  immemorial,  will  remain  a  dream  as  long  as  man

continues  to  condemn  the  biological  demand  for  natural  (orgastic)  sexual

gratification. Genuine democracy and freedom founded on consciousness and

responsibility  are  also  doomed  to  remain  an  illusion  until  this  demand  is

fulfilled. Helpless subjugation to chaotic social conditions will continue to

typify  human  existence.  The  destruction  of  life  by  means  of  coercive

education and war will prevail.

  In the field of psychotherapy, I worked out the technique of character-

analytic  vegetotherapy.  Its  basic  principle  is  the  re-establishment  of

biopsychic  motility  through  the  dissolution  of  the  character  and  muscular

rigidifications  (“armorings”).  This  technique  of  treating  neuroses  was

experimentally  substantiated  by  the  discovery  of  the  bioelectric  nature  of

sexuality  and  anxiety.  Sexuality  and  anxiety  are  functions  of  the  living

organism operating in opposite directions: pleasurable expansion and anxious

contraction.

  The orgasm formula which directs sex-economic research is as follows:

MECHANICAL TENSION → BIOELECTRIC CHARGE → BIOELECTRIC DISCHARGE →

MECHANICAL RELAXATION. It proved to be the formula of living functioning as

such. It led to the experimental investigation of the organization of living

from non-living matter, to experimental bion research, and, more recently, to

the discovery of orgone radiation. Research in the field of sexuality and bions

opened  a  new  approach  to  the  problem  of  cancer  and  a  number  of  other

disturbances of vegetative life.

  The immediate cause of many devastating diseases can be traced to the

fact that man is the sole species which does not fulfill the natural law ofsexuality. The death of millions of people in war is the result of the overt,

social  negation  of  life.  This  negation,  in  turn,  is  the  expression  and

consequence of psychic and somatic disturbances of the life function.

  The sexual process, i.e., the expansive process of biological pleasure, is

the productive life process per se.

  This is saying a lot all at once, and it sounds almost too simple. This

“simplicity” constitutes the secret which some people sense in my work. I

want to try to describe how the difficulties were solved which have blocked

human insight into these problems until now. I very much hope to persuade

the reader that there was no magic involved. On the contrary, my theory is

general but unadmitted human knowledge about the functioning of life. It is

to  be  ascribed  to  the  universal  alienation  from  life  that  the  facts  and

relationships  which  I  discovered  have  been  overlooked  or  consistently

concealed.

  The history of sex-economy would be incomplete without mentioning the

part played in it by its friends and coworkers. They will understand why, in

the scope of the present volume, I have to refrain from paying due respect to

their accomplishments. I can assure everyone who fought and often suffered

for sex-economy that, without their efforts, the entire development would not

have been possible.

  This  presentation  of  sex-economy  proceeds  exclusively  from  the

perspective of the European conditions which led to catastrophe. The victory

of  the  dictatorships  is  ascribable  to  the  psychic  illness  of  the  European

masses  who  were  not  capable  of  mastering  any  of  the  various  forms  of

democracy, economically, socially, or psychologically. I have not been in the

United States long enough to judge to what extent my presentation does or

does not apply to American conditions. The conditions which I have in mind

are not solely external human relationships and social circumstances; what I

have in mind is the deep psychic structure of American men and women and

their society. It requires time to gain an understanding of this structure.  I  can  foresee  that  the  English-language  edition  of  this  book  will  be

objected  to  on  various  grounds.  The  many  years  of  experience  I  had  in

Europe enabled me to use certain indications to assess the importance of an

attack,  a  critique,  or  an  expression  of  praise.  Since  there  is  no  reason  to

assume  that  the  reactions  of  certain  circles  in  this  country  will  be

fundamentally different from those of certain circles in Europe, I should like

to answer possible objections in advance.

    Sex-economy has nothing to do with any one of the existing political

organizations or ideologies. The political concepts which separate the various

strata and classes of society are not applicable to sex-economy. The social

distortion of natural sexuality and its suppression in children and adolescents

are universal human conditions, transcending all state and group boundaries.

    Sex-economy  has  been  persecuted  by  the  representatives  of  political

parties  of  all  persuasions.  My  publications  have  been  prohibited  by  the

communists as well as the fascists; they have been attacked and denounced

by police authorities as well as by the socialist and bourgeois liberals. On the

other hand, they have met with recognition and respect in all strata and circles

of the population. The elucidation of the function of the orgasm, particularly,

was well received by professional-scientific and cultural-political groups of

all kinds.

  Sexual suppression, biological rigidity, moralism, and asceticism are not

confined  to  certain  classes  or  strata  of  the  population.  They  are  found

everywhere.  I  know  of  clergymen  who  willingly  accept  the  distinction

between natural and unnatural sexuality, and who acknowledge the scientific

view  that  there  is  a  parallel  between  the  concept  of  God  and  the  law  of

nature;  I  know  of  other  clergymen  who  look  upon  the  elucidation  and

concrete  realization  of  child  and  adolescent  sexuality  as  a  threat  to  the

existence of the Church and hence take strong measures to combat it. Praise

and  hatred  quoted  the  same  ideology  in  their  defense.  Liberalism  and

democracy felt as threatened as the dictatorship of the proletariat, the honorof socialism as much as the honor of the German woman. In reality, only one

attitude and only one kind of social and moral arrangement is threatened by

the elucidation of the function of life, namely the authoritarian dictatorial

regime  of  every  kind  which  seeks  through  compulsive  morality  and

compulsive  work  to  destroy  the  spontaneous  decency  and  natural  self-

regulation of the vital energies.

    However—and let us put the matter straight this time—it is not solely in

totalitarian states that we find authoritarian dictatorship. It is found in the

Church as well as in academic organizations, among the communists as well

as in parliamentary governments. It is a universal human tendency produced

by  the  suppression  of  life;  authoritarian  upbringing  constitutes  the

psychological basis in the masses of people of all nations for the acceptance

and establishment of dictatorship. Its basic elements are mystification of the

life process, concrete helplessness of a material and social nature, fear of

assuming the responsibility for determining one’s own life, and, therefore,

craving for illusionary security and authority, whether actively or passively.

The genuine, age-old striving for the democratization of social life is based

on self-determination, on natural sociality and morality, on pleasurable work

and on earthly happiness in love. It regards every illusion as a danger. Hence,

it will not only not fear the natural-scientific comprehension of life, it will

make use of it to master decisive problems of the development of human

structure in a scientific and practical and not in an illusionary way. Efforts are

being  made  everywhere  to  transform  formal  democracy  into  a  genuine

democracy  of  all  working  men  and  women,  into  a  work  democracy,  in

keeping with the natural organization of the work process.

  In the field of mental hygiene, the first and foremost task is to replace

sexual  chaos,  prostitution,  pornographic  literature,  and  sexual  trafficking,

with natural happiness in love secured by society. This implies neither the

intent  “to  destroy  the  family”  nor  “to  undermine  morality.”  Family  and

morality are already undermined by the compulsive family and compulsivemorality.  Professionally,  we  are  faced  with  the  task  of  mastering  the

infirmities, in the form of psychic illnesses, caused by sexual and familial

chaos.  To  master  the  psychic  plague,  it  is  necessary  to  draw  a  clear-cut

distinction  between  the  natural  love  which  exists  between  parents  and

children  and  every  form  of  familial  compulsion.  The  endemic  illness,

“familitis,” destroys everything which honest human strivings are attempting

to achieve.

  Though  I  do  not  belong  to  any  political  or  religious  organization,  I

nonetheless have a very definite view of social life. It is, in contrast to every

form of political, purely ideological, or mystical view of life, scientifically

rational. On the basis of this view, it is my belief that our earth will never

find lasting peace and that it will seek in vain to fulfill the function of social

organization  as  long  as  untutored  and  naive  politicians  and  dictators  of

whatever  persuasion  continue  to  contaminate  and  to  lead  sexually  sick

masses of people. The social organization of man has the natural function of

protecting work and the natural fulfillment of love. From ancient times, these

two biological activities of man have been dependent upon scientific research

and thought. Knowledge, work, and natural love are the sources of our life.

They should also govern it, and the full responsibility should be borne by

working men and women everywhere.

  Mental hygiene on a mass scale requires the power of knowledge against

the power of ignorance; the power of vitally necessary work against every

form  of  parasitism,  whether  of  an  economic,  intellectual,  or  philosophic

nature. Taking itself seriously, natural science can become a citadel against

those forces which destroy life, no matter who perpetuates this destruction or

where. Quite obviously, there is no one person who possesses the knowledge

necessary to safeguard the natural function of life. The scientifically rational

view of life excludes dictatorship and demands work democracy.

  Social power, exercised by the people, through the people, and for the

people, borne by the natural feeling for life and respect for the performanceof  work,  would  be  invincible.  However,  this  power  presupposes  that  the

working masses of people will become psychically independent and capable

of  bearing  full  responsibility  for  social  existence  and  of  rationally

determining  their  own  lives.  What  prevents  this  from  happening  is  the

psychic mass neurosis which is materialized in all forms of dictatorship and

in  all  forms  of  political  hullabaloo.  To  master  the  mass  neurosis  and  the

irrationalism in social life, i.e., to implement genuine mental hygiene, a social

framework is required which must first of all eliminate material distress and

safeguard  the  free  development  of  the  vital  energies  in  each  and  every

individual. This social framework can only be genuine democracy.

  However, genuine democracy is not a condition of “freedom” which can

be  given,  granted,  or  guaranteed  to  a  group  of  people  by  an  elected  or

totalitarian government. Genuine democracy is a difficult, lengthy process in

which the people, socially and legally protected, have (i.e., do not “receive”)

every  possibility  of  schooling  themselves  in  the  administration  of  vital

individual and social life and of advancing to ever better forms of living. In

short, genuine democracy is not a finished development which, like some old

man,  now  enjoys  its  glorious,  militant  past.  It  is,  rather,  a  process  of

unceasing wrestling with the problems of the unbroken development of new

ideas, new discoveries, and new forms of living. The development will be

continuous and incapable of being disrupted only when the antiquated and

senescent,  which  fulfilled  its  role  at  an  earlier  stage  of  democratic

development, becomes sagacious enough to make room for the young and the

new and does not stifle them by appealing to dignity or formal authority.

    Tradition is important. It is democratic when it fulfills its natural function

of  providing  the  new  generation  with  a  knowledge  of  the  good  and  bad

experiences of the past, i.e., of enabling it to learn from old errors and not

repeat them. Tradition becomes the bane of democracy when it denies the

rising generation the possibility of choice, when it attempts to dictate what is

to be regarded as “good” and what as “bad” under new conditions of life.Traditionalists  easily  and  readily  forget  that  they  have  lost  the  ability  to

decide what is not tradition. For instance, the improvement of the microscope

was not brought about by destroying the first model: the improvement was

achieved  by  preserving  and  developing  the  first  model  in  keeping  with  a

more advanced stage of human knowledge. A microscope of Pasteur’s time

does not enable the modern researcher to study viruses. Now suppose the

Pasteur microscope had the power and the impudence to prohibit the electron

microscope.

  The young would not feel any hostility toward tradition, would indeed

have nothing but respect for it if, without jeopardizing themselves, they could

say, “This  we  will  take  over  from  you  because  it  is  strong,  honest,  still

relative to our times and capable of development. That, however, we cannot

take over. It was useful and true for your time—it would be useless to us.”

These young people will have to be prepared to hear the same thing from

their children.

  The development of prewar democracy into complete and genuine work

democracy means that the general public must acquire concrete determination

of its existence in place of the formal, fragmentary, and defective sort of

determination it has at present. It means that the irrational political molding

of the will of the people has to be replaced by rational mastery of the social

process. This requires the progressive self-education of the people toward

responsible freedom, instead of the childish expectation that freedom can be

received as a gift or can be guaranteed by someone else. If democracy wants

to eradicate the tendency to dictatorship in the masses of the people, it will

have to prove that it is capable of eliminating poverty and of bringing about

the rational independence of people. This and only this can be called organic

social development.

  It is my opinion that the European democracies were defeated in the fight

against dictatorship because the democratic systems were far too laden with

formal elements and much too deficient in objective and practical democracy.Fear of vital living determined every educational measure. Democracy was

looked  upon  as  a  condition  of  guaranteed  “freedom”  and  not  as  the

development of responsibility in the masses. Even in the democracies, the

people were taught, and still are taught, to be blindly loyal. The catastrophic

events of the times have taught us that people brought up to be blindly loyal

in any form whatever will deprive themselves of their own freedom; they will

slay the giver of freedom and run off with the dictator.

  I am not a politician and I am not versed in politics, but I am a socially

conscious scientist. As such, I claim the right to say what I have recognized

to be true. If my scientific observations have the capacity to be conducive to a

better organization of human conditions, the purpose of my work shall have

been fulfilled. When the dictatorships have come to naught, human society

will have need of truths, and precisely unpopular truths. Those truths which

have  to  do  with  the  unadmitted  reasons  of  the  present  social  chaos  will

eventually prevail, whether people want this to happen or not. One such truth

is that dictatorship is rooted in the irrational fear of life in the masses. He who

expounds such truths is very much endangered—but he can wait. He does not

feel  compelled  to  fight  for  power  for  the  purpose  of  enforcing  truth.  His

power is his knowledge of facts which pertain to mankind as a whole. No

matter how distasteful such facts may be, in times of extreme social exigency,

the  society’s  will  to  life  will  force  it  to  acknowledge  them,  in  spite  of

everything else.

  The scientist is duty-bound to insist on the right of free speech under all

conditions; this right must not be left to those whose intent is to suppress life.

We hear so much about the duty of a soldier to be willing to sacrifice his life

for his country; we hear too little about the duty of a scientist to expound a

truth once it has been recognized, cost what it may.

  The physician or the teacher has but one responsibility, namely to practice

his profession unflinchingly, irrespective of the powers which suppress life,

and to have in mind solely the welfare of those entrusted to him. He must notrepresent any ideologies which contradict medical science or pedagogy.

  Those who call themselves democrats and want to contest this right on the

part of the researcher, physician, educator, technician, or writer are hypocrites

or  at  least  victims  of  the  plague  of  irrationalism.  Without  firmness  and

seriousness in vital questions, the fight against the plague of dictatorship is

hopeless, for dictatorship thrives—and can only thrive—in the obscurity of

unrecognized  issues  of  life  and  death.  Man  is  helpless  when  he  lacks

knowledge; helplessness due to ignorance is the fertilizer of dictatorship. A

social system cannot be called democratic if it is afraid of posing decisive

questions, finding unaccustomed answers, and engaging in a discussion about

such questions and answers. In such a case, it is defeated by the slightest

attack on its institutions by would-be dictators. This is what happened in

Europe.

  “Freedom of religion” is dictatorship when it does not go hand in hand

with  freedom  of  science;  for,  when  this  is  not  the  case,  there  is  no  free

competition in the interpretation of the life process. It must be decided once

and  for  all  whether  “God”  is  a  bearded,  all-powerful,  divine  figure,  or

whether he represents the cosmic law of nature which governs us. Only if

God and the law of nature are identical is an understanding possible between

science and religion. It is but one step from the dictatorship of an earthly

representative of God to the dictatorship of a divinely ordained savior of

peoples.

    “Morality” is dictatorial when it lumps natural feelings of life together

with pornography. In doing so, it perpetuates sexual smut and blights natural

happiness in love, whether this is what it intends or not. It is necessary to

raise a strong protest when those who determine their social behavior on the

basis of inner laws instead of external compulsive codes are labeled immoral.

A man and a woman are husband and wife not because they have received

the sacrament, but because they feel themselves to be husband and wife. The

inner and not the external law is the yardstick of genuine freedom. Moralisticbigotry cannot be fought with another form of compulsive morality, but only

with  knowledge  of  the  natural  law  of  the  sexual  process.  Natural  moral

behavior presupposes that the natural life process can develop freely. On the

other hand, compulsive morality and pathological sexuality go hand in hand.

  The  line  of  compulsion  is  the  line  of  least  resistance.  It  is  easier  to

demand  discipline  and  to  enforce  it  authoritatively  than  it  is  to  bring  up

children to take pleasure in doing independent work and to have a natural

attitude toward sexuality. It is easier to declare oneself to be an omniscient

Führer ordained by God, and to decree what millions of people are to think

and do, than it is to expose oneself to the struggle between rationality and

irrationality in the clash of opinions. It is easier to insist on legal fulfillment

of respect and love than it is to win friendship through humane behavior. It is

easier to sell one’s independence for material security than it is to lead a

responsible, independent existence and to be master of oneself. It is more

convenient to dictate the behavior of subordinates than it is to guide this

behavior, while preserving what is singular in it. This is also why dictatorship

is  always  easier  than  genuine  democracy.  This  is  why  the  complacent

democratic leader envies the dictator and incompetently seeks to imitate him.

It is easy to stand up for what is commonplace. It is difficult to stand up for

truth.

  Hence, those who do not have or have lost faith in the life process are at

the mercy of the subterranean influence of the fear of life which produces

dictatorship. The life process is inherently “rational.” It becomes distorted

and grotesque when it is not allowed to develop freely. When the life process

is distorted, it can only engender fear. Hence, only knowledge of the life

process can dispel fear.

  Our world has indeed become out of joint. But no matter how the bloody

struggles of the present shape the centuries to come, the fact remains that the

science of life is more powerful than tyranny and all forms of life-negation. It

was Galileo and not Nero who laid the foundation of technology; Pasteur andnot  Napoleon  who  combatted  diseases;  Freud  and  not  Schicklgruber  who

plumbed the psychic depths. It was these scientists, in short, who ensured our

existence. The others have merely misused the achievements of great men to

destroy the life process. The roots of natural science go infinitely deeper than

any transitory fascist tumult.


                                                                          Wilhelm Reich

  New York

  November 1940                                        CHAPTER I





  BIOLOGY AND SEXOLOGY BEFORE FREUD




The scientific position which I have just sketched has its roots in the Vienna

seminar on sexology, 1919 to 1922. No system, no preconceived opinion has

directed the development of my views. There are some who would like to

contend that we are dealing here with a man who, having a peculiar personal

history  of  complexes  and  excluded  from  “respectable”  society,  wants  to

impose his fantasies about life on other people. Nothing could be further from

the truth. The fact is that a youth filled with activity and experience enabled

me to perceive and represent data, peculiarities of research, and results which

remained closed to others.

  Before  I  became  a  member  of  the  Vienna  Psychoanalytic  Society  in

October  1920,  I  had  acquired  as  extensive  a  knowledge  in  the  field  of

sexology and psychology as I had acquired in the field of natural science and

natural  philosophy.  This  sounds  immodest.  Be  that  as  it  may;  misplaced

modesty is no virtue. There was no witchcraft involved. Intellectually starved

after  four  years  of  doing  nothing  in  World  War  I  and  endowed  with  the

ability  to  learn  quickly,  thoroughly,  and  systematically,  I  plunged  into

everything of interest which came my way. I did not idle away very much of

my time in cafés and soirées, nor did I spend any time going on sprees or in

clowning around with fellow students.

  It  was  quite  by  chance  that  I  came  into  contact  with  psychoanalysis.

During a lecture on anatomy in January 1919, a handbill was passed around

from desk to desk. It called upon interested students to set up a seminar onsexology. I went to the initial meeting. There were some eight young medical

students present. It was said that a seminar on sexology was necessary for

medical  students  because  the  University  of  Vienna  was  neglecting  this

important question. I regularly attended the seminar, but I did not take part in

the  discussion.  The  manner  in  which  this  subject  was  treated  in  the  first

sessions sounded strange to me; it lacked the tone of naturalness. There was

something in me that rejected it. One of my notes of March 1919 runs as

follows: “Perhaps it is the morality with which the subject is treated that

disturbs me. From my own experience, from observations made on myself

and others, I have reached the conclusion that sexuality is the center around

which the life of society as a whole as well as the inner intellectual world of

the individual … revolves.”

  Why did I object? It was not until some ten years later that I found out the

reason. I had experienced sexuality differently from the way it was dealt with

in that course. There was something bizarre and strange about the sexuality of

those  first  lectures.  A  natural  sexuality  did  not  appear  to  exist  at  all;  the

unconscious  was  full  of  perverse  instincts  only.  For  instance,  the

psychoanalytic theory denied the existence of a primary vaginal eroticism in

young girls and ascribed female sexuality to a complicated combination of

other instincts.

  The suggestion was made to invite an older psychoanalyst to deliver a

series  of  lectures  on  sexuality.  He  spoke  well  and  what  he  said  was

interesting, but I had an instinctive dislike for the manner in which he treated

the subject. I heard a great deal that was new, and I was very much interested,

but somehow the lecturer was not worthy of the subject. I would not have

been able to say why this was so.

  I procured a number of works on sexology: Bloch’s Sexualleben unserer

Zeit,  Forel’s Die  sexuelle  Frage,  Back’s Sexuelle  Verirrungen,  Taruffi’s

Hermaphroditismus und Zeugungsunfähigkeit. Then I read Jung’s Libido, and

finally I read Freud. I read voluminously, quickly, and thoroughly—someworks I read two and three times. Freud’s Three Contributions to the Theory

of Sex and Introductory Lectures to Psychoanalysis decided my choice of

profession. I immediately separated sexologic literature into two groups: one

serious and the other “moralistic and lascivious.” I was enthusiastic about

Bloch, Forel, and Freud. Freud was a tremendous intellectual experience.

  I did not immediately become a devoted disciple of Freud. I assimilated

his discoveries gradually, at the same time studying the ideas and discoveries

of other great men. Before I committed myself completely to psychoanalysis

and threw myself into it totally, I acquired a general grounding in natural

science and natural philosophy. It was the basic theme of sexuality which

compelled  me  to  undertake  these  studies.  I  studied  Moll’s Handbuch der

Sexualwissenschaft very thoroughly. I wanted to know what others had to say

about  the  instincts.  This  led  me  to  Semon.  His  theory  of  “mnemonic

sensations”  gave  me  food  for  thought  on  the  problems  of  memory  and

instinct. Semon contended that the involuntary acts of all living creatures

consist  in  “engrams,”  i.e.,  in  historical  impressions  of  experiences.  The

eternally self-perpetuating protoplasm is continually absorbing impressions

which, responding to corresponding stimuli, are “ecphorized.” This biological

theory fit in very well with Freud’s concept of unconscious remembrances,

the  “memory  traces.”  The  question  “What  is  life?”  prompted  each  new

acquisition of knowledge. Life was characterized by a remarkable rationality

and purposefulness of instinctive, involuntary action.

  Forel’s  investigations  on  the  rational  organization  of  ants  drew  my

attention  to  the  problem  of  vitalism.  Between  1919  and  1921,  I  became

familiar with Driesch’s Philosophie des Organischen and his Ordnungslehre.

I  understood  the  first  book  but  not  the  second.  It  was  clear  that  the

mechanistic conception of life, which also dominated our medical studies,

could not provide a satisfactory explanation. Driesch’s contention seemed

incontestable to me. He argued that, in the sphere of the life function, the

whole could be developed from a part, whereas a machine could not be madefrom a screw. On the other hand, his use of the concept of “entelechy” to

explain  living  functioning  was  unconvincing.  I  had  the  feeling  that  an

enormous problem was evaded with a word. Thus, in a very primitive way, I

learned to draw a clear distinction between facts and theories about facts. I

gave considerable thought to Driesch’s three proofs of the specific totally

different characteristic of living matter as opposed to inorganic matter. They

were  well-grounded  proofs.  However,  I  couldn’t  quite  accept  the

transcendentalism of the life principle. Seventeen years later I was able to

resolve the contradiction on the basis of a formula pertaining to the function

of energy. Driesch’s theory was always present in my mind when I thought

about vitalism. The vague feeling I had about the irrational nature of his

assumption  turned  out  to  be  justified  in  the  end.  He  landed  among  the

spiritualists.

  I had more success with Bergson. I made an exceedingly careful study of

his Matter  and  Memory,  Time  and  Freedom,  and Creative  Evolution.

Instinctively,  I  sensed  the  correctness  of  his  efforts  to  refute  mechanistic

materialism as well as finalism. Bergson’s elucidation of the perception of

time duration in psychic experience and of the unity of the ego confirmed my

own inner perceptions of the non-mechanistic nature of the organism. All of

this was very obscure and vague—more feeling than knowledge. My present

theory of the identity and unity of psychophysical functioning originated in

Bergsonian  thinking,  and  has  become  a  new  theory  of  the  functional

relationship  between  body  and  mind.  For  a  time  I  was  looked  upon  as  a

“crazy Bergsonian.” While I agreed with Bergson in principle, I was not able

to point out the hiatus in his theory. His “élan vital” very much reminded me

of Driesch’s “entelechy.” The principle of a creative force which governed

life could not be gainsaid. Yet, it was not satisfactory as long as it could not

be made tangible, described and dealt with concretely. Practical applicability

was  justifiably  looked  upon  as  the  supreme  goal  of  natural  science.  The

vitalists always seemed to me to be closer to an understanding of the lifeprinciple than the mechanists, who cut life to pieces before endeavoring to

comprehend it. On the other hand, the idea that the organism operated like a

machine  was  intellectually  more  accessible.  One  could  draw  parallels  to

known material in the field of physics.

  I was a mechanist in my medical work, and my thinking tended to be

oversystematic.  Of  my  preclinical  subjects,  I  was  most  interested  in

systematic and topographic anatomy. I mastered the anatomy of the brain and

all of the nervous system. I was fascinated by the complexity of the nerve

tracts and by the ingenious arrangement of the ganglia. I learned far more

than was required for the medical degree. At the same time, however, I was

drawn to metaphysics. I liked Lange’s Geschichte des Materialismus because

it  clearly  showed  the  indispensability  of  the  idealistic  philosophy  of  life.

Some of my colleagues were annoyed by my “erraticism” and “inconsistency

of  thinking.”  It  was  not  until  seventeen  years  later,  when  I  succeeded  in

experimentally resolving the contradiction between mechanism and vitalism,

that I myself understood this seemingly confused attitude. It is easy to think

correctly in known fields. It is difficult, when one is beginning to feel one’s

way into unknown areas, not to be intimidated by the welter of concepts.

Fortunately, it did not take me long to recognize that I had a gift for grappling

with a profusion of seething thoughts and emerging with practical results. I

owe the invention of the orgonoscope through which flashes of biological

energy can be seen, to this unpopular characteristic.

  The versatility of my intellectual interests made me realize that “everyone

is right in some way”—it is merely a matter of knowing “how.” I studied two

or three books on the history of philosophy, which acquainted me with the

immemorial controversy over whether the body or the mind is primary. These

early stages of my scientific development were important, for they prepared

me  for  the  correct  comprehension  of  Freud’s  theory.  In  the  textbooks  of

biology, which I did not study until after I had taken the oral examination in

biology—the value of which is very questionable—I found a rich world, noend  of  material  suited  for  demonstrative  science  as  well  as  for  idealistic

reverie.  Later,  my  own  problems  forced  me  to  make  more  clear-cut

distinctions between fact and hypothesis. Hertwig’s Allgemeine Biologie and

Das Werden der Organismen provided well-grounded knowledge, but they

failed  to  show  the  interrelation  between  the  various  branches  of  natural

science. I could not have put it into these words at that time, but I was not

satisfied. I was disturbed by the application of the “teleological principle” in

the field of biology. According to this principle, the cell had a membrane in

order to better protect itself against external stimuli. The male sperm cell was

so agile in order to have greater facility in getting to the female egg. The male

animals were bigger and stronger than the female animals and were often

more colorful in order to be more attractive to the female, or they had horns

in order to be more adept at dealing with their rivals. It was even contended

that the female workers among the ants were sexless in order to be able to

perform their work better. The swallows built their nests in order to warm

their young, and nature arranged this or that in such and such a way in order

to fulfill this or that purpose. In short, a mixture of vitalistic finalism and

causal  materialism  also  reigned  in  the  field  of  biology.  I  attended

Kammerer’s very interesting lectures on his theory of the heredity of acquired

characteristics.  Kammerer  was  very  much  influenced  by  Steinach,  who

gained  prominence  at  that  time  with  his  great  works  on  the  hormonal

interstitial  tissues  of  the  genital  apparatus.  The  influencing  of  sexual  and

secondary sexual characteristics by means of the implantation experiment and

Kammerer’s modification of the mechanistic theory of heredity made a strong

impression  on  me.  Kammerer  was  a  convinced  champion  of  the  natural

organization of life from inorganic matter and of the existence of a specific

biological energy. Naturally, I was not able to make any concrete judgments.

It was merely that I was attracted by these scientific views. They brought life

into the material which was dryly dished out to us at the university. Both

Steinach and Kammerer were sharply opposed. I once made an appointmentto see Steinach. When I saw him, I had the impression that he was tired and

worn. Later I had a better understanding of how one is wantonly maltreated

because of good scientific work. Kammerer later committed suicide. It is so

easy  to  mount  the  high  horse  of  criticism  when  one  lacks  objective

arguments.

  I again ran across the “in order to” of biology in various doctrines of

salvation. I read Grimm’s Buddha and was stunned by the inner logic of the

theory  of  Nirvana,  which  also  rejected  joy  because  it  inevitably  entailed

suffering. I found the theory of the transmutation of souls ridiculous, but I

was at a loss to explain why millions of people adhered to such a belief. Fear

of death could not be the full explanation. I never read Rudolf Steiner, but I

knew many theosophists and anthroposophists. All of them had something

peculiar about them; on the other hand, they were usually more fervent than

the dry materialists. They too had to be right in some way.

  In the summer semester of 1919, I read the final paper to the seminar on

sexology,  “The  Concept  of  Libido  from  Forel  to  Jung.”  This  paper  was

published  two  years  later  in  the Zeitschrift  für  Sexualwissenschaft.  I  had

examined the various conceptions of sexuality as expounded by Forel, Moll,

Bloch, Freud, and Jung. It was striking just how differently these scientists

regarded  sexuality.  With  the  exception  of  Freud,  they  all  believed  that

sexuality seized man at the age of puberty from out of a clear blue sky. It was

said that “sexuality awakened.” No one was able to say where it had been

before  this  time.  Sexuality  and  procreation  were  regarded  as  one  and  the

same thing. Behind this one erroneous conception lay concealed a mountain

of psychological and sociological errors. Moll spoke of a “tumescence” and a

“detumescence,” but no one was quite able to say what their origin was, nor

what  function  they  had.  Sexual  tension  and  relaxation  were  ascribed  to

various special instincts. In the sexology and psychiatric psychology of that

time, there were as many, or almost as many, instincts as there were human

actions. There was a hunger instinct, a propagation instinct, an exhibitioninstinct,  an  instinct  for  power,  an  instinct  for  self-assertion,  a  survival

instinct, a maternal instinct, an evolutionary instinct, a cultural and a herd

instinct, naturally also a social instinct, an egoistic and an altruistic instinct, a

separate  instinct  for  algolagnia  (instinct  to  suffer  pain)  and  one  for

masochism, a sadistic instinct, and a transvestism instinct. In short, it was

very simple and yet terribly complicated. There was no making heads or tails

of it. Worst of all was the “moral instinct.” Today very few people know that

morality  was  once  regarded  as  a  phylogenetically,  indeed  supernaturally,

determined instinct. This was said in complete seriousness and with great

dignity.

  It was altogether a terribly ethical period. Sexual perversions were matters

of  pure  diabolism,  moral  “degeneracy.”  The  same  was  true  of  psychic

illnesses. A person suffering from mental depression or neurasthenia had a

“hereditary taint,” that is to say, he or she was “bad.” Mental patients and

criminals  were  looked  upon  as  biologically  tainted,  severely  deformed

creatures, for whom there was no help and no excuse. The man of “genius”

was looked upon as something akin to an abortive criminal, at best a caprice

of nature—and not as a person who had shunned the cultural sterility of the

world  around  him  and  had  preserved  a  contact  with  nature.  Listening  to

Beethoven’s symphonies, the rich, i.e., the good and the just, would like to

obliterate  the  ignominy  of  Beethoven’s  death  in  wretched  isolation  and

poverty.

  It  is  merely  necessary  to  read  Wulffen’s  book  on  criminality  or  the

psychiatry of Pilcz, Kraepelin, or anyone else of that time. One does not quite

know whether one is dealing with moral theology or science. Nothing was

known  about  psychic  and  sexual  illnesses;  their  existence  merely  aroused

indignation,  and  the  gaps  in  knowledge  were  filled  in  with  an  utterly

contemptible  morality.  Everything  was  hereditary,  i.e.,  biologically

determined, and that was the end of it. The fact that such a hopeless and

intellectually  cowardly  attitude  was  able  to  conquer  the  German  empirefourteen years later, in spite of all the scientific efforts which were made in

the interim, is to be ascribed in part to the social indifference of the pioneers

of  science.  I  intuitively  rejected  this  metaphysics,  moral  philosophy,  and

“ethicizing.” I looked in vain for facts in substantiation of these doctrines. In

the biological works of a man such as Mendel, who had studied the laws of

heredity,  I  found  far  greater  confirmation  of  the  variability  of  hereditary

succession than I did of its proclaimed rigid uniformity. It did not dawn upon

me that 99 percent of the theory of heredity is one stupendous subterfuge. On

the  other  hand,  I  was  very  much  taken  by  de  Vries’s  mutation  theory,

Steinach’s and Kammerer’s experiments, Fliess’s and Swoboda’s theory of

frequency.  Darwin’s  theory  of  natural  selection  fulfilled  the  reasonable

expectation  that,  while  basic  natural  laws  govern  life,  circumstantial

influences must be allowed the greatest possible latitude. There was nothing

eternally  immutable  here;  nothing  was  traced  back  to  unseen  hereditary

factors. Everything was capable of development.

  It never entered my mind to relate the sexual instinct to these biological

theories. I had no inclination for speculations. The sexual instinct eked out a

meager existence in the field of science.

  One has to be familiar with this atmosphere in the fields of sexology and

psychiatry before Freud to understand the enthusiasm and relief which I felt

when I encountered him. Freud had paved a road to a clinical understanding

of sexuality. He showed that adult sexuality proceeds from stages of sexual

development  in  childhood.  It  was  immediately  clear:  sexuality  and

procreation are not the same. The words “sexual” and “genital” could not be

used interchangeably. The sexual experience comprises a far greater realm

than  the  genital  experience,  otherwise  perversions  such  as  pleasure  in

coprophagy, in filth, or in sadism could not be called sexual. Freud exposed

contradictions in thinking and brought in logic and order.

  The pre-Freudian writers used the concept of “libido” to denote simply

the conscious appetite for sexual activity. It was not known what “libido” wasor should be. Freud said, We cannot concretely grasp what instinct is. What

we experience are merely derivatives of instinct: sexual ideas and affects.

Instinct itself lies deep in the biological core of the organism; it becomes

manifest  as  an  affective  urge  for  gratification.  We  sense  the  urge  for

relaxation but not the instinct itself. This was a profound thought; it was

understood  neither  by  those  sympathetic  to  nor  those  inimical  toward

psychoanalysis. It constituted a foundation of natural-scientific thinking upon

which one could build with confidence. This is how I interpreted Freud: it is

altogether logical that the instinct itself cannot be conscious, for it is what

rules and governs us. We are its object. Take electricity, for example. We do

not know what it is or how it originates. We recognize it only through its

manifestations, such as in light and in electrical shock. True, an electrical

wave can be measured, but it too is only a characteristic of what we call

electricity.  Just  as  electricity  is  capable  of  being  measured  through  its

manifestations of energy, the instincts are capable of being recognized only

through the manifestation of their affects. Freud’s “libido,” I concluded, is

not  the  same  as  the  “libido”  of  pre-Freudians.  The  latter  denotes  the

conscious sexual longings. Freud’s “libido” is and can be nothing other than

the energy of the sexual instinct.  It  is  possible  that  someday  we  shall  be

capable of measuring it. It was entirely without conscious premeditation that I

used the simile of electricity and its energy. I had no idea that sixteen years

later I would have the good fortune of demonstrating the identity between

bioelectric and sexual energy. Freud’s consistent, natural-scientific thinking

in terms of energy captivated me. It was objective and lucid.

  The seminar on sexology enthusiastically accepted my elucidation. They

had heard that Freud interpreted symbols and dreams and did other curious

things.  I  had  succeeded  in  establishing  a  connection  between  Freud  and

known theories of sex. In the fall of 1919, I was elected to the chairmanship

of the seminar. In this position, I learned to bring order into scientific work.

Groups  were  formed  to  study  the  various  branches  of  sexology:endocrinology  and  the  general  theory  of  hormones,  the  biology  of  sex—

above all, psychoanalysis. In the beginning, we studied the sociology of sex

from the books of Müller-Lyer. One medical student delivered lectures on

Tandler’s  ideas  on  social  hygiene,  another  taught  us  embryology.  Of  the

original thirty participants, only some eight remained, but they did serious

work.  We  moved  into  the  basement  of  the  Hayek  Clinic.  Rather

insinuatingly, Hayek asked me whether we also wanted to practice “practical

sexology.” I put his mind at ease. We were already well acquainted with the

attitude of the university professors toward sexuality. It no longer bothered

us.  We  looked  upon  the  omission  of  sexology  in  our  studies  as  a  severe

disadvantage, and we sought to inform ourselves as best we could. I learned a

great deal in preparing a course on the anatomy and physiology of the sexual

organs.  I  had  gathered  my  material  from  various  textbooks  in  which  the

sexual organs were represented solely as serving the purpose of reproduction.

This  did  not  even  seem  strange.  Nothing  was  said  about  how  the  sexual

organs were related to the autonomic nervous system; what was said about

their  relation  to  the  sexual  hormones  was  vague  and  unsatisfactory.  We

learned  that  “substances”  were  produced  in  the  interstitial  glands  of  the

testicle and of the ovary and that these “substances” determined secondary

sexual characteristics and brought about sexual maturity in puberty. They

were also represented as the cause of sexual excitation. These researchers did

not notice the contradiction that men castrated before puberty have a reduced

sexuality,  while  men  castrated after  puberty  do  not  lose  their  sexual

excitability and are capable of the sexual act. The fact that eunuchs develop a

singular sadism was not regarded as a problem. It was not until many years

later, when I was afforded an insight into the mechanisms of sexual energy,

that  I  understood  these  phenomena.  After  puberty,  sexuality  is  fully

developed,  and  castration  cannot  affect  it.  Sexual  energy  operates  in  the

whole body and not solely in the interstitial tissues of the gonads. The sadism

which  eunuchs  develop  is  nothing  other  than  the  sexual  energy  which,deprived of its normal genital function, seizes the musculature of the whole

body. In the physiology of that time, the concept of sexuality did not extend

beyond  the  comprehension  of  the  individual  points  of  attachment  of  the

sexual mechanism, e.g., the interstitial tissues of the testicles and/or ovaries;

it described nothing more than the secondary sexual characteristics. It was for

this reason that Freud’s explanation of the sexual function had a liberating

effect. True, in Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex, he still assumed the

existence of “chemical substances,” which were said to be the cause of sexual

excitation. He investigated the phenomena of sexual excitation, spoke of an

“organ  libido,”  and  ascribed  to  each  cell  that  strange  “something”  which

influences our life to such a large extent. I was later able to experimentally

confirm these intimations on Freud’s part.

    Psychoanalysis gradually gained supremacy over all other disciplines. My

first analysis was of a young man whose chief symptom was the compulsion

to  walk  fast.  He  was  not  able  to  walk  slowly.  The  symbolism  which  he

offered in his dreams did not appear very unusual to me. Indeed, its logic

very often surprised me. Most people found Freud’s interpretation of symbols

rather  fantastic.  I  was  familiar  with  symbolism  not  only  from  Freud’s

Interpretation of Dreams, but also from my own dreams, which I had often

unraveled. I have a series of my own dream analyses.

  The work on my first patient went very well—too well, as is usually the

case  with  beginners.  The  beginner  has  a  way  of  being  insensitive  to  the

inscrutable depth of the unconscious and of overlooking the complexity of

the problems. I was very proud when I succeeded in analyzing the meaning

of  the  compulsive  action.  As  a  small  boy,  the  patient  had  once  stolen

something from a store and had run off in fear of being pursued. He had

repressed  this  incident.  It  reappeared  in  his  “having  to  walk  fast.”  In

connection with this, it was easy to demonstrate his childhood fear of being

caught  in  the  act  of  clandestine  masturbation.  There  was  even  an

improvement in his condition. I also discovered a number of indications ofthe patient’s deep sexual attachment to his mother.

  On the point of technique, I proceeded exactly in accordance with the

instructions set forth in Freud’s works. This is how the analysis took place:

the patient lay flat on the couch, the analyst sitting behind him. If possible,

the patient was to avoid turning around. Looking back at the analyst was

regarded as “resistance.” The patient was urged to “free associate.” He was

not supposed to suppress anything that came to mind. He was supposed to

say everything—but do nothing. The main task was to lead him “from acting

to remembering.” Dreams were analyzed fragment by fragment, one after the

other  in  succession.  The  patient  was  supposed  to  produce  associations  to

every fragment. There was a logical conception behind this procedure. The

neurotic  symptom  is  the  manifestation  of  a  repressed  instinctual  impulse

which has broken through the repression in a disguised form. It followed

from  this  that,  if  the  analyst  proceeded  in  a  technically  correct  way,  the

unconscious sexual desire and the moralistic defense against it would have to

be discovered in the symptom. For instance, a hysterical girl’s anxiety about

being attacked by men armed with knives is a disguised representation of the

desire  for  sexual  intercourse  inhibited  by  morality  and  thrust  into  the

unconscious  through  repression.  The  symptom  results  from  the

unconsciousness of the prohibited instinctual impulse, e.g., to masturbate or

to engage in sexual intercourse. In the above case, the pursuer represents the

girl’s  own  qualms  of  conscience  which  preclude  direct  expression  of  the

instinctual  desire.  Barred  from  direct  manifestation,  the  impulse  seeks

disguised possibilities of expression, e.g., stealing or fear of being attacked.

The cure, according to Freud, is brought about by making the repressed drive

conscious and thus accessible to the condemnation of the mature ego. Since

the unconsciousness of a desire is the condition of the symptom, making it

conscious must produce a cure. Some years later, Freud himself questioned

this formulation. Initially, however, cure was said to be dependent upon the

making  conscious  of  the  repressed  instinctual  impulse  and  on  itscondemnation or sublimation.

  I want to lay particular stress upon this point. When I began to develop

my genital theory of therapy, people ascribed it to Freud or rejected it totally.

To comprehend my later disagreement with Freud, it is important to note its

roots in these early stages of my work. In the first years of my psychoanalytic

work, I partially cured and even completely eliminated many symptoms. I did

this by adhering to the principle of making unconscious impulses conscious.

In 1920, there was no hint of “character” and “character neurosis.” Quite the

contrary: the individual neurotic symptom was explicitly regarded as an alien

element in an otherwise healthy psychic organism. This is a decisive point. It

was said that a part of the personality had failed to go along with the total

development toward adulthood, thus remaining behind at an earlier stage of

sexual development. This resulted in a “fixation.” What happened then was

that this isolated part came into conflict with the remainder of the ego, by

which it was held in repression. My later theory of character, on the other

hand,  maintained  that there  cannot  be  a  neurotic  symptom  without  a

disturbance of the character as a whole. Symptoms are merely peaks on the

mountain  ridge  which  the  neurotic  character  represents.  I  developed  this

conception wholly in accord with the psychoanalytic theory of neurosis. It

made definite demands upon technique and led finally to formulations which

were at variance with psychoanalysis.

  As chairman of the student seminar on sexology, it was my job to procure

literature. I paid visits to Kammerer, Steinach, Stekel, Bucura (a professor of

biology),  Alfred  Adler,  and  Freud.  Freud’s  personality  made  the  greatest,

strongest, and most lasting impression. Kammerer was discerning and kind,

but  was  not  especially  interested.  Steinach  complained  about  his  own

difficulties.  Stekel  sought  to  be  impressive.  Adler  was  disappointing.  He

railed against Freud. He, not Freud, was the one who had the real insight.

According  to  Adler,  the  Oedipus  complex  was  nonsense;  the  castration

complex was a wild fantasy; and, furthermore, his theory of masculine protestcontained a much better version of it. The fruit of his ultimate “science” was

a petty bourgeois community of reformers. At some other time, I shall have

to describe the areas in which he was right, the injustices he suffered, and the

reasons why his theory did not hold up.

  Freud was different. Whereas the others all played some kind of role,

whether that of the professor, the great discerner of human character, or the

distinguished scientist, Freud did not put on any airs. He spoke with me like a

completely ordinary person. He had bright, intelligent eyes, which did not

seek  to  penetrate  another  person’s  eyes  in  some  sort  of  mantic  pose,  but

simply looked at the world in an honest and truthful way. He inquired about

our work in the seminar and found it very sensible. We were right, he said. It

was regrettable that people demonstrated no interest or only a sham interest in

sexuality. He would be only too happy to provide us with literature. He knelt

down in front of his bookcase and eagerly picked out a number of books and

pamphlets. They were special editions of The Vicissitudes of Instincts, The

Unconscious,  a  copy  of The  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  a  copy  of The

Psychopathology of Everyday Life, etc. Freud spoke rapidly, objectively, and

animatedly. The movements of his hands were natural. There was a hint of

irony in everything he said. I had been apprehensive in going to him—I went

away  cheerful  and  happy.  From  that  day  on,  I  spent  fourteen  years  of

intensive  work  in  and  for  psychoanalysis.  In  the  end,  I  was  severely

disappointed in Freud. Fortunately, this disappointment did not lead to hatred

and rejection. Quite the contrary; today I can appreciate Freud’s achievement

in  a  far  better  and  deeper  way  than  I  could  in  those  days  of  youthful

enthusiasm. I am happy to have been his student for such a long time, without

having criticized him prematurely, and with complete devotion to his cause.

    Unreserved devotion to a cause is the loftiest precondition of intellectual

independence. During the years of hard struggle for Freud’s theory, I saw any

number of individuals appear on the stage and disappear again. Like comets,

some  of  them  rose  to  the  top—promising  much,  accomplishing  nothing.Others  were  like  moles,  laboriously  working  themselves  through  difficult

problems of the unconscious without ever once savoring the comprehensive

view which Freud offered. Then there were others who sought to compete

with Freud, without having grasped the fact that Freud was set apart from

conventional academic science by his adherence to the subject of “sexuality.”

And finally there were those who quickly seized a fragment of the theory and

translated it into a profession. Objectively seen, however, it was not a matter

of competing with Freud or of establishing a profession, but of advancing an

enormous  discovery.  At  issue  was  more  than  the  elaboration  of  known

material; essentially, it was a matter of discovering the biological basis of the

libido theory through experimentation. It was necessary to bear responsibility

for a piece of momentous knowledge, which presented a direct challenge to a

world of superficiality and formalism. It was necessary to be able to stand

alone—which  did  not  exactly  foster  popularity.  It  is  clear  today  to  many

people working in this new, psychobiological branch of medicine that the

character-analytic  theory  of  structure  is  the  legitimate  continuation  of  the

theory  of  unconscious  psychic  life.  The  opening  of  a  new  approach  to

biogenesis was the most important result of the consistent application of the

libido concept.

  The history of science is a long unbroken chain of elaboration, deviation,

and rectification, re-creation, followed by reassessment, renewed deviation

and rectification, and renewed creation. It has been a long, arduous course,

and  we  have  hardly  begun.  It  adds  up  to  a  mere  two  thousand  years,

interspersed  with  long  arid  stretches.  The  living  world  is  hundreds  of

thousands of years old and will probably go on existing for many centuries to

come. Life is constantly moving forward, never backward. Life is growing

ever more complex, and its tempo is accelerating. Honest pioneer work in the

field of science has always been, and will continue to be, life’s pilot. On all

sides, life is surrounded by hostility. This puts us under an obligation.                                      CHAPTER II





                                  PEER GYNT




The impact of psychoanalysis was enormous and far-reaching. It was a blow

in  the  face  to  conventional  thinking.  You  think  that  you  determine  your

actions with free will? Far from it! Your conscious action is only a drop on

the  surface  of  a  sea  of  unconscious  processes,  of  which  you  can  know

nothing—about which, indeed, you are afraid to know. You are proud of the

“individuality  of  your  personality”  and  of  the  “broadness  of  your  mind”?

What conceit! Actually, you are the mere toy of your instincts, which do with

you whatever they please. This, no doubt, strongly offends your vanity! And

you were just as vexed when you were told that you were a descendant of the

apes and that the earth on which you crawl is not the center of the universe

you were once so happy to think it was. You still believe that the earth, one

of millions of planets, is the sole planet which bears living matter. In short,

you are ruled by processes which you do not control, do not know, are afraid

of, and erroneously interpret. There is a psychic reality which extends far

beyond  your  conscious  mind.  Your  unconscious  is  like  Kant’s  “thing  in

itself.”  In  itself,  it  cannot  be  grasped;  it  reveals  itself  to  you  only  in  its

manifestation. Ibsen’s Peer Gynt feels this:


  Backward or forward, it’s just as far. —Out or in, the way’s as narrow. It’s there!—and there!—

  and all about me! I think I’ve got out, and I’m back in the midst of it. What’s your name! Let me

  see you! Say what you are!


It  is  the  “great  Boyg!”  I  read Peer  Gynt  again  and  again.  I  read  manyinterpretations of it. Only that of Brandes, the great Nordic scholar, came

close to my own feeling about Ibsen’s drama.

  The affective rejection of Freud’s theory of the unconscious cannot be

fully explained on the basis of the traditional fear of new and great ideas.

Man has to exist, materially and psychically; has to exist in a society which

follows a prescribed pattern and has to hold itself together. Everyday life

demands this. Deviation from what is known, from what is familiar, from the

beaten  path,  can  mean  total  confusion  and  ruin.  Man’s  fear  of  what  is

uncertain, bottomless, cosmic, is justified, or at least understandable. He who

departs from the normal course easily becomes a Peer Gynt, a visionary, a

mental patient. It seemed to me that Peer Gynt wanted to reveal a deep secret,

without quite being able to do so. It is the story of a young man who, though

insufficiently  equipped,  tears  himself  loose  from  the  closed  ranks  of  the

human  rabble.  He  is  not  understood.  People  laugh  at  him  when  he  is

harmless; they try to destroy him when he is strong. If he fails to comprehend

the infinity into which his thoughts and actions reach, he is doomed to wreak

his own ruin. Everything was seething and whirling in me when I read and

understood  Peer  Gynt  and  when  I  met  and  comprehended  Freud.  I  was

ostensibly like Peer Gynt. I felt his fate to be the most likely outcome if one

ventured to tear oneself loose from the closed ranks of acknowledged science

and traditional thinking. If Freud’s theory of the unconscious was correct—

and I had no doubt that it was—then the inner psychic infinity had been

grasped.  One  became  an  infinitesimal  speck  in  the  flux  of  one’s  own

experiences. I felt all this in a nebulous way—not at all “scientifically.”

  Viewed  from  the  standpoint  of  unarmored  life,  scientific  theory  is  a

contrived foothold in the chaos of living phenomena. Hence, it serves the

purpose of a psychic protection. There is little danger of being engulfed in

this  chaos  when  one  has  neatly  classified,  indexed,  described,  and  hence

believes  to  have  comprehended  the  phenomena.  In  this  way,  it  is  even

possible  to  master  a  certain  portion  of  the  chaos.  This  was  of  littleconsolation to me. In view of the infinite possibilities of life, it has been a

constant effort for me during the past twenty years to limit the scope of my

scientific investigations. In the background of every detailed piece of work

was the feeling of being an infinitesimal speck in the universe. Flying at an

altitude  of  one  thousand  meters,  how  wretchedly  the  cars  appear  to  be

creeping along down below.

  In  the  years  that  followed,  I  studied  astronomy,  electronics,  Planck’s

quantum  theory,  and  Einstein’s  theory  of  relativity.  Heisenberg  and  Bohr

became living concepts. Although the similarity between the laws governing

electrons and those governing the planetary system could be recognized with

appropriate scientific detachment, it could not fail to arouse feelings of a

cosmic nature as well—just as one cannot disregard the fantasy of floating in

the  cosmos  all  alone  as  merely  a  womb  fantasy.  With  such  a  view,  the

creeping cars and the lectures on whirling electrons appear very insignificant.

I knew that the experience of mental patients fundamentally moved in that

direction. Psychoanalysis contended that in mental patients consciousness is

inundated  by  the  unconscious.  This  results  in  the  breaking  down  of  the

barriers against the chaos in one’s own unconscious, and the ability to assess

outer reality is lost. The fantasy of the schizophrenic that doomsday is at

hand is the harbinger of psychic breakdown.

  I  was  deeply  moved  by  the  earnestness  with  which  Freud  sought  to

comprehend mental patients. His views were head and shoulders above the

“priggishly  conceited”  opinions  which  the  psychiatrists  of  the  old  school

expressed  about  mental  illness.  As  they  saw  it,  some  things  were  simply

“crazy.” After I read the questionnaire for mental patients, I wrote a short skit

in which I depicted the despair of a mental patient who, unable to cope with

his strong inner experiences, pleads for help and tries to find clarity. For

instance, there are the catatonic stereotypes who sit for hours on end with

their finger pressed against their forehead as if in deep thought. Think of the

deep, self-estranged, searching, far-roving look and facial expression of thesemental  patients.  And  what  does  the  psychiatrist  ask  them?  “How  old  are

you?” “What’s your name?” “How much is three times six?” “What is the

difference between a child and a dwarf?” He diagnoses the patient as being

disoriented,  schizophrenic,  and  megalomanic,  period!  There  were  some

twenty thousand such persons in the Vienna “Steinhof.” Each and every one

of them had experienced the inner collapse of his world and, in order to keep

afloat,  had  constructed  a  new  delusional  world  in  which  he  could  exist.

Hence, Freud’s view was very clear to me, namely that madness is actually

an  attempt  to  reconstruct  the  lost  ego.  Yet,  Freud’s  explanation  was  not

wholly  satisfying.  For  me,  his  theory  of  schizophrenia  got  stuck  in  the

premature conclusion that this illness is ascribable to autoerotic regression.

He represented the view that a fixation of the child’s psychic development in

the period of infantile primary narcissism constitutes a disposition to mental

illness. I held this view to be correct but incomplete. It was not tangible. It

seemed to me that the point in common between the self-absorbed infant and

the adult schizophrenic lay in the manner in which they experienced their

environment. For the infant, the environment with its innumerable stimuli can

be nothing but a chaos in which the sensations of his own body are a part. In

terms of experience, no differentiation exists between self and world. It was

my  opinion  that  initially  the  psychic  apparatus  distinguished  between

pleasurable and unpleasurable stimuli. Everything pleasurable became part of

an expanding ego; everything unpleasurable became part of the non-ego. As

time goes on, this condition changes. Parts of the ego sensations which are

localized in the outer world are absorbed into the ego. In the same way, parts

of  the  environment  which  are  pleasurable  (e.g.,  the  mother’s  nipple)  are

recognized as belonging to the outer world. Thus, the child’s ego gradually

crystallizes from the chaos of internal and external sensations and begins to

sense the boundary between ego and outer world. If, during this process of

detachment, the child experiences a severe shock, the boundaries between

self and world remain blurred and nebulous, and the child becomes uncertain                    1
in his perceptions. When this is the case, impressions from the outer world

can be experienced as something internal or, vice versa, internal physical

sensations can be felt to belong to the outside world. In the first instance,

external  admonitions  are  internalized  and  become  melancholic  self-

reproaches. In the second instance, the patient might have the feeling that he

is being electrified by a secret enemy, whereas he is merely perceiving his

own bioelectric currents. At that time, I knew nothing about the reality of the

mental patient’s sensations of his body. I merely attempted to establish a

relation  between  what  is  experienced  as  self  and  what  is  experienced  as

world. These observations formed the basis of my later conviction that the

schizophrenic’s loss of a sense of reality sets in with the misinterpretation of

his  own  burgeoning  organ  sensations.  All  of  us  are  merely  a  specially

organized electric machine which is correlated with the energy of the cosmos.

I shall have more to say about this later. At any rate, I had to assume a

consonance between world and self. This seemed to be the only way out of

the impasse. I know today that mental patients experience this consonance

without differentiating between self and world, and that the average citizen

has no inkling of consonance and merely experiences his beloved ego as a

sharply delineated center of the world. The profundity of the mental patient is

humanly more valuable than the average citizen with nationalistic ideals! The

former at least has an inkling of what the cosmos is. The latter derives all his

grand ideas from his constipation and inferior potency.

  It was all these observations and intimations that made me read Peer Gynt

again  and  again.  Through  Peer  Gynt,  a  great  poet  gave  voice  to  his

perceptions of world and life. In 1920 I studied the drama and everything that

had been written about it. I saw the play at the Vienna Burgtheater and later

in Berlin. In 1936 I saw a performance of the play by the Oslo National

Theater, with Maurstad as Peer Gynt. It was there that I finally understood

my  interest  in  the  meaning  of  the  play.  Ibsen  had  simply  dramatized  the

misery  of  unconventional  people.  At  first  Peer  Gynt  has  a  great  manyfantastic  ideas  and  feels  strong.  He  is  out  of  tune  with  everyday  life,  a

dreamer, an idler. The others diligently go to school or to work and laugh at

the dreamer. Deep down, they too are Peer Gynts. Peer Gynt feels the pulse

of life, which dashes on impetuously. Everyday life is narrow and demands a

strict course. On the one hand, there is Peer Gynt’s imagination; on the other

hand, there is Realpolitik. Fearing the infinite, the practical man shuts himself

off on a patch of earth and establishes security for his life. It is a modest

problem to which he as a scientist devotes his whole life. It is a modest trade

that he plies as a shoemaker. He does not think about life: he goes to the

office, into the fields, to the factory, pays visits to patients, goes to school. He

does his duty and holds his peace. He has long since disposed of the Peer

Gynt in himself. Thinking is too troublesome and too dangerous. The Peer

Gynts are a threat to his peace of mind. It would be too tempting to be like

them. True, he (the practical man) is becoming more and more impotent, but

he  has  an  uncreative  “critical  mind”;  he  has  ideologies  or  fascistic  self-

confidence. He is a slave, a nobody, but his nation is a “pure nation” or

Nordic; he knows that “spirit” governs the body and that generals defend

“honor.”

  Peer Gynt is bursting with energy and sensuous joy. The others identify

with the feelings of the elephant’s child in Kipling’s story. It ran away from

its mother, reached the river, and tickled the crocodile. It was so curious and

full of life. The crocodile grabbed it by the nose—still very short at that time

—the elephants didn’t have long trunks yet. The elephant’s child defended

itself as best it could. It planted both of its forelegs firmly on the ground. The

crocodile pulled and pulled. The elephant’s child pulled and pulled. Its nose

grew longer and longer. When the nose had become quite long, the crocodile

let go. But the elephant’s child cried out in despair, “This is too buch for be!”

Then it was ashamed of its long nose. This is the punishment for folly and

disobedience. Peer Gynt will get his neck broken with his folly. People will

see to it that he gets his neck broken. It will be drummed into his ears timeand again! The cobbler must stick to his last! The world is wicked, otherwise

there would not be any Peer Gynts. He dashes off, but he is dragged back like

a chained dog chasing after a passing bitch. He deserts his mother and the girl

to whom he is betrothed. Inwardly, he remains tied to both—he can’t get

away. He has a bad conscience and becomes entangled in allurements and

dangerous deviltry. He turns into an animal and gets a tail. Once again he

tears himself away and escapes the danger. He sticks to his ideals, but the

world knows only business. Everything else is crazy nonsense. He wants to

conquer the world, but it refuses to be conquered. It has to be overpowered.

But it is too complicated, too brutal. Ideals are for the stupid people. To

overpower  it,  one  needs  knowledge,  a  great  deal  of  thorough,  cogent

knowledge.  But  Peer  Gynt  is  a  dreamer  who  has  not  learned  anything

“sensible.” He wants to change the world, and he carries it in himself. He

dreams of a great love for his woman, his girl, who is mother, lover, and

friend, and who bears his children. But Solveig is inaccessible as a woman;

his mother scolds him, even if affectionately. He reminds her too much of his

crazy father. And the other woman, Anitra, is nothing but a common whore!

Where is the woman whom one can love, who matches up to one’s dreams?

One has to be a Brand to achieve what Peer Gynt wants. But Brand does not

have  enough  imagination.  Brand  has  the  strength—Peer  feels  life.  How

stupid  that  everything  is  allotted  in  such  a  way.  He  ends  up  among  the

capitalists.  He  loses  his  fortune  according  to  the  rules;  the  others  are

“practical” capitalists and not dreamers. They know their business when it

comes to money; in business matters, they are not duffers like Peer. Broken

and weary, he returns as an old man to the hut in the woods, to Solveig, who

takes the place of his mother. He is cured of his delusion; he has learned what

life has to offer when one dares to feel it. That is how it is for most people

who refuse to toe the line. And the others aren’t going to make fools of

themselves—you can be sure of that! They have been clever and superior

from the beginning.  That was Ibsen and that is his Peer Gynt. It is a drama which will lose its

relevance only when the Peer Gynts finally do win out in the end. Until then,

the good and the just will have their laugh.

  I wrote a long scholarly paper on “The Libido Conflict and Delusion of

Peer Gynt.” In the summer of 1920, I became a guest member of the Vienna

Psychoanalytic Society. That was shortly before the Hague congress. Freud

moderated the sessions. Most of the speeches dealt with clinical material. The

speakers gave objective and good reports on the questions under discussion.

Freud  was  very  good  at  summarizing  the  essential  points  of  a  paper  and

briefly stating his own opinion at the end. It was a real treat to listen to him.

He spoke precisely and unaffectedly, yet with wit and often with biting irony.

He was finally enjoying the success which followed upon many lean years.

There were still no orthodox psychiatrists in the society at that time. The sole

active  psychiatrist,  a  gifted  man  by  the  name  of  Tausk,  had  committed

suicide shortly before. His work, Über den Beeinflussungsapparat bei der

Schizophrenie,  was  important.  He  demonstrated  that  the  apparatus  which

influences the schizophrenic is a projection of his own body, in particular of

the sexual organs. It was not until I discovered bioelectric excitations in the

vegetative currents that I correctly understood this matter. Tausk had been

right: It is his own body that the schizophrenic patient experiences as the

persecutor. I can add to this that he cannot cope with the vegetative currents

which  break  through.  He  has  to  experience  them  as  something  alien,  as

belonging to the outer world and having an evil intent. The schizophrenic

merely  represents  in  grotesquely  magnified  condition  what  characterizes

modern man in general. Modern man is estranged from his own nature, the

biological core of his being, and he experiences it as something alien and

hostile. He has to hate everyone who tries to restore his contact with it.

  The Psychoanalytic Society was like a community of people who had to

put up a united fight against a world of enemies. It was wonderful. Such

scientists  commanded  respect.  I  was  the  sole  young  physician  among“grown-ups,” most of whom were ten to twenty years older than I.

  On  October  13,  1920,  I  delivered  my  lecture  as  a  candidate  for

membership in the society. Freud did not like it when lectures were read from

the manuscript. In such cases, he said, the listener feels like a person who, his

tongue hanging out, is chasing after a speeding car in which the lecturer rides

at leisure. He was right. Hence, I made thorough preparations to deliver my

talk extemporaneously. Prudently, I kept the manuscript at hand, and I was

right in having done so. Hardly had I spoken three sentences when I lost my

thread in a maze of thoughts. Fortunately, I readily found where I had left off.

The  lecture  came  off  well,  except  that  I  had  not  complied  with  Freud’s

wishes. Such details are important. If people were not inhibited by a fear of

authority,  they  would  speak  far  less  nonsense  and  far  more  sense.  It  is

possible for everyone to speak extemporaneously on material which has been

mastered, and still maintain one’s poise. But I had wanted to be particularly

impressive, wanted to be sure not to make a fool of myself. I felt all eyes

focused on me—and hence thought best to refer to my manuscript. Since then

I have delivered hundreds of speeches extemporanously and become well

known as a speaker. I owe this to my early determination never again to take

a manuscript to a lecture, preferring rather “to swim.”

  My paper was very well received. At the next session, I was admitted as a

member in the Psychoanalytic Society.

  Freud knew very well how to remain detached and to command respect.

He was not arrogant—on the contrary, he was very friendly. But behind this

façade, one sensed coldness. Only seldom did he become affable. He was

great when, with biting severity, he took a callow know-it-all to task or when

he spoke out against the psychiatrists who treated him deplorably. He was

inflexible  when  discussing  a  crucial  point  of  theory.  There  were  but  few

lectures on technique, an omission which I felt very keenly in my work with

patients. There was neither a training institute nor a set training program.

Everyone was left to his own resources. I often went to the older analysts foradvice. They were not of much help. “Just keep on analyzing,” they said,

“you’ll  get  there.”  Where  one  was  supposed  to  “get,”  no  one  seemed  to

know. To know how to deal with inhibited or even silent patients was most

difficult. Analysts who came later did not experience this “swimming” in

matters of technique in such a bleak way. When a patient did not produce any

associations, did not “want to have” any dreams, or had nothing to say about

them, the analyst sat there session after session, not knowing what to do.

True, the technique of resistance analysis had been theoretically established,

but  it  was  not  used  in  practice.  I  knew  that  the  inhibitions  represented

resistances against the uncovering of unconscious contents; also that I had to

eliminate them. But how? That was the crucial question. If the patient was

told, “You have a resistance!” he would look at the analyst vacantly. Indeed,

this was not a very intelligent communication. Nor was it any better to tell

him that he “was defending himself against his unconscious.” If the analyst

tried to persuade the patient that his silence or resistance served no purpose,

that it was merely an expression of his anxiety or distrust, this was somewhat

better and more intelligent, but to no avail nonetheless. And the advice of the

older analysts was always the same: “Just keep on analyzing.” My entire

character-analytic  method  of  proceeding  derives  from  this  “just  keep  on

analyzing.” I had no idea of this in 1920. I went to Freud. Freud was a master

in  theoretically  unraveling  the  intricacies  of  a  complicated  situation.  But,

regarding technique, his explanations were unsatisfying. Above all, he said,

analysis means patience. The unconscious is timeless. One has to keep one’s

therapeutic ambitions in check. Other times he encouraged me to intervene

energetically. Finally, I understood that therapeutic work can be efficacious

only when the analyst has the patience to comprehend the therapeutic process

itself. Too little was known about the nature of psychic illness. These details

may appear unimportant in view of our intent to describe the function of the

life process, but they are very important. The question of how and why the

encrustations and rigidifications of human emotional life are brought aboutled directly into the realm of vegetative life.

  At one of the later congresses, Freud modified the original therapeutic

formula. Originally, it was stated that the symptom had to disappear when its

unconscious meaning had been made conscious. Now Freud said, “We have

to make a correction. The symptom can but it does not have to disappear

when the unconscious meaning has been uncovered.” This modification made

a strong impression on me. It led me to ask what condition changes “can

disappear” to “must disappear.” If making the unconscious conscious does

not of necessity eliminate the symptom, what other factor must be added to

guarantee its disappearance? No one knew the answer. Freud’s modification

of his formula regarding the cure of symptoms did not even attract much

attention.  The  analyst  continued  to  interpret  dreams,  slips,  and  chains  of

associations. He felt little responsibility for the mechanism of cure. It did not

occur to him to ask, “Why do we fail to effect a cure?” This is understandable

in terms of the situation in psychotherapy at that time. The usual neurological

therapeutic approach, namely the use of bromide or telling the patient, “You

are only nervous—there’s nothing wrong with you,” were such a tedium to

the patient that just to be able to lie on the couch and give free rein to his

thoughts made him feel good. Indeed, it was not merely that he could give

free rein to his thoughts, he was actually told “to say everything that came

into his head.” It was not until many years later that Ferenczi asserted that no

one really followed or could follow this rule. This is so clear to us today that

we do not even expect it.

  In 1920 it was believed that the average neurosis could be “cured” in

three to, at most, six months. Freud referred patients to me with the notation,

“For  psychoanalysis,  impotence,  three  months.”  It  seemed  impossible.

Meanwhile the suggestionists and psychiatrists raged against the “depravity”

of  psychoanalysis.  There  was  a  deep  commitment  to  the  work;  one  was

firmly convinced of its correctness. Each case was an additional proof of just

how right Freud had been. And the older colleagues never tired of repeating,“Just keep on analyzing”! My first writings dealt not with technique but with

clinical and theoretical material. It was clear that a great deal more would

have  to  be  comprehended  before  better  results  could  be  obtained.  This

awareness made one want to fight harder and dig deeper. One belonged to an

elite  of  scientific  fighters,  completely  set  apart  from  the  quackery  which

existed  in  the  therapy  of  neuroses.  Perhaps  these  historic  details  will  put

today’s orgone therapists in a more patient frame of mind when they do not

readily reach the goal of “orgastic potency” in their patients.                                      CHAPTER III





GAPS IN PSYCHOLOGY AND IN THE THEORY


                                      OF SEX




                          1. “PLEASURE” AND “INSTINCT”


On  the  basis  of  my  biological  studies,  and  in  accordance  with  Freud’s

definition  of  instinct,  I  ventured  to  investigate  a  puzzling  aspect  of  the

pleasure-unpleasure  problem.  Freud  had  pointed  out  the  peculiar

phenomenon that, contrary to the otherwise unpleasurable nature of tension,

sexual  tension  has  a  pleasurable  character.  Tension,  thus  ran  the  usual

conception,  could  only  be  unpleasurable.  It  was  solely  the  relaxation  that

afforded pleasure. This was different in the case of sexuality. I interpreted the

matter in this way: the tension generated in the forepleasure would have to be

felt  as  unpleasurable  if  gratification  failed  to  take  place.  However,  the

fantasized pleasure of gratification does not only generate tension—it also

discharges a small quantity of sexual excitation. This small gratification, and

the promise of the great pleasure in the climax, overshadow the unpleasure of

the tension prior to the complete discharge. This piece of information was the

first  clue  to  my  later  functional  explanation  of  the  activity  of  the  sexual

instinct. It was in this way that I came to consider the instinct as nothing

more than the “motor aspect of pleasure.” Modern psychoanalytic research

disproved  the  idea  that  our  perceptions  are  merely  passive  experiences

without any activity on the part of the ego. It was more correct to say that

every perception was determined by an active “attitude” toward the particularstimulus  (“Wahrnehmungsintention,”  “Wahrnehmungsakt”).  This  was  an

important step forward, for now it was possible to understand that the same

stimuli which, in one case, usually produce a sensation of pleasure are, in the

case of a different inner attitude, not perceived. In terms of sexology, this

meant that, whereas gentle stroking of a sexual zone produces a pleasurable

sensation in one person, this is not the case in another person. The latter

merely  perceives  a  touching  or  a  rubbing.  This  is  the  basis  of  the

differentiation  between  the  experience  of  full  orgastic  pleasure  and  the

experience of purely tactile sensations, i.e., fundamentally the differentiation

between orgastic potency and orgastic impotence. Those who are familiar

with my bio-electrical research are aware that the “active attitude of the ego

in the act of perception” is identical with the flowing of the electrical charge

of the organism toward the periphery.

  I  differentiated  pleasure  into  a  motor-active  and  a  sensory-passive

component, both of which merge into one. At one and the same time, the

motor component of pleasure is experienced passively and the sensation is

actively  perceived.  My  scientific  thinking  at  that  time,  for  all  its

cumbersomeness,  was  definitely  on  the  right  track.  Later  I  learned  to

formulate my findings more succinctly. A drive is no longer something here

which seeks a pleasure there. It is the motor pleasure itself. This created a

problem. How was one to explain the longing to repeat a once-experienced

pleasure? Semon’s engrams were of use here. The sexual drive is nothing

other than the motor remembrance of previously experienced pleasure. In

this way, the concept of drives was reduced to the concept of pleasure. There

was still the question as to the nature of pleasure. In accordance with the false

modesty of that time, I expressed a semper ignorabimus. Notwithstanding, I

continued to grapple with the problem of the relation between the quantitative

concept of “drive” and the qualitative concept of “pleasure.” According to

Freud, the drive was determined by the quantity of the excitation, i.e., by the

amount  of  libido.  Yet,  I  had  just  discovered  pleasure  to  be  the  nature  ofdrives—it is a psychic quality. In keeping with the systems of thought known

to  me  at  that  time,  the  quantitative  factor  and  the  qualitative  factor  were

incompatible, absolutely separate spheres. I had reached a dead end. Yet,

wholly unaware of it, I had made the first step toward my later functional

unification  of  the  quantitative  concept  of  excitation  and  the  qualitative

concept of pleasure. With my clinical-theoretical solution of the problem of

drives, I had come very close to the border line of mechanistic thinking;

opposites are opposites and nothing but that. They are incompatible. I had the

same experience later with concepts such as “science” and “politics,” or the

supposed incompatibility between research and evaluation.

  This retrospective review is proof that correct clinical observation can

never lead one astray. Philosophy is simply wrong! Correct observation must

always  lead  to  functional,  bioenergetic  formulations,  if  one  does  not  turn

aside too soon. The fear of functional thinking on the part of so many good

researchers is in itself a riddle.

  I  recorded  these  modest  findings  in  a  short  essay  entitled  “Zur

Triebenergetik,” and presented it to the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society on

June 8, 1921. It was published in the Zeitschrift für Sexualforschung in 1923.

I remember that it was not understood. From that time on, I presented clinical

material only, and stayed away from theoretical essays.

  I  soon  acquired  a  good  name  as  a  psychoanalytic  clinician.  People

extolled the clarity and exactness of my observations as well as my ability to

present them.


                    2. GENITAL AND NON-GENITAL SEXUALITY


The following diagrams illustrate the identity between drive and pleasure:Diagram depicting identity between instinct and pleasure.


  This diagram enables us to differentiate the non-genital mechanism from

the genital mechanism. On the outside of the circle, we see that the excitation

retrogresses before reaching the peak. On the inside, we see that the discharge

fully resolves the accumulated tension and reduces the excitation to zero. Let

us visualize the diagram differently:

  In figure 1, we see that in the forepleasure the gratification is always less

than the tension and tension increases. Only in the end-pleasure (figure 2) is

the energy discharge equal to the accumulated tension.








Fig. 1. Forepleasure mechanism.Fig. 2. End-pleasure mechanism.


  This idea has continually been the fulcrum of all my conceptions and

representations in the field of sex-economy. Figure 1 also depicts the sexual

stasis that develops when gratification fails to take place and is the cause of

various disturbances of psychic and vegetative balance. Figure 2 depicts the

orgastic potency which guarantees energy equilibrium.

  The  above  theoretical  conceptions  are  based  on  definite  clinical

experiences.  For  example,  I  had  once  treated  a  waiter  who  had  never

experienced an erection. A medical examination did not offer any evidence of

an organic deficiency. A clear-cut distinction was made at that time between

psychic  and  somatic  illness.  Psychoanalytic  treatment  was  automatically

excluded in cases in which somatic symptoms were found. From the point of

view of our present knowledge, this was of course fundamentally incorrect.

However, it was correct in terms of the assumption that psychic illnesses are

brought about by psychic causes. Mistaken conceptions prevailed about the

relation between psychic and somatic functioning.

  I began to treat this patient in January 1921 and had continued without

success six hours per week until October 1923. The absence of any genital

fantasies in this patient drew my attention to various masturbatory practices

in other patients. It soon became evident that the way in which a patient

masturbated was dependent upon definite pathological fantasies. In the act of

masturbation,  not  a  single  patient  conceived  of  experiencing  pleasure

through  the  natural  genital  act.  When  I  inquired  more  closely  into  what

fantasies  the  patients  had  while  masturbating,  I  learned  that  they  had  no

definite conceptions. The term “sexual intercourse” was used mechanically. It

usually denoted the desire “to prove oneself a man.” It included infantiledesires to rest in the arms of a woman, usually an older woman, or “to thrust

into a woman.” In short, the term could denote a great variety of things,

except genital sexual pleasure. This was new and strange to me. I could not

have  surmised  the  existence  of  such  a  disturbance.  True,  psychoanalytic

literature had a lot to say about disturbances of potency—but it had nothing

to say about this. From that time on, I began to make a careful study of the

contents of masturbation fantasies and the way in which masturbation was

practiced. There was no end of curious phenomena to be observed here. The

strangest practices were concealed behind such meaningless expressions as “I

masturbated yesterday,” or “I slept with this or that person.”

  I was soon able to distinguish two large groups. One was characterized by

the fact that the penis as such functioned in the fantasy. An ejaculation took

place, but it did not provide genital pleasure. The penis was a murderous

weapon or it was used to “prove” that one is potent. The patients achieved an

ejaculation by pressing the genital against the mattress. In this, the body was

“as if dead.” The penis was squeezed with a towel, pressed between the legs,

or rubbed against the thigh. Only a rape fantasy was capable to compel an

ejaculation.  In  a  large  number  of  cases,  the  patient  would  not  allow  an

ejaculation  to  take  place  or  would  allow  it  only  after  one  or  more

interruptions.  Yet,  in  spite  of  everything,  the  genital  became  erect  and

participated. In the second group, on the other hand, there was neither activity

nor fantasies which could be called genital. These patients squeezed a penis

which was not erect. They excited themselves with their finger in their anus.

They tried to get their penis into their own mouth. They squeezed it between

their thighs and tickled it from behind. There were fantasies of being beaten,

bound, or tortured, eating excrement or having the penis sucked, in which

case it represented a nipple. In short, though making use of the genital organ,

the fantasies had a non-genital goal.

  It followed from these observations that the form in which the sexual act

was fantasized, and the manner in which the manipulation took place, offeredan easy approach to the unconscious conflicts. I wrote a brief report on this

subject entitled “Über Spezifität des Onanieformen,” which I presented to the

Vienna Psychoanalytic Society on October 10, 1922. It was published in the

Internationale Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse in 1922. This report contained

only a few remarks on the possible prognostic and therapeutic importance of

these specific practices. But this was how I got on the track of the role of

genitality in the therapy of neuroses.

  At the same time, I was concerned with the question as to the limits of the

patients’  memory  in  the  analysis.  The  recalling  of  repressed  infantile

experiences was the main task of the treatment. True, Freud himself did not

regard the possibility as being very great that early childhood ideas would

emerge accompanied by the sensation of recognition (“remembering”). In his

opinion,  the  analyst  had  to  content  himself  with  the  fact  that  the  early

remembrances  emerged  in  the  form  of  fantasies  from  which  the  “primal

situation” could be reconstructed. For good reasons, great importance was

attached to the reconstruction of early infantile situations. Those who had

never taken the trouble to probe the innermost depths of a case could have no

real  idea  of  the  profusion  of  the  child’s  unconscious  attitudes  and  of  the

nature  of  infantile  experience.  They  had  of  necessity  to  be  ignorant  of

analytic thinking. In the long run, this knowledge was far more important

than the achieving of quick superficial successes. The analyst who had it

would later be able to achieve more in therapy. None of my present views on

the biological functions in the psychic sphere would have been possible or

sufficiently substantiated if I had not carried out extensive investigations of

unconscious fantasy life. The goal of my work is the same today as it was

twenty  years  ago:  the  reawakening  of  the  earliest  childhood  experiences.

However, the method of achieving this has changed considerably, so much so

in fact that it can no longer be called psychoanalysis. This study of the genital

practices of patients molded my clinical views. It enabled me to see new

connections in psychic life. However, my work, including that on the activityof  memory,  was  carried  out  wholly  within  the  framework  of  general

psychoanalytic empiricism.

  After three years of clinical work, I saw that the patient’s memory activity

was very poor and unsatisfactory. It was as if an essential specific barricade

blocked access to the unconscious. I delivered a report on this subject to the

Psychoanalytic  Society  in  November  1922.  My  colleagues  were  more

interested in my theoretical explanation of déjà vu, which I took as my point

of departure, than they were in the questions involving therapy and technique.

I had little of a practical nature to say about this, and there really is not much

point in merely raising a question.


    3. FOUNDING OF THE VIENNA SEMINAR FOR PSYCHOANALYTIC TECHNIQUE


In September 1922, the International Psychoanalytic Congress convened in

Berlin. The German analysts led by Karl Abraham took great pains to make it

a success. Analysts from the United States were present. The wounds of the

war were beginning to heal. The International Psychoanalytic Association

was  the  sole  organization  which  had,  as  well  as  it  could,  maintained

international connections during the war. Freud spoke on “The Ego and the

Id.”  After Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  which  had  appeared  the  year

before, it was a clinical treat. The basic idea was as follows: until then, we

had  been  solely  concerned  with  the  repressed  instincts.  They  were  more

accessible to us than the ego. This was very odd really, for one would think

the ego lay closer to consciousness. Strangely enough, however, it is far more

difficult to reach than repressed sexuality. The only explanation for this is

that essential parts of the ego itself are unconscious, i.e., are repressed. It is

not  solely  the  prohibited  sexual  desire  that  is  unconscious,  but  also  the

defensive forces of the ego. From this, Freud inferred an “unconscious guilt

feeling.”  He  did  not  at  that  time  equate  it  to  an  unconscious need  for

punishment. Alexander and Reik in particular later equated the two. Freud

also discussed the curious phenomenon of the so-called “negative therapeuticreaction.” This meant that, instead of showing signs of improvement when

the meaning of their unconscious contents were interpreted to them, many

patients became worse. This was contrary to expectations. There must be a

force in the unconscious ego, Freud argued, which prevents the patient from

getting  well.  Some  eight  years  later,  this  force  revealed  itself  as  the

physiological  fear  of  pleasure  and  the  organic  incapacity  to  experience

pleasure.

  At  that  same  congress,  Freud  proposed  a  competition.  An  exact

investigation was to be made of the correlation between theory and therapy.

To what extent does theory improve therapy? And, conversely, to what extent

does  an  improved  technique  enable  better  theoretical  formulations?  It  is

evident that Freud was very much concerned at that time with the wretched

state of therapy. He felt called upon to find a solution. His speech already

contained hints of the later theory of the death instinct as a central clinical

factor, the decisively important theory of the repressed defense functions of

the ego, and the unity of theory and practice.

  Freud’s  proposal  to  investigate  the  correlation  between  theory  and

technique determined my clinical work during the subsequent five years. It

was  a  proposal  which  was  simple,  clear,  and  in  keeping  with  clinical

demands. At the very next congress, in Salzburg in 1924, three well-known

psychoanalysts presented papers toward a solution of the proposed task, for

which  there  was  to  be  a  cash  prize.  They  did  not  take  a  single  practical

everyday question into account and got lost in a maze of metapsychological

speculations. The problem was not solved, nor did the contestants receive a

prize. Though I was extremely interested in this problem, I had not submitted

a paper. However, I was already engaged in several projects designed to lead

to a well-grounded solution. The character-analytic vegetotherapy of 1940 is

the answer to the question posed by psychoanalysis in 1922. A decade of

systematic work was necessary to arrive at an answer. The gains were far

greater than I could have dreamed at that time. It was very annoying thatthese  findings  should  cost  me  my  membership  in  the  Psychoanalytic

Association, but the scientific reward was great.

  On the return trip from Berlin to Vienna, I spoke with younger colleagues

who were not yet members of the Psychoanalytic Association but who had

already  begun  to  practice  psychoanalysis.  I  suggested  that  we  set  up  a

“seminar on technique.” We wanted to study cases systematically to achieve

the  highest  mastery  in  technique.  I  further  suggested  that  we  set  up  a

“children’s seminar,” i.e., that we “young ones” should get together regularly,

without the “old ones.” The purpose of this would be to allow the young

analysts to discuss their theoretical troubles and doubts and, above all, to

learn to speak freely. Both of these suggestions were acted upon. At one of

the Vienna meetings following the Berlin congress, I officially proposed the

creation  of  the  seminar  on  technique.  Freud  heartily  approved.  In  the

beginning, only the active members met. Hitschmann assumed the position of

official chairman. He was the director of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Clinic,

which had been founded on May 22, 1922. It was not my desire to be the

chairman of the seminar, for I did not feel that I had the necessary experience

for such a task. Nunberg took over the chairmanship a year later. It was not

until the fall of 1924 that I assumed this position. The seminar was under my

leadership until I moved to Berlin in November 1930. It became the cradle of

systematic analytic therapy. The Berlin analysts later set up a seminar on

technique similar to the Vienna seminar. The Vienna seminar produced the

generation  of  young  Viennese  analysts  who  took  part  in  the  early

development of character analysis. While they incorporated elements of it in

their practice, they did not participate in its later development, to which they

were opposed and even hostile. I want to describe the many clinical sources

from which the subsequently famous seminar on technique derived its force.

Those psychological convictions were formed in it which made possible the

breakthrough into the realm of biological functioning.4. PSYCHIATRIC AND PSYCHOANALYTIC DIFFICULTIES IN COMPREHENDING PSYCHIC

                                        ILLNESS


In the summer of 1922, I received my medical degree from the University of

Vienna. I had already been analyzing patients for more than three years, was

a member of the Psychoanalytic Association, and was involved in a number

of clinical investigations.

  My  interests  were  chiefly  concerned  with  schizophrenia.  Psychiatry

merely described and classified—there was no treatment. The patients either

recovered  spontaneously,  or  they  were  sent  to  Steinhof,  the  asylum  for

chronic patients. In Vienna, they did not even use the more and more widely

adopted  methods  of  the  Bleuler  clinic  at  Burghölzli.  Strict  discipline  was

maintained. The attendants had their hands full, especially in the “chronic

ward,” where I was an intern for a year. Wagner-Jauregg was working on his

now famous malaria therapy for general paresis, for which he later received

the Nobel prize. He was good to the patients and had a marvelous ability to

diagnose neurological diseases. But he knew nothing about psychology and

he made no bones about it. He had a rough peasant candor that was very

engaging. I had been to the psychotherapeutic out-patient clinic only a few

times. The neurotic patients were treated with bromide and suggestion. The

director boasted of “curing” better than 90 percent of the patients. Since I

knew beyond a shadow of doubt that he did not really cure a single patient,

and that his “successes” were to be ascribed to suggestion, I was interested in

finding out what the suggestionists meant by “cure.”

  It was in this way that the question of the theory of psychotherapy came

to be discussed in the psychoanalytic seminar on technique. It also tied in

with my own difficulties in technique. At that time, a patient was usually

considered “cured” when he said that he felt better, or when the individual

symptom for which he had sought therapy in the first place disappeared. The

psychoanalytic concept of cure had not been defined. I want to mention only

those  impressions  of  the  psychiatric  clinic  which  contributed  to  thedevelopment of sex-economy. It was not possible to categorize them at that

time. Later, however, they fitted in very well with the basic conception of my

theory on the relation between mind and body. I was working in psychiatry

when  Bleuler’s  modern  theory  of  schizophrenia,  based  on  Freud,  was

beginning to gain prominence. Economo was publishing his great work on

postencephalitis  lethargica,  and  Paul  Schilder  was  making  his  brilliant

contributions  on  alienation,  the  posture  reflexes,  paralytic  psychic

disturbances, etc.

  At that time Schilder was collecting material for his treatise on the “body

image.” He demonstrated that the body is psychically represented in definite

unitary sensations of form and that this “psychic image” roughly corresponds

to  the  actual  functions  of  the  organs.  He  also  attempted  to  establish  a

correlation between the numerous ego-ideals which a person forms and the

organic disturbances in aphasia and paralysis. (Pötzl had worked on brain

tumors in a similar way.) Schilder contended that the Freudian unconscious

could indeed be perceived in some nebulous form, “in the background of

consciousness,”  so  to  speak.  The  psychoanalysts  rejected  this  view.

Philosophically oriented physicians, such as Fröschels, also rejected the view

that psychic ideas are completely unconscious. Behind all such attempts lay

the  intent  to  discredit  the  theory  of  the  unconscious  and,  in  view  of  the

difficult situation created by the rejection of sexuality by scientific workers, it

was necessary to take a sharp stand against them. These clashes of opinion

were important. For instance, experimental work in the field of sex-economy

soon succeeded in demonstrating that the Freudian “unconscious” is present

and concretely comprehensible in the form of vegetative organ sensations

and impulses.

  My present view of the antithetical functional identity between psychic

and somatic impulses originated in the following way. An older girl with

totally paralyzed arms and muscular atrophy was admitted to the clinic. The

neurological  examination  revealed  no  organic  cause.  A  psychologicalexamination was not customary at that time. I learned from the patient that a

shock had precipitated the paralysis of her arms. Her fiancé had wanted to

embrace her and, half terrified, she had stretched her arms forward “as if

paralyzed.” Afterward, she could no longer move them. Atrophy gradually

began to set in. I did not, if I recall correctly, write this episode into the

patient’s case history. In a psychiatric clinic at that time, such an entry would

have  caused  embarrassment.  The  ward  chiefs  either  laughed  derisively  or

they became angry. Wagner-Jauregg took every opportunity to poke fun at

sexual symbolism. What impressed me most about this case was the fact that

a  psychic  experience  can  cause  a  somatic  response  which  produces  a

permanent  change  in  an  organ.  Later,  I  called  this  phenomenon  the

physiological anchoring of a psychic experience. It differs from hysterical

conversion by virtue of the fact that it cannot be psychologically influenced.

In  my  later  clinical  work,  I  had  ample  opportunity  to  apply  this  view  of

organic  illnesses,  e.g.,  in  the  case  of  gastric  ulcers,  bronchial  asthma,

pylorospasm, rheumatism, and various skin diseases. Sex-economic cancer

research is also based on the idea of the physiological anchoring of libidinal

conflicts.

  A great impression was made on me once by a catatonic patient who

veered from stupor to rage. It was a tremendous discharge of destructive rage.

Following this seizure, he was clear and accessible. He assured me that the

frenzy  had  been  a  pleasurable  experience.  He  had  been  happy.  He

remembered  nothing  of  the  apathetic  phase.  It  is  known  that  patients

suffering from a sudden catatonic stupor readily become normal again if they

are capable of fits of rage. In contrast to them, such forms of schizophrenia as

hebephrenia, which set in gradually, destroy the patient slowly but surely. I

knew of no explanation for these phenomena, but later I understood them.

When I eventually learned to produce fits of rage in affect-blocked, muscular-

hypertonic neurotics, I regularly brought about a considerable improvement

in the patient’s general condition. In patients suffering from catatonic stupor,the muscular armoring grips the entire body; the discharge of energy becomes

more and more restricted. In a fit of rage, a strong impulse breaks out of the

vegetative center, which is still mobile, and through the armor, thus releasing

bound muscular energy. By its very nature, such an experience has to be

pleasurable. It was impressive, and the psychoanalytic theory of catatonia

could  not  explain  it.  It  was  said  that  the  catatonic  patient  “completely

regressed  to  the  womb  and  autoeroticism.”  This  explanation  was  not

satisfactory, for the bodily reaction entailed in this experience was too strong.

The psychic content of the catatonic patient’s fantasy could not be the cause

of the organic process. This content could only be activated by a peculiar

general process which, in turn, maintained the condition.

  There was a serious contradiction in psychoanalytic theory. Freud had

postulated a physiological basis for his psychology of the unconscious, but

there were still no signs of it. His theory of the instinct was the first step in

this direction. A connection to orthodox medical pathology was also sought.

Gradually a tendency became evident which some ten years later I criticized

as  the  “psychologization  of  the  physiological.”  It  culminated  in  the

unscientific,  psychologistic  interpretations  of  somatic  processes,  using  the

theory of the unconscious. If a woman missed her period and yet was not

pregnant,  it  was  said  that  this  was  an  expression  of  her  rejection  of  her

husband  or  child.  According  to  this  conception,  just  about  all  physical

illnesses resulted from unconscious desires or anxieties. A person became

sick with cancer “in order to…” Another person destroyed himself through

tuberculosis  because  he  unconsciously  wished  to.  In  the  psychoanalytic

clinic,  strangely  enough,  there  was  a  profusion  of  data  which  seemed  to

confirm  this  view.  The  data  were  incontestable.  Nonetheless,  careful

deliberation rebelled against such a conclusion. How could an unconscious

desire produce a carcinoma? Little was known about cancer, and still less was

known about the real nature of this strange unconscious, the existence of

which could not be doubted! Groddeck’s The Book of the It abounds in suchexamples. It was metaphysics, but even mysticism is “right in some way.”

And it was mystical only to the extent to which one could not say precisely

when  it  was  right,  or  when  it  was  expressing  correct  data  incorrectly.  A

“desire” in the meaning of the word at that time could not conceivably bring

about deep organic changes. The act of desiring had to be grasped in a much

deeper  way  than  analytic  psychology  was  capable  of  doing.  Everything

pointed to deep biological processes, of which the “unconscious desire” could

only be an expression.

  The  controversy  between  the  psychoanalytic  explanation  of  psychic

illnesses on one hand, and the neurological physiological explanation on the

other, was just as vehement. “Psychogenic” and “somatogenic” were absolute

antitheses. The young psychoanalyst working in the field of psychiatry had

somehow to find his way around in this confusion. Conceiving of psychic

illnesses  as  having  “multiple  causes”  offered  some  comfort  against  the

difficulties.

    Postencephalitic paralysis and epilepsy came under the same complex of

problems.  In  the  winter  of  1918,  Vienna  was  stricken  with  a  virulent

influenza epidemic which claimed many lives. No one knew why it was so

malignant.  Even  worse  were  the  illnesses  of  many  stricken  people  who

survived the epidemic. Several years later, they were afflicted with a general

paralysis of their life activity. Their movements were retarded, their faces

acquired a masklike rigid expression, their speech became lethargic, every

impulse of their will appeared to be held back as by a brake. Their inner

psychic  activity  was  unimpaired.  The  disease  was  called  postencephalitis

lethargica. It was incurable. Our wards were full of patients suffering from

this disease. They were an extremely depressing sight. Some of them were

under  my  care.  In  my  perplexity,  I  hit  upon  the  idea  of  having  them  do

muscular exercises in an effort to overcome the extrapyramidal rigidity. True,

it was assumed that the lateral spinal tracts were damaged—the same was

assumed about the nerve centers in the brain. Economo even went so far as toassume that the “sleep center” was impaired. Wagner-Jauregg felt that my

plan  was  a  sensible  one.  I  got  several  pieces  of  equipment  and  had  the

patients do exercises on them, each according to his particular condition. I

was struck by the peculiar facial expressions of the patients while performing

these exercises. One patient displayed the exaggerated facial features of a

“criminal.”  His  movements  with  the  equipment  corresponded  to  these

features.  A  high  school  teacher  had  a  strict  “schoolmaster  face.”  In  the

performance of the exercises, he was somehow “professorial.” It was clearly

noticeable  that  postencephalitic  adolescents  tended  to  be  hyperactive.  In

adolescents,  the  disease  produced  more  exalted  forms;  in  older  people,  it

produced more lethargic forms. I did not publish anything about this, but it

made a lasting impression. At that time, disturbances of the vegetative nerve

functions were diagnosed wholly according to the scheme of disturbances of

the voluntary sensorimotor nervous system. Certain nerve areas and nerve

centers  were  said  to  be  affected  by  the  illness.  Impulses  were  said  to  be

disturbed or reshaped. Mechanical lesions of the nerves were considered the

causes  of  the  disturbance.  No  one  thought  of  the  possibility  of  a  general

disturbance  of  vegetative  functioning.  Even  today,  in  my  opinion,  the

problem has not been solved. I don’t know what to say about it. Most likely,

the  postencephalitic  disease  is  a  disturbance  of  the  total  body  impulse,  a

disturbance in which the nerve tracts play an intermediary role only. There

can be no doubt that there is a connection between the specific character

structure  and  the  particular  form  of  the  vegetative  inhibition.  That  it

originates from an infection is beyond doubt. In short, the disturbance of the

total body impulse and the inhibition of the general vegetative function were

the essential factors which made a lasting impression and became decisive for

my later work. Nothing was known about the nature of vegetative impulses.

  The obviousness of the sexual disturbance in schizophrenia and related

disturbances of the ego firmly convinced me of the correctness of Freud’s

assertions of the sexual etiology of neuroses and psychoses. What the analysthad to spend months in unraveling and interpreting in compulsive patients

was expressed in plain language by the psychotic patient. Strangest of all was

the attitude of the psychiatrists who simply refused to take cognizance of this

and outdid one another in jeering at Freud. There is no case of schizophrenia

which,  once  a  slight  contact  has  been  established,  does  not  reveal

unmistakable  sexual  conflicts.  The  nature  of  these  conflicts  can  be  very

different,  but  blatant  sexual  elements  are  always  uppermost.  Official

psychiatry is solely interested in classifying, and the content of the conflicts

is  merely  a  nuisance.  For  official  psychiatry,  it  is  important  whether  the

patient is only disoriented in space or whether he is also disoriented in time.

The  psychiatrist  is  not  interested  in  what  caused  the  patient  to  become

disoriented in one way or another. The psychotic patient is besieged by the

sexual ideas which, in others, are very carefully concealed, repressed, or only

half admitted. The sexual act, perverse activities, intercourse with the mother

or father, the smearing of excrement over the genitals, the seduction of or by

the wife or husband of a friend, grossly sensuous sucking fantasies, and more

of the same, inundate the psychotic’s conscious thinking. It is not surprising,

therefore, that the patient reacts by losing his inner orientation. The strange

inner situation breeds anxiety.

  A  person  who  has  allowed  prohibited  sexuality,  while  retaining  his

defense against it, must begin to sense the outer world as strange. The world,

too,  for  its  part,  labels  such  a  person  a  freak  and  excludes  him  from  its

regimented  ranks.  Indeed,  the  world  thrusts  sexual  sensations  upon  the

psychotic patient so forcefully that he has to become estranged from usual

thinking and living. In turn, he is often clearly aware of the sexual hypocrisy

of  his  environment.  Hence,  he  ascribes  to  the  physician  or  to  his  own

relatives what he himself directly feels. And what he experiences is reality

—not fantasies about reality. People are “polymorphously perverse,” and so

are their morality and their institutions. Strong barriers have been erected

against this flood of refuse and asociality: moralistic views and inhibitions onthe inside and the vice squad and public opinion on the outside. To be able to

exist, therefore, people have to disown their own most vital interests; they

have to adopt artificial forms of living and attitudes, which they themselves

have made necessary. The result of this is that they experience as innate and

as a constant burden what is alien to their nature; they conceive of it as the

“eternally moral nature of man,” as “the truly human,” as opposed to the

“animal.”  The  many  fantasies  which  psychotic  patients  have  about  the

rearrangement of a state of affairs can be explained on the basis of this split.

They often conceive of locking up their attendants and physicians as the ones

who are really sick. It is they who are in the right—not the others. This idea

is not as fanciful as one would like to believe. Great and sensible men have

concerned  themselves  with  this  phenomenon,  e.g.,  Ibsen  in Peer  Gynt.

Everyone is right in some way. Even psychotic patients have to be right in

principle in some definite places. But where? Certainly not where they claim

to be. Yet, when one succeeds in establishing contact with them, one finds

that they are capable of conversing very sensibly and seriously about the

numerous peculiarities of life.

  The reader who has carefully followed the presentation thus far will be

somewhat  puzzled.  He  will  want  to  know  whether  the  bizarre,  perverse

sexual sensations felt by the psychotic patient truly represent a breakthrough

of what is “natural” in him. Are coprophagia, homosexual fantasies, sadism,

etc., natural experiences of life? The reader is right to be puzzled about these

things.  The  instincts  which  initially  break  through  in  the  schizophrenic

patient  are  indeed  perverse.  But  in  the  background  of  schizophrenic

experience there is something else which is hidden by the perversity. The

schizophrenic  patient  experiences  his  organ  sensations,  the  vegetative

currents, in the form of concepts and ideas which have been borrowed partly

from the world around him and acquired partly in the warding off of his

natural  sexuality.  The  average  normal  person  also  thinks  of  sexuality  in

unnatural  or  perverse  concepts,  e.g.,  fucking.  Hand  in  hand  with  thedeterioration of the natural sexual organ sensation went the words and terms

to express it. If only perversions broke through in the schizophrenic, there

would  be  no  fantasies  of  doomsday  and  cosmic  processes—but  only

perversions. What belongs specifically to the schizophrenic patient is that,

though he experiences the vital biology of the body, he cannot cope with it.

He is bewildered and begins to conceive of his vegetative currents in terms of

perverse sexuality. With respect to their experiencing of life, the neurotic

patient and the perverse patient are related to the schizophrenic as the petty

thief to the daring safecracker.

  And  so,  to  the  impressions  of  postencephalitis  lethargica  were  added

those  of  schizophrenia.  The  ideas  of  a  gradual  or  rapid  “vegetative

deterioration,”  of  the  “splitting  of  the  unitary,  ordered,  vegetative

functioning,”  became  essential  sources  of  my  later  investigations.  To  me,

schizophrenic  lack  of  concentration  and  helplessness,  confusion  and

disorientation,  catatonic  block,  and  hebephrenic  deterioration  were  merely

various forms of one and the same process, i.e., the progressive splitting of

the normally unitary function of the vital apparatus. It was not until twelve

years  later  that  the  unity  of  the  life  function  became  clinically

comprehensible in the form of the orgasm reflex.

  If one has one’s doubts about the absolute rationality and correct way of

thinking of this “respectable” world, one will have an easier time in gaining

access to the nature of psychotic patients. I observed a young girl who had

lain in bed in the clinic for years and did nothing but move her pelvis and rub

her finger over her genital. She was totally blocked. Once in a while, a vague

smile appeared on her face. Only seldom did one get through to her. She did

not answer any questions. On occasion, however, an intelligible expression

took shape on her face. If a person really knows the shocking anguish of

small  children  who  are  forbidden  to  masturbate,  he  will  understand  such

behavior on the part of psychotic patients. They give up the world and, in a

demented  state,  practice  what  an  irrationally  governed  world  once  deniedthem. They do not revenge themselves; they do not punish; they cause no

harm.  They  merely  lie  in  bed  and  try  to  salvage  the  last,  pathologically

distorted, remnants of pleasure.

    Psychiatry understood nothing of all this. It was afraid to understand it. It

would  have  had  to  undertake  a  radical  change.  Freud  had  provided  an

approach to the problem, but his “interpretations” were laughed at. Thanks to

my knowledge of the theory of childhood sexuality and the repression of

instincts, I had a better understanding of psychotic patients. I took up Freud’s

cause  in  earnest.  It  was  clear  to  me  that  the  sole  function  of  psychiatric

science  was  to  divert  attention  from  a  true  elucidation  of  the  sexual

conditions  of  existence.  It  made  every  effort  to  “prove”  that  psychotic

patients are tainted from birth, are degenerate in their very protoplasm. It had

to prove at all cost that disturbances of the brain function or inner secretion

caused  mental  illnesses.  Psychiatrists  gloated  over  the  fact  that  patients

suffering  from  general  paresis  exhibit  some  symptoms  of  genuine

schizophrenia or melancholia. “See, that’s what comes of immorality” was

and still is an often-assumed attitude. It did not occur to anyone that the

ravages of the body functions, in whatever form, could just as well be the

results of a general disturbance of vegetative functioning.

  There were three basic conceptions on the relation between the somatic

sphere and the psychic sphere:

  1. Every psychic illness or manifestation has a physical cause. This was

the formula of mechanistic materialism.

  2. Every psychic illness or manifestation can have only a psychic cause.

For religious thinking, all somatic illnesses are also of psychic origin. This

was the formula of metaphysical idealism. It corresponded to the view that

“spirit creates matter” and not vice versa.

  3. The psychic and the somatic are two parallel processes which have a

reciprocal effect on one another—psychophysical parallelism.

  There was no unitary-functional conception of the body-mind relation.Philosophic questions played no role in my clinical work, nor did my clinical

work proceed from philosophy. On the contrary, on the basis of my clinical

work, I developed a method which, at first, I applied quite unconsciously.

This method required clarity about the connection between the somatic and

the psychic realms.

  So many researchers had correctly observed the same data. And yet, in

scientific work, one scientist was the rival of another, e.g., Adler’s theory of

the  “nervous  character”  opposed  Freud’s  theory  of  the  sexual  etiology  of

neuroses.  As  much  as  one  hesitates  to  admit  it,  it  is  nonetheless  true:

“character”  and  “sexuality”  constituted  two  irreconcilable  poles  of

psychoanalytic  thinking.  Too  much  talk  about  character  was  not  exactly

appreciated in the Psychoanalytic Association. I understood the reasons for

this. There was hardly another subject that was caviled about as much as

“character.” There were few who made a clear-cut distinction between the

valuation of (“good” or “bad”) character and natural-scientific investigations.

Characterology  and  ethics  were,  and  still  are,  almost  identical.  Even  in

psychoanalysis, the concept of character was not free of moral valuations.

There was a stigma attached to the “anal” character; less so to the “oral”

character,  but  the  latter  was  looked  upon  as  an  infant.  Freud  had

demonstrated the origin of a number of typical character traits from early

childhood impulses. Abraham had furnished brilliant data on the character

traits  in  melancholia  and  manic-depressive  states.  Hence,  the  confusion

between  moral  valuations  and  empirical  investigations  was  all  the  more

perplexing. It was said, to be sure, that scientific work had to be “objective”

and  “non-judgmental.”  Yet  every  sentence  on  character  behavior  was  a

judgment, not—which would have been correct—a judgment on the “health”

or “sickness” of a particular form of behavior, but a judgment in the sense of

“good”  and  “bad.”  The  view  was  held  that  there  were  certain  “bad

characters” who were unsuitable for psychoanalytic treatment. It was said

that psychoanalytic treatment required a certain level of psychic organizationin  the  patient,  and  that  many  were  not  worth  the  effort.  Besides,  many

patients were so “narcissistic” that the treatment was not capable of breaking

through  the  barrier.  Even  a  low  IQ  was  considered  an  obstruction  to

psychoanalytic  treatment.  Hence,  psychoanalytic  work  was  limited  to

circumscribed  neurotic  symptoms  in  intelligent  persons  capable  of  free

association and having “correctly developed” characters.

  This feudalistic conception of psychotherapy, which, by its very nature, is

extremely  individualistic,  naturally  came  into  immediate  conflict  with  the

requirements of medical work when the Vienna Psychoanalytic Clinic for

destitute persons was opened on May 22, 1922. At the Budapest congress in

1918, Freud had spoken of the necessity of founding public psychoanalytic

clinics for those who could not afford private treatment. However, the pure

gold of psychoanalysis would have, he said, to be mixed “with the copper of

suggestive therapy.” Mass treatment would make this necessary.

  As early as 1920, a psychoanalytic clinic had been set up in Berlin under

Karl Abraham. In Vienna, both the local medical authorities, who had to give

their authorization to the psychoanalytic clinic, as well as the state board of

health, raised considerable difficulties. The psychiatrists were flatly against it

and advanced all sorts of quibbling excuses, while the doctors’ union feared

that the medical profession would suffer pecuniary damages. In short, the

founding of a clinic was considered altogether useless. Eventually, however,

the necessary authorization was received. We moved into a few rooms in the

cardiac ward of Kaufmann and Meyer. Six months later, an injunction was

issued against our continuation. And so it went, back and forth, because the

medical authorities did not know what to make of it. Nor did it fit into the

framework of their thinking. Hitschmann, the director of the psychoanalytic

clinic, described the difficulties in a booklet written in honor of its tenth

anniversary. However, I want to return to my main theme.

  The  psychoanalytic  clinic  became  a  fountainhead  of  insights  into  the

mechanisms of neuroses in impecunious people. I worked in this clinic fromthe day of its opening as the chief assistant physician; altogether, I worked

there for eight years, ultimately as its deputy director. The consultation hours

were  jammed.  There  were  industrial  workers,  office  clerks,  students,  and

farmers from the country. The influx was so great that we were at a loss to

deal with it, especially when the clinic became known among the populous.

Every psychoanalyst agreed to give one session every day without charge.

But this was not enough. We had to sort out those cases which were more

suited  for  analysis.  This  forced  us  to  try  to  find  ways  of  assessing  the

prospects  of  treatment.  Later,  I  persuaded  analysts  to  make  a  monthly

contribution.  I  wanted  to  use  this  money  to  employ  one  or  two  paid

physicians. In this way, it could be hoped that the name “clinic” would one

day be justified. According to the standards of that time, it was believed that

treatment required one session per day for at least six months. One thing

became immediately clear: psychoanalysis is not a mass therapy. The idea of

preventing neuroses did not exist—nor would one have known what to say

about it. Work in the clinic soon made the following very clear:

  Neurosis is a mass sickness, an infection similar to an epidemic, and not

the  whim  of  spoiled  women,  as  was  later  contended  in  the  fight  against

psychoanalysis.

    Disturbance of the genital sexual function was by far the most frequent

reason given for coming to the clinic.

    Accountability as to the results of the psychotherapeutic treatment was

indispensable  if  we  wanted  to  make  any  headway  at  all.  What  were  the

criteria for determining the prognosis of therapy? This question had not been

previously considered.

  Why an analyst succeeded in curing one patient and not another was also

a  question  of  the  first  magnitude.  If  this  were  known,  then  it  would  be

possible  to  make  a  better  selection  of  patients.  There  was  no  theory  of

therapy at that time.

  Neither the psychiatrist nor the psychoanalyst thought to inquire into thesocial living conditions of the patients. It was known, of course, that there

was poverty and material distress, but somehow this was not regarded as

being relevant to the treatment. Yet, the patient’s material conditions were a

constant problem in the clinic. It was often necessary to provide social aid

first. All of a sudden there was a tremendous gap between private practice

and practice in the clinic.

  After  we  had  been  working  for  two  years  or  so,  it  became  clear  that

individual psychotherapy has a very limited significance. Only a fraction of

the emotionally ill patients could receive treatment. And hundreds of hours of

work with those who were treated were lost in fruitless efforts because of the

unsolved therapeutic problems pertaining to technique. One’s efforts were

rewarded in a small percentage of cases only. Psychoanalysis never made any

secret about the wretchedness of actual practice.

  Then there were patients whom private practice afforded no opportunity

to observe, patients who were so mentally deranged that they were wholly

outside  of  society.  The  usual  psychiatric  diagnosis  for  such  cases  was

“psychopathy,”  “moral  insanity,”  or  “schizoid  degeneracy.”  Severe

“hereditary  taint”  was  looked  upon  as  the  sole  essential  cause.  Their

symptoms  could  not  be  classified  under  any  of  the  known  categories.

Compulsive  actions,  hysterical  comas,  murder  fantasies  and  impulses

completely  uprooted  them  from  the  everyday  world.  While  these  private

manias were, in the case of the well-to-do, socially harmless, they had, in the

case of the poor, a grotesque and dangerous character. As a result of material

distress, the moralistic inhibitions had been broken down to such an extent

that the criminal and perverse impulses clamored for action. My book, Der

triebhafte Charakter, is an investigation of this type. For three years, I had to

deal predominantly with such difficult cases in the clinic. They were put in

the disturbed ward and left there until they settled down. Then they were

discharged, or they were put in a mental institution as soon as a psychosis

broke out. They stemmed almost exclusively from the milieu of the laborerand the clerk.

  One day, a pretty young working woman came to the clinic. She had two

boys and a small child with her. She had lost her voice, a symptom known as

“hysterical mutism.” She wrote on a slip of paper that she had suddenly lost

her voice a few days before. Since an analysis was not possible, I made an

attempt  to  eliminate  the  speech  disturbance  through  hypnosis  and  was

successful  after  a  few  sessions.  Now  she  spoke  in  a  low,  hoarse,  and

apprehensive  voice.  For  years  she  had  been  suffering  from  a  compulsive

impulse to kill her children. The father of the children had deserted her. She

was  alone,  and  she  and  the  children  had  hardly  anything  to  eat.  She  did

sewing at home, but earned hopelessly little from it. Then she was struck by

the idea of murder. She was on the verge of pushing her children into the

water  when  she  was  seized  by  terrible  anxiety.  From  then  on  she  was

tormented by the impulse to confess to the police to protect the children from

herself. This intention put her in a state of deadly fear. She was afraid of

being hanged for her crime. The thought of it produced a constriction in her

throat.  The  mutism  protected  herself  against  carrying  out  her  impulse.  In

reality, her mutism was an extreme spasm of the vocal cords. It was not

difficult to put one’s finger on the childhood situation which lay behind it.

She had been an orphan and had been boarded with strangers. She had lived

with as many as six and more people in one room. As a small girl she had

been sexually violated by grown men. She was tormented by a longing for a

protective mother. In her fantasies, she was a protected infant. Throat and

neck had always been the site of the choking anxiety and the longing. Now

she was a mother and saw her children in a situation similar to the one in

which she had been as a child. She did not want them to live. In addition, she

had transferred to the children the bitter hatred she felt toward her husband. It

was a terribly complicated situation. No one understood her. Though totally

frigid,  she  slept  with  many  different  men.  I  succeeded  in  helping  her

overcome  a  number  of  difficulties.  I  had  the  boys  put  in  a  respectableboarding school. She plucked up enough courage to start working again. We

took  up  a  collection  for  her.  In  reality,  the  misery  continued—merely

somewhat alleviated. The helplessness of such people drives them to commit

unaccountable acts. She would come to my house at night and threaten to

commit suicide or infanticide unless I did this or that, unless I agreed to

protect her in this or that situation, etc. I visited her in her apartment. There I

had to grapple not with the exalted question of the etiology of neuroses but

with  the  question  of  how  a  human  organism  could  put  up  with  such

conditions year in and year out. There was nothing, absolutely nothing, to

bring light into this life. There was nothing but misery, loneliness, gossip of

the neighbors, worries about the next meal—and, on top of it all, there were

the criminal chicaneries of her landlord and employer. In spite of the fact that

she was severely hampered in her work by acute psychic disturbances, she

was ruthlessly exploited. She received some two schillings per day for ten

hours’ work. That is to say, she was expected to support herself and her three

children on some sixty to eighty schillings per month! The phenomenal thing

about it was: she did it! I was never able to find out how she managed. In

spite of everything, she was not at all neglected in her appearance. She even

read books, including some which she borrowed from me.

  Later, when the Marxists never tired of telling me that the sexual etiology

of  psychic  illnesses  was  a  bourgeois  whim,  that  it  was  “only  material

distress” which produced neuroses, I always had to think of cases such as

these. As if sexual distress were not a “material distress”! It is not “material

distress” in the sense of Marxian economy that produces neuroses. Rather it

is  the  neuroses  of  these  people  that  ruins  their  ability  to  do  something

sensible about their distress, to assert themselves more effectively, to stand

up to the competition of the labor market, to come to an understanding with

others  who  are  in  a  similar  social  situation,  to  keep  their  heads  clear  for

rational  thinking.  Objections  to  the  effect  that  such  cases  are  exceptions,

particularly if such objections are raised by people who dismiss neurosis as a“luxury of bourgeois damsels,” can be refuted by facts.

  The neuroses of the working population are merely lacking in cultural

finesse.  They  are  crude,  blunt  rebellions  against  the  psychic  massacre  to

which everybody is subjected. The well-to-do citizen bears his neurosis with

dignity, or he manifests it materially in one form or another. Among the

broad masses of the working population, the neurosis comes out in all its

tragic grotesqueness.

  Another  patient  was  suffering  from  so-called  nymphomania.  She  was

never able to experience gratification. Hence, she slept with any man who

was available, without gratification. She masturbated with a knife handle, or

even with the knife blade in her vagina until she bled. Only those who know

the torment which an insatiable, high-strung sexual excitation can cause cease

to speak about the “transcendence of phenomenological spirituality.” In this

patient, too, the destructive influence of a large, poor, materially harassed

laborer family was ruthlessly revealed. Mothers of such families have neither

the time to nor the possibility of bringing up their children carefully. When

the mother notices that her child is masturbating, she simply throws a knife at

the child. And the child associates the knife with the fear of being punished

for sexual activity and the accompanying guilt feelings; the child does not

allow gratification to take place and attempts later, tormented by unconscious

feelings of guilt, to experience orgasm with the same knife. This case was

described in detail in Der triebhafte Charakter.

  Such cases were not in the same category as simple neuroses or psychotic

illnesses.  Impulsive  characters  seemed  to  represent  a  transitional  stage

between neurosis and psychosis. The ego still functioned properly, but it was

torn  between  affirmation  of  instinct  and  affirmation  of  morality,  between

negation of morality and negation of instinct, at one and the same time. It

seemed to be in a rage against its own conscience, seemed to want to rid itself

of it by exaggerating the impulsive actions. And the conscience was clearly

ascertainable  as  the  product  of  a  contradictory,  brutal  upbringing.Compulsive neurotics and hysterical patients are brought up from an early

age in a consistently antisexual way. In early childhood, these people had

been  without  sexual  guidance  or  had  been  prematurely  active.  Then,

suddenly,  they  were  brutally  punished,  and  this  punishment  lived  in  the

unconscious  as  sexual  guilt  feeling.  The  ego  defended  itself  against  the

overwrought conscience by repressing it, in the same way in which it usually

would repress only sexual desires.

  The stasis of sexual energy in these patients was far greater and more

drastic than it was in instinct-inhibited patients. In treating them, I had first of

all to wrestle with their entire being, their character. The difficulties which

they presented were directly dependent upon the degree of the sexual tension

or  the  extent  to  which  sexual  gratification  had  been  experienced.  Every

discharge  of  sexual  tension  through  genital  gratification  immediately

mitigated  the  effect  of  the  breakthrough  of  pathological  impulses.  Those

familiar  with  the  basic  ideas  of  sex-economy  will  have  noticed  that

everything was present in these patients which was later incorporated into my

basic theory: the character resistance, the curative role of genital gratification,

the accumulative effect of sexual stasis on the asocial and perverse sexual

impulses. I was able to put all this data together only after I had had similar

experiences  with  instinct-inhibited  neuroses.  I  wrote  an  eight-page

monograph in which I explained for the first time the necessity of “character-

analytic work” on the patient. Freud read the manuscript within three days

and wrote me a letter of appreciation. It was possible, he said, that from now

on  mechanisms  similar  to  those  which  had  been  found  to  be  operative

between  ego  and  id  would  be  found  to  be  operative  between  ego  and

superego.

  The idea was new that perverse and asocial impulses increase owing to

the impairment of the normal sexual function. Psychoanalysts were in the

habit of explaining such cases on the basis of the “constitutional intensity of a

drive.” The anal sexuality of compulsive neurotic patients was said to becaused  by  a  “strong  erogenic  predisposition  of  the  anal  zone.”  Abraham

contended  that,  in  melancholia,  a  “strong  oral  disposition”  existed  which

predetermined  the  tendency  to  depressive  moods.  It  was  assumed  that  an

especially “strong skin eroticism” lay at the basis of the masochistic beating

fantasy. Exhibitionism was accounted for by an especially strong erogenicity

of the eyes. An “exaggerated muscle eroticism” was said to be responsible for

sadism. These conceptions are important in order to comprehend the research

which  I  had  to  carry  out  before  I  was  able  to  incorporate  my  clinical

experiences on the role of genitality. What was difficult to understand in the

beginning  was  the  misunderstandings  with  which  I  had  continually  to

contend.

  The  fact  that  the  intensity  of  asocial  actions  is  dependent  upon  the

disturbance  of  the  genital  function  had  been  correctly  perceived.  It

contradicted  the  psychoanalytic  conception  of  isolated  “partial  instincts.”

Although Freud had assumed a development of the sexual instinct from a

pregenital to a genital stage, this view had become obscured in mechanistic

conceptions.  These  are  some  of  the  contentions  that  were  made:  every

erogenic  zone  (mouth,  anus,  eyes,  skin,  etc.)  has  a  corresponding  partial

instinct,  e.g.,  the  pleasure  of  looking,  the  pleasure  of  being  beaten,  etc.

Ferenczi, indeed, was of the opinion that genital sexuality was made up of

pregenital qualities. Freud clung to the view that girls have only a clitoral

sexuality  and  that  they  do  not  experience  vaginal  eroticism  in  early

childhood.  I  went  over  my  handwritten  notes  time  and  again.  There  was

nothing to be done. My observations showed quite clearly that pregenital

sexual impulses increased with impotence and decreased with potency. In the

process of collating my observations, it occurred to me that a completely

developed sexual tie between parent and child could exist at any stage of

childhood sexual development. It was possible that, even at the age of five, a

boy could desire his mother in an oral way only, while a girl of the same age

could  desire  her  father  in  an  anal  or  oral  way  only.  The  relationships  ofchildren to adults of both sexes could have any number of variations. Freud’s

formula “I love my father or my mother and hate my mother or my father”

was only a beginning. For my own convenience, I differentiated pregenital

from genital child-parent relationships. Clinically, the former demonstrated

far deeper regressions and psychic damages than the latter. In terms of sexual

development, I had to conceive of the genital relationship as normal and the

pregenital relationship as pathologic. A boy having a fully developed genital

relationship to his mother would have a much easier time in establishing a

genital relationship to a woman than a boy who loved his mother in an anal,

i.e., perverse, way only. In the former, it was merely necessary to loosen the

fixation; in the latter, the boy’s entire personality had taken on passive and

feminine characteristics. For the same reason, it was easier to cure a girl who

had a vaginal or anal attachment to her father than it was to cure a girl who

had assumed the sadistic male role. Hence, hysteria with its genital incest

fixation offered fewer therapeutic difficulties than compulsive patients with

their pregenital structure.

  Why it was easier to dissolve the genital fixation than it was to dissolve

the pregenital fixation was still not clear. At that time, I knew nothing about

the  fundamental  difference  between  genital  and  pregenital  sexuality.  In

psychoanalysis, no distinction was or is made between the two. Genitality

was  assumed  to  be  as  capable  of  sublimation  as  anality  and  orality.

Gratification  in  the  case  of  the  latter  was  regarded  as  the  same  as

“gratification” in the case of the former. There was “cultural suppression”

and “condemnation” in both the former and the latter.

  It is necessary at this point to go into these ideas in more detail. There is

no basis to the contention of psychoanalysts that they have incorporated the

theory of genitality into their theory of neuroses. It is imperative, therefore, to

define precisely what is meant by genitality. It is true that my publications on

this subject since 1922 have been partially incorporated into psychoanalytic

thinking. It is also true, however, that there is still no understanding for themost essential elements of my ideas. The independent development of sex-

economy began with the question of the difference between pregenital and

genital pleasure. Not a single point of my theory is valid without it. Its correct

solution  leads  automatically  to  the  path  which  I  had  to  pursue.  To  have

evaded it would have been to compromise my work.                                      CHAPTER IV





THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ORGASM THEORY




                              1. INITIAL EXPERIENCES


In December 1920, Freud sent me a young student for treatment. He was

suffering  from  a  compulsion  to  ruminate  and  to  count,  compulsive  anal

fantasies,  habitual  masturbation,  acute  neurasthenic  symptoms,  e.g.,

headaches and back pains, absent-mindedness and nausea. I treated him for

several  months.  The  compulsion  to  ruminate  immediately  became  a

compulsion to associate. His case seemed quite hopeless. Suddenly, an incest

fantasy broke through, and for the first time the patient masturbated with

gratification. All his symptoms vanished at once. In the course of eight days,

they  gradually  returned.  He  masturbated  again.  The  symptoms  again

disappeared, only to return a few days later. This went on for several weeks.

Finally  we  succeeded  in  getting  at  the  root  of  his  guilt  feelings  about

masturbation  and  in  correcting  some  damaging  modes  of  behavior.  His

condition visibly improved. After a total of nine months, I terminated the

treatment. The patient was now capable of working and his condition was

significantly better. My records show that I was informed about the patient’s

condition over a period of six years. He later married and remained healthy.

  Parallel with this case, I was also analyzing a waiter who was totally

incapable of having an erection. The treatment ran a smooth course. In the

third year, we arrived at a perfect reconstruction of the “primal scene.” He

was about two years old when it occurred. His mother gave birth to a child.From the adjacent room, he had been able to observe every detail of the

delivery. The impression of a large bloody hole between her legs became

firmly ingrained in his mind. On a conscious level, there remained only the

sensation  of  an  “emptiness”  in  his  own  genital.  According  to  the

psychoanalytic knowledge of that time, I merely connected his inability to

have an erection with the severely traumatic impression of the “castrated”

female genital. This was no doubt correct. However, it wasn’t until a few

years  ago  that  I  began  to  pay  special  attention  to  and  to  understand  the

“feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  genitals”  in  my  patients.  It  corresponds  to  a

withdrawal of biological energy.

  At that time, I incorrectly assessed the total personality of my patient. He

was very quiet, well-mannered, and well-behaved, and did everything that

was  asked  of  him.  He  never  got  excited.  In  the  course  of  three  years  of

treatment,  he  never  once  became  angry  or  exercised  criticism.  Thus,

according to the prevailing concepts, he was a fully “integrated,” “adjusted”

character,  with  only  one  acute  symptom  (monosymptomatic  neurosis).  I

delivered a report on this case to the seminar on technique and was praised

for the correct elucidation of the primal traumatic scene. Theoretically, I had

given a complete explanation of the symptom, the patient’s inability to have

an  erection.  Since  the  patient  was  industrious  and  orderly—“adjusted  to

reality” as we used to say—it did not occur to any one of us that it was

precisely  this  emotional  tranquility,  this  unshakable  equanimity,  which

formed the pathological characterological basis on which erective impotence

could be maintained. The older analysts considered the analytic work that I

had  performed  complete  and  correct.  For  my  part,  I  left  the  meeting

unsatisfied. If everything was indeed just as it should be, why was there no

change in the patient’s impotence? There must be something missing some

place, but none of us knew where. I terminated the analysis several months

later—the patient had not been cured. The imperturbability with which he

bore it was as stoical as the imperturbability with which he had acceptedeverything throughout the entire treatment. This patient impressed upon me

the important character-analytic concept of “affect-block.” I had hit upon the

far-reaching  connection  between  the  present-day  formation  of  the  human

character and emotional coldness and genital deadness.

  This was when psychoanalysis was requiring longer and longer periods of

treatment. When I first began to treat patients, six months was considered a

long time. In 1923, one year was already a matter of course. The idea gained

ground that two or more years for a treatment would be even better. There

was  no  getting  around  it:  neuroses  are  complicated  and  severe  illnesses.

Freud wrote his now famous History of an Infantile Neurosis on the basis of a

case which he treated for five years. Freud of course had acquired a deep

knowledge  of  a  child’s  world  of  experience  from  this  case.  The

psychoanalysts,  on  the  other  hand,  made  a  virtue  of  necessity.  Abraham

contended that years were needed to understand a chronic depression, and

that  the  “passive  technique”  was  the  only  true  technique.  Psychoanalysts

made sly jokes about their drowsiness during the analytic session. If a patient

did not produce any associations for hours on end, then the analyst had to

smoke a great deal in order not to fall asleep. There were analysts, indeed,

who deduced grandiose theories from this. If the patient was silent, then the

analyst too had to be silent, whether for hours or weeks on end. This was

regarded as “consummate technique.” From the very beginning, I sensed that

something was fundamentally wrong here. Yet I too attempted to follow this

“technique.” Nothing came of it. The patients merely developed a deep sense

of helplessness, a bad conscience, and the stubbornness which went hand in

hand with both. Matters were not made any better by the jokes about the

analyst who woke up from a deep sleep during a session and found his couch

empty, nor with convoluted explanations to the effect that it was quite all

right for the analyst to drowse for a while, for his unconscious would keep an

anxious  watch  over  the  patient.  It  was  even  contended  that  the  analyst’s

unconscious was able, upon waking up from sleep during a treatment, to pickup precisely where the patient’s unconscious was continuing. It was both

depressing and hopeless. On the other hand, Freud warned us not to be overly

ambitious in our therapeutic efforts. It was not until many years later that I

understood  what  he  meant.  The  allegations  which  were  made  by  the

psychotherapists  were  simply  not  true.  Following  the  discovery  of  the

unconscious mechanisms, Freud himself had initially cherished the definite

hope of being able to tread upon secure ground toward the development of a

causal psychotherapy. He had deceived himself. He must have been greatly

disappointed.  His  conclusion  was  correct  that  further  research  was  most

imperative. A rash desire to cure is not conducive to the recognition of new

facts. I had as little notion as anyone about the nature of the area into which

this indispensable research had to lead. Nor did I have any notion that it was

the psychoanalyst’s fear of the social consequences of psychoanalysis which

caused him to assume such bizarre attitudes in questions of therapy. At issue

were the following questions:

  1. Is the Freudian theory on the etiology of the neurosis complete?

  2. Is it possible to arrive at a scientific theory of technique and therapy?

  3. Is the Freudian theory of instinct correct? Is it complete? If not, where

is it lacking?

  4. What made sexual repression (which led to the epidemic of neurosis)

necessary in the first place?

  These questions contained the germ of everything that later came to be

called sex-economy. It is only in retrospect that I can pose these orientating

questions. At that time, the conscious formulation of any one of them might

well have prematurely held me back from any kind of research. I am grateful

that I had no concrete conception of these questions in those initial years, that

I innocently went about my work in the psychoanalytic clinic and worked on

the  development  of  the  psychoanalytic  system—all  in  the  belief  that  my

activity was in Freud’s name and for his life work. Deeply committed to my

own life work, I have not the slightest regret today that this not very self-confident attitude later caused me considerable suffering. This attitude was

the presupposition of my later discoveries.


  2. SUPPLEMENTATION OF FREUD’S CONCEPTION OF THE ANXIETY NEUROSIS


I would remind the reader that I came to Freud from sexology. It is not at all

surprising, therefore, that I found his theory of the actual neuroses, which I

called  sexual  stasis  neuroses,  far  more  appealing  and  scientific  than  the

“interpretation” of the “meaning” of symptoms in the psychoneuroses. Freud

designated  as  actual  neuroses  those  illnesses  which  were  caused  by

contemporary disturbances of sexual life. According to his conception, the

anxiety  neurosis  and  neurasthenia  were  illnesses  which  did  not  have  a

“psychic etiology.” He held the view that they were direct manifestations of

dammed-up sexuality. They were just like toxic disturbances. Freud assumed

that the body contained “chemical substances” of a “sexual nature” which, if

they  were  not  adequately  “metabolized,”  produced  nervous  palpitations,

cardiac  irregularity,  acute  attacks  of  anxiety,  perspiration,  and  other

symptoms of the vegetative life apparatus. It was far from Freud’s intent to

establish a relation between the anxiety neurosis and the vegetative system.

On the basis of his clinical experience, he contended that the anxiety neurosis

was the result of sexual abstinence or coitus interruptus. It was different from

neurasthenia which, in contrast to the anxiety neurosis, was brought about by

“sexual  abuses,”  that  is,  by  unregulated  sexuality,  e.g.,  excessive

masturbation. The symptoms of neurasthenia were back pains and lumbago,

headaches, general irritability, disturbances of memory and attentiveness, etc.

In other words, Freud classified syndromes which were not understood by

official neurology and psychiatry according to their etiology. It was for this

reason  that  he  was  attacked  by  the  psychiatrist  Löwenfeld,  who,  like

hundreds  of  other  psychiatrists,  completely  denied  the  sexual  etiology  of

neuroses. Freud stuck to the official clinical terminology. He contended that

the above-mentioned symptoms did not reveal any psychic content, whereassuch  contents  were  revealed  by  psychoneuroses,  particularly  hysteria  and

compulsion neurosis. The symptoms of these illnesses showed a concretely

comprehensible content which was always sexual. It was merely necessary to

have a sufficiently broad and sensible conception of sexuality. The incest

fantasy and the fear of being injured in one’s genitals were at the core of

every psychoneurosis. The unconscious fantasies which were expressed in

the psychoneurotic symptom were clearly of an infantile sexual nature. Freud

made  a  clear-cut  distinction  between  the  actual  neuroses  and  the

psychoneuroses.  Understandably,  the  psychoneuroses  were  of  central

importance  in  psychoanalytic  clinical  work.  It  was  Freud’s  view  that  the

actual  neuroses  could  be  cured  by  ridding  the  patient  of  the  detrimental

sexual activities, i.e., abstinence or coitus interruptus in the case of anxiety

neurosis,  and  excessive  masturbation  in  the  case  of  neurasthenia.

Psychoneuroses, on the other hand, have to be treated psychoanalytically. In

spite of this sharp dichotomization, he admitted a connection between the two

groups. He was of the opinion that every psychoneurosis centered around “an

actual-neurotic core.” It was this very illuminating sentence that formed the

point of departure of my investigations of stasis anxiety. Freud no longer

published anything on this subject.

    According to Freud’s conception of the actual neurosis, sexual energy is

inadequately disposed of. Its access to consciousness and motility is blocked.

The actual anxiety and the concomitant physiologically determined nervous

symptoms are, so to speak, proliferations of a malignant nature which are

nourished by non-resolved sexual excitation. But even the strange psychic

formations  of  the  compulsion  neurotic  and  hysterical  patients  had  the

appearance of biologically meaningless, malignant proliferations. Where did

they derive their energy?  Could  there  be  any  doubt  that  it  was  from  the

“actual-neurotic core” of dammed-up sexual excitation. In other words, this

must also be the energy source of the psychoneuroses. Freud’s hint admitted

of no other interpretation. This could be the only possible way of seeing it.The objection which most psychoanalysts raised to the theory of the actual

neuroses had a disturbing effect. They contended that there was no such thing

as  an  actual  neurosis.  This  illness  also,  they  said,  was  “psychically

determined.” Unconscious psychic contents could also be shown to exist in

so-called “free-floating anxiety.” Stekel was the chief exponent of this view.

He  argued  that  all  forms  of  anxiety  and  nervous  disturbances  were

psychically determined and not somatically determined, as was contended in

the case of the actual neuroses. Like many others, Stekel failed to see the

fundamental difference between the psychosomatic excitation and the psychic

content of a symptom. Freud did not clear up the contradiction, but he stuck

to his initial differentiation. I, on the other hand, saw any number of somatic

symptoms in the psychoanalytic clinic. However, it could not be denied that

the symptoms of the actual neurosis also had a psychic superstructure. Cases

of pure actual neuroses were rare. The differentiation was not as clear-cut as

Freud had assumed. Such specific questions of scientific research may well

appear  unimportant  to  the  layman.  It  will  be  shown  that  very  decisive

problems of human health were concealed in them. In short, there was no

doubt that the psychoneuroses had an actual (stasis) neurotic core and that

the stasis neuroses had a psychoneurotic superstructure. Was there still any

point in differentiating the two? Was it not merely a quantitative question?

  While  most  analysts  attached  the  greatest  importance  to  the  psychic

contents of the neurotic symptoms, leading psychopathologists like Jaspers

(cf.  his Psychopathologie)  completely  denied  the  scientific  character  of

psychological  interpretation  of  meaning  and,  hence,  denied  the  scientific

character of psychoanalysis itself. He argued that the “meaning” of a psychic

attitude  or  action  could  be  grasped  only  “philosophically”  and  not

scientifically.  The  natural  sciences,  he  said,  were  concerned  solely  with

quantities  and  energies,  whereas  philosophy  was  concerned  with  psychic

qualities.  There  was  no  bridge  between  the  quantitative  and  qualitative

factors. At issue was a decisive question: did psychoanalysis and its methodshave a natural scientific character? In other words: can there be a natural

scientific  psychology  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word?  Can  psychoanalysis

claim to be a natural science, or is it merely one of the many philosophic

disciplines? Freud paid no attention to these methodological questions and

unconcernedly published his clinical observations. He disliked philosophic

discussions.  But  I  had  to  fight  against  narrow-minded  opponents  in  these

arguments.  They  wanted  to  relegate  psychoanalysts  to  the  ranks  of  the

spiritualists and thus dispose of us. However, we knew that, for the first time

in the history of psychology, we were practicing natural science. We wanted

to be taken seriously. It was in the difficult struggle to gain clarity about these

questions in the dialogue with our opponents that the weapons were forged

with which I later defended Freud’s cause. If it were true that only Wundt’s

experimental  psychology  is  “scientific”  because  it  measures  reactions

quantitatively; if, moreover, psychoanalysis is not scientific because it does

not measure quantities but merely describes and constructs the relation of

meanings  between  psychic  phenomena  which  have  been  torn  apart;  then

natural science is false. For Wundt and his students knew nothing of man in

his living reality. They made evaluations about man on the basis of how

many seconds it took him to react to the stimulus-word “dog.” They still do

this today. We, however, made evaluations on the basis of the manner in

which a person dealt with his conflicts and the motives which prompted his

actions. In the background of this dispute was the question of whether it was

possible to arrive at a more concrete understanding of the Freudian concept

of “psychic energy” or, best of all, to classify it under the general concept of

energy.

  Facts are not of much use in countering philosophic arguments. Allers,

the Viennese philosopher and physiologist, declined to enter into the question

of unconscious psychic life because, from the point of view of philosophy,

the assumption of an “unconscious” was a priori false. I still run across such

arguments today. When I maintain that highly sterilized substances can bealive, people say no—that is not possible. The slide must have been dirty, or

else  what  I  saw  was  “Brownian  movement.”  The  fact  that  it  is  easy  to

distinguish dirt on the slide from the bions, and Brownian movement from

vegetative  movement,  does  not  make  any  difference  to  them.  In  short,

“objective science” is a problem in itself.

    Unexpectedly, a number of observations in the everyday life of the clinic,

such as those made on the two patients mentioned earlier, helped me to find

my way in this confusion. It gradually became clear that the intensity of a

psychic idea depends upon the momentary somatic excitation with which it is

associated. Emotion originates in the instincts, thus in the somatic realm. An

idea, on the other hand, is a purely “psychic,” non-physical formation. What,

then,  is  the  relation  between  the  “non-physical”  idea  and  the  “physical”

excitation?  When  a  person  is  fully  aroused  sexually,  the  idea  of  sexual

intercourse  is  vivid  and  urgent.  After  gratification,  on  the  other  hand,  it

cannot  be  immediately  reproduced;  it  is  feeble,  colorless,  and  somehow

nebulous. There can be no doubt that this fact contained the secret of the

relation  between  the  physiogenic  anxiety  neurosis  and  the  psychogenic

psychoneurosis.  My  one  patient  had  momentarily  lost  all  his  psychic

compulsive  symptoms  after  experiencing  sexual  gratification.  With  the

reappearance of excitation, the symptoms also reappeared and remained until

the  next  gratification.  My  other  patient,  however,  had  thoroughly  worked

through all the material in the psychic sphere, but there had not been any

sexual  excitation.  The  unconscious  ideas  which  made  him  incapable  of

having an erection had not been influenced by the treatment. Suddenly, things

began to fit together. I understood now that a psychic idea endowed with a

very small amount of energy can provoke an increase in the excitation. In

turn,  this  provoked  excitation  makes  the  idea  urgent  and  vivid.  If  the

excitation  ceases,  the  idea  also  vanishes.  If,  as  in  the  case  of  the  stasis

neurosis, a conscious idea of the sexual act fails to materialize because of a

moralistic inhibition, what happens is that the excitation becomes attached toother ideas which can be thought of more freely. I concluded from this that

the stasis neurosis is a physical disturbance caused by inadequately disposed

of, i.e., unsatisfied, sexual excitation. However, without a psychic inhibition,

the sexual excitation would always be adequately discharged. I was surprised

that Freud had overlooked this fact. Once an inhibition has produced a sexual

stasis,  it  can  easily  happen  that  the  latter  intensifies  the  inhibition  and

reactivates infantile ideas that take the place of normal ideas. As a result of a

contemporary inhibition, childhood experiences which are not in themselves

pathologic could, so to speak, receive an excess of sexual energy. Once this

happens,  they  become  urgent,  come  into  conflict  with  the  adult  psychic

organization, and have, from now on, to be held in check with the help of

repression. It is in this way that a chronic psychoneurosis with its infantile

sexual  contents  develops  from  a  contemporaneously  caused,  at  first

“harmless,” sexual inhibition. This is the essence of what Freud described as

the  neurotic  “regression  to  infantile  mechanisms.”  All  the  cases  which  I

treated demonstrated this mechanism. If the neurosis had not existed from

childhood, if it had developed later, it always turned out that a “normal”

sexual inhibition or difficulty in one’s sexual life had produced a stasis, and

this  stasis  in  turn  had  activated  the  infantile  incest  desires  and  sexual

anxieties.

  The next question was this: is the sexual inhibition and the concomitant

rejection  of  sexuality  that  develops  at  the  beginning  of  a  chronic  illness

“neurotic” or “normal”? No one spoke about this. It appeared that the sexual

inhibition of a well-brought-up middle-class girl was quite the way it should

be. I, too, was of the same opinion; that is to say, I simply did not give it any

thought at that time. If, owing to an ungratifying marriage, a young lively

woman developed a stasis neurosis, e.g., nervous cardiac anxiety, it did not

occur  to  anyone  to  ask  about  the  inhibition  that  prevented  her  from

experiencing sexual gratification in spite of her marriage. In time, it is even

possible that she might develop a real hysteria or compulsion neurosis. In thiscase, the primary cause would have been the moralistic inhibition, while the

ungratified sexuality would have been its driving force.

  This was the point of departure for the solution of many problems. But it

was very difficult to tackle them immediately and energetically. For seven

years I thought I was working in complete accordance with the Freudian

school of thought. No one divined that this line of questioning would lead to

a fatal clash between fundamentally incompatible scientific views.


                                3. ORGASTIC POTENCY


The case of the uncured waiter called into question the correctness of the

Freudian  formula  of  therapy.  The  other  case  clearly  revealed  the  actual

mechanism of cure. For a long time, I tried to bring opposing views into

harmony. In his History of the Psychoanalytic Movement, Freud tells about

the time he heard Charcot relating to a colleague the case history of a young

woman who was suffering from acute symptoms. Her husband was impotent

or very clumsy in the sexual act. Seeing that the colleague did not grasp the

connection, Charcot suddenly exclaimed with great vivacity, “Mais, dans des

cas pareils, c’est toujours la chose génitale, toujours! toujours! toujours!” “I

know,” Freud writes, “that for a moment I was paralyzed with astonishment,

and I said to myself, ‘Yes, but if he knows this, why does he never say so?’”

  A year later, the Viennese physician Chrobak referred a patient to Freud.

She was suffering from acute anxiety attacks and was still a virgin, after

eighteen  years  of  marriage  to  an  impotent  man.  Chrobak  had  written  the

following comment: “We know only too well what the only prescription is

for  such  cases,  but  we  can’t  prescribe  it.  It  is:  ‘Penis  normalis,  dosim.

Repetatur!’” In other words, the hysterical patient falls ill owing to a lack of

genital gratification. This put Freud on the track of the sexual etiology of

hysteria, but he shrank from the full consequences of Charcot’s statement.

  It is banal and sounds rather hackneyed, but I maintain that every person

who has succeeded in preserving a certain amount of naturalness knows this:those  who  are  psychically  ill  need  but  one  thing—complete  and  repeated

genital  gratification.  Instead  of  simply  investigating  this  matter,

substantiating  it,  expressing  it,  and  immediately  taking  up  its  fight,  I

entangled  myself  for  years  on  end  in  the  psychoanalytic  formulation  of

theories, which detracted from it. Most of the theories which psychoanalysts

have advanced since the publication of Freud’s The Ego and the Id have had

but  one  function:  to  wipe  out  Charcot’s  statement,  “In  these  cases,  it  is

always a question of genitality, and I mean always.” The fact that man’s

sexual  organs  do  not  function  in  a  normal  way,  thus  precluding  sexual

gratification for both sexes, that this is the cause of most psychic misery and

even has a bearing on the cancer scourge, was too simple to be perceived. Let

us see if this is an exaggeration.

  The  facts  of  medical  experience  were  confirmed  again  and  again

wherever I was working—in my private practice, the psychoanalytic clinic,

and the psychiatric-neurologic clinic.

  The severity of every form of psychic illness is directly related to the

severity of the genital disturbance.

  The prospects of cure and the success of the cure are directly dependent

upon the possibility of establishing the capacity for full genital gratification.

  Of the hundreds of cases which I observed and treated in the course of

several years of extensive and intensive work, there was not a single woman

who did not have a vaginal orgastic disturbance. Roughly 60 to 70 percent of

the male patients had gross genital disturbances. Either they were incapable

of  having  an  erection  during  the  act  or  they  suffered  from  premature

ejaculations. The disturbance of the ability to experience genital gratification,

to experience, that is, the most natural of what is natural, proved to be a

symptom which was always present in women and seldom absent in men. At

that time, I did not give any further thought to the 30 to 40 percent of the men

who  appeared  to  be  genitally  healthy  but  were  otherwise  neurotic.  This

negligence in clinical thinking was consistent with the psychoanalytic viewthat impotence or frigidity was “merely one symptom among many.”

  In  November  1922,  I  read  a  paper  before  the  Vienna  Psychoanalytic

Society on the “Limits of Memory Activity in the Psychoanalytic Cure.” The

presentation met with enthusiastic approval, for all therapists were tormented

in  applying  the  basic  rule,  to  which  the  patients  did  not  adhere,  and  in

obtaining  the  memories  which  the  patients  were  supposed  to  produce  but

could not. In the hands of mediocre analysts, the primal scene remained a not

very  convincing,  rather  arbitrary  reconstruction.  I  emphasized  that  there

could be no doubt about the Freudian formulation concerning the existence of

primal traumatic experiences in children between the ages of one and four. It

was all the more important, therefore, to investigate the limitations of the

method.

  In January 1923, I presented the case history of a psychogenic tic. The

patient  was  an  older  woman  suffering  from  a  diaphragmatic  tic,  which

subsided when it became possible for her to masturbate. My presentation was

praised and affirmed.

  In October 1923, I read a paper before the society on introspection in a

schizophrenic patient. I had been treating a female schizophrenic patient who

had particularly clear insights into the mechanisms of her persecution ideas.

She confirmed the finding of Tausk regarding the influence of the genital

apparatus.

  On November 28, 1923, following three years of investigation, I read my

first major paper, “On Genitality, from the Point of View of the Prognosis

and  Therapy  of  Psychoanalysis.”  It  was  published  in  the Internationale

Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse the following year.

  During my presentation, I became aware of a growing chilliness in the

mood of the meeting. I was a good speaker and had always been listened to

attentively.  When  I  had  finished,  an  icy  stillness  hung  over  the  room.

Following  a  break,  the  discussion  began.  My  contention  that  the  genital

disturbance was an important, perhaps the most important, symptom of theneurosis was said to be erroneous. The same was said about my contention

that  valuable  prognostic  and  therapeutic  data  could  be  derived  from  the

assessment of genitality. Two analysts literally asserted that they knew any

number of female patients who had a “completely healthy genital life.” They

appeared  to  me  to  be  more  excited  than  was  in  keeping  with  their  usual

scientific reserve.

  I was at a disadvantage in this controversy, for I had to admit that there

were many male patients who did not appear to have any genital disturbance.

Among female patients, on the other hand, this was clearly not the case. I was

looking for the energy source of the neurosis, its somatic core. This core

could  be  nothing  other  than  dammed-up  sexual  energy,  but  I  could  not

explain  the  origin  of  this  stasis  if  potency  was  unimpaired.  Two  cardinal

views of psychoanalysis led me astray. A man was said to be “potent” when

he was able to carry out the sexual act. He was said to be very potent when he

could do so several times in the course of one night. The most cherished topic

of  conversation  among  men  of  all  circles  centers  around  the  question  of

which one could sleep with a woman the most number of times in one night.

The  psychoanalyst  Roheim  even  went  so  far  as  to  define  potency  as  the

ability  of  a  man  to  embrace  a  woman  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  an

inflammation of the vagina.

  The other misleading view was that a partial instinct, e.g., the desire to

suck on the mother’s breast, could be blocked individually. In this way, it

was  argued,  the  existence  of  neurotic  symptoms  in  patients  having  “full

potency” could be explained. This view was wholly in keeping with the idea

of non-related erogenous zones. In addition, the psychoanalysts denied my

contention that there is not a single female patient capable of full genital

gratification.  A  woman  was  considered  genitally  healthy  when  she  was

capable  of  having  a  clitoral  orgasm.  At  that  time,  the  sex-economic

                                                                                      1
differentiation  between  clitoral  and  vaginal  excitation  was  unknown.  In

short, no one had any idea of the natural function of the orgasm. Still to beaccounted for was a questionable remainder of genitally healthy men who, if

they  were  indeed  capable  of  experiencing  genital  gratification,  threw

overboard  all  assumptions  about  the  prognostic  and  therapeutic  role  of

genitality. For it was clear: if my assumption was correct, i.e., if the genital

disturbance constituted the energy source of neurotic symptoms, then there

could not be a single case of neurosis with undisturbed genitality.

  My procedure in this was much the same as in all my other scientific

achievements.  A  general  hypothesis  was  derived  from  a  series  of  clinical

observations. There were gaps in it here and there; it was open to objections

which appeared justified. One’s opponents seldom fail to ferret out such gaps

                                                                                          2
and, on the basis of them, to reject the hypothesis as a whole. As Du Teil

once said, “Scientific objectivity is not of this world. Indeed, its existence is

altogether doubtful.” There is little hope of objective cooperation on any one

problem.  It  was  precisely  through  their  “fundamental”  objections  that  the

critics helped me to overcome difficulties, though this was hardly their intent.

Such was the case then, too. The objection that there are any number of

genitally  healthy  neurotics  prompted  me  to  take  a  closer  look  at  “genital

health.” As incredible as it may seem, it is nonetheless true that the precise

analysis of genital behavior, which goes deeper than “I slept with a woman”

or “I slept with a man,” was strictly forbidden in psychoanalysis. It took me

more than two years of experience to rid myself completely of this cultivated

reserve and to realize that people confuse “fucking” with the loving embrace.

  The more precisely my patients described their behavior and experiences

in  the  sexual  act,  the  more  firm  I  became  in  my  clinically  substantiated

conviction that all patients, without exception, are severely disturbed in their

genital function. Most disturbed of all were those men who liked to boast and

make a big show of their masculinity, men who possessed or conquered as

many women as possible, who could “do it” again and again in one night. It

became quite clear that, though they were erectively very potent, such men

experienced no or very little pleasure at the moment of ejaculation, or theyexperienced the exact opposite, disgust and unpleasure. The precise analysis

of fantasies during the sexual act revealed that the men usually had sadistic or

conceited attitudes and that the women were afraid, inhibited, or imagined

themselves  to  be  men.  For  the  ostensibly  potent  man,  sexual  intercourse

means the piercing, overpowering, or conquering of the woman. He merely

wants to prove his potency or to be admired for his erective endurance. This

“potency”  can  be  easily  undermined  by  uncovering  its  motives.  Severe

disturbances of erection and ejaculation are concealed in it. In none of these

cases is there the slightest trace of involuntary behavior or loss of conscious

activity in the act. Gradually, groping my way ahead step by step, I acquired

a knowledge of the characteristics of orgastic impotence. It took me a decade

to gain a full understanding of this disturbance, to describe it and to learn the

correct technique for eliminating it.

  Orgastic  impotence  has  always  been  in  the  forefront  of  sex-economic

research, and all of its details are still not known. Its role in sex-economy is

similar to the role of the Oedipus complex in psychoanalysis. Whoever does

not have a precise understanding of it cannot be considered a sex-economist.

He  will  never  really  grasp  its  ramifications.  He  will  not  understand  the

difference  between  health  and  sickness,  nor  will  he  comprehend  human

pleasure anxiety or the pathological nature of the parent-child conflict and the

misery of marriage. It is even possible that he will endeavor to bring about

sexual reforms, but he will never touch upon the core of sexual misery. He

might admire the bion experiments, even imitate them perhaps, but he will

never  really  conduct  research  in  the  field  of  sex-economy.  He  will  never

comprehend  religious  ecstasy,  nor  have  the  least  insight  into  fascist

irrationalism. Because he lacks the most important fundamentals, he will of

necessity adhere to the antithesis between nature and culture, instinct and

morality, sexuality and achievement. He will not be able to really solve a

single  pedagogic  problem.  He  will  never  understand  the  identity  between

sexual process and life process. Nor, consequently, will he be able to graspthe sex-economic theory of cancer. He will mistake sickness for health and

health for sickness. He will end up misinterpreting man’s fear of happiness.

In short, he might be anything, but he will never be a sex-economist, who

knows  that  man  is  the  sole  biological  species  that  has  destroyed  its  own

natural sexual function and is sick as a consequence of this.

  Instead of a systematic presentation, I want to describe the theory of the

orgasm in the way in which it developed. This will enable the reader to grasp

more easily its inner logic. It will be seen that no human brain could have

invented these relationships.

  Until 1923, the year the orgasm theory was born, only ejaculative and

erective potency were known to sexology and psychoanalysis. Without the

inclusion  of  the  functional,  economic,  and  experiential  components,  the

concept of sexual potency has no meaning. Erective and ejaculative potency

are  merely  indispensable  preconditions  for  orgastic  potency. Orgastic

potency is the capacity to surrender to the flow of biological energy, free of

any inhibitions; the capacity to discharge completely the dammed-up sexual

excitation through involuntary, pleasurable convulsions of the body. Not a

single  neurotic  is  orgastically  potent,  and  the  character  structures  of  the

overwhelming majority of men and women are neurotic.

  In the sexual act free of anxiety, unpleasure, and fantasies, the intensity of

pleasure  in  the  orgasm  is  dependent  upon  the  amount  of  sexual  tension

concentrated  in  the  genitals.  The  greater  and  steeper  the  “drop”  of  the

excitation, the more intense the pleasure.

  The following description of the orgastically gratifying sexual act pertains

only to the course of a few typical, naturally determined phases and modes of

behavior.  I  did  not  take  into  account  the  biological  foreplay  which  is

determined by the individual needs and does not exhibit a universal character.

In  addition,  we  must  note  that  the  bioelectric  processes  of  the  orgasm

function have not been explored and therefore this description is incomplete.


Phase of voluntary control of the excitation3
1. Erection is not painful as it is in priapism, spasm of the pelvic floor, or of

the spermatic duct. It is pleasurable. The penis is not overexcited as it is after

a prolonged period of abstinence or in cases of premature ejaculation. The

female genital becomes hyperemic and moist in a specific way through the

profuse secretion of the genital glands; that is, in the case of undisturbed

genital  functioning,  the  secretion  has  specific  chemical  and  physical

properties  which  are  lacking  when  the  genital  function  is  disturbed.  An

important characteristic of male orgastic potency is the urge to penetrate.

Erections can occur without this urge, as is the case in some erectively potent

narcissistic characters and in satyriasis.















 
Diagram depicting the typical phases of the sexual act in which both male and female are orgastically

potent


F = forepleasure (1, 2). P = penetration of penis (3). I (4, 5) = phase of voluntary control of the

excitation and prolongation which is still unharmful. II (6 a-d) = phase of involuntary muscle

contractions and automatic increase of excitation. III (7) = sudden and steep ascent to the climax (C).

IV (8) = orgasm. The shaded part represents the phase of involuntary convulsions of the body. V (9, 10)

= steep drop of the excitation. R = pleasant relaxation. Duration from five to twenty minutes.


  2. The man and the woman are tender toward each other, and there are no

contradictory impulses. The following are pathological deviations from this

behavior:  aggressiveness  stemming  from  sadistic  impulses,  as  in  some

erectively  potent  compulsion  neurotics,  and  the  inactivity  of  the  passive-

feminine character. Tenderness is also absent in “onanistic coitus” with anunloved object. Normally, the activity of the woman does not differ in any

way from that of the man. The widespread passivity on the part of the woman

is pathological, usually the result of masochistic rape fantasies.

  3. The pleasurable excitation, which has remained at approximately the

same level during forepleasure activity, suddenly increases in both man and

woman with the penetration of the penis into the vagina. The feeling on the

part of the man that he is “being sucked in” is the counterpart of the woman’s

feeling that she is “sucking in” the penis.

  4. The man’s urge to penetrate deeply increases, but does not take on the

sadistic form of “wanting to pierce through,” as in the case of compulsion

neurotic  characters.  Through  the  mutual,  gradual,  spontaneous,  effortless

friction, the excitation becomes concentrated on the surface and glans of the

penis and on the posterior parts of the mucous membrane of the vagina. The

characteristic sensation which heralds and accompanies the discharge of the

semen is still wholly absent; this is not the case in premature ejaculation. The

body is still less excited than the genital. Consciousness is fully attuned to the

assimilation  of  the  streaming  sensations  of  pleasure.  The  ego  actively

participates insofar as it attempts to explore all possible avenues of pleasure

and to achieve the highest degree of tension before the onset of the orgasm.

Conscious  intentions  obviously  play  no  part  in  this.  It  all  takes  place

spontaneously  on  the  basis  of  the  individually  different  forepleasure

experiences, through change of position, the nature of the friction, its rhythm,

etc. According to most potent men and women, the slower and more gentle

the frictions are and the more closely synchronized, the more intense are the

sensations of pleasure. This presupposes a high degree of affinity between the

partners. A pathological counterpart to this is the urge to produce violent

frictions. This is especially pronounced in sadistic compulsive characters who

suffer from penis anesthesia and the inability to discharge semen. Another

example  is  the  nervous  haste  of  those  who  suffer  from  premature

ejaculations. Orgastically potent men and women never laugh and talk duringthe  sexual  act,  except  possibly  to  exchange  words  of  endearment.  Both

talking and laughing are indicative of severe disturbances of the ability to

surrender;  surrender  presupposes  complete  immersion  in  the  streaming

sensation of pleasure. Men who feel that surrender is “feminine” are always

orgastically disturbed.

  5. In this phase, interruption of the friction is in itself pleasurable because

of  the  special  sensations  of  pleasure  which  attend  this  pause  and  do  not

require psychic exertion. In this way, the act is prolonged. The excitation

subsides a little during the pause. However, it does not, as in pathological

cases, subside altogether. Interruption of the sexual act by withdrawing the

penis is not unpleasurable as long as it occurs after a restful pause. When

friction continues, the excitation steadily increases beyond the level which

had been previously attained. It gradually takes more and more possession of

the entire body, while the genital itself maintains a more or less constant level

of excitation. Finally, as a result of a fresh, usually sudden increase of genital

excitation, the phase of involuntary muscular contraction sets in.


Phase of involuntary muscle contractions


6. In this phase, voluntary control of the course of the excitation is no longer

possible. It exhibits the following characteristic features:

  a. The increase of the excitation can no longer be controlled; rather it

grips  the  entire  personality  and  causes  an  acceleration  of  pulse  and  deep

exhalation.

  b. The physical excitation becomes more and more concentrated in the

genital; there is a sweet sensation which can be best described as the flowing

of excitation from the genital to other parts of the body.

  c. To begin with, this excitation causes involuntary contractions of the

entire musculature of the genitalia and pelvic floor. These contractions are

experienced in the form of waves: the rise of the wave coincides with the

complete penetration of the penis, while the fall of the wave coincides withthe retraction of the penis. But as soon as the retraction goes beyond a certain

limit,  immediate  spasmodic  contractions  take  place  which  accelerate

ejaculation. In the female, it is the smooth musculature of the vagina which

contracts.

  d. At this stage, the interruption of the act is altogether unpleasurable for

both the man and the woman. When an interruption takes place, the muscular

contractions which lead to the orgasm in the woman and the ejaculation in the

man are spasmodic instead of rhythmic. The sensations which this produces

are highly unpleasurable and occasionally pains in the pelvic floor and the

sacrum are experienced. As a result of the spasms, moreover, the ejaculation

takes place earlier than it does in the case of undisturbed rhythm.

  The voluntary prolongation of the first phase of the sexual act (1 to 5) is

not harmful up to a certain degree and has a pleasure-intensifying effect. On

the  other  hand,  the  interruption  or  voluntary  change  of  the  course  of  the

excitation in the second phase is harmful because of the involuntary nature of

this phase.

  7. Through the further intensification and increase in the frequency of the

involuntary muscle contractions, the excitation mounts rapidly and sharply to

the climax (III to C in the diagram); normally this coincides with the first

ejaculatory muscle contractions in the man.

  8. At this point, consciousness becomes more or less clouded; following a

brief pause at the “height” of the climax, the frictions increase spontaneously

and  the  urge  to  penetrate  “completely”  becomes  more  intense  with  every

ejaculatory muscle contraction. The muscle contractions in the woman follow

the  same  course  as  they  follow  in  the  man;  there  is  merely  a  psychic

difference, namely that the healthy woman wants “to receive completely”

during and just after the climax.

  9.  The  orgastic  excitation  takes  hold  of  the  entire  body  and  produces

strong convulsions of the musculature of the whole body. Self-observations

on the part of healthy persons of both sexes, as well as the analysis of certaindisturbances of the orgasm, show that what we call the resolution of tension

and  experience  as  motor  discharge  (descending  curve  of  the  orgasm)  is

essentially the result of the reversion of the excitation from the genital to the

body. This reversion is experienced as a sudden reduction of the tension.

  Hence,  the  climax  represents  the  turning  point  in  the  course  of  the

excitation, i.e., prior to the climax, the direction of the excitation is toward

the genital; subsequent to the climax, the excitation flows away from the

genital. It is this complete return of the excitation from the genital to the body

that constitutes the gratification. This means two things: flowing back of the

excitation to the entire body and relaxation of the genital apparatus.

  10. Before the neutral point is reached, the excitation fades away in a

gentle curve and is immediately replaced by a pleasant physical and psychic

relaxation.  Usually,  there  is  also  a  strong  desire  to  sleep.  The  sensual

relations  are  extinguished,  but  a  “satiated”  tender  attitude  to  the  partner

continues, to which is added the feeling of gratitude.

  In contrast to this, the orgastically impotent person experiences a leaden

exhaustion, disgust, repulsion, weariness, or indifference and, occasionally,

hatred toward the partner. In the case of satyriasis and nymphomania, the

sexual  excitation  does  not  subside.  Insomnia  is  one  of  the  essential

characteristics of lack of gratification. It cannot be automatically concluded,

however, that a person has experienced gratification when he falls asleep

immediately following the sexual act.

  If we re-examine the two phases of the sexual act, we see that the first

phase  is  characterized  essentially  by  the  sensory  experience  of  pleasure,

while the second phase is characterized by the motor experience of pleasure.

    Involuntary  bioenergetic  convulsion  of  the  organism  and  the  complete

resolution of the excitation are the most important characteristics of orgastic

potency. The shaded part of the diagram represents the involuntary vegetative

relaxation. There are partial resolutions of the excitation which are similar to

the orgastic resolution. They have until now been looked upon as the actualrelease.  Clinical  experience  shows  that,  as  a  result  of  universal  sexual

suppression, men and women have lost the ability to experience the ultimate

surrender  to  the  involuntary.  It  is  precisely  this  previously  unrecognized

phase of final excitation and resolution of tension that I have in mind when I

speak of “orgastic potency.” It constitutes the primal and basic biological

function  which  man  has  in  common  with  all  living  organisms.  All

experiencing of nature is derived from this function or from the longing for it.

  The course of excitation in the woman is exactly the same as that of the

man. The orgasm in both sexes is more intense when the peaks of genital

excitation coincide. This is very frequently the case among men and women

who are capable of concentrating affection and sensuality on one partner who

reciprocates  this  affection  and  sensuality.  It  is  the  rule  when  the  love

relationship  is  disturbed  neither  by  internal  nor  external  factors.  In  such

cases, at least conscious fantasy activity is completely suspended; the ego

absorbs and is fully focused on the sensations of pleasure. The ability to

focus the entire affective personality upon the orgastic experience, in spite of

any contradictions, is another characteristic of orgastic potency.

  It cannot be easily determined whether unconscious fantasy activity is

also at rest. Certain factors would indicate that it is. Fantasies which are not

allowed  to  become  conscious  can  only  detract  from  the  experience.  It  is

necessary to distinguish two groups of fantasies which could accompany the

sexual act, those in harmony with the sexual experience and those at variance

with it. If the partner is capable of attracting all sexual interests to herself or

himself  at  least  momentarily,  then  the  unconscious  fantasies  are  also

superfluous. In terms of their very nature, these fantasies are opposed to the

real  experience,  for  one  fantasizes  only  what  one  cannot  have  in  reality.

There is a genuine transference from the primal object to the partner. It is

possible for the partner to replace the object of the fantasy because of the

identity between their basic characteristics. If, however, the transference of

sexual interests takes place solely on the basis of a neurotic desire for theprimal object, without the inner ability for genuine transference and in spite

of the fact that there is no identity between the partner and the fantasized

object, then no illusion can drown out the vague feeling of artificiality in the

relationship. In the former instance, coitus is not followed by disappointment.

In the latter, disappointment is inevitable, and we can assume that the fantasy

activity during the act did not cease: it served, rather, to maintain the illusion.

In the former, one loses interest in the original object and, consequently, its

fantasy-generating force is also lost. The original object is regenerated by the

partner.  In  a  genuine  transference,  there  is  no  glorification  of  the  sexual

partner;  characteristics  at  variance  with  the  primal  object  are  correctly

assessed  and  tolerated.  In  an  artificial  transference,  the  sexual  partner  is

inordinately idealized and the relationship is full of illusions. The negative

characteristics are not recognized, and fantasy activity must be continued,

otherwise the illusion is lost.

  The  more  intensively  the  fantasy  has  to  work  to  make  the  partner

approximate  the  ideal,  the  more  the  sexual  pleasure  loses  in  the  way  of

intensity and sex-economic value. It depends entirely upon the nature of the

disagreements, that occur in every extended relationship, whether and to what

extent they reduce the intensity of the sexual experience. The reduction tends

to become a pathological disturbance much sooner when there is a strong

fixation  on  the  primal  object  and  an  inability  to  achieve  a  genuine

transference; when, moreover, a great deal of energy is required to overcome

those  characteristics  in  the  partner  which  are  at  variance  with  the  primal

object.


            4. SEXUAL STASIS—THE ENERGY SOURCE OF THE NEUROSIS


Since my first clinical observations in 1920, I had carefully singled out and

noted genital disturbances in the patients whom I treated at the clinic. Over

the course of two years, I had collected sufficient material to permit me to

make this formulation: the disturbance of genitality is not, as was previouslybelieved,  one  symptom  among  others.  It  is the  symptom  of  the  neurosis.

Little by little all the evidence pointed to one conclusion: psychic illness is

not only a result of a sexual disturbance in the broad Freudian sense of the

word; even more concretely, it is the result of the disturbance of the genital

function, in the strict sense of orgastic impotence.

  If I had redefined sexuality to mean solely genital sexuality, I would have

relapsed  to  the  pre-Freudian,  erroneous  conception  of  sexuality.  Sexual

would be only what is genital. By amplifying the concept of genital function

with the concept of orgastic potency and defining it in terms of energy, I

added a new dimension to the psychoanalytic theory of sexuality and libido

within  its  original  framework.  The  arguments  in  support  of  this  were  as

follows:













  

Relaxation

    

Tension
1. Sex-economic energy process













 
2. Inhibition. Disturbed sex-economy (stasis).  1. If every psychic illness has a core of dammed-up sexual excitation, it

can  be  caused  only  by  the  disturbance  of  the  capacity  for  orgastic

gratification. Hence, impotence and frigidity are the key to the understanding

of the economy of neuroses.

  2. The energy source of the neurosis is created by the difference between

the  accumulation  and  discharge  of  sexual  energy.  The  ungratified  sexual

excitation  which  is  always  present  in  the  neurotic  psychic  apparatus

distinguishes it from the healthy psychic apparatus. This holds true not only

for the stasis neuroses (in Freudian terminology, actual neuroses) but for all

psychic illnesses, with or without symptom formation.

  3. Freud’s therapeutic formula for neuroses, though correct, is incomplete.

The primary prerequisite of therapy is to make the patient conscious of his or

her repressed sexuality. This alone does not cure, i.e., it can but it does not of

necessity do so. Making the patient conscious of his or her repressed sexual

impulses guarantees cure when this also eliminates the energy source of the

neurosis, i.e., the sexual stasis. In other words, this kind of therapy brings

about a cure when the consciousness of the instinctual demands also restores

the  capacity  for  full  orgastic  gratification.  In  this  way,  the  pathological

proliferations are deprived of the source of their energy (principle of energy

withdrawal).

  4. There can be no doubt, therefore, that the highest and most important

goal of causal analytic therapy is the establishment of orgastic potency, the

ability to discharge accumulated sexual energy.

  5. Sexual excitation is a somatic process. The conflicts of the neurosis are

of a psychic nature. What happens is that a minor conflict, in itself normal,

causes a slight disturbance in the balance of sexual energy. This minor stasis

intensifies the conflict, and the conflict in turn increases the stasis. Thus, the

psychic conflict and the stasis of somatic excitation mutually augment one

another. The central psychic conflict is the sexual relationship between child

and parent. It is present in every neurosis. It is the historical storehouse ofexperience from which the content of the neurosis is nourished. All neurotic

fantasies can be traced back to the child’s early sexual relationship to the

parents. However, if it were not continually nourished by the contemporary

stasis of excitation which it initially produced, the child-parent conflict could

not  by  itself  cause  a  permanent  disturbance  of  the  psychic  equilibrium.

Hence, the stasis of excitation is the ever-present contemporary factor of the

illness; it does not add to the content of the neurosis but supplies it with

energy. The pathological incestuous ties to parents and brothers and sisters

lose their force when the contemporary energy stasis is eliminated, i.e., when

full orgastic gratification is experienced in the actual present. Hence, whether

the Oedipus conflict becomes pathological or not depends upon the degree to

which  the  sexual  energy  is  discharged.  In  short,  actual  neurosis  and

psychoneurosis  overlap:  they  cannot  be  conceived  as  separate  types  of

neuroses.














   
   
     
 
 
 

Peychoneurosis having

 

©

  

Incest @
fantosy A Energy of the i
prychaneurosis Peychoneurotic

(e) inhibition of
genitality

Sociol
Diagram depicting the relation between the content of childhood experience and sexual stasis


a. Socially induced sexual inhibition (○)

  b. Stasis results in fixation on parents (historical content⁪)

c. Incest fantasy

  d. Energy source of the neurosis

e. Neurosis maintains the stasis (contemporary stasis of energy)


  6. The dynamics of pregenital sexuality (oral, anal, muscular, etc.) arefundamentally different from the dynamics of genital sexuality. If non-genital

sexual activities are retained, the genital function becomes disturbed. This

disturbance  incites  pregenital  fantasies  and  actions.  The  pregenital  sexual

fantasies and activities which we find in neuroses and perversions are not

only the cause of the genital disturbance but, at least as much the result of

this disturbance. These insights and observations constitute the groundwork

of the distinction I made in 1936 between natural and secondary drives. With

reference to the theory of instinct and the theory of culture, the most decisive

formula was: the general sexual disturbance is a result of genital disturbance,

i.e.,  orgastic  impotence.  What  I  understood  by  genital  sexuality  was  a

function that was unknown and did not conform to the usual ideas about

man’s sexual activities. “Genital” in the sex-economic sense of the word and

“genital” in the usual sense of the word do not mean the same thing, any

more than “sexual” and “genital” mean the same thing.

  7. Moreover, a question of the theory of neurosis which harassed Freud in

the following years was solved in a simple way. Psychic illnesses represent

qualities only. Nonetheless, they always appear to be dependent upon so-

called quantitative factors, upon the strength and force, the energy cathexis,

of the psychic experiences and actions. At a meeting of the inner circle of

analysts,  Freud  once  exhorted  us  to  be  cautious.  We  had,  he  said,  to  be

prepared  to  expect  dangerous  challenges  to  the  psychic  therapy  of  the

neurosis by a future organotherapy. There was no way of knowing what it

would be like, but one could already hear its exponents knocking at the door.

Psychoanalysis must one day be established on an organic basis. This was a

genuine  Freudian  intuition!  When  Freud  said  this,  I  understood  that  the

solution of the quantity problem of the neurosis presupposed the solution of

the problem of organotherapy. Access to the latter could be provided only by

the  understanding  and  handling  of  the  physiological  sexual  stasis.  I  had

already  begun  to  work  along  these  lines.  Indeed,  the  first  significant

breakthrough had been achieved five years before: the advancement fromcharacter  analysis  to  the  formulation  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  the

technique of the vegetotherapy of the neurosis. The interim was taken up with

fifteen years of hard work and difficult struggles.

  In the years 1922 to 1926, the theory of the orgasm was formulated and

substantiated piece by piece, followed by the development of the technique of

character analysis. Every subsequent experience, success as well as failure,

confirmed this theory, which had developed by itself on the basis of those

first decisive observations. For my work, the problems loomed up rapidly and

clearly.

  Clinical work led in one direction to the present level of experimental

work in the field of sex-economy. A second direction proceeded from the

question: what is the source and what is the function of the social suppression

of sexuality?

  Much  later,  from  1933  on,  a  biological  offshoot  of  sex-economy

developed from the first complex of problems: bion research, sex-economic

cancer research, and the investigation of the phenomena of orgone radiation.

Some seven years later, the second complex of problems split up into actual

                                                                                    4
sexual sociology on the one hand and political psychology on the other. The

orgasm  theory  has  determined  the  psychological,  psychotherapeutic,

physiobiological, and sociological sectors of sex-economy. I do not claim

that the framework of sex-economy could replace these specialized fields.

But it does claim today to be a unitary natural-scientific theory of sex, on the

basis of which it will be possible to resuscitate and fecundate all aspects of

human  life.  This  imposes  upon  us  the  obligation  of  giving  a  thorough

presentation of its framework in all related fields. Since the life process and

the sexual process are one and the same, it goes without saying that sexual,

vegetative energy is active in everything that lives. This statement is very

dangerous precisely because it is simple and absolutely correct. To apply it

correctly, care must be taken to prevent it from becoming a platitude or from

deteriorating  into  a  system.  Followers  tend  to  make  matters  easy  forthemselves. They take over arduously worked-out material and operate with

it in the most comfortable way possible. They make no effort to find new

applications for all the subtleties of the method. They become torpid and the

complex of problems ceases to be a challenge. I hope that I shall succeed in

saving sex-economy from this fate.                                      CHAPTER V





  THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CHARACTER-


                      ANALYTIC TECHNIQUE




                      1. DIFFICULTIES AND CONTRADICTIONS


The psychoanalytic technique made use of free association to ferret out and

interpret  unconscious  fantasies.  However,  the  therapeutic  effect  of

interpretation proved to be limited. There were but few patients who were

capable  of  free,  unconscious  association.  The  improvements  which  were

achieved  were  ascribable  to  breakthroughs  of  genital  energy.  They  were

usually  brought  about  accidentally  through  the  loosening  of  the  psychic

apparatus, as a consequence of free association. I could see that the release of

genital energies had enormous therapeutic effect, but I did not know how to

direct  and  control  this  factor.  It  was  never  really  possible  to  say  which

processes in the patient were responsible for the accidental breakthrough. It

became necessary, therefore, to make a careful study of the psychoanalytic

technique itself.

  I have already described the hopelessness of the technical situation at that

time. When I became chairman of the Vienna seminar on technique in the fall

of 1924, I had a good idea of the work that had to be done. In the preceding

two  years,  the  lack  of  systematic  presentation  in  the  case  reports  was

disturbingly conspicuous. I sketched a plan for systematic reports. The cases

offer a bewildering profusion of experiences. Hence, I suggested that only

that  material  should  be  presented  which  pertained  to  the  problems  oftechnique. Other matters would come up by themselves in the discussion.

Prior  to  this,  it  was  the  custom  to  give  a  thorough  presentation  of  the

childhood history of the case without reference to the therapeutic problem

and, at the conclusion, to offer random suggestions. I saw no point in this. If

psychoanalysis was a causal scientific therapy, then the specifically necessary

technique had to result by itself from the structure of the case. The structure

of  the  neurosis  could  be  determined  only  by  the  fixations  in  childhood

situations. It was further shown that the resistances were circumvented, partly

because they were not recognized and partly because it was believed that they

were an obstruction to the analytic work and, hence, to be avoided as much as

possible. For this reason, only situations having to do with resistance were

discussed during the first years of my activity as head of the seminar. In the

beginning, we were completely helpless. However, we soon learned a great

deal and rapidly added to our knowledge. The most important fruit of the first

years of our work in the seminar was the decisive insight that, in speaking of

“transference,” the analysts meant only positive transference and not negative

transference, though the theoretical differentiation between the two had been

made by Freud long before. The analysts were afraid to listen to, examine,

confirm, or refute deprecatory opinions and embarrassing criticism by the

patient. In short, the analyst felt insecure both personally and professionally,

because of the sexual material and the vast complexity of human nature.

  It was further shown that unconscious hostile attitudes on the part of the

patient formed the basis of the neurosis as a whole. Every interpretation of

the unconscious material glanced off from this secret hostility. It followed,

therefore, that no unconscious material should be interpreted until the secret

deprecatory attitudes had been uncovered and eliminated. True, this was in

line with known principles of practical work—but its application still had to

be learned.

  The  discussion  of  practical  questions  removed  many  incorrect  and

complacent attitudes on the part of therapists, e.g., so-called “waiting,” whichwas supposed to have a meaning. Usually, it was sheer helplessness. We

condemned the habit of many analysts who simply reproached the patient

when he or she demonstrated resistance to the treatment. For it was wholly

inherent in psychoanalytic principles that we had to try to comprehend the

resistance and to eliminate it with analytic means. At that time analysts were

in the habit of setting termination dates when the treatment stagnated. The

idea behind this practice was that the patient was supposed to decide before a

certain date “to give up the resistance to getting well.” If he or she was not

able to do so, then he or she simply had “insurmountable resistances.” It must

be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  the  clinic  was  constantly  making  high

demands on our skills. No one had any idea of the physiological anchoring of

such resistances.

  There were a number of incorrect technical procedures that had to be

eliminated. Since I myself had made these mistakes for five years and had

treated many patients unsuccessfully as a result of them, I knew precisely

what they were and recognized them in other analysts. One of these incorrect

procedures was the unsystematic way in which the analyst dealt with the

material which the patient produced. It was interpreted “just as it. came,”

without taking into account its depth and the resistances which precluded

genuine understanding. This procedure often resulted in grotesque situations.

The  patients  readily  divined  what  the  psychoanalyst  expected  in  terms  of

theory,  and  they  produced  the  appropriate  “associations.”  In  short,  they

produced material to oblige the analysts. If they were cunning individuals,

they  half-consciously  led  the  analyst  astray,  e.g.,  produced  extremely

confusing dreams so that no one knew what was going on. It was precisely

this continual confusion of the dreams, not their content, that was the crucial

problem. Or they produced one symbol after another—the sexual meaning of

which they readily divined—and in no time they were able to operate with

concepts. They would speak about the “Oedipus complex” without any trace

of  affect.  Inwardly,  they  did  not  believe  in  the  interpretations  of  theirassociations,  which  the  analysts  usually  took  at  face  value.  Almost  all

treatments were chaotic. There was no order in the material, no organization

in the treatment, and, therefore, no evolving of a process. Most cases were

forgotten after two or three years of treatment. There were improvements

now and then, but no one could explain precisely what had brought them

about. Thus, we came to realize the importance of orderly and systematic

work on the resistances. In the treatment, the neurosis breaks up, so to speak,

into  individual  resistances.  These  the  analyst  must  keep  clearly  separated

from one another and eliminate individually, always proceeding from the one

closest to the surface, i.e., nearest to the patient’s conscious perception. This

was not new—merely a consistent application of the Freudian conception.

  I  dissuaded  analysts  from  trying  to  “convince”  patients  that  an

interpretation was correct. If the resistance to an unconscious impulse has

been comprehended and eliminated, the patient will proceed further of his

own  accord.  That  element  of  the  instinct  against  which  the  resistance  is

directed is contained in the resistance. If the patient recognizes the meaning

of the defense, then he is also well on his way to comprehending what is

being warded off. This means, however, that the analyst must consistently

and precisely uncover every minute trace of distrust and rejection on the part

of the patient. Every patient is deeply skeptical about the treatment. Each

merely conceals it differently. I once presented a report on a patient who

concealed his secret distrust in an extremely clever way, i.e., he was very

polite and agreed with everything. Behind this politeness and acquiescence

lay the real source of anxiety. Hence, he revealed a great deal, but always

very cleverly concealed his aggression. The situation demanded that I should

not interpret his very clear dreams of incest with his mother until he had

manifested his aggression toward me. This was flatly at variance with the

practice  at  that  time  of  interpreting  each  individual  dream  fragment  or

association. Yet, it was in keeping with the principles of resistance analysis.

  I  very  soon  sensed  that  I  had  become  entangled  in  a  conflict.  Sincepsychoanalytic practice was not commensurate with psychoanalytic theory, it

was clear that some analysts would take issue with my approach. For, in

effect, they were required to bring their practice into conformity with theory,

i.e.,  to  make  readjustments  in  technique.  This,  in  their  eyes,  was  an

unreasonable demand. Without having any inkling of it, we had come up

against the peculiarity of modern man’s character, i.e., the tendency to ward

off genuine sexual and aggressive impulses with spurious, contrived, deluded

attitudes.  The  adaptation  of  technique  to  the  patient’s  characterological

hypocrisy  had  consequences  which  no  one  divined  and  everyone

unconsciously feared. At issue was the concrete releasing of aggression and

sexuality in the patient. At issue was the personal structure of the therapist

who  had  to  deal  with  and  handle  this  aggression  and  sexuality.  But  we

analysts  were  the  children  of  our  times.  We  were  operating  with  subject

matter  which,  though  acknowledged  in  theory,  we  shied  away  from  in

practice. We did not want to experience it. It was as if we were fettered in

formal academic conventions. The analytic situation required freedom from

conventional  standards  and  an  attitude  toward  sexuality  untrammeled  by

moral prejudices. During the first years of the seminar, there was no mention

of establishing the capacity to experience orgasm. I instinctively avoided the

subject. It was touchy, and one generally became very excited in discussing

it. I myself did not feel completely secure about it. Nor was it at all easy to

comprehend correctly the toilet habits and sexual peculiarities of the patient

and still maintain one’s social and academic dignity. One preferred to speak

of “anal fixation”or “oral desires.” The animal was and remained untouched.

  The situation was difficult in other respects also. On the basis of a number

of clinical observations, I had formulated a hypothesis on the therapy of the

neurosis. To compass the desired goal in practice required considerable skill

in technique. It was like an arduous march toward a definite goal which,

clearly  visible,  seemed  to  move  further  and  further  away  with  each  step.

While, on one hand, clinical experience repeatedly confirmed that neuroseswere cured quickly when genital gratification was made possible, it revealed,

on  the  other  hand,  that  cases  in  which  this  gratification  was  not  (or

inadequately) achieved were all the more difficult. This spurred one on to

make a conscientious study of the obstructions to the goal and of the many

stages to it. It is not easy to give a lucid exposition of this. Nonetheless, I

want to try to give as vivid a picture as possible of how the orgasm theory of

the therapy of neuroses gradually became more and more closely related to

the development of the character-analytic technique. In the course of a few

years,  they  became  an  inseparable  unity.  As  the  foundation  of  this  work

gained in clarity and firmness, conflicts with the psychoanalysts of the old

school became more frequent.

  There were no conflicts during the first two years, but then a growing

opposition began to make itself felt from the older colleagues. They simply

refused  to  grasp  what  we  were  doing;  they  were  afraid  of  losing  their

reputations as “experienced authorities.” Hence, they had to take one of two

attitudes toward the new material which we were investigating: (1) “There is

nothing new here—Freud knew all about it”; or (2) they declared that our

approach was all “wrong.” In the long run, the role of genital gratification in

the therapy of neuroses could not be kept hidden. It came up inevitably in the

discussion of every case. This fortified my position but it also made enemies

for  me.  The  goal  of  enabling  the  patient  to  experience  “orgastic  genital

gratification”  shaped  technique  in  the  following  way:  all  patients  are

disturbed in their genital function; this function must be made whole again.

Hence, all pathological attitudes that obstruct the establishment of orgastic

potency  have  to  be  sought  out  and  destroyed.  This  became  the  task  of

technique for a generation of therapeutic analysts, for the obstructions to the

genital function were legion and had an endless variety of forms. They were

anchored  in  the  social  no  less  than  in  the  psychic  framework.  Most

importantly, as was later discovered, they were anchored in the body.

  I began by laying the main stress of the work on the study of pregenitalfixations, the devious modes of sexual gratification, and the social difficulties

which  obstruct  a  gratifying  sexual  life.  Without  intending  it,  questions

pertaining  to  marriage,  adolescence,  and  the  social  inhibition  of  sexuality

gradually cropped up in the discussions. All this still appeared to be very

much within the framework of psychoanalytic research. My young colleagues

were very enthusiastic and demonstrated a great determination to work. They

made  no  secret  of  their  enthusiasm  for  my  seminar.  Their  distinctly

unprofessional  and  unscientific  conduct  later,  when  the  rupture  in  my

relations with the Psychoanalytic Assocation occurred, cannot diminish my

appreciation of their achievements in the seminar.

  The  publication  of  Freud’s The  Ego  and  the  Id  in  1923  had  a

disconcerting impact on everyday analytic practice, the central concern of

which was the patient’s sexual difficulties. In practice, it was very difficult to

know what to make of the “superego” and the “unconscious guilt feelings”

which were theoretical formulations about facts that were still very obscure.

A  technique  for  dealing  with  these  “phenomena”  had  not  been  specified.

Thus, one preferred to operate with masturbation anxiety and sexual guilt

feelings. In 1920, Freud had published Beyond the Pleasure Principle, in

which, initially as a hypothesis, the death instinct was placed on an equal

footing with the sexual instinct, indeed was accorded deeper instinctual force.

Young analysts who had not yet begun to practice and those analysts who did

not  grasp  the  structure  of  the  sexual  theory  began  to  apply  the  new  ego

theory. It was a very disturbing situation. Instead of sexuality, analysts began

to speak of “Eros.” Mediocre therapists claimed that they were able “to put

their hands on” the superego, a concept that had been theoretically postulated

to help grasp the psychic structure. They operated with it as if it were a

concretely established fact. The id was “wicked,” the superego sat on a throne

with a long beard and was “strict,” and the poor ego endeavored to “mediate”

between the two. The vivid and fluid description of facts was replaced by a

mechanical  schema  which  seemed  to  make  further  thinking  unnecessary.Clinical  discussions  drifted  more  and  more  into  the  background  and

speculation began. Soon strangers who had never analyzed came along and

delivered “brilliant” lectures on the ego and superego or on schizophrenics

they  had  never  seen.  In  1934,  when  my  break  with  the  International

Psychoanalytic  Association  occurred,  they  functioned  officially  as  the

“transcendental”  exponents  of  psychoanalysis  against  the  sex-economic

principle  of  depth  psychology.  Clinical  investigation  stagnated.  Sexuality

became something shadowy; the “libido” concept was deprived of every trace

of  sexual  content  and  became  a  figure  of  speech.  Seriousness  in

psychoanalytic communications disappeared. It was more and more replaced

by a pathos reminiscent of moral philosophers. Little by little, the theory of

the  neuroses  was  translated  into  the  language  of  “ego  psychology.”  The

atmosphere was becoming “purified”!

  Slowly but surely, it was cleansed of all Freud’s achievements. Bringing

psychoanalysis into line with the world, which shortly before had threatened

to annihilate it, took place inconspicuously at first. Analysts still spoke of

sexuality, but they had something else in mind. At the same time, they had

retained  a  trace  of  the  old  pioneer  pride.  Hence,  they  developed  a  bad

conscience  and  usurped  my  new  findings,  declaring  them  traditional

components  of  psychoanalysis,  with  the  intent  of  destroying  them.  Form

eclipsed content; the organization became more important than its task. The

process of deterioration, which has destroyed every great social movement in

history, set in. Just as the primitive Christianity of Jesus was transformed into

the  Church,  and  Marxist  science  became  fascistic  dictatorship,  many

psychoanalysts soon became the worst enemies of their own cause. The rift

within the movement was no longer reparable. Today, fifteen years afterward,

this is evident to everyone. It was not until 1934 that I grasped it clearly. It

was too late. Until then, suppressing my inner conviction of my own cause, I

had  fought  within  the  framework  of  the  International  Psychoanalytic

Association, officially and for myself in the name of psychoanalysis.  Around 1925, a cleavage occurred in the formulation of psychoanalytic

theory that initially was not perceived by the representatives, but is clearly

evident today. To the same extent to which a cause loses ground, it becomes

susceptible to personal intrigue. What is outwardly passed off as objective

interest is backstage politics, tactics, diplomacy. It is perhaps to the painful

experiences  of  this  development  within  the  International  Psychoanalytic

Association that I owe the most important fruits of my efforts: the knowledge

of the mechanism of every kind of politics.

  The description of these facts is by no means irrelevant. The critical stand

I  took  against  these  signs  of  disintegration  within  the  psychoanalytic

movement (e.g., the theory of the death instinct) provided the groundwork for

my successful breakthrough, several years later, into the realm of vegetative

life.

  Reik published a book, Geständniszwang und Strafbedürfnis [Compulsion

to Confess and Need of Punishment], in which the whole original conception

of psychic illness was turned upside down. The worst of it was that the book

met  with  approval.  Reduced  to  the  simplest  terms,  his  innovation  can  be

described  as  the  elimination  of  the  fear  of  punishment  for  sexual

transgressions committed in childhood. In Beyond the Pleasure Principle and

in The Ego and the Id, Freud assumed the existence of an unconscious need

for  punishment.  This  need  ostensibly  explained  the  patient’s  resistance  to

getting  well.  At  the  same  time,  the  “death  instinct”  was  made  a  part  of

psychoanalytic theory. Freud assumed that living substance was governed by

two  antithetical  instinctual  forces.  On  one  hand,  he  postulated  the  life

instincts, which he equated to the sexual instinct (Eros). According to Freud,

these instincts had the task of rousing the living substance out of its inorganic

state  of  repose,  creating  tension,  and  concentrating  life  into  greater  and

greater unities. These instincts were loud, clamorous; they were responsible

for the hubbub of life. However, operating behind these life instincts was the

“mute” but “far more important” death instinct (Thanatos), the tendency toreduce living substance to an inanimate condition, to nothingness, to Nirvana.

According to this conception, life was really only a disturbance of the eternal

silence, of nothingness. In the neurosis, according to this view, the death

instinct counteracted the creative life, i.e., sexual, instincts. To be sure, the

death instinct could not be perceived. But its manifestations were said to be

too evident to be overlooked. In everything he did, man demonstrated the

tendency  toward  self-annihilation.  The  death  instinct  manifested  itself  in

masochistic strivings. It was because of these strivings that neurotic patients

“refused” to get well. They nourished the unconscious feeling of guilt, which

could also be called the need for punishment. The patients simply did not

want to get well, because this need for punishment, which found gratification

in the neurosis, prevented them.

  Reik made me realize where Freud had begun to go wrong. Disregarding

all  Freud’s  precautions,  Reik  simply  used  the  patient’s  death  instinct  to

excuse  his  own  psychotherapeutic  inadequacies.  Reik  exaggerated  correct

insights, e.g., that criminals easily betray themselves or that many people feel

relieved when they can confess a crime.

  Until this point, a neurosis was looked upon as the result of a conflict

between  sexual  demand  and  fear  of  punishment.  Now  it  was  said  that  a

neurosis was a conflict between sexual demand and demand for punishment,

i.e., the exact opposite of fear of punishment for sexual activities. This was a

complete  liquidation  of  the  psychoanalytic  theory  of  neurosis.  It  was  at

variance with every clinical insight. The latter left no doubt that Freud’s first

formulation was correct, i.e., neuroses were caused by fear of punishment for

sexual activity and not by desire to be punished for it. On the basis of the

complications in which some patients became involved due to the inhibition

of their sexuality, they subsequently developed the masochistic attitude of

wanting to be punished, to injure themselves, or to stick to their illness. It was

undoubtedly the task of the analyst to treat these desires for self-punishment

as  a  secondary  neurotic  formation,  to  eliminate  the  patient’s  fear  ofpunishment, and to liberate his sexuality. It was not the task of the treatment

to  confirm  these  self-injuries  as  the  manifestations  of  deep  biological

strivings. The exponents of the death instinct, who appeared in greater and

greater numbers and with increasing dignity, because now they could speak

of “Thanatos” instead of sexuality, traced the neurotic self-injurious intent of

the  sick  psychic  organism  to  a  primary  biological  instinct  of  the  living

substance. Psychoanalysis never recovered from this.

  Reik was followed by Alexander, who investigated a number of criminals

and  ascertained  that,  in  the  main,  crime  was  the  consequence  of  an

unconscious need for punishment which compelled the person to commit a

criminal act. He did not inquire into the origin of this unnatural behavior. He

did not devote a single word to the powerful social basis of criminality. This

saved the trouble of any further questioning. If the analyst failed to cure a

patient, it was the death instinct that was responsible. If people committed

murder,  they  did  so  to  get  themselves  put  in  jail.  Children  stole  to  free

themselves from the pressure of a tormenting conscience. Today, I look back

in amazement at the energy expended at that time in the discussion of such

views. Nevertheless, Freud had meant something worthy of great effort. I

shall go into this later. Indolent analysts, however, fastened upon his idea and

frittered away decades of effort.

  The “negative therapeutic reaction” of the patient later proved to be the

result of the analyst’s technical and theoretical inability to establish orgastic

potency in the patient, in other words, his inability to deal with the patient’s

pleasure anxiety.

  With these concerns in mind, I paid a call on Freud. I asked him whether

he  had  intended  to  introduce  the  death  instinct  as  a  clinical  theory.  He

himself,  I  pointed  out,  had  denied  that  the  death  instinct  was  a  tangible

clinical phenomenon. Freud reassured me. It was “merely a hypothesis,” he

said. It could just as well be omitted. Its elimination would change nothing in

the  basic  structure  of  the  psychoanalytic  system.  He  had  merely  allowedhimself  to  venture  a  speculation  for  once.  He  was  well  aware  that  his

speculation was being misused. I should not let it bother me, he said, but just

go on working clinically. I went away relieved. But I was determined, in my

sphere of work, to put up a strong fight against any chatter about the death

instinct,  and  I  wrote  a  polemic  against  Alexander  in  which  I  proved  the

untenability of his views.

  My negative critique of Reik’s book and the polemic against Alexander

were published in 1927. In my seminar on technique, hardly any mention was

made of the death instinct and the unconscious need for punishment as the

causes of therapeutic failure. The meticulously precise clinical presentation of

the  individual  cases  precluded  this.  Only  occasionally,  one  of  the  death-

instinct theorists attempted to set forth his views. I carefully avoided any

direct  attack  on  this  erroneous  theory.  It  was  clear  that  its  complete

untenability  would  have  to  be  proven  by  clinical  work  itself.  The  more

minutely we studied the mechanisms of the neuroses, the more certain we

were to triumph. In the Psychoanalytic Association, on the other hand, the

incorrect interpretation of the ego theory gained ever greater influence. The

situation grew more and more tense. All of a sudden, it was discovered that I

was very aggressive, “riding my own hobbyhorse,” and wholly exaggerating

the importance of genitality.

  At  the  Psychoanalytic  Congress  in  Salzburg  in  April  1924,  I  added

“orgastic potency” to my initial formulations on the therapeutic importance of

genitality.  My  presentation  dealt  with  two  basic  facts:  (1) neurosis is the

manifestation of a genital disturbance and not solely of sexuality in general;

(2) relapse into neurosis subsequent to analytic treatment is avoided to the

extent to which orgastic gratification in the sexual act has been secured. My

presentation was well received. Abraham congratulated me on my successful

formulation of the economic factor of the neurosis.

  To establish orgastic potency in patients, it was not enough to liberate

existing  genital  excitations  from  their  inhibitions  and  repressions.  Sexualenergy is bound in the symptoms. Hence, the dissolution of every symptom

releases a quantity of psychic energy. At that time, the two concepts “psychic

energy”  and  “sexual  energy”  were  by  no  means  identical.  The  liberated

sexual energy was spontaneously conveyed to the genital system: potency

improved. The patient ventured to approach a partner, gave up abstinence, or

experienced more gratifying sexual embraces. However, only in a few cases

was the expectation fulfilled that this liberating of sexual energy would also

entail the establishment of the orgastic function. The conclusion to be drawn

from this seemed to be that insufficient energy had been liberated from the

neurotic  bindings.  Symptoms  did,  to  be  sure,  disappear,  and  the  patient’s

ability to work more or less improved. On the whole, however, the patient

remained blocked. Thus, the question suggested itself: where, apart from the

neurotic  symptoms,  is  sexual  energy  bound?  This  was  a  new  question  in

psychoanalysis, but it was not outside its framework. On the contrary, it was

merely a consistent application of the analytic method of thinking, using the

individual  neurotic  symptom  as  its  point  of  departure.  At  first,  I  had  no

answer  to  this  question.  Clinical  and  therapeutic  problems  can  never  be

solved  by  musing  about  them.  They  solve  themselves  in  the  process  of

mastering practical tasks. This is true generally of every form of scientific

work. The correct formulation of a practical problem automatically leads to

further  formulations,  which  gradually  become  concentrated  in  a  uniform

picture of a general problem.

  On the basis of the psychoanalytic theory of neurosis, it seemed obvious

to look for the energy necessary to establish full orgastic potency in the non-

genital,  i.e.,  early  childhood,  pregenital  activities  and  fantasies.  If  a  large

amount of sexual interest is focused on sucking, biting, the desire to be loved,

anal habits, etc., the capacity for genital experience is reduced. This gave

further credence to the view that the individual sexual drives do not function

independently  of  one  another  but  form  a  unity,  as  a  liquid  in  connecting

pipes. There can be only one uniform sexual energy which seeks gratificationin various erogenous zones and psychic ideas. This was at variance with

views which were beginning to gain ground at that time. Ferenczi published

his theory of genitality, according to which the genital excitation function is

made up of pregenital excitations, anal, oral, and aggressive. This was at

variance with my clinical experience. I had observed the exact opposite of

this:  every  admixture  of  non-genital  excitations  in  the  sexual  act  or  in

masturbation  weakened  orgastic  potency.  A  woman  who  unconsciously

equates vagina and anus might be afraid of breaking wind during excitation

and thus making a fool of herself. Such an attitude can have a paralyzing

effect on her entire life activity. A man who unconsciously regards his penis

as a knife or uses it to prove his potency is incapable of total surrender in the

sexual act. Helene Deutsch published a book on female sexuality in which

she contended that, for the woman, the culmination of sexual gratification lay

in the act of giving birth. According to her conception, there is no primary

vaginal excitation. The latter, she argued, was made up of excitations which

were shifted to the womb from the mouth and the anus. Right at that time,

Otto Rank published his Trauma der Geburt, in which he contended that the

sexual act corresponded to a “return to the womb.” I was on good terms with

these psychoanalysts and valued their views, but there was a wide divergency

between my experiences and ideas and theirs. Gradually, it became clear that

it was fundamentally incorrect to try to give the experience in the sexual act a

psychological interpretation, to seek a psychic meaning in it as one would

seek a psychic meaning in a neurotic symptom. The exact opposite is true:

every psychic idea during the sexual act can only hinder one’s immersion in

the excitation. Moreover, such interpretations of genitality constitute a denial

of its biological function. By seeing it as the concentration of non-genital

excitations, one denies its existence. It was precisely in the function of the

orgasm that I, on the other hand, recognized the basic qualitative difference

between genitality and pregenitality. Only the genital apparatus is capable of

bringing about orgasm and fully discharging biological energy. Pregenitalitycan only increase vegetative tensions. One notices the deep cleavage that was

taking place here in the psychoanalytic view of the function of drives.

  The  therapeutic  implications  deriving  from  these  two  views  were

incompatible with one another. If genital excitation is merely a mixture of

non-genital excitations, then cure must consist in a shifting of anal and oral

eroticism  to  the  genital.  If,  however,  my  view  was  correct,  then  genital

excitation had to be liberated from and purified of (so to speak, “distilled

from”) admixtures with pregenital excitations. There was nothing in Freud’s

writings that suggested an answer one way or another.

  Freud stated that libido development in the child proceeded from the oral

to the anal and from the anal to the phallic stage. He ascribed the phallic

genital  position  to  both  sexes.  The  phallic  eroticism  of  the  girl  became

concentrated in the clitoris, just as the phallic eroticism of the boy became

concentrated  in  the  penis.  It  was  not  until  puberty,  Freud  said,  that  all

infantile  sexual  excitations  became  subordinated  to  “genital  primacy,”  at

which  time  the  latter  “began  to  fulfill  the  function  of  procreation.”  This

formulation retained the old identification between genitality and procreation

—genital pleasure continued to be regarded as a function of procreation. I

had failed to see this in the beginning. A Berlin psychoanalyst pointed it out

to me some years later when the rift had become flagrantly obvious. I was

able  to  remain  in  the  International  Psychoanalytic  Association  with  my

theory of genitality for such a long time only because I continually referred to

Freud in substantiating my views. This was an injustice to my theory, and it

made  separation  from  the  psychoanalytic  organization  difficult  for  my

associates.

  Today,  such  views  appear  impossible.  I  am  amazed  at  how  seriously

analysts discussed at that time whether or not there is an original genital

function.  No  one  had  any  inkling  of  the  social  reasons  for  this  scientific

naïveté. The further development of the theory of genitality revealed them all

too flagrantly.                    2. THE SEX-ECONOMY OF NEUROTIC ANXIETY


The wide divergencies in the formulation of psychoanalytic theory after 1922

are also evident in the central problem of anxiety. The original hypothesis ran

as follows: if the path to the perception and discharge of physical sexual

excitation is blocked, then the excitation is converted into anxiety. Nothing

was said about how this “conversion” took place. Since I was continually

confronted  with  the  task  of  liberating  sexual  energy  from  its  neurotic

bindings,  this  problem  demanded  clarification.  Stasis  anxiety  was

undischarged sexual excitation. To reconvert it into sexual excitation, it was

necessary to know how the initial conversion into anxiety had taken place. In

1924, I treated two female patients with cardiac neurosis. With the emergence

of genital excitation, the cardiac anxiety diminished. In one of these patients,

I  could  observe,  over  a  period  of  weeks,  the  alternation  between  cardiac

anxiety  and  genital  excitation.  Every  inhibition  of  vaginal  excitation

immediately  evoked  a  feeling  of  constriction  and  anxiety  “in  the  cardiac

region.”  This  was  an  eloquent  confirmation  of  the  original  Freudian

conception of the relation between libido and anxiety. But there was more to

it than that. I was now able to localize the site of the anxiety sensation. It was

the region of the heart and the diaphragm. The other patient exhibited the

same  alternating  function,  but  also  urticaria.  If  the  patient  was  afraid  to

accede  to  her  vaginal  excitation,  the  result  was  cardiac  anxiety  or  large

itching wheals on various parts of the skin. Clearly, therefore, the sexual

excitation  and  the  anxiety  had  something  to  do  with  the  functions  of  the

vegetative nervous system. This was further borne out by the fact that anxiety

is localized in the cardiac region. I reformulated the Freudian formula to read:

there  is  no  conversion  of  sexual  excitation.  The  same  excitation  which

appears in the genitals as the sensation of pleasure is perceived as anxiety

when it takes hold of the cardiac system, i.e., it is perceived as the exact

opposite of pleasure. The vasovegetative system can, in one instance, express

itself  in  the  form  of  sexual  excitation  and,  in  another  instance,  when  theexcitation is blocked, in the form of anxiety. This idea proved to be very

fortunate. Its development led step by step directly to my present view that

sexuality  and  anxiety  are  manifestations  of  two  antithetical  directions  of

vegetative  sensations  of  excitation.  It  took  some  ten  years  to  clarify  the

bioelectric nature of these sensations and excitations.

  Freud had not mentioned the vegetative nervous system in connection

with his theory of anxiety. I had not the least doubt that my supplementation

would  be  evident  to  him.  However,  when  I  presented  my  concept  at  a

meeting in his apartment toward the end of 1926, he rejected the relation

between  anxiety  and  the  vasovegetative  system.  I  have  never  understood

why.

  It became more and more clear that the overloading of the vasovegetative

system  with  undischarged  sexual  excitation  is  the  central  mechanism  of

anxiety  and,  hence,  of  neurosis.  Every  new  case  confirmed  the  initial

observations. Apparently, anxiety always developed when the vasovegetative

system  became  overexcited  in  a  certain  way.  Cardiac  anxiety  is  found  in

angina  pectoris,  bronchial  asthma,  nicotine  poisoning,  and  exophthalmic

goiter. Thus, anxiety always develops when the cardiac system is affected by

some abnormal excitation. In short, the sexual stasis anxiety ties in very well

with  the  problem  of  anxiety  as  a  whole.  It  is  merely  that,  here,  the

undischarged  sexual  excitation  burdens  the  cardiac  system,  as  nicotine  or

toxic substances do in other cases. The question remained as to the nature of

this  overexcitation.  In  this  connection,  I  still  had  no  knowledge  of  the

antithesis between sympathetic and parasympathetic reactions.

  For my own clinical needs, I differentiated the concept of anxiety from

that of fear or apprehension. “I am ‘afraid’ of being beaten, punished, or

castrated” is something different from the “anxiety” which one experiences

when  faced  with  a  real  danger.  “Fear”  or  “apprehension”  becomes  an

affective  “anxiety  experience”  only  when  the  stasis  of  physical  excitation

overloads  the  autonomic  system.  There  were  patients  who  experiencedcastration “anxiety” without any affect of anxiety. And there were others who

experienced affects of anxiety without any idea of danger, e.g. patients who

were sexually abstinent. Thus, it was necessary to differentiate the anxiety

which was the result of a stasis of excitation and the anxiety which became

the cause of a sexual repression. The former determined the stasis neuroses,

the  latter  the  psychoneuroses.  But  both  kinds  of  anxiety  operated

simultaneously in either case. Initially, the fear of being punished or of being

socially  ostracized  produces  a  damming-up  of  sexual  excitation.  This

excitation is shifted from the genital-sensory system to the cardiac system

and  accumulates  there  as  stasis  anxiety.  Even  the  anxiety  experienced  in

fright,  I  thought,  can  be  nothing  other  than  severely  dammed-up  sexual

excitation suddenly flowing back to the cardiac system. It takes only a small

quantity of stasis anxiety to produce the experience of apprehension. Even a

vivid  idea  of  a  possible  danger  can  create  it.  In  such  a  case,  the  danger

situation is, so to speak, physically anticipated by imagining it. This tied in

very well with the earlier consideration that the intensity of a psychic idea,

whether in the nature of pleasure or anxiety, is determined by the intensity of

the amount of excitation currently operative in the body. In the fantasy or

expectation  of  a  danger,  the  organism  acts  as  if  the  danger  were  already

present. Possibly, fantasizing in general is based upon such reactions on the

part  of  the  life  apparatus.  At  that  time,  I  was  working  on  my  book Die

Funktion des Orgasmus. In special chapters on the “vasomotor neurosis” and

“anxiety  and  the  vasovegetative  system,”  I  set  forth  the  above-mentioned

relationships.

  In the fall of 1926, Freud published Hemmung, Symptom und Angst. In

this work, many of the original formulations on actual anxiety were retracted.

Neurotic anxiety was defined as a “signal” of the ego. Anxiety was said to be

an alarm signal of the ego when prohibited drives were stirred, as well as

when an actual danger threatened from the outside. It was not possible, Freud

contended,  to  establish  a  connection  between  actual  anxiety  and  neuroticanxiety.  This  was,  he  said,  most  regrettable,  but  he  concluded  his

observations with a non liquet. Anxiety was no longer to be understood as the

result of sexual repression but as its actual cause. The question as to the

substances  out  of  which  anxiety  is  manufactured  was  of  no  interest.  The

contention that it was the libido which was converted into anxiety diminished

in importance. Freud failed to see that anxiety, a biological phenomenon,

cannot appear in the ego unless it is first prepared in the biological depth.

  This was a hard blow for my work on the anxiety problem. I had just

succeeded in making a big step forward toward the differentiation between

anxiety as a cause and anxiety as a result of repression. From now on it

would be more difficult to represent the view that stasis anxiety resulted from

sexual stasis because Freud’s formulations, of course, carried considerable

authority. It was not very easy to hold a different opinion, certainly not in

matters of central importance. In my book on the orgasm, I had passed over

this difficulty with a harmless footnote. It was generally agreed, I pointed out,

that anxiety in neurosis is the cause of sexual repression. At the same time, I

stuck to my own view that anxiety is the result of sexual stasis. This Freud

abrogated.

  The rift deepened rapidly and to an alarming degree. Unfortunately, I was

right.  Since Hemmung,  Symptom  und  Angst,  there  is  no  longer  any

psychoanalytic theory of anxiety that satisfies the clinical needs. I was firmly

convinced of the correctness of my amplification of Freud’s original concept

of anxiety. It was very gratifying that I was getting closer and closer to its

physiological function. At the same time, this entailed a sharpening of the

conflict.

  In my clinical work, it became increasingly important to convert the stasis

anxiety  back  into  genital  excitation.  When  I  succeeded  in  doing  this,  I

achieved  good  and  lasting  results.  However,  I  did  not  always  succeed  in

liberating the cardiac anxiety and in bringing about its oscillation with genital

excitation. Thus, the next question was: what is it that prevents the biologicalexcitation from becoming manifest as cardiac anxiety as soon as the genital

excitation  is  blocked?  Why  did  stasis  anxiety  not  appear  in  all  cases  of

psychoneurosis? Here, too, original formulations of psychoanalysis came to

my help. Freud had demonstrated that anxiety in neurosis becomes bound.

The  patient  evades  anxiety  if,  for  example,  he  develops  a  compulsive

symptom. If the function of the compulsion is disturbed, anxiety immediately

appears.  Many  cases  of  protracted  compulsion  neurosis  and  chronic

depression could not be disturbed. They were somehow inaccessible. I had an

especially  hard  time  with  the  affect-blocked  compulsive  characters.  They

could produce associations, but no trace of affect was ever revealed. All one’s

efforts  bounced  back  as  from  a  “thick,  hard  wall.”  They  were  “armored”

against  any  attack.  In  psychoanalytic  literature,  there  were  no  technical

procedures for getting beneath the surface of this rigidified condition. It was

the character as a whole that resisted. With this insight, I was on the threshold

of character analysis. Apparently, the character armor was the mechanism

which bound all energy. It was also the mechanism that enabled so many

psychoanalysts to maintain that there is no stasis anxiety.


  3. CHARACTER ARMOR AND THE DYNAMIC STRATIFICATION OF THE DEFENSE

                                        MECHANISMS


The theory of “character armor” was the result of my efforts, which were at

first very tentative, to extract the patient’s resistances one by one. Between

1922, when the therapeutic role of genitality was comprehended, and 1927,

when Die Funktion des Orgasmus was published, I collected the countless

minor and major experiences which, taken together, pointed in one direction:

it  is  the  patient’s  total  “personality”  or  “character”  that  constitutes  the

difficulty of cure. “Character armor” is expressed in treatment as “character

resistance.”

  I want to describe the main features of the preliminary work. This will

enable  the  reader  to  grasp  the  sex-economic  theory  of  character  and  thetheory of structure more easily than a reading of the systematic presentation

which  I  gave  in  my  book Character Analysis.  In  that  work,  the  analytic

theory of character might still appear to be an amplification of the Freudian

theory of neurosis. However, the two theories soon came into conflict with

one another. My theory was developed in the struggle against the mechanistic

conceptions of psychoanalysis.

  The  task  of  psychoanalytic  therapy  was  to  uncover  and  eliminate

resistances. It was not supposed to interpret unconscious material directly.

Hence,  the  analyst  had  to  proceed  from  the  psychic  warding  off  of

unconscious impulses by the moralistic ego. But there was not just one layer

of ego defenses to break through, behind which lay the great realm of the

unconscious. In reality, instinctual desires and defense functions of the ego

are interlaced and permeate the entire psychic structure.























Structure of the armor resulting from the dynamic interplay of forces


  This is where the difficulty lies. Freud’s schema of the interrelation of“unconscious,” “preconscious,” and “conscious” and his other schema of the

psychic structure consisting of “id,” “ego,” and “superego” did not coincide.

Indeed, they often contradicted one another. Freud’s “unconscious” is not

identical with the “id.” The latter is deeper. The unconscious comprises the

repressed desires and important elements of the moralistic superego. Since

the superego has its origin in the incestuous child-parent relationship, it bears

that  relationship’s  archaic  characteristics.  The  superego  itself  is  equipped

with great instinctual intensity, particularly of an aggressive and destructive

nature.  The  “ego”  is  not  identical  with  the  “system  conscious.”  The  ego

defense against prohibited sexual desires is itself repressed. Moreover, the

ego originates from and is merely a specially differentiated part of the id,

even if later, under the influence of the superego, it comes into conflict with

it. If one understands Freud correctly, then early infantile is not necessarily

“id” or “unconscious,” and adult is not necessarily “ego” or “superego.” In

the  above,  I  have  merely  pointed  out  some  of  the  inconsistencies  of

psychoanalytic theory, without discussing or drawing any conclusions about

them.  I  am  only  too  happy  to  leave  that  part  of  it  to  the  psychoanalytic

theorists.  At  any  rate,  sex-economic  research  on  the  human  character

structure  has  clarified  a  number  of  these  questions.  The  sex-economic

conception  of  the  psychic  apparatus  is  not  of  a  psychological  but  of  a

biological nature.

  The  differentiation  between  what  is  repressed  and  what  is  capable  of

becoming  conscious  played  the  major  role  in  the  clinical  work.  Also  of

importance was the differentiation of the child’s individual stages of sexual

development.  This  was  something  the  analyst  could  operate  with  in  a

practical way. At that time, it was not possible to operate with the id, which

was  not  tangible,  nor  with  the  superego,  which  was  merely  a  theoretical

hypothesis, overtly expressed in the form of conscience-anxiety. Nor was it

possible to operate with the unconscious in the strict sense for, as Freud had

correctly  pointed  out,  it  can  be  reached  only  through  its  derivatives,  i.e.,manifestations that are already conscious. For Freud, the “unconscious” was

never  anything  more  than  an  “indispensable  hypothesis.”  Capable  of

immediate  and  practical  comprehension  were  the  manifestations  of  the

patient’s  pregenital  impulses  and  the  various  forms  of  the  moralistic  or

apprehensive warding off of instincts. The fact that in their theoretical works

psychoanalysts  did  not  render  any  account  whatever  on  the  differences

between  theory,  hypothetical  construction,  and  phenomena  which  were

overtly visible and changeable and also that they referred to the unconscious

as if it were something concrete greatly contributed to the confusion. This

acted as a block to the investigation of the vegetative nature of the id and,

consequently, shut off the approach to the biological foundation of psychic

functioning.

  I acquired my first insight into the stratification of the psychic apparatus

in the previously-mentioned case of a passive-feminine young man suffering

from hysterical symptoms, inability to work, and ascetic impotence. Overtly,

he was very polite; covertly, his fear caused him to be very cunning. Thus, he

yielded in everything. The politeness represented the topmost layer of his

structure.  He  produced  material  on  his  sexual  tie  to  his  mother  in

superabundance. He “produced” without any inner conviction. I did not enter

into  any  of  this  material  but  continually  focused  his  attention  on  his

politeness as a warding off of the really affective insight. The concealed hate

appeared  more  and  more  in  his  dreams.  As  his  politeness  diminished,  he

became  insulting.  Thus,  the  politeness  warded  off  hate.  I  brought  it  out

completely by breaking down every one of his inhibitions. Until then, the

hate had been an unconscious attitude. Hate and politeness were antitheses.

At the same time, his excessive politeness was a disguised expression of hate.

Excessively  polite  people  are  usually  the  most  ruthless  and  the  most

dangerous.

  For its part, the liberated hate warded off acute fear of his father. It was

simultaneously a repressed impulse and an unconscious ego defense againstanxiety.  The  more  clearly  the  hate  was  brought  to  the  surface,  the  more

distinctly manifestations of anxiety appeared. Eventually, the hate gave way

to  new  anxiety.  The  former  was  by  no  means  the  original  childhood

aggression but a new formation from a later period. The new anxiety which

broke through was the manifestation of a defense against a deeper layer of

destructive hate. The superficial layer of hate had been content with ridicule

and  disparagement.  The  deeper  destructive  attitude  consisted  of  murder

impulses against his father. As fear of these impulses (“destructive anxiety”)

was eliminated, the deeper destructive attitude became manifest in feelings

and  fantasies.  Thus,  this  deeper  layer  of  destruction  was  the  repressed

element with respect to the anxiety, by which it was held in repression. At the

same time, however, it was identical with this fear of destruction. It could not

stir without producing anxiety, and the fear of destruction could not rise to

the surface without, at the same time, betraying the destructive aggression. In

this way I gained insight into the antithetical functional unity between what

wards off and what is warded off. I did not publish anything about this until

eight years later, when I illustrated it in the following diagram.

  As a result of the manner in which the character structure of modern man

is  developed,  an  “inner  resistance”  is  constantly  interpolated  between  the

biological impulse and its realization: man acts “reactively,” and is inwardly

divided against himself.External behavior
character trait,
symptom,
secondary drive,
reactive work.

 

Unconscious
defense

Repressed
instinct

 

Split and development
of antithesis ("Inner
contradiction”)

Original instinctual energy
Diagram depicting the antithetical functional unity between instinct and defense.


















Exaggerated politeness

   
 

Fear of being
destroyed, fear

of authority

Inhibition

Love Sadism
Inhil

 

Love

Biological nucleus
The same diagram illustrating specific impulses


  The destructive impulse toward the father was, in turn, a defense of the

ego against destruction by the father. When I began to take this apart and

unmask  it  as  defense,  genital  anxiety  came  to  the  surface.  Thus,  the

destructive intentions against the father had the function of protecting the

patient against castration by the father. The fear of being castrated, that was

held in repression by the destructive hatred of the father, was itself a defense

against a still deeper layer of destructive aggression—namely the desire todeprive the father of his penis and thus eliminate him as a rival. The second

layer  of  destructiveness  was  solely  destructive.  The  third  layer  was

destructive with a sexual overtone. It was held in check by fear of castration;

at  the  same  time,  it  warded  off  a  very  deep  and  strong  layer  of  passive,

loving, feminine attitude toward the father. To be a woman toward the father

had the same meaning as being castrated, i.e., to be without a penis. Hence,

the ego of the small boy had to protect itself against this love by means of a

strong destructive aggression against the father. It was the healthy “young

man” who defended himself in this way. And this “young man” desired his

mother  passionately.  When  his  warded-off  femininity,  i.e.,  the  same

femininity visible on the surface of his character, was taken apart, the genital

incest desire appeared and, with it, his full capacity for genital excitability.

Though still orgastically disturbed, he became erectively potent for the first

time.

  This  was  my  first  success  with  a  systematic,  orderly,  layer  by  layer

resistance and character analysis. A thorough description of this case appears

in my book Character Analysis.

  The  concept  of  “armor  stratification”  opened  many  possibilities  for

clinical work. The psychic forces and contradictions no longer presented a

chaos,  but  a  systematic,  historically  and  structurally  comprehensible

organization.  The  neurosis  of  each  individual  patient  revealed  a  specific

structure. There was a correlation between the structure and the development

of the neurosis. That which had been repressed latest in point of time in

childhood lay closest to the surface. But early childhood fixations which had

a bearing on later stages of conflicts had a dynamic effect in the depth and on

the  surface  at  one  and  the  same  time.  For  instance,  it  is  possible  that  a

woman’s oral tie to her husband, which stemmed from a deep fixation to her

mother’s breast, is a part of the most superficial layer when she has to ward

off genital anxiety toward the husband. In terms of energy, the ego defense is

nothing other than a repressed impulse in its reverse function. This is true ofall modern man’s moralistic attitudes.

  Usually, the structure of the neurosis corresponds to its development in

reversed sequence. The “antithetical functional unity between instinct and

defense” made it possible to comprehend contemporary and early childhood

experiences  simultaneously.  There  was  no  longer  any  dichotomy  between

historical and contemporary material. The entire world of past experience

was embodied in the present in the form of character attitudes. A person’s

character  is  the  functional  sum  total  of  all  past  experiences.  These

explanations,  academic-sounding  as  they  may  be,  are  of  the  utmost

importance for the understanding of human restructurization.

  This structure was not a schema which I imposed upon the patients. The

logic with which layer after layer of the defense mechanisms were exposed

and eliminated through the correct dissolution of resistances showed me that

the stratification was actually and objectively present, independent of me. I

compared  the  stratification  of  the  character  with  the  stratification  of

geological  deposits,  which  are  also  rigidified  history.  A  conflict  which  is

fought  out  at  a  certain  age  always  leaves  behind  a  trace  in  the  person’s

character. This trace is revealed as a hardening of the character. It functions

automatically and is difficult to eliminate. The patient does not experience it

as something alien; more often than not, he is aware of it as a rigidification or

as a loss of spontaneity. Every such layer of the character structure is a piece

of the person’s life history, preserved and active in the present in a different

form. Experience showed that the old conflicts can be fairly easily reactivated

through the loosening of these layers. If the layers of rigidified conflicts were

especially numerous and functioned automatically, if they formed a compact,

not easily penetrable unity, the patient felt them as an “armor” surrounding

the living organism. This armor could lie on the “surface” or in the “depth,”

could be “as soft as a sponge” or “as hard as a rock.” Its function in every

case was to protect the person against unpleasurable experiences. However, it

also entailed a reduction in the organism’s capacity for pleasure. Experiencesof severe conflict made up the latent content of the armor. The energy which

held  the  armor  together  was  usually  inhibited  destructiveness.  This  was

shown by the fact that aggression immediately began to break free when the

armor was penetrated. What was the source of the destructive and hateful

aggression that came to the surface in this process? What was its function?

Was it primary, biological destructiveness? Many years elapsed before such

questions were answered. I found that people reacted with deep hatred to

every disturbance of the neurotic balance of their armor. This was one of the

greatest difficulties in investigating character structure. The destructiveness

itself was never free. It was held in check by opposite character attitudes.

Hence, in life situations in which it was necessary to be aggressive, to act, to

be decisive, to take a definite stand, the person was ruled by pity, politeness,

reticence, false modesty, in short by virtues that are held in high esteem. But

there could be no doubt that they paralyzed every rational reaction, every

living active impulse in the person.Fear of losing love
and protection

=

Fear and feeling of
inferiority toward
authority

> L

Fear of aggression

>/

Self-protection; fear
of being destroyed

A
Fear of being castrated g

Fear of being a woman;
i.e., costrated

 

4
Disappointment by
mother; fear of g
the vagina

A

 

Politeness; impotence;
esceticism; condition
of anxiety

Contempt; ridicule;
distrust; craving
for power

Aggression toward
authority

Murder impulses
toward father

Desire to
castrate father

Passive-feminine
attitude toward father;
anal eroticism

Sadistic attitude toward
mother; piercing; phallic

 

Genital object love
toward the mother
Diagram depicting the defensive forces and the stratification of the neurotic structure


  If  natural  aggression  was  sometimes  expressed  in  an  action,  it  was

fragmentary, lacked direction, concealed a deep feeling of insecurity or a

pathological selfishness. Thus, it was pathological aggression—not healthy,

goal-directed aggression.

  I gradually began to comprehend the patients’ latent attitude of hate. It

was  never  missing.  If  the  analyst  did  not  get  stuck  in  emotionless

associations,  if  he  refused  to  be  content  with  dream  interpretations  and

attacked the character defenses concealed in the patient’s attitude, then thepatient became angry. At first, I did not understand this reaction. The patient

would complain about the emptiness of his experiences. But when I pointed

out the same emptiness in the nature of his communications, in his coolness,

in his grandiloquent or hypocritical nature, he became angry. He was aware

of the symptom, a headache or a tic, as something alien. But his character

was the person himself. He was disturbed when it was pointed out to him.

What was it that prevented a person from perceiving his own personality?

After all, it is what he is! Gradually, I came to understand that it is the entire

being  that  constitutes  the  compact,  tenacious  mass  which  obstructs  all

analytic  efforts.  The  patient’s  whole  personality,  his character,  his

individuality  resisted  analysis.  But  why? The  only  explanation  is  that  it

fulfills a secret function of defense and protection. I was familiar with Adler’s

theory of character. Was I, too, destined to go astray as Adler had done? I

saw the self-assertion, the feeling of inferiority, the will to power—all of

which were ill suited to be examined in the open. Vanity and concealment of

weaknesses were also there. Was Adler right, after all? But he had contended

that character, “not sexuality,” was the cause of psychic illness. In what way,

then, were the character mechanisms and the sexual mechanisms related? For

I had not the least doubt that Freud’s and not Adler’s theory of neuroses was

the correct one.

  It took me years to become clear about this: the destructiveness bound in

the character is nothing but the rage the person feels, owing to his frustration

in life and his lack of sexual gratification. When the analyst proceeds into the

depth, every destructive impulse gives way to a sexual impulse. The desire to

destroy is merely the reaction to disappointment in or loss of love.

  If  a  person  encounters  insurmountable  obstacles  in  his  efforts  to

experience love or the gratification of sexual urges, he begins to hate. But the

hate cannot be expressed. It has to be bound to avoid the anxiety it causes. In

short, thwarted love causes anxiety. Likewise, inhibited aggression causes

anxiety; and anxiety inhibits demands of hate and love.  I  now  had  a  theoretical  understanding  of  what  I  had  experienced

analytically  in  the  dissolution  of  the  neurosis.  I  also  had  an  analytic

understanding  of  what  I  knew  theoretically,  and  I  recorded  the  most

important result: the  orgastically  ungratified  person  develops  an  artificial

character and a fear of spontaneous, living reactions, thus, also, a fear of

perceiving his own vegetative sensations.

  About this time, the theories about destructive instincts began to move

into  the  forefront  of  psychoanalysis.  In  his  essay  on  primary  masochism,

Freud made an important change in an earlier formulation. Initially, it was

said  that  hate  was  a  biological  instinctual  force  parallel  to  love.

Destructiveness  was  first  directed  against  the  outside  world.  Under  the

latter’s influence, however, it turned inward against itself and thus became

masochism, i.e., the desire to suffer. Now it appeared that the reverse was

true: “primary masochism,” or the “death instinct,” was in the organism from

the  beginning.  It  was  an  integral  part  of  the  cells.  Its  outward  projection

against the world caused destructive aggression to emerge, which, for its part,

could again be turned back against the ego as “secondary masochism.” It was

argued  that  the  patient’s  secret  negative  attitude  was  nourished  by  his

masochism. According to Freud, masochism also accounted for the “negative

therapeutic  reaction”  and  the  “unconscious  feeling  of  guilt.”  After  many

years of work on various forms of destructiveness that caused guilt feelings

and depressions, I finally began to see its significance for the character armor

and its dependence on sexual stasis.

  Having obtained Freud’s consent, I began to think seriously about writing

a book on psychoanalytic technique. In this book, I had to take a clear stand

on the question of destructiveness. I did not yet have a view of my own.

Ferenczi  took  issue  with  Adler  in  an  essay  entitled Weitere  Ausbau  der

‘aktiven  Technik.’  “Character  investigations,”  he  wrote,  “never  play  a

prominent role in our technique.” Only at the termination of the treatment are

they “of some importance.” “The character assumes importance only whencertain abnormal, psychosis-like traits disrupt the normal continuation of the

analysis.”  In  these  sentences,  he  correctly  formulated  the  attitude  of

psychoanalysis  toward  the  role  of  character.  At  that  time,  I  was  deeply

immersed  in  characterological  investigations.  Adler  had  advocated  the

analysis of character in place of the analysis of the libido. I, however, was in

the process of developing psychoanalysis into “character analysis.” Real cure,

I argued, can be achieved only through the elimination of the basis of the

symptoms  in  the  patient’s  character.  The  difficulty  of  the  task  lay  in  the

comprehension  of  those  analytic  situations  which  required  not  symptom

analysis but character analysis. My technique differed from Adler’s inasmuch

as I approached the analysis of character through the analysis of the patient’s

sexual behavior. Adler, however, had said, “Not libido analysis but character

analysis.” There is no parallel between my concept of character armor and

Adler’s conception of individual character traits. Any reference to Adler in

discussing  the  sex-economic  theory  of  structure  is  indicative  of  a  deep

misunderstanding. Character traits such as “inferiority complex” or “will to

power” are merely surface manifestations in the process of armoring in the

biological sense of the vegetative inhibition of vital functioning.

  In Der triebhafte Charakter (1925), on the basis of my experiences with

impulsive patients, I moved from symptom analysis to character analysis.

This was a logical move, but I did not have sufficient clinical and technical

knowledge to follow it through at that time. Thus, I stuck to Freud’s theory of

the ego and the superego. However, a character-analytic technique could not

be  worked  out  with  the  auxiliary  concepts  of  psychoanalysis.  What  was

necessary  was  a  functional,  biologically  substantiated  theory  of  psychic

structure.

  At this same time, my clinical experiences clearly revealed that the goal

of therapy was to establish the capacity for full sexual gratification. I knew

this was the goal even if I had succeeded in bringing it about in only a few

patients. But I had no idea whatever of a technique that would enable me toachieve it consistently. Indeed, the more firm I became in my contention that

orgastic  potency  is  the  goal  of  therapy,  the  more  aware  I  was  of  the

imperfections  of  our  skill  in  technique.  Instead  of  diminishing,  the  gap

between goal and ability became greater.

    Therapeutically, the Freudian schemata of the psychic function turned out

to be efficient to a limited extent only. The making conscious of unconscious

desires  and  conflicts  had  a  healing  effect  only  when  genitality  was  also

established.  As  for  the  unconscious  need  for  punishment,  it  had  no

therapeutic usefulness whatever. For, if there is a deeply ingrained biological

instinct to remain sick and to suffer, then therapy is hopeless!

  Many analysts lost their bearing owing to the desolation which prevailed

in the field of therapy. Stekel rejected the work on psychic resistance against

the  uncovering  of  unconscious  material,  choosing  rather  “to  shoot  at  the

unconscious  with  interpretations.”  This  practice  is  still  followed  by  many

“wild psychoanalysts.” It was a hopeless state of affairs. Stekel rejected the

actual neuroses and the castration complex. He wanted to effect quick cures.

This was why he detached himself from Freud’s plow which, though slow,

cultivated thoroughly.

  Adler  could  not  come  to  grips  with  the  theory  of  sexuality  when  he

perceived  guilt  feelings  and  aggression.  He  ended  up  as  a  finalistic

philosopher and social moralist.

  Jung generalized the concept of libido to such an extent that it completely

lost  its  meaning  as  sexual  energy.  He  ended  up  in  the  “collective

unconscious”  and,  therewith,  in  mysticism,  which  he  later  officially

represented as a National Socialist.

  Ferenczi,  that  highly  gifted  and  humanly  outstanding  man,  was  well

aware of the desolateness in the field of therapy. He sought for the solution in

the body. He developed an “active technique,” focused on states of physical

tension. But he was not familiar with the stasis neurosis, and he made the

mistake of not taking the orgasm theory seriously.  Rank, too, was aware of the therapeutic desolateness. He recognized the

longing for peace, for a return to the womb. However, he misconstrued man’s

fear of living in this dreadful world, interpreting it biologically as the trauma

of birth, which was supposed to be the core of the neurosis. It did not occur to

him to ask why people want to flee from real life back into the protective

womb. He came into conflict with Freud, who held onto the libido theory,

and withdrew from the association.

  They  all  foundered  on  the  one  question  that  every  psychotherapeutic

situation raises: where and how is the patient to express his natural sexuality

when it has been liberated from repression? Freud neither alluded to nor, as it

later turned out, even tolerated this question. And, eventually, because he

refused to deal with this central question, Freud himself created enormous

difficulties by postulating a biological striving for suffering and death.

  Such problems could not be solved theoretically. The examples of Rank,

Adler, Jung, and others deterred one from making contentions that had not

been clinically substantiated in minute detail. I could have run the risk of

oversimplifying the entire complex of problems. Just tell the patients to have

sexual  intercourse  if  they  live  abstinently,  tell  them  to  masturbate,  and

everything will be just right! It was in this way that analysts attempted to

misinterpret my theory of genitality. Indeed, this was precisely what many

physicians and psychiatrists were telling their patients at that time. They had

heard that Freud said sexual stasis was responsible for the neurosis, so they

encouraged  their  patients  to  “gratify  themselves.”  They  were  after  quick

results. They failed to see that it was precisely the inability to experience

gratification  which  characterized  neurosis.  The  concept  of  “orgastic

impotence” contained the essence of the question which, though it sounded

simple,  was  quite  complicated.  My  first  premise  stated  that  genital

gratification resolves symptoms. However, clinical experience showed that

few patients had at their disposal the genital energy necessary to experience

genital  gratification.  Thus,  it  was  necessary  to  find  the  places  andmechanisms where it was bound or had been misdirected. The pathological

pleasure in destructiveness (more simply expressed, human maliciousness)

was  one  such  biological  deviation  of  genital  energy.  Extensive,  strictly

controlled theoretical work had been necessary to arrive at this conclusion.

The patient’s aggressiveness was misdirected, burdened with guilt feelings,

excluded  from  reality,  and  usually  deeply  repressed.  Freud’s  theory  of

primary biological destructiveness complicated the solution. For, if the overt

and covert everyday manifestations of human sadism and brutality were the

expression of a biological and, therefore, natural instinctual force, there was

little hope for the therapy of neuroses, or for the highly esteemed cultural

perspectives. And if, indeed, the impulses to self-annihilation were biological

and immutable, there remains only the prospect of mutual human slaughter.

In that case, neuroses would be biological manifestations. Why, then, did we

practice psychotherapy? I had to have clarity about these matters—I did not

want  to  indulge  in  speculations.  One  sensed  that  affective  blocks  against

truths lay concealed behind such contentions. On the other hand, my clinical

experience indicated a specific direction toward the realization of a practical

goal: sexual  stasis  is  the  result  of  a  disturbance  of  the  orgasm  function.

Fundamentally, neuroses can be cured by eliminating their energy source,

the sexual stasis.  This  direction  led  through  hidden  and  dangerous  areas.

Genital energy was bound, concealed, and disguised in many places and in

myriad ways. The official world had banned this subject. The technique of

research and therapy had to be extracted from the dismal state of affairs in

which it was immersed. Only a viable dynamic method of psychotherapy

could keep one out of dangerous sidetracks. In the course of the next ten

years, character analysis became the technique that helped to open the buried

sources of genital energy. Its task as a method of cure was fourfold:

  1. The thorough investigation of human behavior, including the sexual

act.

  2. The comprehension and mastery of human sadism.  3.  The  investigation  of  the  most  important  manifestations  of  psychic

illness  which  have  their  roots  in  periods  prior  to  the  genital  phase  of

childhood. It had to be made clear how non-genital sexuality obstructs the

genital function.

  4. The investigation of the social cause of genital disturbances.

  I shall begin by describing the second part of the task.


                    4. DESTRUCTION, AGGRESSION, AND SADISM


In  psychoanalysis,  the  terms  “aggression,”  “sadism,”  “destruction,”  and

“death  instinct”  were  used  randomly  and  interchangeably.  Aggression

seemed  identical  with  destruction,  which,  in  turn,  was  “the  death  instinct

directed against the world.” And sadism remained the primary partial instinct

which begins to be active at a certain stage of sexual development. On the

basis  of  their  origins  and  intentions,  I  attempted  to  assess  all  the  human

actions that are included under the concept of “hate.” In my clinical work, I

never  encountered  a  death  instinct,  a  will  to  die,  as  a  primary  instinct

corresponding to sexuality or hunger. All psychic manifestations that could

be interpreted as “death instinct” proved to be products of the neurosis. Such,

for  instance,  was  the  case  in  suicide,  which  was  either  an  unconscious

revenge on another person with whom one identified, or an action to escape

the enormous unpleasure caused by an extremely embroiled life situation.

  The  patient’s  fear  of  death  could  always  be  traced  back  to  a  fear  of

catastrophes and this fear, in turn, could be traced back to genital anxiety.

Moreover, analysts who accepted the theory of the death instinct frequently

confused anxiety and instinct. It was not until eight years later that the matter

became clear to me: fear of death and dying is identical with unconscious

orgasm anxiety, and the alleged death instinct, the longing for disintegration,

for  nothingness,  is  the  unconscious  longing  for  the  orgastic  resolution  of

tension. In short, I had not “generalized the orgasm theory all too quickly and

schematically.”  A living creature develops a destructive impulse when it wants to destroy

a source of danger. In this case, the destruction or killing of the object is the

biologically  purposeful  goal.  The  original  motive  is  not  pleasure  in

destruction. Rather the destruction serves the “life instinct” (I intentionally

use  the  term  which  was  current  at  that  time)  and  is  an  attempt  to avoid

anxiety  and  to preserve  the  ego  in  its  totality.  I  destroy  in  a  dangerous

situation because I want to live and do not want to have any anxiety. In short,

the impulse to destroy serves a primary biological will to live. As such, it

does not have a sexual connotation. Its goal is not pleasure, even though

liberation from unpleasure is an experience similar to pleasure.

  All  this  is  important  for  many  basic  concepts  of  sex-economy,  which

deny the primary biological character of destructiveness. An animal does not

kill another animal because it takes pleasure in killing. This would be sadistic

murder for the sake of pleasure. It kills because it is hungry or because it

feels that its life is threatened. Thus, here too, the destruction serves the “life

instinct.” What the “life instinct” is we do not yet know.

    Aggression, in the strict sense of the word, has to do neither with sadism

nor  with  destruction.  The  word  means  “approach.” Every  positive

manifestation of life is aggressive, the act of sexual pleasure as well as the act

of  destructive  hate,  the  sadistic  act  as  well  as  the  act  of  procuring  food.

Aggression  is  the  life  expression  of  the  musculature,  of  the  system  of

movement. The reassessment of aggression is of enormous importance for the

rearing of children. Much of the inhibition of aggression which our children

have to endure, to their own detriment, is the result of equating “aggressive”

with “wicked” or “sexual.” Aggression is always an attempt to provide the

means for the gratification of a vital need. Thus, aggression is not an instinct

in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word;  rather  it  is  the  indispensable  means  of

gratifying  every  instinctual  impulse.  The  latter  is  inherently  aggressive

because the tension demands gratification. Hence, there is a destructive, a

sadistic, a locomotor, and a sexual aggressiveness.  If aggressive sexuality is denied gratification, the urge to gratify it in spite

of  the  denial  continues  to  make  itself  felt.  Indeed,  the  impulse  arises  to

experience the desired pleasure at all cost. The need for aggression begins to

drown out the need for love. If the pleasurable goal is completely eliminated,

i.e.,  made  unconscious  or  imbued  with  anxiety,  then  aggression,  which

originally was only a means, becomes a tension-releasing action in itself. It

becomes pleasurable as an expression of life, thus giving rise to sadism. Hate

develops as a result of the exclusion of the original goal of love. And the hate

is most intense when the act of loving or being loved is blocked. This is what

brings the sexually motivated destructive intention into the aggressive action.

An example of this would be sexual murder. Its precondition is the complete

blocking of the ability to enjoy genital pleasure in a natural way. Thus, the

perversion “sadism” is a mixture of primary sexual impulses and secondary

destructive impulses. It does not exist anywhere else in the animal kingdom,

and it is a characteristic of man acquired late in his development, a secondary

drive.

  Every seemingly arbitrary destructive action is a reaction of the organism

to the frustration of a gratification of a vital need, especially of a sexual

need.

  Between 1924 and 1927, as these connections became clear to me in their

basic characteristics, I nonetheless continued to use the term “death instinct”

in my publications in order not to have to “break from the ranks.” In my

clinical work, I rejected the death instinct. I did not discuss its biological

interpretation because I had nothing to say about it. In everyday practice, it

always appeared as a destructive impulse. However, I had already formulated

the  dependence  of  the  destructive  impulse  on  sexual  stasis,  initially,

according to its intensity. I left open the question as to the biological nature

of  destructiveness.  It  was  also  necessary  to  be  cautious  in  view  of  the

scantiness of the facts. What was clear even then, however, was that every

suppression of sexual impulses provokes hate, non-directed aggressiveness(i.e., motor restlessness without a rational goal), and destructive tendencies.

Numerous examples from clinical experience, everyday life, and the animal

kingdom readily come to mind.

  It was impossible to overlook the reduction of hate impulses in patients

who  had  acquired  the  ability  to  obtain  natural  sexual  pleasure.  Every

conversion of a compulsion neurosis into a hysteria was accompanied by a

reduction of hate. Sadistic perversions or sadistic fantasies in the sexual act

decreased  to  the  extent  to  which  gratification  increased.  These  insights

enabled  us  to  understand  the  increase  in  marital  conflicts  when  sexual

attraction  and  gratification  decrease;  it  also  enabled  us  to  understand  the

disappearance of marital brutality when another gratifying partner is found. I

inquired into the behavior of wild animals and learned that they are harmless

when they are well-fed and sexually gratified. Bulls are wild and dangerous

only  when  they  are  led  to,  not  when  they  are  led  away  from,  the  cow.

Chained dogs are very dangerous because their motor activity and sexual

satisfaction  are  impeded.  I  came  to  understand  the  brutal  character  traits

exhibited under conditions of chronic sexual dissatisfaction. I could observe

this  phenomenon  in  spiteful  spinsters  and  ascetic  moralists.  By  contrast,

persons capable of genital gratification were conspicuously gentle and good.

A person capable of sexual gratification is never sadistic. If such a person

became sadistic, it could be safely assumed that a sudden disturbance had

obstructed the usual gratification. This was also borne out by the behavior of

women in the menopause. There are climacterical women who show no trace

of  spitefulness  or  irrational  hate,  and  others  who  develop  hateful

characteristics in the menopause insofar as they did not already have them.

There can be no question that the difference in behavior is due to their prior

genital experience. The second type are always women who had never had a

gratifying  love  relationship  and  now  regret  this  lack,  consciously  or

unconsciously  sensing  the  consequences  of  sexual  stasis.  Hateful  and

envious, they become the most vicious opponents of every form of progress.Thus, it becomes clear that the sadistic pleasure of destruction so evident in

our times can be traced to the general inhibition of natural sexuality.

  An  important  source  of  genital  excitation  had  been  disclosed:  by

eliminating destructive aggressiveness and sadism, energy can be liberated

and transferred to the genital. Soon it was shown that orgastic potency is

incompatible with strong destructive or sadistic impulses. One cannot want to

gratify the partner genitally and simultaneously want to destroy the partner.

Thus,  there  was  no  substance  to  the  talk  about  “sadistic  masculine  and

masochistic  feminine  sexuality.”  Nor  was  there  any  substance  to  the

contention  that  the  rape  fantasy  was  part  of  normal  sexuality.  In  these

matters, psychoanalysts simply failed to think beyond man’s present sexual

structure.

  When frustrated, genital energies become destructive. By the same token,

this destructiveness disappears with genital gratification. The theory of the

biological origin of sadism and destructiveness was clinically untenable, and

it was hopeless from a cultural point of view. But even this realization was

still  far  from  a  conclusive  solution  to  the  problem.  It  did  not  suffice  to

achieve the therapeutic goal of orgastic potency. Destructive energy was also

bound  in  many  places  and  in  myriad  ways.  In  most  cases,  it  lapses  into

repression. Thus, as far as technique was concerned, it was necessary to find

the mechanisms that inhibited the reactions of hate in order to liberate bound

energy. In this connection, character armor, in the form of the affect block,

became the most fruitful soil for research.

  The development of systematic resistance analysis to character analysis

did not take place until after 1926. Until then, I had concentrated our work in

the technical seminar on the study of the latent resistances and pregenital

disturbances in the neurotic process. Patients demonstrated a typical behavior

when  liberated  sexual  energy  excited  the  genital  system.  Most  patients

reacted to an increase in excitation by taking flight into non-genital attitudes.

It  was  as  if  sexual  energy  oscillated  back  and  forth  between  genital  andpregenital zones of excitation.

  In 1925–6, I treated a young American woman who had been suffering

from  severe  bronchial  asthma  from  earliest  childhood.  Every  situation  of

sexual excitation produced an attack. The attacks appeared whenever she was

about to have sexual intercourse with her husband, or when she flirted with

somebody  and  began  to  get  excited.  In  such  cases,  she  suffered  acute

dyspnea,  from  which  she  could  obtain  relief  only  through  the  use  of

antispasmodic drugs. Her vagina was hypesthetic. Her throat, on the other

hand, was hypersensitive. Unconsciously, she suffered from strong impulses

to bite and to suck, which were directed toward her mother. There was a

choking sensation in her throat. The fantasy of having a penis stuck in her

throat  appeared  clearly  in  dreams  and  actions.  As  these  fantasies  became

conscious, the asthma disappeared for the first time. But it was replaced by

acute vagotonic bowel excitations in the form of diarrhea. This alternated

with sympatheticotonic constipation. The throat was free, whereas the bowel

was overexcited. The fantasy of having a penis in her throat gave way to the

fantasy of “having a child in her stomach and of having to spew it out.” With

the diarrhea, the genital disturbance worsened. She ceased to have any feeling

whatever in her vagina and completely rejected the sexual act. She was afraid

of having an attack of diarrhea during coitus. As the bowel symptoms were

alleviated,  preorgastic  vaginal  excitations  appeared  for  the  first  time.

However,  they  did  not  go  beyond  a  certain  degree.  To  every  increase  of

excitation, the patient reacted with anxiety or with an attack of asthma. For a

while, the asthma reappeared in its original form, accompanied by the oral

excitations and fantasies as if they had never been treated. At every relapse,

they  arose  again,  while  the  excitation  advanced  closer  and  closer  to  the

genital  system.  Each  time  she  was  more  capable  of  enduring  vaginal

excitations. The intervals between relapses became longer. This went on for

several months. The asthma disappeared with every advance toward vaginal

excitation  and  returned  with  every  withdrawal  of  the  excitation  to  therespiratory organs. The oscillation of the sexual excitation between the throat

and the pelvis was accompanied by the corresponding fantasies of oral and

genital childhood sexuality. When the excitation was “above,” she became

petulant and depressive. When it was concentrated in the genital, she became

feminine and desired the male. The genital anxiety that caused her to escape

every time appeared initially as fear of being injured in the sexual act. After

this fear had been worked through, she was seized by the anxiety that she

would disintegrate or burst due to the excitation. Gradually, the patient got

used to the vaginal excitation and eventually experienced orgasm. This time,

there was no spasm in the throat and, consequently, no asthma. It disappeared

completely. I remained in contact with the patient for several years. I last

heard from her in 1932, at which time she was still well.

  This  case  was  a  further  confirmation  of  my  view  of  the  therapeutic

function of the orgasm and revealed additional important processes. I now

understood  that  the  non-genital  excitations  and  forms  of  gratification  are

retained out of fear of the intense orgastic sensations in the genitals, for the

non-genital forms provide a far lesser degree of excitation. Here, then, lay an

important key to the problem of instinct anxiety.

  The inhibition of sexual excitation produces a contradiction that grows

steadily worse. The inhibition increases the stasis of excitation; the increased

stasis  weakens  the  ability  of  the  organism  to  reduce  the  stasis.  As  a

consequence,  the  organism  acquires  a  fear  of  excitation,  in  other  words,

sexual anxiety. Hence, sexual anxiety is caused by the external frustration of

instinctual gratification and is internally anchored by the fear of the dammed-

up sexual excitation. This leads to orgasm anxiety, which is the ego’s fear of

the overpowering excitation of the genital system due to its estrangement

from the experience of pleasure. Orgasm anxiety constitutes the core of the

universal, biologically anchored pleasure anxiety. It is usually expressed as a

general anxiety about every form of vegetative sensation and excitation, or

the perception of such excitations and sensations. The pleasure of living andthe pleasure of the orgasm are identical. Extreme orgasm anxiety forms the

basis of the general fear of life.

  The  outward  forms  and  mechanisms  of  orgasm  anxiety  are  manifold.

Common  to  all  forms  is  the  fear  of  the  overpowering  orgastic  genital

excitation. There are various mechanisms of inhibition. It took roughly eight

years  to  investigate  them  thoroughly.  Until  1926,  only  a  few  typical

mechanisms were known. Female patients offered the best possibilities of

studying them. In males, the sensation of ejaculation often conceals orgasm

anxiety. In females, the orgasm anxiety is unadulterated. Their most frequent

anxieties are that they will soil themselves during excitation, break wind, or

involuntarily  have  to  urinate.  The  intensity  of  the  inhibition  and,

consequently, of the orgasm anxiety depends on how severely the function of

vaginal  excitation  is  impaired  and  how  tenaciously  non-genital  ideas  and

fantasies absorb genital energy. When it is inhibited, orgastic excitation is

experienced as a physical annihilation. Women are afraid of falling under

“the  power  of  the  man,”  of  being  injured  or  exploded  internally  by  him.

Hence, in fantasy, the vagina is transformed into a biting organ, the intent of

which is to remove the threat of the penis. Every spasm of the vagina is

developed in this way. If the spasm appears before the sexual act, it means

the penis is denied entrance. If it appears during the act, it means there is an

unconscious  desire  to  retain  or  bite  off  the  penis.  If  strong  destructive

impulses are present, the organism is afraid of fully surrendering itself to the

experience out of fear that destructive rage might break through.

  Women react to orgasm anxiety in various ways. Most of them hold their

bodies still, always dimly aware of the sexual activity. Others move their

bodies in a very forced manner, because gentle movement produces too great

an excitation. The legs are pressed together. The pelvis is pulled back. As a

means  of  inhibiting  the  orgastic  sensation,  they  always  hold  their  breath.

Strangely enough, I did not become aware of this until 1935.

  A female patient having masochistic beating fantasies was plagued by theunconscious  fantasy  that  she  would  soil  herself  with  excrement  during

excitation.  As  a  four-year-old  child,  she  had  developed  the  masturbation

fantasy  that  her  bed  was  equipped  with  an  apparatus  that  automatically

eliminated the dirt. Holding still in the sexual act out of fear of soiling oneself

is a widespread symptom of inhibition.













 
Diagram depicting typical genital disturbances in both sexes


A = Unpleasure and aversion marked by complete absence of feeling in the sexual act

B  =  Genital  hypesthesia,  minor  preorgastic  pleasure,  intermittent  inhibition  (I)  marked  by

    emotional deadness

C  =  Normal  preorgastic  excitation  of  the  genitals,  decrease  of  excitation  without  orgasm:

    isolated orgastic impotence

D = Orgasm disturbance in nymphomania and satyriasis: intense preorgastic excitation, no

    decrease in excitation, no orgasm

I = Inhibition

  ----- Normal orgasm curve


  Orgasm anxiety is often experienced as a fear of death or fear of dying. If

the patient suffers from a hypochondriacal fear of catastrophes, then every

strong  excitation  is  blocked.  The  loss  of  consciousness  in  the  sexual

experience, instead of being pleasurable, is fraught with anxiety. Thus, it is

necessary  “not  to  lose  one’s  head,”  necessary  to  be  constantly  “on  one’s

guard.” It is necessary “to be on the alert.” This attitude of watchfulness is

expressed in the forehead and eyelids.

  Every form of neurosis has a genital disturbance which corresponds to it.Hysteria  in  women  is  characterized  by  a  localized  disturbance  of  vaginal

excitation  together  with  general  hypersexuality.  Abstinence  due  to  genital

anxiety is hysteria’s typical genital disturbance. Hysterical men are either

incapable of experiencing an erection during the sexual act, or they suffer

from  premature  ejaculations.  Compulsion  neuroses  are  characterized  by

ascetic,  rigid,  well-rationalized  abstinence.  The  women  are  frigid  and

generally incapable of being excited, while compulsively neurotic men are

often  erectively  potent,  but  never  orgastically  potent.  From  the  group  of

neurasthenias, I was able to separate a chronic form which is characterized by

spermatorrhea and a pregenital structure. Here, the penis has completely lost

its role as a penetrating pleasure organ. It represents a breast being extended

to a child or a feces which is pressed out, etc.

  A fourth group is composed of men who, out of fear of the woman and to

ward off unconscious homosexual fantasies, are erectively superpotent. They

must constantly demonstrate to themselves that they are potent, using the

penis as a piercing organ, accompanied by sadistic fantasies. They are the

phallic-narcissistic males, always to be found among Prussianistic officers,

promiscuous charmers, and compulsively self-confident types. All of them

have  severe  orgastic  disturbances.  The  sexual  act  is  nothing  but  an

evacuation, followed by a reaction of disgust. Such men do not embrace the

woman—they “fuck” her. Among women, their sexual behavior creates a

deep aversion to the sexual act.

  I presented a part of these findings at the Homburg Congress in 1925,

under the title “On Chronic Hypochondriacal Neurasthenia.” Specifically, my

presentation dealt with what I referred to as “genital asthenia.” This develops

when genital excitation occurs with ideas of a pregenital but not a genital

nature. I subsumed a second part of the subject under the title “Sources of

Neurotic  Anxiety.”  This  paper  was  published  in  the  volume  presented  to

Freud to commemorate his seventieth birthday, in May 1926. In this work, I

discussed the differences between the anxiety that develops from repressedaggression, the anxiety that develops from conscience, and the anxiety which

is caused by sexual stasis. The guilt feeling originates from the sexual anxiety

indirectly by way of intensified destructive aggression. In short, I pointed out

the role played by destructiveness in the development of anxiety. Six months

later, Freud demonstrated the connection between conscience-anxiety and the

repressed instinct of destruction; at the same time, however, he minimized its

connection with sexual anxiety. This was logical within his system. For, after

all, he considered destruction a primary biological instinct, equal to sexuality.

In the meantime, I had demonstrated the correlation between the intensity of

the  destructive  impulse  and  the  intensity  of  sexual  stasis,  and  had

differentiated  “aggression”  and  “destruction.”  These  differentiations,  as

theoretical  and  as  specialized  as  they  may  appear,  are  of  fundamental

importance.  They  led  in  an  entirely  different  direction  from  the  Freudian

conception of destruction.












 
Diagram depicting the excitation curve in the case of premature ejaculation


O = Overexcitation of penis

P = Penetration of penis

E = Ejaculation

U = Unpleasure following ejaculation

C = Curve of normal orgasm


  The major aspects of my clinical findings were presented in my book Die

Funktion des Orgasmus. I gave the manuscript to Freud in his apartment on

May 6, 1926. This work had been dedicated to him. He seemed somewhatannoyed  upon  reading  the  title.  He  looked  at  the  manuscript,  hesitated  a

moment, and said, as if he were agitated, “So thick?” I felt uncomfortable.

His reaction had not been rational. He was usually very polite and would not

normally have made such a cutting remark. Prior to this, Freud had been in

the habit of reading every manuscript in a few days and then making his

comments in writing. In this instance, more than two months elapsed before I

received his letter. It read as follows:


    Dear Doctor: I have taken considerable time, but finally I have read the manuscript which

  you dedicated to me in commemoration of my birthday. I find the work valuable, rich in clinical

  material as well as in ideas. You know that I am definitely not opposed to your attempt at a

  solution which traces neurasthenia back to an absence of genital primacy.…


  With regard to an earlier work on the problem of neurasthenia, Freud had

written me:


    I have known for quite some time that my postulation and conception of the actual neuroses

  was a superficial one and that it requires detailed corrections. Clarification was to be expected

  from further intelligent investigations. Your efforts give me the impression that you are entering

  upon  a  new  and  hopeful  path.…  I  do  not  know  whether  your  hypothesis  really  solves  the

  problem. I had, and still have, certain doubts about it. You yourself fail to explain some of the

  most characteristic symptoms, and your entire conception of the displacement of genital libido is

  still not quite palatable to me. However, I hope that you will keep the problem in mind and

  eventually arrive at a satisfactory solution.… [italics Reich’s]


  This is what Freud had to say about a partial solution of the problem of

neurasthenia  in  1925,  and  about  a  detailed  presentation  of  the  orgasm

problem and the role of somatic sexual stasis in the neurosis. The cooling in

his attitude is quite evident. At first, I did not understand it. Why did Freud

reject  the  solution  contained  in  the  “orgasm  theory,”  which  had  been

enthusiastically greeted by most young analysts? I had no idea that he and

others were held back by the consequences my theory entailed for the whole

theory of the neuroses.

  On his seventieth birthday, Freud had told us we should not trust theworld;  acclaim  did  not  mean  anything.  Psychoanalysis  was  merely  being

accepted so it could be destroyed more easily. What he really meant was the

theory of sexuality. But it was precisely to the consolidation of the theory of

sexuality  that  I  had  made  a  decisive  contribution—and  Freud  rejected  it.

Therefore, I decided to hold on to the Orgasm manuscript for a few months

and to think about it. It did not go to the printers until January 1927.

  In  December  1926,  I  gave  a  talk  on  character-analytic  technique  to

Freud’s inner circle. I concentrated my presentation on the problem whether,

in the presence of a latent negative attitude, the analyst should interpret the

patient’s incestuous desires or whether it would be better to wait until the

patient’s distrust had been eliminated. Freud interrupted me. “Why don’t you

want to interpret the material in the sequence in which it appears? Of course,

it is necessary to analyze and interpret the incest dreams as soon as they

appear!” I had not expected this. I proceeded to give a precise and minute

explanation of my standpoint. The whole thing was foreign to Freud. He did

not  understand  why  the  analyst  should  not  interpret  the  material  in  the

sequence in which it appeared. This contradicted views he had expressed

earlier in private conversations about technique. The mood of the meeting

was not good. My opponents in the seminar gloated and felt sorry for me. I

held my peace.

  From  1926  on,  the  problems  of  the  “theory  of  therapy”  were  given

priority. The official report of the psychoanalytic clinic covering the period

1922–32 ran as follows:


    The causes of psychoanalytic successes and failures, the criteria of cure, the attempt to arrive

at a typology of forms of illness in terms of their resistances and possibilities of cure, the

  problems of character analysis, character resistances, “narcissistic resistances,” and the “affect

  block” were always subjected to a clinical and theoretical investigation on the basis of concrete

  cases. Partially in connection with this, we reviewed a number of publications dealing with the

  problems of technique.


  The reputation of our seminar grew. The line of approach I was followingproduced  a  large  number  of  subjects  for  investigation.  These  I  assigned

without any claims of priority. I took the collective work seriously. It was

enough for me that I had made headway in a central field of research.

  In the years which followed, a number of ambitious students who had

participated in the seminar raised unjustified claims of originality. There was

no reason to pay any attention to these claims. Generally speaking, those

working in the field of psychoanalysis knew the origin of the basic ideas. Of

the twenty students or so who were members of the Vienna seminar, not one

of them continued in the path of character analysis.

  In a letter, Freud acknowledged the originality of my work, in contrast to

what  was  “common  knowledge.”  But  this  common  knowledge  was

insufficient for instruction in practical work. I contended that I was merely

consistently applying analytic principles to the character. I did not know I

was interpreting Freud’s theory in a way he would soon reject. I still had no

inkling of the incompatibility between the theory of the orgasm and the later

psychoanalytic theory of neuroses.


5. THE GENITAL CHARACTER AND THE NEUROTIC CHARACTER. THE PRINCIPLE OF

                                    SELF-REGULATION


I  was  not  able  at  that  time  to  turn  my  intuitions  about  the  physiological

anchorings of psychic phenomena to practical or theoretical account. That is

all they were then—intuitions. Hence, I worked on the development of my

character-analytic  technique.  Clinically,  the  orgasm  theory  had  been

sufficiently substantiated to be able to provide a solid foundation for this

technique.

  My book Character Analysis was not published until April 1933. In 1928,

the first essay on this subject entitled “The Technique of Interpretation and

Resistance Analysis” was published in the psychoanalytic journal. At the end

of the year, I revised this essay and presented it to the seminar on technique.

It was the first of a number of articles which in the following five years madeup  the  aforementioned  book.  It  was  supposed  to  be  published  by  the

psychoanalytic  press.  I  was  already  in  the  process  of  reading  the  second

galley  proofs  when  the  executive  committee  of  the  International

Psychoanalytic Association decided not to allow the book to appear under its

imprint. Hitler had just seized power.

  The principle of consistency developed on the basis of typical errors of

conventional, so-called orthodox psychoanalysis. The latter followed the rule

of interpreting the material in the sequence in which the patient offered it,

without regard to stratification and depth. I suggested that the resistances

should be dealt with systematically, starting with that resistance closest to the

psychic surface and having particular contemporary importance. The neurosis

was to be undermined from a secure position. Every quantum of psychic

energy which became liberated through the dissolution of defense functions

had  to  strengthen  the  unconscious  instinctual  demands  and  thereby  make

them more accessible. A systematic removal of the layers of the character

armor  should  take  into  account  the  stratification  of  neurotic  mechanisms.

Direct interpretations of unconscious instinctual material could only disrupt

this work and therefore had to be avoided. The patient first had to establish

contact  with  himself  before  he  could  grasp  the  connections  between  his

various neurotic mechanisms. As long as the armor functioned, the patient

could  at  best  achieve  only  an  intellectual  comprehension  of  his  situation.

According to experience, this had minor therapeutic effect.

  An additional rule was to proceed consistently from the warding off of

sexual contents and not to go into prohibited sexual desires until the defense

against  them  had  been  broken  down.  In  the  analysis  of  resistances,  I

recommended  the  strictest  consistency,  i.e.,  sticking  to  that  element  of

defense which proved to be the most important and most disruptive at the

moment.  Since  every  patient  had  a  character  armor  which  reflected  his

individual history, the technique of destroying the armor had to be specific to

each case, determined and developed from step to step. This precluded aschematic technique. The analyst bore the main burden of responsibility for

the success of the therapy. Since the armor restricts the patient, his inability

to express himself openly is a part of his illness. It is not ill will, as many

analysts believed at that time. Correct dissolution of rigid psychic armorings

must eventually lead to the release of anxiety. Once the stasis anxiety has

been set free, there is every possibility of establishing free-flowing energy

and, in conjunction with it, genital potency. It merely remained questionable

whether  the  comprehension  of  the  character  armor  also  included  the

comprehension of the ultimate sources of energy. I had my doubts, and they

proved to be justified. One thing I was sure about, however, was that the

character-analytic  technique  was  a  considerable  step  forward  toward  the

mastery  of  severe,  encrusted  neuroses.  The  stress  was  no  longer  on  the

content of neurotic fantasies but on the energy function. Since the majority of

patients  were  incapable  of  following  the  so-called  basic  rule  of

psychoanalysis, i.e., “to say everything which comes to mind,” I ceased to

insist on it. Instead, I used as my points of attack not only what the patient

communicated but everything he offered, in particular the way in which he

made  his  communications  or  was  silent.  Even  silent  patients  revealed

themselves, expressed something which could be gradually unraveled and

mastered. Alongside the “what” of the old Freudian technique, I placed the

“how.” I already knew that the “how,” i.e., the form of the behavior and of

the communications, was far more important than what the patient told the

analyst.  Words  can  lie.  The  expression  never  lies.  Although  people  are

unaware of it, it is the immediate manifestation of the character. I learned in

the course of time to comprehend the form of the communications themselves

as direct expressions of the unconscious. The need to convince and persuade

the patient diminished in importance and soon became superfluous. Whatever

the patient did not grasp spontaneously and automatically did not have any

therapeutic value. Character attitudes had to be understood spontaneously.

The  intellectual  understanding  of  the  unconscious  was  superseded  by  thepatient’s  immediate  perception  of  his  own  expression.  I  ceased  to  use

psychoanalytic  terminology  with  my  patients.  This  in  itself  precluded  the

possibility  of  concealing  an  affect  behind  a  word.  The  patient  no  longer

talked  about  his  hate—he  experienced  it.  He  had  no  way  of  escaping  it

insofar as I correctly removed the armoring.

    Narcissistic  individuals  were  looked  upon  as  ill  suited  for  analytic

treatment,  but  by  breaking  down  the  armor,  these  cases  also  became

accessible. I was able to bring about cures in patients suffering from severe

character disturbances, though they were regarded as inaccessible by analysts

                                1
using conventional methods.

  The  love  and  hate  transferences  to  the  analyst  lost  their  more  or  less

academic character. It is one thing to talk about the anal eroticism of one’s

childhood or to remember that one felt such things at one time; it is quite

another thing to experience them in the session as an actual urge to break

wind and even to have to yield to such an urge. In the latter instance, no

convincing or persuading is necessary. I finally had to free myself from the

academic attitude toward the patient and to tell myself that, as a sexologist, I

had to deal with sexuality in the same way an internist has to deal with bodily

organs. In the process, I discovered the severe hindrance to analytic work

entailed by the rule, insisted on by most analysts, that the patient live in

abstinence for the duration of the treatment. If this was to be the case, how

were the genital disturbances to be understood and eliminated?

  I  am  not  mentioning  these  technical  details  here,  which  are  fully

discussed  in  my  book Character  Analysis,  for  reasons  pertaining  to

technique. I merely want to describe the reassessment in my basic attitude

that enabled me to discover, formulate, and make applicable for my later

work the principle of sexual self-regulation.

  Many  psychoanalytic  rules  had  an  inherently  and  strongly  taboo

character, which merely reinforced the patient’s neurotic taboos in the sexual

realm. Such, for instance, was the rule that the analyst should not be seen—should remain, so to speak, a blank sheet of paper upon which the patient

inscribed  his  transferences.  This  procedure  did  not  eliminate  but  rather

reinforced  the  patient’s  feeling  that  he  had  to  deal  with  an  “invisible,”

unapproachable, superhuman, i.e., in terms of the child’s way of thinking, a

sexless being. Under these circumstances, how was the patient to overcome

the sexual timidity that lay at the root of his illness? Dealt with in this way,

everything  pertaining  to  sexuality  remained  diabolic  and  forbidden,

something which had to be “condemned” or “sublimated” at all cost. It was

forbidden to look at the analyst as a sexual being. Under such circumstances,

how could the patient dare to express his human criticism? All the same, the

patients  had  a  way  of  knowing  about  the  analysts.  But  with  this  kind  of

technique,  they  seldom  expressed  what  they  knew.  With  me,  however,

patients  quickly  learned  to  overcome  any  reserve  about  criticizing  me.

Another  rule  was  that  the  patient  was  only  supposed  “to  remember,”  but

never to “do anything.” I was in agreement with Ferenczi in rejecting this

method. There could be no doubt that the patient should be “allowed to do”

also.  Ferenczi  got  into  difficulties  with  the  association  because,  having  a

good intuition, he allowed the patients to play like children. I tried every

conceivable means to free my patients from their characterological stiffness.

My intent was to have them look upon me as a human being, not to fear me

as an authority. This was part of the secret of my successes, which were

generally acknowledged. Another part of the secret was that I used every

available means appropriate to medical work to liberate my patients from

genital inhibitions. I did not consider any patient cured who could not at least

masturbate free of guilt feelings. I attached the greatest importance to the

supervision  of  the  patient’s  genital  sex  life  at  the  time  of  treatment.

(Hopefully,  it  is  clear  that  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  superficial

masturbation therapy practiced by some “wild” analysts.) It was precisely by

following this approach that I first learned to differentiate sham genitality

from the natural genital attitude. Gradually, over long years of work, the traitsof the “genital character,” which I later set off against those of the “neurotic

character,” became clear to me.

  I overcame my reserve toward the patient’s actions and discovered an

unexpected world. At the base of the neurotic mechanism, behind all the

dangerous, grotesque, irrational fantasies and impulses, I discovered a simple,

self-evident, decent core. I found it without exception in every case where I

was able to penetrate to a sufficient depth. This gave me courage. I allowed

the patients greater and greater rein, and I was not disappointed. True, there

were dangerous situations now and then. However, the fact speaks for itself

that, as extensive and protean as my practice has been, I have not had a single

case of suicide. It was not until much later that I came to understand the cases

of suicide that happened during treatment. Patients committed suicide when

their sexual energy had been stirred up but was prevented from attaining

adequate  discharge.  The  universal  fear  of  the  “evil”  instincts  has  had  a

severely  detrimental  effect  on  the  work  of  psychoanalytic  therapy.

Psychoanalysts had unquestioningly accepted the absolute antithesis between

nature (instinct, sexuality) and culture (morality, work, and duty) and had

come to the conclusion that “living out of the impulses” was at variance with

cure. It took me a long time to overcome my fear of these impulses. It was

clear that the asocial impulses which fill the unconscious are vicious and

dangerous only as long as the discharge of biological energy by means of

natural sexuality is blocked. When this is the case, there are basically only

three  pathological  outlets:  unbridled,  self-destructive  impulsiveness

(addiction,  alcoholism,  crime  due  to  guilt  feelings,  psychopathic

impulsiveness, sexual murder, child rape, etc.); instinct-inhibited character

neuroses (compulsion neurosis, anxiety hysteria, conversion hysteria); and

the  functional  psychoses  (schizophrenia,  paranoia,  melancholia,  or  manic-

depressive  insanity).  I  am  omitting  the  neurotic  mechanisms  which  are

operative  in  politics,  war,  marriage,  child  rearing,  etc.,  all  of  which  are

consequences of the lack of genital gratification in masses of people.  With the ability to experience complete genital surrender, the patient’s

personality underwent such a thorough and rapid change that, initially, I was

baffled by it. I did not understand how the tenacious neurotic process could

give  way  so  rapidly.  It  was  not  only  that  the  neurotic  anxiety  symptoms

disappeared—the  patient’s  entire  personality  changed.  I  was  at  a  loss  to

explain this theoretically. I interpreted the disappearance of the symptoms as

the withdrawal of the sexual energy which had previously nourished them.

But  the  character  change  itself  eluded  clinical  understanding.  The  genital

character appeared to function according to different, hitherto unknown laws.

I want to cite a few examples by way of illustration.

  Quite  spontaneously,  the  patients  began  to  experience  the  moralistic

attitudes of the world around them as something alien and peculiar. No matter

how tenaciously they might have defended premarital chastity beforehand,

now they experienced this demand as grotesque. Such demands no longer had

any  relevancy  for  them;  they  became  indifferent  to  them.  Their  attitude

toward their work changed. If, until then, they had worked mechanically, had

not demonstrated any real interest, had considered their work a necessary evil

which  one  takes  upon  oneself  without  giving  it  much  thought,  now  they

became  discriminating.  If  neurotic  disturbances  had  previously  prevented

them  from  working,  now  they  were  stirred  by  a  need  to  engage  in  some

practical work in which they could take a personal interest. If the work which

they performed was such that it was capable of absorbing their interests, they

blossomed.  If,  however,  their  work  was  of  a  mechanical  nature  as,  for

example, that of an office employee, businessman, or middling attorney, then

it became an almost intolerable burden. In such cases, I had a hard time

mastering  the  difficulties  which  arose.  The  world  was  not  attuned  to  the

human aspect of work. Teachers who had been liberal, though not essentially

critical of educational methods, began to sense a growing estrangement from,

and  intolerance  of,  the  usual  way  of  dealing  with  children.  In  short,  the

sublimation of instinctual forces in one’s work took various forms, dependingupon the work and the social conditions. Gradually, I was able to distinguish

two trends: (1) a growing immersion in a social activity to which one was

fully  committed;  (2)  a  sharp  protest  of  the  psychic  organism  against

mechanical, stultifying work.

  In other cases, there was a complete breakdown in work when the patient

became  capable  of  genital  gratification.  This  appeared  to  confirm  the

malicious exhortations of the world that sexuality and work were antithetical.

Upon closer examination, the matter ceased to be alarming. It turned out that

the latter were always patients who had, until then, performed their work on

the basis of a compulsive sense of duty, at the expense of inner desires they

had repudiated, desires which were by no means asocial—quite the contrary.

A person who felt himself best suited to be a writer had, if employed in an

attorney’s  office,  to  muster  all  his  energy  to  master  his  rebellion  and  to

suppress his healthy impulses. Thus, I learned the important rule that not

everything unconscious is asocial, and that not everything conscious is social.

On the contrary, there are highly praiseworthy, indeed culturally valuable,

attributes  and  impulses  which  have  to  be  repressed  for  material

considerations, just as there are flagrantly asocial activities which are socially

rewarded with fame and honor. The most difficult patients were those who

were  studying  for  the  priesthood.  Inevitably,  there  was  a  deep  conflict

between sexuality and the practice of their profession. I resolved not to accept

any more priests as patients.

  The change in the sexual sphere was just as pronounced. Patients who had

felt no qualms in going to prostitutes became incapable of going to them once

they were orgastically potent. Wives who had patiently endured living with

unloved  husbands  and  had  submitted  to  the  sexual  act  out  of  “marital

obligation”  could  no  longer  do  so.  They  simply  refused;  they  had  had

enough. What could I say against such behavior? It was at variance with all

socially dictated views, for instance, the conventional arrangement whereby

the wife must unquestioningly fulfill her husband’s sexual demands as longas the marriage lasts, whether she wants to or not, whether she loves him or

not, whether she is sexually aroused or not. The ocean of lies in this world is

deep! From the point of view of my official position, it was embarrassing

when a woman, correctly liberated from her neurotic mechanisms, began to

make claims upon life for the fulfillment of her sexual needs, not troubling

herself about morality.

  After a few timid attempts, I no longer ventured to bring up these facts in

the seminar or in the psychoanalytic association. I feared the stupid objection

that I was imposing my own views upon my patients. In this case, I would

have had to retort that moralistic and authoritarian influencing by means of

ideologies lay not on my side but on the side of my opponents. Nor would it

have served any purpose if I had wanted to lessen the impact of such facts by

confronting official morality with more acceptable examples. For instance, I

might  have  pointed  out  that  orgasmotherapy  imbued  women  with  a

seriousness about sex which made it impossible for them to go to bed with

anybody who happened to come along. And I am speaking of women who,

whether married or not, had been previously capable of spreading their legs at

the drop of a hat simply because they did not experience any gratification.

That is to say, they became “moral” and wanted only one partner who loved

and  gratified  them.  As  I  said,  such  examples  would  not  have  served  any

purpose. Where scientific work is under the purview of morality, it is guided

not  by  facts  but  by  moral  codes.  What  rankles  most  in  all  this  is  the

ostentation of “scientific objectivity.” The more trapped one is in the net of

dependencies, the more loudly one asserts that one is an “objective scientist.”

Once a psychoanalyst sent me a woman for treatment who was suffering

from  deep  melancholia,  suicidal  impulses,  and  acute  anxiety,  explicitly

stipulating that I “should not destroy the marriage.” The patient, as I learned

in the first session, had already been married for four years. Her husband had

not  yet  deflowered  her.  Instead,  he  had  engaged  in  all  sorts  of  perverse

activities which his wife, in her middle-class naïveté, had accepted as herunquestioning  marital  obligation.  And  the  analyst  had  stipulated  that  this

marriage should not be destroyed under any circumstances! The patient broke

off the treatment after three sessions because she suffered from extremely

acute anxiety and experienced the analysis as a seductive situation. I knew

this, but there was nothing I could do about it. A few months later I learned

that the patient had taken her life. This kind of “objective science” is one of

the millstones around the neck of a drowning humanity.

  I no longer had a clear conception of the relation of the psychic structure

to the existing social system. The change in the patient’s attitude with respect

to this moralistic code was neither clearly negative nor clearly positive. The

new psychic structure appeared to follow laws which had nothing in common

with the conventional demands and views of morality. It followed laws that

were new to me, of which I had no inkling prior to this. The picture which

these laws offered when taken altogether corresponded to a different form of

sociality. They embraced the best principles of official morality, e.g., that

women must not be raped and children must not be seduced. At the same

time,  they  contained  moral  modes  of  behavior  which,  though  flatly  at

variance with conventional conceptions, were socially unimpeachable. One

such attitude, for instance, was that it would be base to live a chaste life due

to external pressure, or to be faithful solely for reasons of marital obligation.

The attitude that it is unsatisfying and repulsive to embrace a partner against

his or her will appeared to be unassailable, even from the strictest moralistic

point of view. Yet, it was incompatible with the legally protected demand of

“marital obligation.”

  Allow these few examples to suffice. This other form of morality was not

governed by a “Thou shalt” or “Thou shalt not”; it developed spontaneously

on the basis of the demands of genital gratification. One refrained from an

ungratifying action not out of fear, but because one valued sexual happiness.

These people abstained from a sexual act even when they felt a desire for it, if

the external or internal circumstances did not guarantee full gratification. Itwas as if moralistic injunctions had been wholly dispensed with and replaced

by better and more tenable guarantees against antisocial behavior. They were

guarantees  which  were  not  incompatible  with  natural  needs;  indeed,  they

were based precisely on principles that fostered the joy of life. The sharp

contradiction  between  “I  want”  and  “I  must  not”  was  eliminated.  It  was

replaced  by  something  which  might  almost  be  called vegetative

consideration: “True, I would very much like to, but it would mean little to

me; it would not make me happy.” This was an entirely different matter.

Actions were carried out in accordance with a self-regulating principle. This

self-regulation, in turn, brought with it a certain amount of harmony because

it  eliminated  and  obviated  the  struggle  against  an  instinct  which,  though

inhibited, was constantly obtruding itself. The interest was merely shifted to a

different goal or to a different love object which offered fewer difficulties of

gratification. The precondition for this shift was that the interest, which was

natural  and  of  an  inherently  social  nature,  was  neither  repressed  (i.e.,

withdrawn from consciousness) nor moralistically condemned. It was merely

gratified elsewhere and under different circumstances.

  If a young man was in love with an “untouched” girl from a so-called

“good family,” this was certainly something natural. If he wanted to embrace

her,  this  impulse  was  not,  to  be  sure,  “socially  acceptable”—but  it  was

healthy. If the girl proved to be strong enough and healthy enough to deal

with all the internal and external difficulties contingent upon her acceptance

of him as an intimate friend, then everything would be all right. True, their

behavior would be at variance with official morality, but it would be wholly

in keeping with rational, healthy conduct. If, however, the girl proved to be

weak, apprehensive, inwardly dependent upon her parents’ opinion—in short,

neurotic—then the embrace could entail only difficulties. If the young man is

not  enslaved  by  morality  and  does  not  conceive  of  the  embrace  as  a

“violation,” he might do one of two things: (1) help the girl to gain the clarity

he has gained; (2) simply forego the pleasure. In the latter case, which is justas rational as the former, he would eventually turn his attention to another

girl where these difficulties did not exist. The neurotic—moralistic in the old

sense  of  the  word—young  man  would  have  behaved  in  a  fundamentally

different way in the same situation. He would have desired the girl and at the

same time refrained from the fulfillment of his desire, thus creating a lasting

contradiction.  The  moralistic  renunciation  would  have  worked  against  the

impulse until the latter’s repression would have put an end to the conscious

conflict, replacing it by an unconscious conflict. The young man would have

become progressively enmeshed in a difficult situation. Not only would he

have refrained from the possibility of instinctual gratification, he would also

have denied himself the possibility of seeking another object. A neurosis for

both partners would have necessarily resulted. The gap between morality and

instinct would remain. Or the instinct would be expressed in a disguised or

distorted  form.  The  young  man  might  easily  develop  compulsive  rape

fantasies, actual rape impulses, or the characteristics of a double morality. He

would go to prostitutes and run the risk of acquiring a venereal disease. There

would be no possibility of inner harmony. From a purely social point of view,

the result could be nothing but disastrous. “Morality” would not have been

served in any respect whatever. There are any number of variations of this

example. It applies to marriage as well as to every other sexual relationship.

  Now  let  us  contrast moralistic  regulation  and  sex-economic  self-

regulation.

  Morality functions as an obligation. It is incompatible with the natural

gratification of instincts. Self-regulation follows the natural laws of pleasure

and is not only compatible with natural instincts; it is, in fact, functionally

identical  with  them.  Moralistic  regulation  creates  a  sharp,  irreconcilable

psychic  contradiction,  i.e.,  morality  contra  nature.  It  thus  intensifies  the

instinct,  and  this,  in  turn,  necessitates  increased  moralistic  defense.  It

precludes  an  efficient  circulation  of  energy  in  the  human  organism.  Self-

regulation withdraws energy from an unrealizable desire by transferring it toa  different  goal  or  partner.  Steadily  alternating  between  tension  and

relaxation, it is consistent with all natural functions. The psychic structure

molded by compulsive morality performs work perfunctorily, governed by an

ego-estranged “should.” The sex-economically regulated structure performs

work in harmony with sexual interests, drawing from a great reserve of life

energy. The moralistic psychic structure overtly adheres to the rigid laws of

the moralistic world, adapts itself to them externally, and rebels internally. A

person  with  such  a  structure  is  constantly  at  the  mercy  of  antisocial

inclinations, of both a compulsive and impulsive nature. The person with a

healthy, self-regulated structure does not adapt himself to the irrational part

of the world; he insists on the fulfillment of his natural rights. He appears

sick  and  antisocial  to  neurotic  moralists.  In  reality,  he  is  incapable  of

antisocial  actions.  He  develops  a  natural  self-confidence,  based  on  sexual

potency. A moralistic structure always goes hand in hand with weak potency,

and  such  a  person  is  constantly  forced  to  make  compensations,  i.e.,  to

develop  an  artificial,  stiff  self-confidence.  He  is  ill  disposed  toward  the

sexual happiness of others because he feels provoked by it and is incapable of

enjoying it himself. Essentially, he engages in sexual intercourse to prove his

potency.  For  the  person  who  has  a  genital  structure,  sexuality  is  an

experience of pleasure and nothing but that. Work is a pleasurable activity

and  achievement.  For  the  moralistically  structured  individual,  work  is  an

irksome duty or solely a material necessity.

  The nature of the character armor is also different. The person having a

moralistic  structure  has  to  develop  an  armor  which  restricts  and  controls

every  action  and  functions  automatically  and  independently  of  external

situations. He cannot vary his attitudes even when he would like to. The

compulsively moralistic official continues to be one in the conjugal bed also.

The sex-economically regulated person is capable of closing himself to one

situation and opening to another. He is in control of his armor because he

does not have to hold back forbidden impulses.                                                                                          2
  I called one type a “neurotic” character, the other a “genital” character.

From this point on, the therapeutic task consisted in the transformation of the

neurotic  character  into  the  genital  character  and  in  the  replacement  of

moralistic regulation by sex-economic self-regulation.

  It  was  well  known  at  the  time  that  moralistic  inhibitions  produce

neuroses. Analysts spoke of the necessity of “smashing the superego.” I did

not succeed in convincing them that this was not enough, that the problem

was  more  extensive  and  lay  deeper.  The  moralistic  regulation  cannot  be

destroyed unless it is replaced by something different and better. And yet, it

was  precisely  this  something  different  that  my  colleagues  regarded  as

dangerous,  wrong,  and  “nothing  new.”  In  reality,  they  were  afraid  of  the

“meat  grinder,”  of  the  serious  confrontation  with  the  present-day  world,

which categorizes and assesses everything in accordance with compulsive

moralistic principles. At that time I myself was not too clear about the very

far-reaching social consequences. I simply followed the traces of my clinical

work with great determination. One cannot escape a certain kind of logic,

even if one would like to.

  It was not until a few years ago that I began to understand why free, self-

regulated behavior fills people with enthusiasm but at the same time terrifies

them. The fundamentally changed attitude toward the world, toward one’s

own experience, toward other people, etc., which characterizes the genital

character, is simple and natural. It is immediately evident, even to people

whose structure is completely different. It is a secret ideal in all people, and it

always means the same thing, even if called by a different name. No one

would gainsay the capacity for love, any more than he would gainsay sexual

potency. No one would dare to postulate incapacity for love or impotence, the

results of authoritarian upbringing, as goals of human striving. It is part of

natural attitudes to be spontaneously social, and it is not exactly the ideal to

force oneself to be social by suppressing criminal impulses. It is obvious to

everyone that it is better and healthier not to have an impulse to rape in thefirst place than to have to inhibit it morally. For all that, no other point of my

theory has endangered my work and existence as much as my contention that

self-regulation is possible, naturally present, and universally feasible. If, of

course, I had merely postulated a hypothesis about this, using sweet elegant

words  and  pseudo-scientific  phrases,  I  would  have  been  universally

acclaimed.  My  medical  work  required  constant  improvements  in  the

technique of influencing people, and this prompted me to raise ever more

deeply penetrating questions: if the attributes of the genital character are so

self-evident and desirable, why is the intimate relation between sociality and

orgastic  potency  overlooked?  Why  is  it  that  the  exact  opposite  view

dominates everything that rules life today? Why has the conception of a sharp

antithesis between nature and culture, instinct and morality, body and spirit,

devil and God, love and work, become one of the most salient characteristics

of our culture and philosophy of life? Why has it become incontestable and

given  legal  protection?  Why  was  the  development  of  my  scientific  work

followed with such great interest, only to be rejected in dismay and slandered

and denigrated when it began to make serious headway? Originally, I thought

the reason was ill will, treachery, or scientific cowardice. Not until many

years later, years filled with horrible disappointments, did I understand this

enigma.Neurotic character

 

| choracter

Reactive work

Sexuality Work

Protest,
escope

    
   

Oscillotion of

  
 

ool Sologial anarey
pinie

inviired, it Nosexual reresion
represied pe -

repression

Biological
Nobad
Diagram depicting the reactive and sex-economic performance of work


Reactive work performance: The work is performed in a mechanical, forced, dull way; it deadens the

sexual desires and is diametrically opposed to them. Only small amounts of biological energy can be

discharged in the performance. Work is essentially non-pleasurable. Sexual fantasies are strong and

disrupt the work. Hence, they have to be repressed, creating neurotic mechanisms which further reduce

the capacity for work. The reduction of one’s work performance burdens every love impulse with guilt

feelings. Self-confidence is weakened. This produces compensatory neurotic fantasies of grandeur.


Sex-economic work performance: In this case, biological energy oscillates between work and sexual

activity. Work and sexuality are not antithetical; they foster one another by building up self-confidence.

The respective interests are clear and concentrated, borne by a feeling of potency and a capacity for

surrender.


  Most of the troubled and disoriented reactions I had at that time toward

my opponents, whose number increased from day to day, originated from the

erroneous assumption that what is correct in principle can also be simply and

naturally  accepted  and  put  into  practice.  If  I  had  been  able  to  grasp  and

formulate  these  obvious  facts,  if  they  fit  in  so  well  with  the  purposes  of

therapeutic work, why should not my colleagues grasp them also? My naïveté

was fostered by the enthusiasm my colleagues had for my views, by their

keen interest and affirmation. I had touched their simple human ideals and

ideas. I was soon to find out that ideals are smoke and ideas are quickly

changed. Far more persuasive were the concerns for one’s livelihood and the

ties to organizations, authoritarian attitudes, and…? Something was missing.

  What was affirmed and longed for in the ideal aroused anxiety and terror

in reality. It was inherently alien to the existing structure. The entire official

world fought against it. The mechanisms of natural self-regulation lay deeply

buried  in  the  organism,  covered  over  and  infused  with  compulsive

mechanisms. The pursuit of money as the content and goal of life was at

variance with every natural feeling. The world forced this upon people by

educating them in specific ways and by placing them in conditions of life that

fostered it. Thus, the gap which formed in social ideology between morality

and reality, the demands of nature, and the idea of culture, existed in man

himself,  merely  in  a  different  form.  To  be  able  to  cope  with  this  world,people had to suppress what was most beautiful and most true, what was

most basic in themselves; they had to strive to annihilate it, to surround it

with the thick wall of the character armor. In doing so, they came to grief

internally, and usually externally as well; but they also spared themselves the

struggle with this chaos. There was a dim reflection of the deepest and most

natural feelings for life, of natural decency, spontaneous honesty, mute and

complete feelings of love. However, it was embodied in a “sentiment” which

was all the more artificial the more thickly the psychic armor was developed

against their own naturalness. Thus, even in the most exaggerated pathos, we

find a tiny trace of what is really alive. And it is from this last dim spark of

life that human mendacity and meanness derive the force which nourishes

falsity. This became my firm conviction, for how else could it be explained

that the ideology of human morality and honor had survived for such a long

time and been defended by masses of people, in spite of the actual filthiness

of their lives. Since people neither can nor are allowed to live their real life,

they cling to the last glimmer of it, which reveals itself in hypocrisy.

  On  the  basis  of  such  considerations,  the  idea  of  the  direct  correlation

between social structure and character structure developed. Society molds

human character. In turn, human character reproduces the social ideology en

masse. Thus, in reproducing the negation of life inherent in social ideology,

people produce their own suppression. This is the basic mechanism of so-

called tradition. I had no inkling of the importance this formulation would

have for the comprehension of fascist ideology some five years later. I did

not indulge in any speculations in the interest of political views. Nor did I

construct a philosophy of life. The solution of every problem which came up

in my clinical work led to this formulation. Thus, I was no longer surprised

that the glaring inconsistencies in the moralistic ideology of society coincided

in every detail with the contradictions in the human structure.

  Freud had contended that the existence of culture as such is dependent

upon the “cultural” repression of instincts. I had to agree with him, but withvery  definite  reservations:  present-day  culture  is,  in  fact,  based  on  sexual

repression. But the next question was: is the development of culture as such

dependent  upon  sexual  repression?  And  does  not  our  culture  rest  on  the

suppression of unnatural, secondarily developed impulses? No one had yet

spoken  about  what  I  had  discovered  in  man’s  depth  and  was  now  in  a

position to develop. There was still no opinion about this. I soon noticed that,

in discussions about “sexuality,” people meant something other than what I

had in mind. By and large, pregenital sexuality is antisocial and is at variance

with natural feelings. But the condemnation extends to the genital embrace as

well. Why, for instance, does a father look upon the sexual activity of his

daughter as a defilement? It is not solely because he is unconsciously jealous.

This would not explain the severity of his reaction, which sometimes includes

murder. Genital sexuality is, in fact, looked upon as something low and dirty.

For the average man, the sexual act is merely an evacuation or a proof of

conquest. The woman instinctively rebels against this, justifiably so. And it is

also  precisely  for  this  reason  that  the  father  conceives  of  his  daughter’s

sexual activity as a defilement. Under such circumstances, there can be no

correlation between sexuality and happiness. From this, everything written

about the baseness of sexuality and its dangers can be explained. But this

“sexuality” is a sick distortion of natural love. It has completely submerged

everything that is deeply yearned for as genuine happiness in love. People

have lost their feeling for natural sexual life. Their assessment of it is based

on a distortion, which they rightly condemn.

  Hence, to fight for or against sexuality is futile and hopeless. On the basis

of such distortions, the moralist can, must, and should win out. The distortion

cannot be tolerated. The modern woman is repelled by the sexuality of men

who get their experience in brothels and acquire a revulsion toward sex from

prostitutes.  “Fucking”  is  a  defilement.  No  sensitive  woman  wants  “to  let

herself be fucked.”

  This is what causes an impasse in discussions and makes the struggle fora healthy life so difficult. This is where my opponents and I were speaking at

cross  purposes.  When  I  speak  of  sex,  I  do  not  mean  “fucking,”  but  the

embrace  prompted  by  genuine  love;  not  “urinating  into  the  woman,”  but

“making her happy.” No headway can be made unless a distinction is drawn

between the unnatural practices in sexual life, practices that have developed

on a secondary level, and the deeply buried needs for love which are present

in every person.

  And so the question arose: how can principle be translated into reality, the

natural laws of a few into the natural laws of everyone? It was clear that an

individual  solution  of  the  problem  was  unsatisfactory  and  missed  the

essential point.

  Inquiry into the social aspects of psychotherapy was new at that time.

Accesses to the social problem were opened on three sides: the prophylaxis

                                                                      3
of neuroses, the closely related question of sexual reform, and finally the

general problem of culture.                                      CHAPTER VI





  AN ABORTIVE BIOLOGICAL REVOLUTION




              1. MENTAL HYGIENE AND THE PROBLEM OF CULTURE


The countless burning questions that came up in my social work prompted

me to want to hear Freud’s opinion. In spite of the encouragement he had

given me in an earlier conversation regarding my plan to set up a center for

the purpose of providing sexual counseling for the poor, I was not sure of his

concurrence.  Behind  the  scenes,  the  situation  in  the  psychoanalytic

organization was tense. I made an effort to induce my colleagues to take a

clear stand, for I had no doubts about the social radicalness of my work and

did not want to conceal it. I had already heard the first sexually defamatory

slanders against me. Following the publication of a series of articles on the

sex education of children in the Zeitschrift für Psychoanalytische Pädagogik,

rumors  were  circulated  that  I  allowed  my  children  to  witness  sexual

intercourse. It was also rumored that, abusing the transference situation, I

engaged in sexual intercourse with my patients during the analytic sessions.

And  there  was  more  of  the  same.  It  was  the  typical  reaction  of  sexually

frustrated people to the fight of healthy people for sexual happiness. I knew

that this reaction was unparalleled in hate and bitterness. There is nothing in

the world which, in a mute and murderous way, is capable of causing so

much  human  suffering.  Murder  in  war  gives  the  victim  the  sensation  of

heroic sacrifice. Men and women with healthy feelings for life must mutely

bear the mark of filth branded upon them by those who, out of fear and guilt,are ridden by perverse fantasies. There was not a single organization in our

society  which  would  have  defended  the  natural  feelings  for  life.  I  did

everything possible to shift the discussion from a personal to an objective

level. The intent of these slanderous rumors was all too clear.

  I gave my talk on the prophylaxis of neuroses to Freud’s inner circle on

December 12, 1929. These monthly meetings in Freud’s house were open

only to the officers of the Psychoanalytic Society. Everyone knew that words

of far-reaching importance were spoken here and that important decisions

were made. One had to consider very carefully what one said. Psychoanalysis

had become a very controversial, worldwide movement. The responsibility

was enormous, but it was not my nature to escape it by glossing over the

truth: I had either to present the problem exactly as it was or to say nothing at

all. But the latter was no longer possible. My sex-political work had gained

autonomy—thousands  of  people  flocked  to  my  meetings  to  hear  what

psychoanalysis had to say about social and sexual misery.

  The following are typical questions. They were asked by people of all

circles and professions in open meetings, and they were answered.


  What should one do when the woman, in spite of a conscious desire, has a

dry vagina?

  How often should one have sexual intercourse?

  Can one have intercourse during the menstrual period?

  What should a man do when the woman is unfaithful?

  What should a woman do when the man does not gratify her? When he is

too quick?

  Is it all right to engage in sexual intercourse from behind?

  Why is homosexuality punished?

  What should a woman do when the man wants to and she does not?

  Is there any remedy for insomnia?

  Why  do  men  so  much  love  to  talk  among  themselves  about  their

relationships with women?  Is intercourse between brother and sister punished in the Soviet Union?

  A  worker  was  married  to  a  woman  who  was  severely  ill.  She  was

confined  to  her  bed  for  years.  There  were  three  small  children  and  an

eighteen-year-old daughter. She took the place of the mother, cared for the

children, and cared for the father. There were no problems. She slept with the

father. Everything went well. She continued to care for the family, to cook for

them, and to keep house for them. The father worked and provided for his

sick wife. The daughter was nice to her younger brothers and sisters. People

began  to  gossip.  The  vice  squad  was  called  in.  The  father  was  arrested,

charged with incest, and put into prison. The children were put on welfare.

The family went to pieces. The daughter had to become a servant in a strange

household. Why is this so?

  What should one do if one wants to make love and several other people

are sleeping in the same room?

  Why do physicians refuse to help when a woman becomes pregnant and

does not want to or cannot have the child?

  My daughter is just seventeen years old and already has a boy friend. Is

there anything wrong with that? He won’t marry her—that’s for sure.

  Is it very bad to have sexual relations with more than one person?

  The girls make such a fuss. What should I do?

  I am very lonely; I want very much to have a boy friend. But when one

comes along, I am afraid.

  My husband goes out with another woman. What should I do? I would

like to go out with another man. Is there anything wrong with that?

  I live on twenty schillings per week. My girl wants to go to the movies.

There isn’t enough money for that. I love my girl. What should I do to keep

her from going to someone else?

  I  have  been  living  with  my  wife  for  eight  years  now.  We  love  one

another, but we don’t hit it off sexually. I have a strong desire to sleep with

another woman. What should I do?  My child is three years old and is always playing with his penis. I try to

punish him, but it is no use. Is that bad?

  I masturbate every day—three times on some days. Is this injurious to my

health?

    Zimmermann [a Swiss reformer] says that, to avoid pregnancy, the man

should prevent ejaculation by not moving inside of the woman. Is this true? It

really hurts!

  I read in a book for mothers that one should have intercourse only when

one wants to have a child. That’s ridiculous, isn’t it?

  Why is everything pertaining to sex so forbidden?

  If sexual freedom were introduced, wouldn’t this produce chaos? I would

be afraid of losing my husband!

  Woman  is  naturally  different  from  man.  Man  has  a  polygamous

predisposition—woman a monogamous predisposition. Bearing children is a

duty. Would you allow your wife to sleep with another man?

  You speak of sexual health. Do you allow your children to masturbate as

much as they please? I’ll bet you don’t!

  In the company of others, our husbands behave differently from the way

they behave at home. At home, they are brutal tyrants! What should one do

about this?

  Are you married? Do you have children?

  Wouldn’t sexual freedom lead to the complete destruction of the family?

  I suffer from uterine hemorrhages. The physician at the clinic is uncouth,

and I have no money to consult a private physician. What should I do?

  At what age can one begin to engage in sexual intercourse?

  My period always lasts ten days and it is very painful. What should I do?

  Is masturbation harmful? People say that it makes you goofy!

  Why are parents so strict with us? I always have to be at home by eight

o’clock! And I’m already sixteen years old.

  When I attend meetings (I am a functionary and very much interested inpolitics), my wife is jealous. What should I do with her?

  My husband always insists on making love to me. I don’t always feel like

it. What should I do?

  I am engaged, and it happens with us that my fiancé does not find the

right  position  in  sexual  intercourse,  so  that  we  get  tired  before  the

gratification  and  immediately  stop.  I  want  to  point  out  that  my  fiancé  is

twenty-nine years old, but has never had intercourse before this.

  Are people with reduced potency allowed to get married?

  What should unattractive people do who can’t find a boy friend or a girl

friend?

  What should an older untouched girl do? Obviously she can’t offer herself

to a man!

  Is  it  possible  that  a  man  who  lives  like  an  ascetic  can  forgo  sexual

intercourse by taking cold baths every day, engaging in gymnastics, sports,

etc.?

  Is coitus interruptus harmful?

  If coitus interruptus is practiced over a long period of time, will it lead to

impotence?

  What  should  be  the  relationship  between  boys  and  girls  at  a  summer

camp?

  Does  the  sexual  intercourse  of  an  adolescent  have  any  mental

consequences?

  Is it harmful to interrupt masturbation right before the ejaculation?

  Is vaginal discharge caused by masturbation?


  On  those  evenings,  which  were  dedicated  to  the  discussion  of  the

prophylaxis of neuroses and the question of culture, Freud for the first time

clearly  expressed  the  views  which  were  published  in Civilization  and  Its

Discontents, 1931, and were often glaringly at variance with the position he

took in The  Future  of  an  Illusion.  I  had  not  “provoked”  Freud,  as  some

analysts  accused  me  of  doing.  Nor  were  my  arguments  “dictated  byMoscow,” as others maintained. At that very time, I was using these same

arguments to fight the economists in the socialist movement who, with their

slogans about the “iron course of history” and the “economic factors,” were

alienating the very people whom they claimed to be liberating. I was merely

making an effort to clarify the issues, and I have no regrets about it today. I

was resisting the growing tendency to move away from the psychoanalytic

theory of sex and to shy away from its social consequences.

  By  way  of  introduction,  therefore,  I  asked  that  my  presentation  be

regarded  as  a  private  and  personal  communication,  since  I  had  not  yet

published anything on this subject. Four questions demanded an answer:

  1. What  are  the  ultimate  consequences  of  psychoanalytic  theory  and

therapy?  What  are  they,  that  is,  if  psychoanalysis  retains  the  central

importance of the sexual etiology of the neuroses?

  2. Is it possible to continue to merely limit oneself to the analysis of the

neuroses of individual men and women in private practice? Neurosis is an

epidemic  disease  operating  beneath  the  surface.  Humanity  as  a  whole  is

psychically ill.

  3. What is the nature of the role the psychoanalytic movement has to

assume in the social framework? There can be no doubt that it has to assume

a  role.  We  are  speaking  here  of  the  important  social  question  of  psychic

economy which is identical with sex-economy if the theory of sexuality is

pursued to its ultimate conclusion.

  4. Why does society produce neuroses en masse?

  I answered these questions on the basis of experiences which I have often

described elsewhere. According to the statistical data which I had gathered in

various  organizations  and  youth  groups,  it  could  be  demonstrated  that  as

many as 60 to 80 percent of these people were afflicted with severe neurotic

illnesses. And it must be borne in mind that these figures represent conscious

neurotic symptoms only; they do not include character neuroses of which the

members  of  these  organizations  were  unaware.  In  meetings  having  aspecifically  sex-political  character,  the  percentage  was  higher,  above  80

percent. The reason for this, as could be assumed, was that a great many

neurotically  ill  people  came  to  such  meetings.  The  argument  that  only

neurotics  attended  such  meetings,  however,  was  refuted  by  the  following

fact:  in  meetings  of  closed  organizations  (e.g.,  free-thinker  organizations,

groups  of  schoolchildren,  laborers,  all  kinds  of  politically  oriented  youth

groups,  etc.)  which  did  not  have  any  special  attraction  for  neurotics,  the

percentage of symptom neuroses was only an average of 10 percent lower

than that of the open meetings. In the six counseling centers in Vienna which

were under my supervision, about 70 percent of those who came to us for

help and advice were in need of psychoanalytic treatment. Only about 30

percent, consisting of men and women who suffered from stasis neuroses of a

mild sort, could be helped through counseling and social help. This meant

that even if sex-hygiene care were provided for the entire population, at best

only  some  30  percent  of  the  people  could  be  helped  by  quick  medical

intervention. The remaining 70 percent of the population (higher in the case

of  women,  lower  in  the  case  of  men)  required  psychoanalytic  treatment

which, in every case and with questionable results, necessitated an average of

two to three years. It was senseless to set this as the goal of social-political

work. Mental hygiene on this individual basis was only a dangerous utopia.

  The  situation  demanded  clear,  extensive  social  measures  aimed  at  the

prevention of neuroses. The principles and means by which these measures

would be applied, could, of course, be derived from the experience gained

from individual patients, in the same way that efforts are made to combat a

plague on the basis of experiences gained from individuals infected with it.

There is a tremendous difference, however. Smallpox is prevented through

quick vaccinations. The measures necessary to prevent neuroses present a

somber,  appalling  picture.  Still,  they  cannot  be  circumvented.  The  only

prospect is to destroy the source from which neurotic misery issues.


What are the sources of the neurotic plague?The  most  important  source  is  authoritarian,  sexually  repressive  family

upbringing,  with  its  unavoidable,  sexual  child-parent  conflict  and  genital

anxiety. Precisely because there could be no doubt about the correctness of

Freud’s clinical findings, there could be no doubt about the correctness of the

conclusions  I  had  drawn.  I  had,  moreover,  solved  a  problem  which  had

remained  unclear  until  then:  the  relation  between  the  sexual  child-parent

attachment and the general social suppression of sexuality. We were dealing

here with a fact characteristic of education as a whole, and hence the problem

assumed a new perspective.

  There could no longer be any doubt that people became neurotic on a

mass scale. What was not clear and in need of explanation was how people

could remain healthy under the prevailing conditions of education! To solve

this far more interesting riddle, it was necessary to draw upon the relationship

between authoritarian family upbringing and sexual suppression.

  Parents  suppress  the  sexuality  of  small  children  and  adolescents,  not

knowing that they are doing so at the behest of authoritarian, mechanized

society. Their natural expression blocked by forced asceticism and in part by

the  lack  of  fruitful  activity,  children  develop  a  sticky  attachment  to  the

parents, marked by helplessness and guilt feelings. This, in turn, thwarts their

liberation  from  the  childhood  situation,  with  all  its  concomitant  sexual

anxieties and inhibitions. Children brought up in this way become character-

neurotic adults who, in turn, pass on their neuroses to their own children. And

so it goes from generation to generation. This is how the conservative, life-

fearing tradition is perpetuated. How, in spite of this, can people become and

remain healthy?

  The  theory  of  the  orgasm  provided  the  answer:  accidental  or  socially

determined  conditions  occasionally  enable  the  attainment  of  genital

gratification; this, in turn, eliminates the energy source of the neurosis and

weakens  the  tie  to  the  childhood  situation.  Thus,  in  spite  of  the  neurotic

family  situation,  it  is  possible  for  some  people  to  become  and  to  remainhealthy. The sexual life of the youth of 1940 is fundamentally more free, but

also more conflict-laden, than that of the youth of 1900. The healthy person

as well as the sick person goes through family conflict and sexual repression.

It is a peculiar coinciding of circumstances, quite accidental in this society,

which makes it possible for an organism, with the help of a sex-economic

mode of life, to free itself from both ties. The industrial collectivization of

work has been an important factor in this connection. But what is the fate of

these healthy people later in life? They do not have an easy time of it, that is

certain.  However,  with  the  help  of  the  “spontaneous  organotherapy  of

neurosis”—the term I used to designate the orgastic resolution of tensions—

they overcome the pathological tie to the family as well as the effects of the

sexual misery of society. There is a category of people in society who, living

and working in scattered parts of the world without any connection with one

another,  are  endowed  with  natural  sexuality.  They  represent  what  I  have

termed  the genital character.  They  are  very  frequently  found  among  the

industrial workers.

  The mass plague of neuroses is produced in three main stages of human

life: in early childhood, through the atmosphere of the neurotic home, in

puberty,  and  finally  in  the compulsive  marriage  in  its  strict  moralistic

conception.

  Strict and premature toilet training and insistence on “good behavior,”

absolute self-control, and good manners have a damaging effect in the first

stage. They make the child amenable to the most important prohibition of the

next period, the prohibition of masturbation. Other obstructions to the child’s

development  may  vary,  but  these  are  typical.  The  inhibition  of  natural

childhood sexuality in all layers of the population provides the most fertile

soil for the fixation to the neurotic home and its extension into the tie to one’s

“homeland.” This is the origin of man’s lack of independence in thought and

action. Psychic mobility and energy go together with sexual vitality and are

its precondition. On the other hand, sexual inhibition is the precondition ofpsychic inhibition and clumsiness.

  In puberty, the damaging principle of education is repeated, leading to

psychic stagnation and character armoring. It is repeated on the solid basis of

the  previous  inhibition  of  childhood  impulses.  Contrary  to  psychoanalytic

belief, the puberty problem is socially and not biologically determined. Nor is

it determined by the child-parent conflict. Adolescents who find their way

into the real life of sexuality and work sever the neurotic tie to the parents

acquired  in  childhood.  The  others,  severely  affected  by  the  specific

frustration brought about by sexual inhibition, sink back into the infantile

situation  more  than  ever.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  most  neuroses  and

psychoses  develop  in  puberty.  Statistical  investigations  carried  out  by

Barasch on the duration of marriages; with reference to the period at which

genital sexual life began, confirm the close correlation between marriage and

adolescent asceticism. The sooner an adolescent arrives at gratifying sexual

intercourse, the more incapable he is of adapting himself to the strict demand

of “only one partner, and this partner for a lifetime.” However one may feel

about this, it is a fact which can no longer be gainsaid. It means that the

demand of asceticism for adolescents has the intent of making adolescents

amenable  and  marriageable.  And  this  is  precisely  what  it  does.  In  the

process,  however,  it  produces  the  very  sexual  impotence  which,  in  turn,

destroys marriages and heightens marriage crises.

  One  plays  the  hypocrite  when  one  makes  it  legally  possible  for  an

adolescent  to  marry  on  the  eve  of  his  or  her  sixteenth  birthday—thereby

proclaiming that sexual intercourse is not damaging in this case—while at the

same time demanding “asceticism to the day of marriage,” even when this

cannot take place until the man or woman is thirty years old. Then, all of a

sudden, “sexual intercourse at an early age is damaging and immoral.” No

person capable of thinking for himself can accept such an explanation, any

more than he can accept the neuroses and perversions produced in this way.

Making the punishment of masturbation less severe is merely a convenientevasion  of  the  issue,  which  is  the  fulfillment  of  the  physical  demands  of

budding youth. Puberty is sexual ripening, and initially that is all it is. The so-

called cultural puberty of aesthetic psychologists is, to put it mildly, sheer

nonsense. Safeguarding the sexual happiness of maturing adolescents is a

central point in the prophylaxis of neuroses.

  The youth of every generation has the function of representing the next

step of civilization. The older generation attempts to keep the youth at its

own cultural level. The motives for this are of a predominantly irrational

nature:  the  older  generation  has  had  to  become  resigned—hence  it  feels

threatened when the youth lives out what it could not achieve. The typical

adolescent rebellion against the parental home is not a neurotic manifestation

of puberty, but a preparation for the social function these young people will

later have to fulfill as adults. They have to fight for their ability to progress.

No matter what cultural and civilized tasks confront every new generation, it

is always the older generation’s fear of the sexuality and fighting spirit of the

young which inhibits.

  I was accused of being a utopian, of wanting to eliminate unpleasure from

the world and safeguard pleasure only. However, I had put down in black and

white that conventional upbringing makes people incapable of pleasure by

armoring them against unpleasure. Pleasure and joy of life are inconceivable

without struggle, painful experiences, and unpleasurable self-confrontations.

Psychic health is characterized, not by the Nirvana theory of the Yogis and

                                                              1
the  Buddhists,  the  hedonism  of  the  epicureans,  the  renunciation  of

monasticism;  it  is  characterized  by  the  alternation  between  unpleasurable

struggle and happiness, error and truth, deviation and rectification, rational

hate and rational love; in short, by being fully alive in all situations of life.

  The ability to endure unpleasure and pain without becoming embittered

and seeking refuge in rigidification goes hand in hand with the ability to

receive happiness and to give love. As Nietzsche put it, he who would “exult

to  high  heaven”  must  be  prepared  to  “grieve  unto  death.”  However,  ourEuropean  social  philosophy  and  education  turned  adolescents,  depending

upon their social situation, either into fragile puppets or into dried-up, dull,

chronically  morose  machines  of  industry  and  “business,”  incapable  of

pleasure.

  One has to learn to see clearly into the problem of marriage. Marriage is

neither a love affair pure and simple, as one group of people contends, nor is

it a purely economic institution, as another group contends. It is a form which

                                                                                  2
was imposed upon sexual needs through socio-economic processes. Apart

from the ideology acquired in early childhood and the moral pressure exerted

by society, sexual and economic needs, particularly in women, produce the

desire for marriage. Marriages fall to pieces as a result of the ever deepening

discrepancy  between  sexual  needs  and  economic  conditions.  The  sexual

needs can be gratified with one and the same partner for a limited time only.

On the other hand, the economic tie, moralistic demand, and human habit

foster the permanency of the relationship. This results in the wretchedness of

marriage. Premarital abstinence is supposed to prepare a person for marriage.

But this very abstinence creates sexual disturbances and thereby undermines

marriage. Sexual fulfillment can provide the basis for a happy marriage. But

this  same  fulfillment  is  at  variance  with  every  aspect  of  the  moralistic

demand for lifelong monogamy. This is a fact, no matter how one feels about

it.  But  there  should  be  no  hypocrisy.  Under  poor  internal  and  external

conditions,  the  above  contradictions  lead  to  resignation.  This  necessitates

severe inhibition of the vegetative impulses. This, in turn, draws out from the

depth  all  available  neurotic  mechanisms.  Sexual  partnership  and  human

friendship  are  replaced  by  fatherliness  or  motherliness  in  the  marital

relationship  and  by  mutual,  slavish  dependency—in  short,  by  disguised

incest.  Today,  these  are  commonplace,  long-since  thoroughly  described

matters,  of  which  only  many  priests,  psychiatrists,  social  reformers,  and

politicians are still ignorant.

  These internal injuries to the psychic structure, already extremely seriousin themselves, are strongly reinforced by the external social conditions which

caused them in the first place. Psychic misery is not the intention of sexual

chaos,  but  it  is  an  inseparable  part  of  it. Compulsive  marriage  and  the

compulsive family reproduce the human structure of the economically and

psychically mechanized era. In terms of sexual hygiene, everything is turned

upside  down  in  this  system.  Biologically,  the  healthy  human  organism

requires three to four thousand sexual acts in the course of the thirty to forty

years during which it is genitally active. Generally speaking, parents do not

want more than two to four children. Moralism and asceticism postulate that,

even  in  marriage,  sexual  pleasure  should  serve  only  the  purpose  of

procreation. Carried to its ultimate conclusion, this means at most four sexual

acts in one lifetime. The authorities say yes to this, and people suffer mutely,

cheat, and become hypocrites. Yet no one puts up a forceful and energetic

fight against such nonsense, which takes on the proportions of mass murder.

This nonsense is manifested in the legal or moralistic prohibition of the use of

contraceptives.  This  causes  sexual  disturbances  and  fear  of  pregnancy  in

women, which, in turn, resuscitate childhood sexual anxieties and destroy

marriages. The elements of sexual chaos are interconnected. The childhood

prohibition of masturbation reinforces in the woman the anxiety of having her

vagina  entered  or  touched.  This  causes  women  to  be  afraid  of  using

contraceptives. Hence, we have the thriving practice of “criminal abortions,”

which, for their part, produce countless bases for neuroses. When there is a

fear  of  pregnancy,  neither  the  woman  nor  the  man  can  experience

gratification. Approximately 60 percent of the adult male population practice

coitus interruptus. This produces sexual stasis and nervousness en masse.

  And to all this science and medicine say nothing. More than that, they

obstruct every serious scientific, social, or medical attempt to remedy the

situation,  by  evading  the  issue,  erudition,  false  theories,  and  direct

endangerments of life. There is every reason to be indignant when one hears

all the claptrap about “moralistic indications,” the harmlessness of abstinenceand coitus interruptus, etc., expounded in a highly dignified and authoritarian

manner. I did not say this at Freud’s apartment, but my objective description

of the facts must have triggered off a feeling of indignation.

  To all this is added the housing problem. According to the statistics of

1927, more than 80 percent of the population of Vienna lived four and more

in one room. Thus, for 80 percent of the population, this meant a disturbance,

indeed  the  impossibility,  of  regulated,  physiologically  adequate  sexual

gratification,  even  under  the  best  inner  conditions.  There  was  complete

silence about this in the fields of medicine and sociology.

  Mental hygiene presupposes an ordered, materially secure life. A person

harassed by basic material needs cannot enjoy any kind of pleasure and easily

becomes  a  sexual  psychopath.  Thus,  those  who  are  in  favor  of  the

prophylaxis of neuroses must be prepared for a radical revolutionizing of

everything  that  produces  neuroses.  This  explains  why  the  prophylaxis  of

neuroses was never a topic of serious discussion and why it was alien to

human thought. My arguments had to have a provocative effect, whether I

intended it or not. The facts alone contained all manner of provocation. I did

not  even  mention  the  legally  enforceable  “marital  obligation”  and  the

“obedience owed to parents to the point of enduring physical punishment.”

Such things were not talked about in academic circles; they were looked upon

as “unscientific and political.”

  What was awkward about my objectively unassailable position was that,

while no one wanted to hear the facts I presented, no one could gainsay them.

Everyone  knew  of  course  that  individual  therapy  was  of  no  consequence

socially,  that  education  was  hopeless,  and  that  ideas  and  lectures  on  sex

education  alone  were  not  enough.  With  inevitable  logic,  this  led  to  the

problem of culture.

  Until 1929, the relation of psychoanalysis to “culture” was not discussed.

Not only had psychoanalysts not seen any contradiction between the two,

they  had  averred  that  the  Freudian  theory  “fostered  culture”,  whollydisclaiming  its  criticism  of  culture.  Between  1905  and  about  1925,  the

enemies of psychoanalysis had continually called attention to the “danger to

culture”  which  psychoanalysis  would  soon  entail.  The  opponents  of

psychoanalysis  and  the  attentive  world  had  attributed  to  psychoanalytic

theory more than it purported. This was due, on one hand, to the deep need

people had for clarity about sexuality and, on the other, to the “sexual chaos”

the “champions of culture” feared. Freud thought he could harness the danger

by means of the theories of sublimation and of instinctual renunciation. The

hubbub gradually subsided, especially as the theory of the death instinct came

more and more into prominence and the theory of stasis anxiety faded more

and more into the background. The theory of the biological will to suffer

saved  embarrassment.  Its  postulation  and  acceptance  were  proof  that

psychoanalysis could “adapt itself to culture.” Now this harmony was being

endangered  by  my  work.  Not  to  compromise  themselves,  psychoanalysts

explained that my views were really quite “banal,” or they said that my views

were incorrect. But I had not made matters at all easy for myself. I had not

merely  contended  that  psychoanalysis  was  at  variance  with  the  existing

culture and that it was “revolutionary.” It was much more complicated than

most people imagine today.

  My views could not be dismissed; clinicians worked more and more with

the  genital  theory  of  therapy.  Nor  could  they  be  denied.  At  best,  their

importance  could  be  minimized.  My  work  confirmed  the  revolutionary

character of the natural-scientific theory of sex. On the other hand, it was

proclaimed that Freud had just introduced a new cultural epoch. How, in

view of this, could the correctness and practicality of my views be admitted?

To  do  so  would  have  been  at  variance  with  the  psychoanalysts’  material

security,  as  well  as  with  the  contention  that  psychoanalysis  only fostered

“culture.” No one asked what was being endangered in this “culture” and

what  was  being  fostered.  Everyone  overlooked  the  fact  that,  by  its  very

development, the “new” criticized and negated the old.  The  leading  social  scientists  of  Austria  and  Germany  rejected

psychoanalysis and competed with it in the attempt to elucidate problems of

human existence. The situation was anything but simple. It is astonishing that

I did not commit any serious blunders at that time. It would have been very

tempting to make a short-sighted judgment and to come up with a widely

acceptable  statement,  e.g.,  that  sociology  and  psychoanalysis  could  be

reconciled without any difficulty or that psychoanalysis, though correct as

individual psychology, was socially unimportant. This was how the Marxists

who were sympathetic toward psychoanalysis spoke. But this was not the

way to go about it. I was too much of a psychoanalyst to accept a superficial

solution and too much interested in the development of freedom in the world

to be content with halfway measures. For the moment, I was satisfied that I

had  been  able  to  incorporate  psychoanalysis  as  such  into  the  province  of

                                                        3
sociology, even if only as a method at that time. Friends and foes alike were

forever accusing me of being overhasty. However, even if their unconsidered

accusations often made me angry, I saw no reason to be perturbed by them. I

knew that no one put in as much theoretical and practical effort as I. I allowed

my manuscripts to lie in my desk drawer for years before I felt secure enough

to publish them. Being clever was something I could leave to others.

  The relationship between psychoanalysis and culture began to be clarified

when a young psychiatrist gave a talk on Psychoanalyse und Weltanschauung

at Freud’s apartment. Only a very few people know that Freud’s Civilization

and Its Discontents grew out of these discussions on culture as a defense

against my ripening work and the “danger” it entailed. Statements with which

Freud had opposed my views appeared in the book.

  While it is true that in this book Freud reaffirmed that natural sexual

pleasure is the aim of human striving for happiness, it is also true that he tried

to demonstrate the untenability of this principle. His basic theoretical and

practical  formula  continued  to  read:  man  normally,  and  of  necessity,

advances from the “pleasure principle” to the “reality principle.” He has toforgo pleasure and to adjust himself to reality. The irrational components of

this  “reality,”  which  today  celebrate  orgies  of  annihilation,  were  not

questioned, nor was a distinction made between those pleasures which are

compatible with sociality and those which are not. In Civilization and Its

Discontents, Freud sets forth the same arguments he used to reject the point

of  view  I  advocated  in  our  discussions.  In  retrospect,  I  see  that  this

confrontation  had  a  positive  value  for  the  cultural-political  movement.  It

clarified  many  things,  particularly  the  fact  that  psychoanalysis  could  not

continue  to  be  effective  as  a  “cultural-revolutionary”  theory,  without

concretely criticizing and changing the conditions of education. How else

could the misused word “progress” be interpreted?

  The following was the view held by intellectuals at that time: science is

concerned  with  problems  of  essence;  ideology  deals  with  questions  of

possibility. Essence (science) and possibility (politics) were said to be totally

separate fields. The establishment of a fact did not spell out a possibility, i.e.,

did  not  indicate  a  goal  which  should  be  striven  after.  Every  political

orientation was free to do what it pleased with facts established by science. I

spoke out against these ethical logicians who took refuge from reality in an

abstract formula. When I ascertain that an adolescent becomes neurotic and

disturbed in his work as a result of the abstinence demanded of him—this is

“science.” In an “abstract logical” sense, it can be concluded from this that

the adolescent should continue to live abstinently or that he should give up

abstinence.  The  conclusion  arrived  at  is  “political  ideology”  and  its

implementation  is  political  practice.  I,  however,  argued  that  there  are

scientific findings which allow only one practical conclusion. What appears

to be logically correct can be wrong from a practical and objective point of

view. If, today, someone came forth and established as fact that abstinence is

injurious  to  adolescents,  without  drawing  the  conclusion  that  adolescents

should cease to live abstinently, he would simply be laughed at. It is for this

reason that it is so important to know the practical implications of a question.A physician must never assume an abstract point of view. He who refuses to

accept the “should” which follows from the above finding with respect to

adolescent  abstinence  must,  whether  he  intends  to  or  not,  make  a  false

statement of a purely “scientific nature.” With the full force of his “scientific

authority,” he will have to contend that abstinence is not injurious to the

adolescent. He has, in short, to veil the truth and to play the hypocrite. Every

scientific finding has an ideological presupposition and a practical social

consequence. At that time, it first became clear just how deep was the abyss

separating abstract logical thinking and functional, natural-scientific thinking.

Abstract  logic  often  has  the  function  of  admitting  scientific  facts  without

allowing  a  single  practical  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  them.  For  this

reason, I preferred practical functionalism.

  Freud took the following position: the “average man’s” attitude toward

religion was understandable. As a famous poet once put it:


  Wer Wissenschaft und Kunst besitzt,

  hat auch Religion,

  Wer jene beiden nicht besitzt,
                  4
  der habe Religion!


This saying holds true for the present, as does everything else conservative

ideology presumes to assert. The right of the conservatives is identical with

the right of science and medicine to confront conservatism at such a deep

level that the source of its arrogance—ignorance—is destroyed. Because we

refuse to question the workingman’s attitude of toleration, his pathological

renunciation of the knowledge and cultural fruits of this world of “science

and  art,”  his  helplessness,  his  fear  of  responsibility,  and  his  craving  for

authority, we must look on while the world plunges into the abyss, at present

in the form of the fascist plague. What meaning can science have if it looks

down on such questions? Do they have a clear conscience, those scientists

who  could  have  worked  out  the  answer  but  deliberately  refused  to  fight

against the psychic plague? Today, faced with universal danger, the wholeworld realizes what was barely speakable twelve years ago. Social life has

put into sharp focus the problems which, at that time, were the concern of

individual physicians only.

  Freud  justified  the  renunciation  of  happiness  of  masses  of  people  as

expertly as he defended the fact of childhood sexuality. A few years later,

exploiting  human  ignorance  and  fear  of  happiness,  a  pathological  genius

plunged Europe into the abyss with the slogan of the “heroic renunciation of

happiness.”


    Life,  as  we  find  it,  is  too  hard  for  us  [Freud  wrote];  it  brings  us  too  many  pains,

    disappointments, and impossible tasks. In order to bear it we cannot dispense with palliative

  measures.… There are perhaps three such measures: powerful deflections, which cause us to

  make light of our misery; substitute satisfactions, which diminish it; and intoxicating substances,
                                                                  5
  which make us insensitive to it. Something of the kind is indispensable.


  At the same time, in The Future of an Illusion, Freud rejected the most

dangerous illusion, i.e., religion.


    The  common  man  cannot  imagine  this  Providence  otherwise  than  in  the  figure  of  an

  enormously exalted father. Only such a being can understand the needs of the children of men

  and be softened by their prayers and placated by the signs of their remorse. The whole thing is

so patently infantile, so foreign to reality, that to anyone with a friendly attitude to humanity it is

  painful to think that the great majority of mortals will never be able to rise above this view of

  life.


  Thus, Freud’s correct findings with respect to religious mysticism ended

in resignation. And life outside was seething with struggles for a rational

philosophy and a scientifically based social regulation. In principle, there was

no  difference  between  the  two.  Freud,  however,  not  only  refused  to  take

sides,  he  also  rejected  “political”  ideology  and  advocated  the  “scientific”

view  of  life.  He  felt  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  politics.  I  sought  to

demonstrate that the striving for the democratization of the work process is

and must be scientifically rational. At that time, the smashing of Lenin’s

social democracy, the development of dictatorship in the Soviet Union, andthe  abandonment  of  all  principles  of  truth  in  sociological  thinking,  had

already begun. These things could not be denied. I rejected Freud’s political

aloofness. It could be only dimly divined then that Freud’s attitude, as well as

the dogmatic attitude of the Soviet government, each in its own way, was

justified. The scientific, rational regulation of human existence is the highest

goal. However, the acquired irrational structure of the masses, i.e., of those

who embody the historical process, makes dictatorship possible through the

very  exploitation  of  this  irrationalism.  It  depends  on  who  wields  power,

toward what goal, and against what forces. At any rate, Russia’s initial social

democracy  was  the  most  human  approach  possible  under  the  existing

historical conditions and given man’s structure. Freud had explicitly admitted

this. The degeneration of this social democracy into the dictatorial Stalinism

of  today  cannot  be  denied,  and  is  grist  for  the  mill  of  the  opponents  of

democracy. In the following years, Freud’s pessimism appeared to be all too

horribly  justified:  “There’s  nothing  to  be  done.”  After  the  Russian

experience, the development of genuine democracy appeared utopian. Those

who did not have art and science had the “socialistic mystique,” to which a

tremendous world of scientific thought had degenerated. It is to be stressed

that Freud’s attitude merely reflected the basic general attitude of academic

scientists.  They  had  no  confidence  in  the  possibility  of  democratic  self-

education, nor in the mental capacities of the masses. Therefore, they did

nothing to undermine the sources of dictatorship.

  Since the beginning of my activity in the field of social hygiene, the idea

had  become  more  and  more  fixed  in  my  mind  that  cultural  happiness  in

general and sexual happiness in particular are the real content of life, and

should  be  the  goal  of  a  practical  politics  of  the  people.  Everyone,  the

Marxists included, were opposed to this idea. But the discovery which I had

made  in  the  depth  of  the  human  organism  outweighed  all  objections,

difficulties, and reservations. The entire output of culture, from the love story

to the highest achievements of poetry, confirmed my view. The entire politicsof  culture  (film,  novels,  poetry,  etc.)  revolve  around  the  sexual  element,

thrive  on  its  renunciation  in  reality  and  its  affirmation  in  the  ideal.  The

consumer goods and advertising industries capitalize on it. If all humanity

dreams and poeticizes about sexual happiness, should it not also be possible

to translate the dream into reality? The goal was clear. The facts discovered

in the biological depth demanded medical attention. Why, in spite of this, did

striving for happiness always appear merely as a fantastic vision that wrestled

with hard reality? Freud became resigned in the following way:

  In terms of human behavior itself, what is the purpose and goal of man’s

life? What does man want from life? What does he hope to accomplish in it?

In  1930,  these  were  the  questions  Freud  asked  after  those  discussions  in

which the effects of the sexual will to life of the broad masses were felt as far

away  as  the  quiet  rooms  of  the  scholar,  precipitating  a  clash  between

antithetical views.

  Freud had to admit, “The answer to this can hardly be in doubt. They

                                                                                    6
strive after happiness; they want to become happy and to remain so.” Man

wants  to  experience  strong  feelings  of  pleasure.  It  is  simply  the  pleasure

principle  that  determines  the  purpose  of  life.  This  principle  governs  the

performance of the psychic apparatus from the very beginning.


    There can be no doubt about its efficacy, and yet its program is at loggerheads with the

  whole world, with the macrocosm as much as with the microcosm. There is no possibility at all

of its being carried through; all the regulations of the universe run counter to it. One feels

  inclined to say that the intention that man should be “happy” is not included in the plan of

  “Creation.” What we call happiness in the strictest sense comes from the (preferably sudden)

  satisfaction of needs which have been dammed up to a high degree, and it is by its nature only

  possible as an episodic phenomenon.


  In  this  passage,  Freud  articulated  a  mood  which  constitutes  a  part  of

man’s inability to be happy. The argument rings true, but it is incorrect. It

seems to say that abstinence is a precondition of the experience of happiness.

It overlooks the fact that the damming-up itself is experienced as pleasurewhen there is the prospect of gratification and this gratification is not overly

delayed. On the other hand, the damming-up makes the organism rigid and

incapable of pleasure when there is no prospect of gratification, and when the

experience  of  happiness  is  threatened  with  punishment.  The  greatest

experience  of  pleasure,  the  sexual  orgasm,  has  the  peculiarity  that  it

presupposes a damming-up of biological energy. However, this peculiarity by

no means leads to the Freudian conclusion that happiness is at variance with

all the institutions of the world. Today, I can prove experimentally that this

contention  is  incorrect.  At  that  time,  I  merely  sensed  that  Freud  was

concealing  a  reality  behind  a  figure  of  speech. To  have  admitted  the

possibility of human happiness would have been tantamount to admitting the

incorrectness of the theory of the repetition compulsion and the theory of the

death instinct. It would have meant a critique of the social institutions which

destroy the happiness of life. To retain his resigned position, Freud advanced

arguments which he deduced from the existing situation, without questioning

whether  this  situation  is  inherently  necessary  and  immutable.  I  did  not

understand  how  Freud  was  able  to  believe  that  the  discovery  of  child

sexuality could have no world-changing effect whatever. He appeared to me

to do a terrible injustice to his own works, and to feel the tragedy of this

contradiction. When I disagreed with him and presented my arguments, he

told me that either I was all wrong or that one day I would “have to bear the

heavy  burden  of  psychoanalysis  all  alone.”  Since  I  was  not  wrong,  his

prophecy proved true.

  In his discussions as well as in his publications, Freud took refuge in the

theory of biological suffering. He sought a way out of the catastrophe of

civilization in an “effort on the part of Eros.”

  In  a  private  conversation  in  1926,  Freud  expressed  the  hope  that  the

“experiment” of the Soviet Russian revolution would succeed. No one had

any inkling at that time that Lenin’s attempt to establish social democracy

would end so disastrously. Freud knew, and had set down in writing, thatmankind is sick. Neither the psychiatrist nor the politician had the faintest

notion of how this universal sickness was related to the Russian and later to

the  German  catastrophe.  Three  years  later,  conditions  in  Germany  and

Austria were already in such a state of turmoil as to distort every professional

activity.  The  irrationalism  in  political  life  became  more  and  more

conspicuous.  Analytic  psychology  penetrated  more  and  more  into  social

problems. In my work as a whole, I began to consider “man” not solely as a

type, but as a being acting within a specific social context. I saw that neurotic

and  starving  masses  of  people  were  falling  into  the  hands  of  political

exploiters. In spite of his knowledge of the psychic plague, Freud feared the

inclusion of psychoanalysis in the political arena. His conflict, which was

very deep, made me feel very close to him. Today, I also understand the

necessity of his resignation. For a decade and a half, he had fought for the

recognition of simple facts. His professional colleagues had slandered him,

called him a charlatan, and questioned the sincerity of his intentions. Freud

was not a social pragmatist, “only” a scientist, but he was a strict and honest

scientist. The world could no longer gainsay the fact of unconscious psychic

life. Thus, it resorted to its old game of corruption. It sent him many students,

who came to a set table and did not have to bother about the cooking. They

had  but  one  interest:  to  popularize  psychoanalysis  as  quickly  as  possible.

They carried their conservative ties to this world into his organization, and

Freud’s work could not exist without organization. One after the other, they

discarded or watered down the libido theory. Freud was well aware of the

difficulties involved in championing the libido theory. But, in the interest of

self-preservation and the consolidation of the movement, he could not permit

himself to say what, in a more honest world, he would certainly have stood

up for all alone. In his scientific work, he had gone far beyond the narrow

intellectual framework of the traditional habits and modes of thought of the

middle classes. His school pulled him back in again. Freud knew, in 1929,

that, for all my youthful scientific enthusiasm, I was right. To admit this,however,  would  have  meant  to  sacrifice  half  of  the  psychoanalytic

organization.

    Essentially,  one  question  was  at  issue:  child  upbringing  and

psychotherapy.  Psychic  illness—this  much  was  beyond  question—is  a

product  of  sexual  repression.  Analytic  theory  and  therapy  advocated  the

elimination of the repression of sexual instincts. The next question was: what

happens to the instincts which are liberated from repression? According to

psychoanalysis, they are condemned and sublimated. There was no mention

of, nor could there have been any mention of, actual gratification, because the

unconscious was conceived of solely as an inferno of asocial and perverse

impulses.

  I became more and more intent on finding an answer to this one question:

what happens to the natural genitality of small children and adolescents after

it has been liberated from repression? Was it too supposed to be “sublimated

and condemned”? Psychoanalysts were never able to give me an answer to

this question. Yet, it constituted the central problem of character formation.

  All education suffers from the fact that social adjustment requires the

repression of natural sexuality, and that this repression makes people sick and

asocial. Thus, it became necessary to ask why social adjustment demands

repression. This demand is based on a fundamental error in the assessment of

sexuality.

  Freud’s great tragedy was that he sought refuge in biologistic theories,

instead of saying nothing or simply allowing everyone to do as he pleased. It

was this that caused him to contradict himself.

    Happiness, he said, is an illusion, because suffering threatens inevitably

from three sides. First, “from one’s own body, which is fated to decay and

disintegrate…”  Why,  then,  is  science  forever  dreaming  about  the

prolongation of life?

  Second,  “from  the  outside  world,  which  can  rage  against  us  with

overwhelming,  unrelenting,  destructive  force.…”  Why,  then,  have  greathumanitarians spent half their lives thinking about ways of improving this

world? Why have millions of freedom-fighters given their lives in the fight

against this threatening outside world, both in its social and technological

context? Had not pestilence been finally checked, after all? Had not physical

and social slavery been reduced? Was it never to be possible to master cancer

and war, as pestilence had been mastered? Was it never to be possible to

vanquish the moralistic hypocrisy that cripples our children and adolescents?

  The third argument against the longing for human happiness was serious

and remained unexplained. The suffering caused by one’s relations to other

people, Freud said, is more painful than any other. People are inclined to look

upon it as a superficial annoyance, but it is no less fateful or avoidable than

suffering  of  different  origin.  Here,  Freud  gives  voice  to  his  own  bitter

experiences with the human species. Here, he touched upon the sex-economic

problem of structure, i.e., the irrationalism that determines man’s behavior. I

myself  had  a  painful  taste  of  it  in  the  psychoanalytic  organization,  an

organization whose professional task was supposed to consist of the medical

mastery of irrational behavior. Now Freud was saying that this suffering was

fateful and inevitable.

  But why? What then was the purpose of viewing human behavior through

the  perspective  of  rational  scientific  methods?  What  was  the  purpose  of

advocating the education of man to rational, reality-oriented behavior? For

some unexplainable reason, Freud failed to see the growing contradiction in

his attitude. On one hand, he had been correct in tracing back man’s acting

and thinking to unconscious irrational motives. However, he had carried it

too far. The impulse to chop down a tree to build a hut is not of irrational

origin. On the other hand, there was a scientific view of the world in which

the law he had discovered was not supposed to be valid. It was a science that

transcended its own principles! Freud’s resignation was nothing other than an

evasion  of  the  enormous  difficulty  presented  by  the  pathology  in  human

behavior, man’s maliciousness. Freud was disillusioned. Initially, he believedthat he had discovered the radical therapy of neuroses. In reality, it had been

only a beginning. It was much more complicated than was indicated by the

formula  of  making  the  unconscious  conscious.  He  claimed  that

psychoanalysis  could  grasp  not  only  medical  problems,  but  universal

problems of human existence. But he did not find his way into sociology. In

Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  he  had  entered  into  important  biological

questions hypothetically and had deduced the theory of the death instinct. It

turned out to be a misleading hypothesis. Initially, Freud himself took a very

skeptical view of it. The psychologization of sociology as well as of biology

precluded every prospect of achieving a practical mastery of these enormous

problems.

    Moreover, from both his medical practice and people’s attitudes toward

his  theory,  Freud  had  come  to  know  human  beings  as  highly  unreliable,

malicious creatures. For decades he had been living isolated from the world

to protect his psychic bearing. If he had entered into every irrational objection

made against him, he would have been lost in destructive everyday battles.

To isolate himself, he needed a skeptical attitude toward human “values”; he

needed, indeed, a certain contempt for modern man. Learning and knowledge

came to mean more to him than human happiness, especially in view of the

fact that people themselves appeared not to make the best of happiness when

it  came  their  way.  This  attitude  was  definitely  in  keeping  with  the  then

prevalent attitude of academic superiority. There was also concrete evidence

to support such an attitude. But one should not assess universal problems of

human existence from the point of view of a scientific pioneer.

  Two  crucial  facts  prevented  me  from  following  Freud,  though  I

understood his motives. One was the continually growing demand on the part

of  the  culturally  neglected,  materially  exploited,  and  psychically  ruined

masses of people to determine their own social existence. Their point of view

was that of earthly happiness. Not to see and take this demand into account

would have been to close one’s eyes to the existing political mood. I hadbecome  too  familiar  with  this  mass  awakening  to  discredit  it  or  to

misappraise its social potential. Freud’s motives were unimpeachable. But the

motives  of  the  awakening  masses  were  also  unimpeachable.  Simply  to

dismiss them meant ultimately to find oneself in the ranks of the non-working

drones of society.

  The  second  fact  was  that  I  had  learned  to  see  people  from  two

perspectives:  They  were  often  corrupt,  slavish,  faithless,  full  of  empty

slogans, or simply dried up. But they were not like this by nature. They had

become this way through the conditions of life. In principle, therefore, they

could become something different: decent, honest, capable of love, sociable,

mutually  responsible,  social  without  compulsion.  We  were  dealing  with

characterological contradictions that reflected the contradictions of society.

More and more I realized that what is called “wicked” and “antisocial” is a

neurotic mechanism. A child plays in a natural way. He is inhibited by his

environment.  Initially,  he  defends  himself  against  this  inhibition.  He  is

subdued and retains merely the defense against the limitation of pleasure, in

the form of pathological, aimless, irrational reactions of spitefulness. In the

same way, human behavior merely reflects the contradictions between life-

affirmation and life-negation in the social process itself. The next question

was:  could  the  contradiction  between  striving  for  pleasure  and  social

frustration of pleasure be resolved someday? Psychoanalytic research in the

field of sexuality seemed to me to be the first step in the direction of such a

change. But this approach to the problem had been all but excluded from the

picture. Psychoanalysis became an abstract and then a conservative “theory

of cultural adjustment,” with many insoluble contradictions.

  The  conclusion  was  irrefutable: man’s  longing  for  life  and  pleasure

cannot be checked, whereas the social chaos of sexuality can be eliminated.

  Then Freud began to make absolute judgments, to provide justifications

for ascetic ideologies. The “unrestrained gratification” of all needs, he stated,

obtruded  itself  as  the  most  seductive  mode  of  life,  but  this  would  meanputting pleasure before caution and would have repercussions after a short

time.  To  this,  I  could  answer  even  at  that  time  that  it  was  necessary  to

distinguish natural  needs  for  happiness  from  secondary asocial  drives

produced  by  compulsive  education.  Secondary,  unnatural,  asocial  drives

entailed  and  continue  to  entail  moralistic  inhibition.  However,  the

gratification of natural needs can be governed by the principle of freedom, by

the principle of “living out,” if you like. It must merely be known what the

word “drive” means in each case.

    According  to  Freud,  “The  use  of  narcotics  in  the  effort  to  achieve

happiness and keep misery at bay is appreciated as a blessing to such a high

degree that individuals as well as peoples have set aside a fixed place for it in

their libido economy.” He says nothing of the medical condemnation of this

substitute pleasure, which destroys the organism! Not a word is mentioned

about  the  preconditions  that  produce  the  need  for  narcotics,  i.e.,  the

frustration of sexual happiness. Not a word is mentioned in all psychoanalytic

literature  on  the  correlation  between  addiction  and  the  lack  of  genital

gratification!

  Freud’s assessment was hopeless. While he admitted that the striving for

pleasure is ineradicable, he claimed that it is not the social chaos but the drive

for happiness that should be influenced.

  The complicated structure of the psychic apparatus, Freud argued further,

made  it  possible  to  influence  it  in  a  number  of  ways.  While  instinctual

gratification is happiness, the need for this gratification becomes the cause of

severe  suffering  when  the  outside  world  forces  us  to  live  in  want  and

frustrates the fulfillment of our needs. Thus, by influencing the instinctual

impulses, i.e., not the world which forces people to live in want, one could

hope to free oneself from a certain amount of suffering. The intent of this

influencing was to master the inner sources of the needs. In an extreme way,

this can be brought about by killing the instincts, as is taught by Oriental

philosophy and put into practice by Yoga. These are the arguments of Freud,the man who incontestably put before the world the fact of child sexuality

and sexual repression!

  Here one no longer could or should follow Freud. On the contrary, it was

necessary to gather all one’s resources to fight against the consequences of

such a view spoken by an authority. I knew that one day all the life-fearing

spirits of darkness would point to Freud as their authority. This was no way

to deal with a human problem of the first magnitude, no way to defend the

renunciation imposed upon the Chinese coolie, no way to indirectly condone

the infant mortality in the brutal patriarchy of India, a patriarchy which had

just suffered its first defeats. The most crucial problem of adolescence and

stultifying  childhood  was  the  killing  of  spontaneous  life  impulses  in  the

interest of a questionable refinement. This was something to which science

must never consent. It must not make it so easy for itself, especially in view

of  the  fact  that  Freud  himself  did  not  question  the  overwhelming,  and

fundamentally correct, role of human striving for happiness.

  It  is  true,  he  wrote,  that  the  striving  for  the  positive  fulfillment  of

happiness,  the  orientation  which  takes  love  as  its  center  of  gravity  and

expects all gratification from loving and being loved, is felt keenly enough by

everyone. Sexual love, he said, provided the strongest sensations of pleasure

and was the prototype of the striving for happiness in general. But there was a

weak side to this view, otherwise it would never have occurred to anyone to

leave this path in favor of another. A person is never less protected against

suffering than when he loves, never more helplessly unhappy than when he

loses  the  loved  object  or  love.  To  become  happy  in  accordance  with  the

pleasure principle, Freud concluded, was not possible. Again and again, he

maintained that human structure and the conditions of human existence were

unchangeable. He was speaking of the attitudes he observed in the neurotic

reactions of disappointment in women who were emotionally and materially

dependent upon a man.

  My detachment from Freud’s point of view and the working out of thesex-economic  solution  of  these  problems  fell  into  two  parts:  first,  it  was

necessary  to  comprehend  the  striving  after  happiness  biologically.  In  this

way, it could be separated from the secondary distortions of human nature.

Second, there was the momentous question as to the social feasibility of that

which people so deeply long for and at the same time fear so much.

  The first part was new ground in the field of biology. No one had yet

investigated the pleasure mechanism from a biological point of view. The

second part was new ground in the field of sociology, more specifically in the

field of sexual policy. When people naturally strive for something that is

rightfully theirs and they cannot attain it because the social modes of life

prevent it, one question inevitably arises, namely: what measures have to be

applied and what paths have to be pursued in order, eventually, to gain what

is naturally striven for? This is as much the case in speaking of the attainment

of  sexual  happiness  as  it  is  in  speaking  of  the  realization  of  economic

interests. We need only that peculiar, slogan-saturated mentality to deny here

what is otherwise readily conceded, e.g., when it is a matter of making money

or preparing for war. A rational economic policy is needed to guarantee the

distribution  of  goods.  Sexual  policy  is  nothing  other  than  this,  when  the

obvious principles which pertain to the fulfillment of economic needs are

applied to the fulfillment of sexual needs. It was not difficult to recognize

sexual policy as the core of cultural policy, to separate it from the shallow

efforts  of  sexual  reform  and  pornographic  mentality,  and  to  represent  its

simple scientific foundation.

  Life and, with it, the striving for pleasure do not take place in a vacuum,

but under definite, natural, and social presuppositions.

  All cultural efforts, as expressed in literature, poetry, art, dance, and folk

customs, are characterized by their concern with sexuality.

  No interest influences man more strongly than the sexual interest.

  The patriarchal laws pertaining to religion, culture, and marriage were

predominantly laws against sexuality.  In  the  libido,  the  energy  of  the  sexual  instinct,  Freudian  psychology

recognized the central motor of psychic phenomena.

  In  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  primeval  history  and  mythology  are

reproductions of the sexual economy of the human species.

  The crucial question could no longer be evaded: is sexual repression an

indispensable  component  of  cultural  development?  If  scientific  research

clearly  answered  this  question  in  the  affirmative,  then  any  attempt  at  a

positive cultural policy would be hopeless. However, this would also have to

apply to every psychotherapeutic effort.

  Such  a  view  could  not  be  correct.  It  was  at  variance  with  all  human

strivings, scientific findings, and intellectual achievements. Since my clinical

work had firmly convinced me that the sexually gratified man is also the

more productive man in the cultural sense, I could not possibly answer the

above question according to Freud’s line of reasoning. The question whether

the suppression of child and adolescent sexuality was necessary was replaced

by  a  far  more  important  one:  what  were  the  human  motives  for  so

consistently and, until now, so successfully evading a clear answer? I sought

to discover the unconscious motives of a man like Freud, who put himself

and his authority at the apex of a conservative ideology and, with his theory

of civilization, overthrew what he had achieved through diligent work as a

natural scientist and physician. There could be no doubt that he had not done

so out of intellectual cowardice or for conservative political reasons. He had

acted within the framework of a science which, like every other science, was

dependent upon society. The social barrier made itself felt not only in the

therapy  of  neuroses,  but  also  in  the  investigation  of  the  origin  of  sexual

repression.

  In my sex-counseling centers, it became clear to me that the suppression

of child and adolescent sexuality had the function of making it easier for

parents to insist on blind obedience from their children.

  In  the  earliest  beginnings  of  economic  patriarchy,  the  sexuality  ofchildren  and  adolescents  was  combatted  by  means  of  direct  castration  or

genital mutilation in one form or another. Later, psychic castration through

the  inculcation  of  sexual  anxiety  and  guilt  feeling  became  the  customary

means.  Sexual  suppression  has  the  function  of  making  man  amenable  to

authority,  just  as  the  castration  of  stallions  and  bulls  has  the  function  of

producing willing draft animals. No one had thought about the devastating

consequences  of psychic  castration,  and  no  one  can  predict  how  human

society  will  cope  with  them.  Freud  later  confirmed  the  relation  between

sexual suppression and the attitude of submissiveness, after I had brought the

                                      7
issue to a head in my publications.


    Fear of a revolt by the suppressed elements drives it to stricter precautionary measures. A

  high-water mark in such a development has been reached in Western European civilization. A

  cultural  community  is  perfectly  justified,  psychologically,  in  starting  by  proscribing

  manifestations of the sexual life of children, for there would be no prospect of curbing the

  sexual  lusts  of  adults  if  the  ground  had  not  been  prepared  for  in  childhood.  But  such  a

  community cannot in any way be justified in going to the length of actually disavowing such
                                                  8
  easily demonstrable, and, indeed, striking phenomena.


  Thus, the molding of a negative sexual character structure was the real,

unconscious goal of education. Psychoanalytic pedagogy could no longer be

discussed, therefore, without taking into account the problem of character

structure, nor could the latter be discussed without deciding the social goal of

education.  Education  always  serves  the  purposes  of  the  existing  social

system. If this social system is at variance with the interests of the child, then

education has to leave the child’s interests out of account. It has, in short, to

turn against its own interest, i.e., to become unfaithful to itself, and either

openly relinquish or hypocritically represent its declared goal, “the welfare of

the  child.”  This  education  did  not  distinguish  between  the  “compulsive

family” which suppresses the child and the “family” which is founded on

deep relations of love between parents and children, relations that are always

destroyed by compulsive familial relationships. It overlooked the enormoussocial  revolutions  which  had  taken  place  in  man’s  sexual  and  family  life

since  the  turn  of  the  century.  With  its  “ideas”  and  “reforms,”  it  hobbled

behind and still hobbles behind the concrete changes that have occurred. In

short, it became enmeshed in its own irrational motives, of which it neither

was nor could be aware.

  For all that, the contagion of neuroses is comparable to the contagion of a

plague. It poisons everything created by striving, effort, thought, and work. It

was  possible  to  combat  the  plague  without  external  obstruction  because

neither pecuniary interests nor mystical feelings were violated thereby. It is

far more difficult to combat the contagion of neuroses. Everything which

thrives upon man’s mysticism clings to it and has power. Who could accept

the argument that the psychic plague should not be combatted because mental

hygiene measures impose too much of a strain on the masses? It is an excuse

to say that there are not enough funds to carry out such measures. The sums

of money squandered on war in a week’s time would be enough to meet the

hygienic  needs  of  millions.  We  also  have  a  way  of  underestimating  the

enormous forces which lie fallow in man himself and demand expression and

confirmation.

    Sex-economy had comprehended the biological goal of human striving,

the realization of which was thwarted by the human structure itself, as well as

by  some  institutions  of  the  social  system.  Freud  overruled  the  goal  of

happiness  in  favor  of  the  contemporary  human  structure  and  the  existing

social chaos. Hence, there was nothing left for me other than to stick to the

goal and to learn to know the laws according to which this human structure is

molded and can be altered. It took me a long time to realize the magnitude of

this  problem,  to  realize  above  all  that  the neurotic  psychic  structure  has

become somatic innervation, “second nature,” as it were. In spite of all his

pessimism,  Freud  was  not  content  to  rest  his  position  on  a  note  of

hopelessness. His final statement was:


    The fateful question for the human species seems to me to be whether and to what extent  their cultural development will succeed in mastering the disturbance of their communal life by

  the human instincts of aggression and self-destruction.… And now it is to be expected that the

  other of the two “heavenly powers,” eternal Eros, will make an effort to assert himself in the
                                          9
  struggle with his equally immortal adversary.


  This  was  far  more  than  a  figure  of  speech,  as  was  believed  by

psychoanalysts. It was far more than merely a clever observation. “Eros”

presupposes  full  sexual  capacity.  And  sexual  capacity  presupposes  social

concern and the general affirmation of life. In 1930, following the debates

and radical clashes of opinion, it appeared to me that Freud secretly wished

me  success  in  my  undertaking.  He  expressed  himself  vaguely,  but  the

concrete weapons had been found which one day would help to fulfill this

hope. It is only the liberation of man’s natural capacity for love that can

vanquish sadistic destructiveness.


                  2. THE SOCIAL ORIGIN OF SEXUAL REPRESSION


At that time, of course, the question as to the feasibility of general human

happiness here on earth could not be answered in a practical way. As we

continue our presentation, the naïve person will now ask whether science had

nothing else to worry about except the stupid question as to the “desirability”

or “feasibility” of the earthly happiness of masses of people. His opinion is

that this is self-understood. Nevertheless, it is not as simple as the vigorous,

enthusiastic adolescent and the easygoing, happy-go-lucky person imagine.

In the important centers that molded public opinion in Europe in 1930, the

claim to earthly happiness on the part of masses of people was not looked

upon  as  self-evident,  nor  was  its  lack  looked  upon  as  being  worthy  of

question. There was at that time not a single political organization which

would  have  regarded  such  questions  in  any  other  way  than  as

“commonplace,” “personal,” “unscientific,” and “non-political.”

  Be that as it may, it was precisely this question which the social events

around 1930 made imperative. It was the fascist deluge which swept acrossGermany like a tidal wave, astonishing everyone and causing many to ask

how such a thing was possible. Economists, sociologists, cultural reformers,

diplomats, and statesmen sought for an answer in the old books. But the old

books contained no explanation of these phenomena. There was not a single

political model which provided an insight into the eruption of the irrational

human  emotions  that  fascism  represented.  Never  before  had  high  politics

itself been called into question as an irrational formation.

  In the present volume, I want to analyze merely those social events that

had  a  forceful  bearing  upon  the  controversy  which  took  place  in  Freud’s

study. I have to omit the broad socio-economic background.

  Viewed  socially,  Freud’s  discovery  of  child  sexuality  and  sexual

repression was the first dim awareness of the sexual renunciation which had

been going on for thousands of years. This awakening consciousness still

appeared in a highly academic garb and had little faith in its own movements.

The question of human sexuality had to be shifted from the dark corners of

the social framework, where for thousands of years it had been leading a

filthy,  distorted,  and  festering  life,  to  the  very  front  of  the  shiny  edifice

grandiosely  called  “culture”  and  “civilization.”  Sexual  murder,  criminal

abortions, the sexual agony of adolescents, the killing of all vital impulses in

children, perversions en masse, pornography and the vice squad that goes

with it, exploitation of the human longing for love by a cheap and prurient

consumer  industry  and  commercial  advertising,  millions  of  illnesses  of  a

psychic and somatic nature, loneliness and psychic deformity everywhere,

and—on  top  of  this—the  neurotic  politicizing  of  the  would-be  saviors  of

mankind  could  hardly  be  looked  upon  as  showpieces  of  civilization.  The

moral and social assessment of man’s most important biological function was

in the hands of sexually frustrated ladies and dignified, vegetatively inert

privy councilors.

  There was no quarrel with societies of sexually frustrated old ladies and

other mummified creatures. But one protested against the fact that it wasprecisely these atrophied specimens of life who not only wanted but were in a

position  to  dictate  the  behavior  of  healthy  and  vigorous  individuals.

Moribund and frustrated men and women appealed to the general sexual guilt

feeling and pointed to the sexual chaos and the “downfall of civilization and

culture.” True, the masses of people were not really taken in by this claptrap,

but they were silent because they were not really sure whether their own

natural feelings of life might not be criminal after all. This is what they had

always  been  told.  Hence,  Malinowski’s  investigations  in  the  South  Sea

islands  had  an  unusually  beneficial  effect.  Their  impact  was  of  a  serious

nature. There was nothing of the sensational lasciviousness with which the

sexually  bankrupt  traders  experienced  the  South  Sea  girls  or  raved  about

Hawaiian belly dancers.

  As early as 1926, Malinowski contested in one of his publications the

biological nature of the sexual conflict between child and parent (the Oedipus

conflict)  discovered  by  Freud.  He  was  right  in  contending  that  the

relationship between children and parents changes with social processes; that

it was, therefore, of a sociological and not biological nature. In short, the

family in which the child grows up is itself the result of social development.

Among the Trobrianders, for example, it is not the father but the brother of

the child’s mother who determines how the child should be brought up. This

is an important characteristic of matriarchy. The father plays only the role of

a friend to his children. The Oedipus complex of the Europeans does not exist

among  the  Trobrianders.  Naturally,  the  Trobriander  child  also  comes  into

conflict with the taboos and precepts of the family, but these laws of conduct

are  fundamentally  different  from  those  of  the  Europeans.  Apart  from  the

taboo  of  incest  between  brother  and  sister,  they  contain  no  sexual

prohibitions.  The  English  psychoanalyst  Ernest  Jones  sharply  protested

against  this  functional  sociological  contention,  arguing  that  the  Oedipus

complex discovered in European man was the “fons et origo” of all culture.

Hence, the present-day family was an immutable biological institution. Atissue in this controversy was the decisive question: does sexual repression

have a biological origin, or is it sociologically determined and, therefore,

changeable?

    Malinowski’s principal work, The Sexual Life of Savages, appeared in

1929. This book contained a profusion of material which made it quite clear

that sexual repression was of a sociological and not of a biological origin.

Malinowski himself did not discuss this question in his book, but the material

spoke  for  itself.  In  my  essay  “Der  Einbruch  der  Sexual-moral”  (second

                10
edition, 1934), I attempted to demonstrate the sociological origin of sexual

negation on the basis of available ethnological material. I shall summarize

what is important for the present discussion.

  The  Trobriander  children  are  not  familiar  with  sexual  repression  and

sexual secrecy. The sexual life of Trobriander children develops naturally,

freely, and without interference through all stages of life with full sexual

gratification. The children engage in sexual activity in keeping with their age.

In spite of this, or, rather, precisely for this reason, the Trobriander society, in

the  third  decade  of  this  century,  was  ignorant  of  any  sexual  perversions,

functional mental illnesses, psychoneuroses, sexual murder; they had no word

for theft. In their society, homosexuality and masturbation were looked upon

as incomplete and unnatural means of sexual gratification, as a proof that the

capacity  to  experience  normal  gratification  is  hampered.  The  strict,

compulsion-neurotic toilet training which saps the civilization of the white

races  is  unknown  to  the  Trobriander  child.  Hence,  the  Trobriander  is

spontaneously  clean,  orderly,  naturally  social,  intelligent,  and  industrious.

Non-compulsive, voluntary monogamous marriage, which can be dissolved

at any time without difficulties, prevails as the social form of sexual life.

There is no promiscuity.

  A few miles from the Trobriand Islands, on the Amphlett Islands, there

lived a tribe having a patriarchal, authoritarian family arrangement. All the

characteristics  of  the  European  neurotics  (distrust,  anxiety,  neuroses,suicides, perversions, etc.) were already evident in the natives of this island.

  Our  science,  which  is  so  steeped  in  sexual  negation,  has  thus  far

succeeded in nullifying the importance of decisive facts by placing side by

side  and  equating  what  is  important  and  what  is  unimportant,  what  is

commonplace  and  what  is  extraordinary.  The  difference  just  described

between  the  matriarchal,  free  organization  of  the  Trobrianders  and  the

patriarchal,  authoritarian  organization  of  the  tribe  living  on  the  Amphlett

Islands carries more weight in the assessment of mental hygiene than the

most  complicated  and  seemingly  most  exact  curves  and  graphs  of  our

academic world. To what extent does a population enjoy natural sexuality?—

that is the pivotal question of mental hygiene.

  Freud  had  contended  that  the  sexual  latency  period  of  our  children,

roughly speaking between the ages of six and twelve, was of a biological

nature. I had been attacked by psychoanalysts because I had ascertained in

adolescents stemming from various strata of the population that there is no

latency period when sexuality develops in a natural way. The latency period

is  an  unnatural  product  of  civilization.  Now  this  was  confirmed  by

Malinowski. The sexual activity of the Trobriander children is continuous; it

merely  varies  from  age  group  to  age  group.  There  is  no  latency  period.

Sexual intercourse begins when puberty demands it. The sexual life of the

adolescents is monogamous; changing a partner takes place quietly, in an

orderly fashion, without violence or jealousy. And, completely contrary to

our civilization, the Trobriander society provides for the privacy and hygiene

of adolescent sexuality, particularly with reference to living accommodations,

and to other matters as well, as far as their knowledge of natural processes

permits.

  There is only one group of children excluded from this natural course.

They  are  the  children  who  are  set  aside  for  a  prearranged,  economically

advantageous marriage, for a cross-cousin marriage. Such a marriage brings

the chief economic advantages and constitutes the nucleus from which thepatriarchal order develops. The cross-cousin marriage was found wherever

ethnological  research  was  able  to  prove  the  contemporary  or  historical

existence of matriarchy (cf. Morgan, Bachofen, Engels, and others). Just like

our  own  children,  these  children  are  compelled  to  live  ascetic  lives;  they

demonstrate  the  same  neuroses  and  character  traits  known  to  us  from

character-neurotics.  Their  asceticism  has  the  function  of  making  them

subservient. Sexual  suppression  becomes  an  essential  tool  of  economic

enslavement.

  Thus, sexual suppression in the small child and in the adolescent is not

the  precondition  for  cultural  adjustment,  sociality,  industriousness,  and

cleanliness,  as  psychoanalysis,  in  line  with  the  traditional  erroneous

conception  of  education,  contends.  It  is  the  exact  opposite.  With  their

complete freedom of natural sexuality, the Trobrianders have achieved a high

stage  of  agriculture.  More  significantly,  due  to  the  absence  of  secondary

drives, they have preserved a social condition that must appear like a dream

to every European state of 1930 or 1940. Healthy children are sexually active

in a natural and spontaneous way. Sick children are sexually active in an

unnatural,  i.e.,  perverse,  way.  Therefore,  in  our  sexual  education,  we  are

faced not with the alternative of sexual activity or asceticism, but with the

alternative of natural and healthy, or perverse and neurotic sexuality.

  Sexual repression is of a socio-economic and not of a biological origin.

Its function is to lay the foundation for an authoritarian, patriarchal culture

and economic slavery, which we find especially pronounced in Japan, China,

India, and other countries. In its sexual life, the primeval period of mankind

adhered  to  natural  laws,  which  established  the  foundation  for  a  natural

sociality. Using the energy of suppressed sexuality, the intermediary period

of authoritarian patriarchal society of some four to six thousand years has

produced the secondary, perverse, distorted sexuality of modern man.


                            3. FASCISTIC IRRATIONALISMThere is ample evidence to support the contention that the cultural upheavals

of the twentieth century are determined by mankind’s struggle to reclaim the

natural laws of sexuality. This struggle for naturalness and the harmony of

nature  and  culture  is  reflected  in  the  various  forms  of  mystical  longing,

cosmic fantasies, “oceanic” feelings, religious ecstasies, and, above all, in the

advance  toward  sexual  freedom.  It  is  unconscious,  imbued  with  neurotic

contradictions  and  anxiety,  and  is  often  manifested  in  the  forms  that

characterize  the  secondary  perverse  drives.  A  humanity  which  has  been

forced  for  thousands  of  years  to  deny  its  basic  biological  law  and,  as  a

consequence of this denial, has acquired a second nature which is anti-nature

can only work itself up into an irrational frenzy when it wants to restore the

basic biological function and, at the same time, is afraid of doing so.

  The patriarchal, authoritarian era of human history has attempted to hold

the  asocial  impulses  in  check  by  means  of  compulsive  moralistic

prohibitions. It is in this way that civilized man, if he can indeed be called

civilized, developed a psychic structure consisting of three layers. On the

surface,  he  wears  an  artificial  mask  of  self-control,  compulsive  insincere

politeness, and pseudo-sociality. This mask conceals the second layer, the

Freudian  “unconscious,”  in  which  sadism,  avarice,  lasciviousness,  envy,

perversions  of  all  kind,  etc.,  are  held  in  check  without,  however,  being

deprived of the slightest amount of energy. This second layer is the artificial

product of a sex-negating culture and is usually experienced consciously as a

gaping  inner  emptiness  and  desolation.  Beneath  it,  in  the  depth,  natural

sociality and sexuality, spontaneous joy in work, the capacity for love, exist

and operate. This third and deepest layer, which represents the biological core

of the human structure, is unconscious, and it is feared. It is at variance with

every aspect of authoritarian education and control. At the same time, it is the

only real hope man has of one day mastering social misery.

  All discussions on the question of whether man is good or evil, a social or

antisocial  being,  are  philosophic  game-playing.  Whether  man  is  a  socialbeing  or  a  mass  of  protoplasm  reacting  in  a  peculiar  and  irrational  way

depends on whether his basic biological needs are in harmony or at variance

with  the  institutions  he  has  created  for  himself.  In  view  of  this,  it  is

impossible to free the workingman from the responsibility he bears for the

regulation or lack of regulation of biological energy, i.e., for the social and

individual economy of his biological energy. It has become one of his most

essential characteristics that he is only too happy to shift this responsibility

from himself to some Führer or politician, since he no longer comprehends

and indeed fears himself and his institutions. He is helpless, incapable of

freedom, and he craves authority, because he cannot react spontaneously; he

is armored and wants to be told what to do, for he is full of contradictions and

cannot rely upon himself.

  The cultivated European bourgeoisie of the nineteenth and early twentieth

centuries  took  over  the  compulsive  moralistic  forms  of  behavior  from

feudalism and made them the ideal of human conduct. Since the dawn of

enlightenment,  people  have  begun  to  search  for  truth  and  to  cry  out  for

freedom.  As  long  as  the  compulsive  moralistic  institutions  governed  man

externally as coercive law and public opinion, and internally as compulsive

conscience,  a  sham  peace  prevailed,  with  occasional  outbreaks  from  the

subterranean world of secondary drives. During this period, the secondary

drives  remained  curiosities,  of  psychiatric  interest  only.  They  became

manifest  as  symptom  neuroses,  neurotic  criminal  actions,  or  perversions.

When, however, social upheavals began to arouse in the people of Europe a

longing for freedom, independence, equality, and self-determination, there

was  also  an  inner  urge  to  liberate  the  living  organism  itself.  Social

enlightenment and legislation, pioneer work in the field of social science, and

freedom-oriented organizations strove to put “freedom” into this world. After

World  War  I,  which  had  destroyed  many  compulsive  authoritarian

institutions, the European democracies wanted “to lead people to freedom.”

But  this  freedom-striving  European  world  committed  a  major  assessmenterror. It failed to see what thousands of years of the suppression of the vital

energies in man had bred beneath the surface. It failed to see the far-reaching,

universal defect of character neurosis. The severe catastrophe of the psychic

plague, i.e., the catastrophe of the irrational human character structure, swept

over large parts of the world in the form of the victory of dictatorships. What

the superficial veneer of good breeding and artificial self-control had held in

check  for  such  a  long  time  now  broke  through  into  action,  action

implemented by the freedom-striving masses of people themselves—in the

concentration camps; in the persecution of the Jews; in the annihilation of all

human  decency;  in  the  sadistic,  playful,  mowing-down  of  entire  cities  by

those  who  are  capable  of  feeling  life  only  when  they  goose-step,  as  in

Guernica in 1936; in the stupendous betrayal of the masses by authoritarian

governments  claiming  to  represent  the  interests  of  the  people;  in  the

engulfing of tens of thousands of young people who, naïvely and helplessly,

thought that they were serving an idea; in the destruction of billions of dollars

worth of human labor, a fraction of which would have been sufficient to

eliminate poverty the world over; in short, in a St. Vitus dance which will

return again and again, as long as those who work and have knowledge fail to

destroy  the  mass  neurosis  in  themselves  and  outside  of  themselves,  the

neurosis  which  calls  itself  “high  politics”  and  thrives  upon  the

characterological helplessness of the citizens of the earth.

  In 1928–30, at the time of the controversy with Freud, I knew very little

about  fascism,  about  as  little  as  the  average  Norwegian  in  1939  or  the

average American in 1940. It was not until 1930–3 that I became familiar

with it in Germany. I was helplessly perplexed when I rediscovered in it, bit

by bit, the subject of the controversy with Freud. Gradually, I understood that

this  had  to  be  so.  At  issue  in  the  controversy  was  the  assessment  of  the

human  structure,  of  the  respective  roles  played  by  human  striving  for

happiness and the irrationalism in social life. In fascism, psychic mass illness

was thrust into the open.  The  opponents  of  fascism—liberal  democrats,  socialists,  Communists,

Marxist  and  non-Marxist  economists,  etc.—sought  the  solution  to  the

problem in the personality of Hitler or in the formal political errors of the

various democratic parties of Germany. One, as well as the other, meant to

trace  back  the  deluge  of  the  plague  to  individual  shortsightedness  or  the

brutality of a single man. In reality, Hitler was merely the expression of the

tragic contradiction between longing for freedom and actual fear of freedom.

  German fascism made it quite clear that it operated not with people’s

thinking and knowledge, but with their childish emotional reactions. Neither

its political program nor any one of its many confused economic promises

carried fascism to power and secured it in the period that followed. In the

main, it was the appeal to a dark, mystical feeling, to a vague, nebulous, but

extraordinary powerful longing. Those who did not grasp this did not grasp

fascism, which is an international phenomenon.

  The irrationalism in actions of the masses of the German people can be

illustrated by the following contradictions: the masses of the German people

wanted  “freedom.”  Hitler  promised  them  authoritarian,  strictly  dictatorial

leadership, with the explicit exclusion of any freedom of speech. Seventeen

million out of thirty-one million voters jubilantly carried Hitler to power in

March 1933. Those who watched the events with open eyes knew that the

masses of people felt helpless and incapable of bearing the responsibility for

the solution of the chaotic social problems within the old political framework

and system of thinking. The Führer should and would do it for them.

  Hitler promised to eliminate democratic discussion of opinions. Masses of

people flocked to him. They were tired of these discussions, because these

discussions had always bypassed their personal everyday needs, that is, what

was subjectively important. They did not want discussions about the “budget”

and “high politics.” What they wanted was concrete, true knowledge about

life.  Not  getting  it,  they  threw  themselves  into  the  hands  of  authoritarian

leadership and the illusionary protection they were now promised.  Hitler  promised  to  do  away  with  individual  freedom  and  to  establish

“national  freedom.”  Masses  of  people  enthusiastically  exchanged  the

possibility of individual freedom for illusionary freedom, that is, freedom

through identification with an idea. This illusionary freedom relieved them of

all individual responsibility. They craved a “freedom” which the Führer was

going to conquer and secure for them: the freedom to yell; the freedom to

escape  from  truth  into  the  lies  of  political  principle;  the  freedom  to  be

sadistic; the freedom to boast, in spite of one’s actual nothingness, that one is

a  member  of  a  superior  race;  the  freedom  to  attract  girls  with  uniforms

instead of a strong sense of humanity; the freedom to sacrifice oneself for

imperialistic aims instead of for the concrete struggle for a better life, etc.

  The fact that masses of people had always been taught to acknowledge

traditional political authority instead of authority based on factual knowledge

constituted  the  basis  on  which  the  fascistic  demand  for  obedience  could

operate. Hence, fascism was not a new philosophy of life, as its friends and

many of its enemies wanted to make people believe; still less had it anything

to do with a rational revolution against intolerable social conditions. Fascism

is  merely  the  extreme  reactionary  consequence  of  all  prior  undemocratic

forms of leadership within the framework of the social machinery. Even the

racial  theory  was  nothing  new;  it  was  merely  the  logical  and  brutal

continuation of the old theories of heredity and degeneration. Hence, it was

precisely the heredity-oriented psychiatrists and eugenicists of the old school

who were so accessible to the dictatorship.

  What was new in the fascist mass movement was the fact that extreme

political reaction succeeded in making use of the deep longings for freedom

of  the  masses  of  people. Intense  longing  for  freedom  on  the  part  of  the

masses, plus fear of the responsibility which freedom entails, produces fascist

mentality,  whether  this  longing  and  fear  are  found  in  a  fascist  or  in  a

democrat. New in fascism was that the masses of the people affirmed and

concretely implemented their own suppression. The need for authority provedto be stronger than the will to independence.

  Hitler  promised  male  supremacy.  Women  were  to  be  relegated  to  the

kitchen  and  home,  denied  the  possibility  of  material  independence,  and

excluded from the process of molding social life. Women, whose personal

freedom  had  been  suppressed  for  centuries,  and  who  had  developed  an

especially strong fear of leading an independent existence, were foremost in

hailing him.

  Hitler  promised  the  destruction  of  the  socialistic  and  bourgeois

democratic  organizations.  Socialistic  and  bourgeois  democratic  masses  of

people flocked to him because, though their organizations spoke a great deal

about freedom, they never even mentioned the difficult problem of the human

craving for authority and the helplessness of the masses in practical politics.

The masses of the people had been disappointed by the irresolute attitude of

the  old  democratic  institutions. Disappointment  on  the  part  of  masses  of

people in liberal organizations, plus economic crisis, plus an irresistible will

to  freedom,  produces  fascist  mentality,  i.e.,  the  willingness  to  surrender

oneself to an authoritarian father figure.

  Hitler promised an all-out fight against birth control and the sexual reform

movement. In 1932, Germany comprised some 500,000 people who were

members  of  organizations  fighting  for  rational  sexual  reform.  But  these

organizations always shied away from the central element of the problem—

the longing for sexual happiness. Years of work among the masses of the

people taught me that it is precisely this problem they want to have discussed.

They were disappointed when they were given learned talks on demography,

instead of being told how they should raise their children to be vitally alive,

how adolescents should cope with their sexual and economic needs, and how

married people should deal with their typical conflicts. The masses of the

people seemed to feel that the suggestions on “techniques of love,” such as

those  given  by  Van  de  Velde,  though  good  business,  did  not  really  have

anything to do with what they were looking for, nor were they appealing.And so it happened that the disappointed masses of the people flocked to

Hitler,  who,  even  if  mystically,  appealed  to  their  vital  forces. Preaching

about freedom leads to fascism unless a consistent and determined effort is

made  to  inculcate  in  the  masses  of  people  a  willingness  to  assume

responsibility for everyday life, and unless there is an equally consistent and

determined fight to establish the social preconditions for this responsibility.

  For decades, German science had been fighting for the separation of the

concept of sexuality from the concept of procreation. This struggle failed to

bear fruit for the working masses, because it was of a purely academic nature

and hence without social effect. Now Hitler came along and promised to

make the idea of procreation, and not happiness in love, the basic principle of

his  cultural  program.  Brought  up  to  be  ashamed  to  call  a  spade  a  spade,

compelled by all facets of the social system to say “eugenic higher breeding”

when one meant “happiness in love,” the masses flocked to Hitler, for he

added a strong, even if irrational, emotion to the old concept. Reactionary

concepts plus revolutionary excitement produce fascist feelings.

  The Church had preached “happiness in the beyond” and, drawing upon

the  concept  of  sin,  had  planted  deep  in  the  human  structure  a  helpless

dependency on a supernatural, omnipotent figure. But the economic world

crisis between 1929 and 1933 confronted the masses of the people with bitter

earthly distress. It was neither socially nor individually possible for them to

master this distress by themselves. Hitler appeared and declared himself to be

an earthly, omnipotent, and omniscient Führer, ordained by God, who could

remove this mundane misery. The stage had been set to drive new masses of

people to him, people who were hemmed in between their own individual

helplessness and the minimal real gratification which the idea of happiness in

the beyond offered them. Hence, an earthly god who let them shout “Heil”

with all their might had greater emotional significance than a God whom they

could never see and who no longer helped them, even emotionally. Sadistic

brutality plus mysticism produces fascist mentality.  For years, Germany had been fighting in its schools and universities for

the principle of a liberal school system, for voluntary achievement, and for

the self-determination of the students. In the broad sphere of education, the

responsible democratic authorities clung to the authoritarian principle, which

instilled in the student a fear of authority and, at the same time, incited him to

engage in irrational forms of rebellion. The liberal educational organizations

did  not  enjoy  any  social  protection.  On  the  contrary,  they  were  wholly

dependent  upon  private  financial  aid,  in  addition  to  being  exposed  to  the

gravest dangers. It was not surprising, therefore, that these inchoate stirrings

toward the non-compulsive restructuralization of the masses of the people

remained a drop in the bucket. The youth flocked to Hitler by the thousands.

He did not impose any responsibility upon them; he merely built upon their

structures, which had been previously molded in the authoritarian families.

Hitler was victorious in the youth movement because the democratic society

had not done everything possible to educate the youth to lead a free and

responsible life.

  In  place  of  voluntary  achievement,  Hitler  promised  the  principle  of

compulsive discipline and mandatory work. Several million German workers

and  employees  voted  for  Hitler.  The  democratic  institutions  had  not  only

failed to cope with unemployment, they had shown themselves to be clearly

afraid when it came right down to teaching the working masses of people to

assume responsibility for their own work accomplishment. Brought up not to

understand  anything  about  the  work  process  (indeed  prevented  from

understanding it), accustomed to being excluded from having any part in the

control  of  production  and  to  merely  receiving  wages,  these  millions  of

workers and employees could easily accept the old principle in an intensified

form. Now they could identify themselves with “the state” and “the nation,”

which were “great and strong.” Hitler openly declared in his writings and

speeches that since the masses of the people were childish and feminine, they

merely repeated what was funneled into them. Masses of people hailed him,for here was a man who wanted to protect them.

  Hitler demanded that all science be subordinated under the concept of

“race.” Large segments of German science deferred to this demand, for the

theory of race was rooted in the metaphysical theory of heredity. It is this

theory, with its concepts of “inherited substances” and “predispositions,” that

has repeatedly enabled science to shirk the responsibility for understanding

life functions in their state of becoming and for actually comprehending the

social origin of human behavior. It used to be customary to believe that when

cancer,  neurosis,  or  psychosis  were  declared  to  be  hereditary,  something

highly  significant  had  been  said. The  fascist  theory  of  race  is  merely  an

extension of the convenient theories of heredity.

  There  was  hardly  another  dogma  of  German  fascism  as  capable  of

inspiring masses of people as that of the “surging of the German blood” and

of its “purity.” The purity of German blood meant freedom from “syphilis,”

from “Jewish contamination.” In each and every one of us, there is a deep

fear of venereal disease; it is a carry-over of childish genital anxiety. Hence,

it is understandable that masses of people flocked to Hitler, for he promised

them “purity of blood.” Every human being senses in himself what are called

“cosmic or oceanic feelings.” Dry academic science felt it was too elevated to

concern itself with such mysticism. This cosmic or oceanic longing which

people feel is nothing other than the expression of their orgastic longing for

life. Hitler appealed to this longing, and it is for this reason that the masses of

people followed him and not the dry rationalists, who tried to suffocate these

vague feelings of life with economic statistics.

  From olden times, the “preservation of the family” has been an abstract

slogan in Europe, behind which the most reactionary thoughts and actions

were concealed. A person who criticized the compulsive authoritarian family

and distinguished it from the natural relationship of love between children

and parents was “an enemy of the fatherland,” a “destroyer of the sacred

institution of the family,” an anarchist. As Germany became more and moreindustrialized,  familial  ties  came  into  sharp  conflict  with  this  collective

industrialization. There was no official organization that would have dared to

single out what was sick in the family and to tackle the problem of parental

suppression of children, family hatreds, etc. The typical authoritarian German

family,  particularly  in  the  country  and  in  small  towns,  hatched  fascist

mentality by the millions. These families molded the child according to the

pattern  of  compulsive  duty,  renunciation,  absolute  obedience  to  authority,

which  Hitler  knew  how  to  exploit  so  brilliantly.  By  espousing  the

“preservation of the family,” and at the same time drawing the youth away

from the family into its youth groups, fascism made allowances for familial

ties as well as rebellion against the family. By stressing the emotional identity

of “family,” “nation,” and “state,” fascism made possible a smooth transition

from the structure of the family to the structure of the fascist state. True, not a

single problem of the family nor the actual needs of the nation were solved

by this, but it enabled masses of people to transfer their familial ties from the

compulsive  family  to  the  larger  “family,”  the  “nation.”  The  structural

groundwork for this transfer had been well prepared over thousands of years.

“Mother Germany” and “Father-God Hitler” became the symbols of deeply

rooted  infantile  emotions.  Identified  with  the  “strong  and  unique  German

nation,”  every  citizen—no  matter  how  nondescript  or  miserable  he  felt

himself to be—could mean something, even if in an illusionary way. Finally,

the interest in “race” was capable of absorbing and concealing the unleashed

sources of sexuality. Adolescents could engage in sexual intercourse now if

they  alleged  that  they  were  propagating  children  in  the  interest  of  racial

breeding.

  It was not only that man’s natural vital forces remained buried; now they

were forced to express themselves in far more disguised forms than ever

before. As a result of this “revolution of the irrational,” there were more

suicides and socio-hygienic misery in Germany than ever before. The death

of tens of thousands in the war in honor of the German race constitutes theapotheosis of this witches’ dance.

  The  persecution  of  the  Jews  was  part  and  parcel  of  the  longings  for

“purity of blood,” i.e., purity from sins. The Jews tried to explain or to prove

that they too had strict moral codes, that they too were nationalistic, that they

too  were  “German.”  Anthropologists  who  were  against  Hitler  used  skull

measurements in an attempt to prove that the Jews were not an inferior race.

Christians  and  historians  attempted  to  explain  that  Jesus  was  of  Jewish

descent. In the persecution of the Jews, however, rational questions played no

part; i.e., it was not a question whether the Jews too were decent, whether

they were racially inferior, or whether they had acceptable cranial indexes.

These  were  not  at  all  a  part  of  the  issue.  It  was  something  else  entirely.

Precisely  on  this  point,  the  consistency  and  correctness  of  sex-economic

thinking proved valid.

  When the fascist says “Jew,” he means a definite irrational sensation.

Irrationally,  the  “Jew”  represents  the  “money-maker,”  the  “usurer,”  the

“capitalist.” This is borne out by the depth-psychological treatment of Jews

and  non-Jews  alike.  At  a  deeper  level,  the  concept  “Jew”  means  “dirty,”

“sensual,”  “bestially  sexual,”  but  also  “Shylock,”  “castrator,”  “murderer.”

Since the fear of natural sexuality is as deeply rooted as the horror of perverse

sexuality, it is easily understood that the skillfully executed persecution of the

Jews stirred the deepest sexual defense functions of people brought up in a

sexually aberrant way. Drawing upon the concept “Jew,” it was possible to

fully incorporate the anticapitalistic and antisexual attitude of the masses of

people  into  the  machinery  of  the  fascist  deluge. Unconscious longing for

sexual joy in life and sexual purity coupled with fear of natural sexuality and

horror  of  perverse  sexuality  produces  fascist,  sadistic  anti-Semitism.

“Frenchman” has the same meaning for the German as “Jew” and “black

man” have for the unconsciously fascistic Englishman. “Jew,” “Frenchman,”

and “black man” are terms for “sexually sensual.”

  These  were  the  unconscious  factors  which  enabled  the  modern  sex-propagandist of the twentieth century, the sexual psychopath and criminal

pervert Julius Streicher, to put Der Stürmer into the hands of millions of

German  adolescents  and  adults.  In  the  pages  of Der  Stürmer  more  than

anywhere  else,  it  became  clear  that  sexual  hygiene  had  ceased  to  be  a

problem of medical societies; it had, rather, become a question of decisive

social significance. The following samples of Streicher’s fantasy will suffice

to elucidate. We quote from issues of Stürmer published in 1934:


    Helmut Daube, 20, had just completed his first year at college. Toward two o’clock in the

  morning, he went home. At five in the morning, his parents found him lying dead on the street

in front of their apartment building. His throat had been cut through to the spine, his penis had

  been removed. There was no blood. The hands of the unfortunate boy were cut. He had been

  stabbed a number of times in the abdomen.

    One day the old Jew fell upon the unsuspecting non-Jewish girl in the attic, raped and

  abused her. As time went on, he would sneak into her room, which could not be locked.

    A young couple went for a walk outside of Paderborn and found a piece of flesh on the path.

  Upon  closer  examination,  they  discovered  to  their  horror  that  it  was  the skillfully removed

  genital part of a female body.

    The Jew had cut up [the body] into one pound pieces. Together with his father, he had

  scattered the pieces throughout the entire area. They were found in a small wood, in fields, in

  brooks, in a pond, in a creek, in a drainpipe and in the cesspool. The cut-off breasts were found

in the hayloft.

    While Moses strangled the child with a handkerchief, Samuel cut off a piece of his cheek

  with a knife. The others collected the blood in a basin, at the same time pricking the naked

  victim with needles.…

    The woman’s resistance was not capable of cooling off his lust. On the contrary. He tried to

  close the window to prevent the neighbors from looking in. But then he again touched the

  woman  in  a  vile,  typically  Jewish  way.…  He  urgently  persuaded  the  woman  not  to  be  so

  prudish. He locked all the windows and doors. His words and actions became more and more

  shameless. More and more he pushed his victim into the corner. All protestations were to no

  avail. He even laughed at her threats to cry out for help. He pushed the woman closer and closer

to the couch. Verbally, he hurled the meanest and most obscene words at her. But then he

  pounced upon the woman’s body like a tiger and completed his diabolic work.


  Until this point, many readers of this newspaper undoubtedly believedthat I was exaggerating when I spoke of the psychic plague. I can only assure

them that I am not introducing this concept frivolously, nor merely as a subtle

figure of speech. I am quite serious about it. During the past seven years, the

Stürmer has not merely effectively confirmed the genital castration anxiety a

million times over in the German and other masses of people who read it.

Over and above this, it has stirred and nourished the perverse fantasies that

slumber in every one of us. After the downfall of the chief perpetuators of the

psychic plague in Europe, it will remain to be seen how this problem will be

dealt with. It is not a German but an international problem, for the longing for

love and the fear of genitality are international facts. In Scandinavia, I was

sought out by fascist adolescents who had managed to preserve a trace of

natural  feeling  for  life,  and  asked  what  attitude  they  should  take  toward

Streicher, the racial theory, and the other “niceties.” Something was not quite

right,  they  said.  I  summarized  the  necessary  measures  in  a  short  résumé,

which I want to append here:


                                    What Is to Be Done?

      General: This reactionary filth has to be opposed with a well-organized and objectively

  correct elucidation of the difference between sick and healthy sexuality. Every average person

  will  understand  this  difference  because  he  feels  it  instinctively.  Every  average  person  is

  ashamed of his perverse, pathological ideas of sex and desires clarity, help, and natural sexual

  gratification.

    We have to clarify and help!

    1. Collect all material which makes the pornographic character of Streicherism readily clear

to every reasonable person. Circulate this material in leaflets! The healthy sexual interest of the

  masses has to be awakened, made conscious, and championed.

    2. Collect and circulate all material which will show the population that Streicher and his

  accomplices are psychopaths and are committing grave crimes against the health of the nation!

  There are Streichers everywhere in this world.

    3.  Expose  the  secret  of  Streicher’s  effect  upon  the  masses:  he  provokes  pathological

  fantasies. The people will gladly purchase and read good educational material.

    4. The pathological sexuality which forms the soil of Hitler’s racial theory and Streicher’s

  crimes can be opposed most effectively by showing the people the natural and healthy processes

  and modes of behavior in sexual life. The people will immediately grasp this difference and

  demonstrate a burning interest for it, once they have understood what they really want and are

  afraid to articulate; among other things:    a.  Healthy  and  gratifying  sexuality  unconditionally  presupposes  the  possibility  of  being

  alone and undisturbed with the loved partner. Thus, it is necessary to provide apartments for

  everyone who needs them, also for the youth.

    b.  Sexual  gratification  is  not  identical  with  procreation.  The  healthy  person  has  sexual

  intercourse about three to four thousand times during his life, but an average of only two or

  three children. Contraceptives are absolutely necessary for sexual health.

    c. Owing to their sexually suppressed upbringing, the vast majority of men and women are

  sexually disturbed, i.e., they remain ungratified by sexual intercourse. Thus, it is necessary to set

  up a sufficient number of clinics to treat sexual disturbances. A rational, sexually affirmative sex

  education is imperative.

    d. Youth is made sick by its masturbation conflicts. Only self-gratification which is free of

  guilt feelings is not detrimental to one’s health. Youth has a right to a happy sexual life under

  the best conditions. Prolonged sexual abstinence is definitely harmful. Pathological fantasies

  disappear only with gratifying sexuality.

    Fight for this right!


  I  know  that  leaflets  and  clarifications  alone  are  not  enough.  What  is

needed  is  general,  socially  protected  work  on  the  human  structure  which

produces  the  psychic  plague  and  makes  it  possible  for  psychopaths  to

function as dictators and modern sexual propagandists who poison the life of

everyone. In short, what is needed is the liberation and social protection of

natural sexuality in the masses of the people.

  In 1930, human sexuality was a social Cinderella, a subject discussed by

questionable reform groups. Now, in 1940, it has become a pivotal social

problem.  If  it  is  correct  that  fascism  has  been  successful  in  irrationally

exploiting the sexual longing for life on the part of masses of people and, in

having  done  so,  has  created  chaos,  then  it  must  also  be  correct  that  the

perversions  which  it  allowed  to  break  loose  can  be  mastered  through  the

universal rational solution of the sexual problem.

  In  their  profusion  of  mental  hygiene  problems,  the  events  in  Europe

between 1930 and 1940 confirmed the position I had taken in my discussions

with Freud. What was painful in this confirmation was the powerlessness I

felt and the conviction I had that natural science was still a long way off from

really comprehending what, in this book, I call the “biological core” of thecharacter structure.

  On the whole, both as individuals and as physicians and teachers, our

position with respect to the biological deviations of life is just as helpless as

was  the  position  of  the  individual  in  the  Middle  Ages  with  respect  to

infectious diseases. At the same time, we feel certain that the experience of

the fascist plague will mobilize the forces in the world which are needed to

come to terms with this problem of civilization.

  The fascists claim they are going to carry out the “biological revolution.”

The truth is that fascism completely exposes the fact that the life function in

man has become neurotic. From the point of view of the masses who follow

it, an inflexible will to life is undoubtedly at work in fascism. But the forms

in  which  this  will  to  life  has  manifested  itself  reveal  all  too  clearly  the

consequences  of  an  ancient  psychic  enslavement. In  fascism,  only  the

perverse impulses have broken through. The post-fascist world will carry out

the biological revolution which fascism did not produce but made necessary.

  The  following  chapters  of  this  book  deal  with  the  functions  of  the

“biological core.” Its scientific comprehension and social mastery will be an

achievement of rational work, militant science, and the natural function of

love, an achievement of genuine democratic and collective efforts. The goal

of these collective efforts is the earthly, material, and sexual happiness of

masses of people.                                      CHAPTER VII





THE BREAKTHROUGH INTO THE BIOLOGICAL


                                      REALM




The theory of the orgasm confronted me with this question: what is to be

done with the sexual energy liberated from repression in the process of cure?

The world said no to everything that sexual hygiene demanded. The natural

instincts are biological facts. They cannot be done away with and they cannot

be  fundamentally  changed.  Like  all  living  beings,  man  needs,  first  and

foremost, the appeasement of hunger and the gratification of sexual needs.

Today’s society makes the first difficult and frustrates the latter. There is a

glaring contradiction between natural demands and certain social institutions.

Man is immersed in this contradiction, leans more toward one side or the

other, makes compromises that always backfire, escapes into sickness and

death, or rebels senselessly and fruitlessly against the existing system. The

human structure is molded in these struggles.

    Biological as well as sociological demands are operative in the human

structure. Everything that has social standing, title, and prestige champions

the sociological demands against the natural demands. I was amazed that the

overwhelming  role  of  natural  demands  could  have  been  so  thoroughly

overlooked. Even Freud, who of course had discovered very essential parts of

these demands, became inconsistent. After 1930, the instincts were merely

“mythical qualities” for him. They were “indeterminable,” though “rooted in

chemical  processes.”  The  contradictions  were  enormous.  In  clinical

therapeutic work, the instinctual demands determined everything and societyjust about nothing. On the other hand there was no getting away from the fact

that “society and culture,” representing the so-called reality principle, also

made  demands.  True,  the  instincts  unconditionally  and  overwhelmingly

determined  existence—at  the  same  time,  however,  they  had  to  adapt

themselves  to  the  sex-negating  reality.  True,  the  instincts  derived  from

physiological sources. At the same time, however, the id had an Eros and a

death instinct which are engaged in an eternal struggle. The duality in Freud’s

concept of instinct was absolute. There was no functional connection between

sexuality  and  its  biological  counterpart,  the  death  instinct.  The  two  were

merely  antithetical.  Freud  psychologized  biology.  He  said  that  there  were

“tendencies” in the realm of the living which “intended” this and that. This

was  a  metaphysical  point  of  view.  Its  criticism  was  justified  by  the  later

experimental proof of the simple functional nature of instinctual processes.

The attempt to explain neurotic anxiety in terms of the concepts of Eros and

the death instinct was not successful. Freud eventually discarded the libido-

anxiety theory.

  The  “partial  drives”  also  created  difficulties  for  Freud’s  theory  of  the

instincts. Each one of them, even those which led to perversions, were said to

be  biologically  determined.  Thus,  whether  he  intended  to  or  not,  Freud

ultimately gave credence to many views of hereditary science. And in Freud

himself, the theory of constitution gradually began to replace the dynamic

conception of psychic illness. If a child smashed a glass, this act was said to

be the expression of the destructive instinct. If he often fell down, this was

said to be the effect of the mute death instinct. If his mother left him and the

child played going away and coming back, this was said to be the effect of a

“repetition compulsion beyond the pleasure principle.”

  The biological “repetition compulsion” beyond the pleasure principle was

supposed to explain masochistic actions. There was supposed to be a will to

suffer. This fit in with the theory of the death instinct. In short, Freud carried

over  laws  he  had  discovered  in  the  psychic  function  to  its  biologicalfoundation. Since, according to this conception, society is structured like an

individual, psychology became overburdened with methodology that could

not  withstand  any  criticism  and,  moreover,  gave  free  rein  to  speculations

about “society and Thanatos.” In the process, psychoanalysis became more

and  more  assertive  in  its  claim  that  it  could  explain  all  existence.  It

simultaneously  demonstrated  an  ever-growing  aversion  to  the  correct

sociological and physiological, as well as psychological comprehension of

one  object:  man.  Nonetheless,  there  could  be  no  doubt  that  man  is

distinguished  from  the  other  animals  by  a  particular  interlacing  of

biophysiological  and  sociological  processes  with  psychological  processes.

The correctness of this structural principle of my theory was borne out by the

solution of the problem of masochism. From then on, piece by piece of the

psychic structure was elucidated as a dynamic unification of biophysiological

and sociological factors.


                1. THE SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM OF MASOCHISM


For  psychoanalysis,  the  pleasure  in  suffering  pain  was  the  result  of  a

biological  need.  “Masochism”  was  said  to  be  an  instinct  like  any  other

instinct, merely directed toward a peculiar goal. Nothing could be done with

this in therapy. For, if the analyst told the patient that he wanted to suffer “for

biological  reasons,”  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  done.  The

orgasmotherapeutic  task  confronted  me  with  the  question  of  why  the

masochist converted the otherwise clearly understandable desire for pleasure

into a desire for unpleasure. A drastic incident freed me from the false line of

questioning  which  had  led  psychology  and  sexology  astray  until  then.  In

1928,  I  treated  a  completely  crushed  individual  who  had  a  masochistic

perversion. His incessant complaining and his demands to be beaten blocked

every attempt to get through to him. After months of the usual psychoanalytic

work, my patience gave out. When he once again demanded that I should

beat  him,  I  asked  what  he  would  say  if  I  granted  his  wish.  He  beamedblissfully. I took a ruler and gave him two hard whacks on his buttocks. He

let out a terrible yell. There was no trace of pleasure, and that was the last I

heard of such demands. But he continued to complain and make reproaches.

My  colleagues  would  have  been  scandalized  if  they  had  heard  of  this

incident. I did not regret it. All at once I understood that pain and unpleasure

are not at all, as is contended, the instinctual goal of the masochist. When he

is beaten, the masochist, like any normal person, experiences pain. There are

entire industries that thrive upon the false appraisal of masochism they help

to  create.  The  question  remained: if  the  masochist  does  not  strive  for

unpleasure, does not experience it pleasurably, why does he feel compelled to

be tormented? After a great deal of effort, I discovered the fantasy which lay

at the basis of this perverse conduct. The masochist fantasizes he is being

tormented because he wants to burst. Only in this way does he hope to attain

relaxation.

  The masochistic complaints proved to be the expression of a torturous and

unresolvable inner tension. They are open or concealed pleas of desperation

to  be  released  from  this  instinctual  tension.  Since,  owing  to  his  pleasure

anxiety, the ability to experience gratification through his own initiative and

activity is blocked, the masochist anticipates the orgastic resolution, which he

deeply fears, as a release from the outside brought about by another person.

The  desire  to  burst  is  counteracted  by  a  deep  fear  of  bursting.  The

masochistic  character’s  self-disparagement  now  appeared  in  a  hitherto

unknown light. Self-aggrandizement is, so to speak, a biopsychic erection, a

fantastic expansion of the psychic apparatus. A few years later I learned that

underlying it is the perception of bioelectric charges. The opposite of this is

self-disparagement, brought about by the fear of expanding to the point of

bursting.  Vain  ambition  and  an  inhibited  seeking  for  greatness,  rooted  in

anxiety,  are  the  driving  forces  of  masochistic  self-disparagement.  The

masochist’s provocation of punishment proved to be the expression of a deep

desire to be brought to gratification against his own will. Characterologicallymasochistic women could engage in the sexual act only with the fantasy that

they were being seduced or raped. The man is supposed to force them to do

what they simultaneously desire and fear. To engage in the sexual act of their

own volition is forbidden and laden with severe guilt feelings. The familiar

vindictiveness on the part of the masochist, whose self-confidence is severely

damaged,  is  realized  by  making  the  other  person  out  to  be  bad,  or  by

provoking him into cruel behavior.

  The  idea  that  the  skin,  especially  the  skin  of  the  buttocks,  becomes

“warm,” or “is burning,” is frequently encountered among masochists. The

desire to be rubbed with a hard brush or to be beaten until one’s skin “bursts”

is nothing other than the wish to bring about the release of a tension through

bursting. Thus, the pain is by no means the goal of the impulse; it is merely

an  unpleasant  experience  in  achieving  release  from  the  unmistakably  real

tension.  Masochism  is  the  prototype  of  a  secondary  drive,  and  forcefully

demonstrates the result of the repression of the natural pleasure function.

  Masochists  exhibit  a  special  form  of  orgasm  anxiety.  Other  types  of

patients do not allow a sexual excitation in the genital to take place, as in

compulsion neurotics, or they take refuge in anxiety, e.g., hysterical patients.

The masochist persists in pregenital stimulation. He does not elaborate it into

neurotic symptoms. This causes the tension to mount and, since the ability to

experience relaxation diminishes, there is a corresponding increase in orgasm

anxiety.  Thus  the  masochist  becomes  entangled  in  a  vicious  cycle  of  the

worst kind. The more he desires to extricate himself from the tension, the

deeper he sinks into it. At the moment the orgasm is supposed to take place,

the masochistic fantasies become much more intense. Often, it is only at this

point that they become conscious. For instance, the man might fantasize that

he is being forcefully dragged through fire; the woman that her abdomen is

being  slit  open  or  that  her  vagina  is  bursting.  Many  are  capable  of

experiencing  a  certain  measure  of  gratification  only  with  the  aid  of  such

fantasies. To be forced to burst means to use outside help in order to obtainrelief from tension. Since fear of orgastic excitation is met with in every

neurosis,  masochistic  fantasies  and  attitudes  are  part  of  every  emotional

illness.

  It was strictly at variance with clinical experience to explain masochism

as the perception of the inner death instinct or as the result of “fear of death.”

Masochists  develop  very  little  anxiety  as  long  as  they  can  fantasize

masochistically. They are immediately afraid when a hysteria or compulsion

neurosis  begins  to  consume  the  masochistic  fantasies.  Pronounced

masochism, on the other hand, is an excellent means of avoiding instinctual

anxiety, since it is always the other person who causes the injury. Moreover,

the twofold nature of the idea of bursting (desire for and fear of orgastic

release) satisfactorily explains all aspects of the masochistic attitude.

  The desire to explode or burst (or the fear of it), which I subsequently

discovered  in  all  my  patients,  puzzled  me.  According  to  prevailing

psychological concepts, a psychic idea has to have a function and has to have

an origin. We are in the habit of deducing ideas from graphic impressions.

The idea originates in the outside world and is transmitted to the organism as

a  perception  through  the  sense  organs.  It  derives  its  energy  from  inner

instinctual  sources.  No  such  external  origin  was  found  for  the  idea  of

bursting. This made it difficult to incorporate it clinically.

    Nevertheless,  I  was  able  to  record  a  number  of  important  insights:

masochism does not correspond to a biological instinct. It is the result of a

disturbance  in  a  person’s  capacity  for  gratification  and  a  continuously

unsuccessful attempt to correct this disturbance. It is a result and not a cause

of the neurosis. Masochism is the expression of a sexual tension that cannot

be  relieved.  Its  immediate  source  is  the  pleasure  anxiety  or  the  fear  of

orgastic  discharge.  What  characterizes  it  is  that  it  seeks  to  bring  about

precisely what it fears most deeply: the pleasurable release of tension which

is experienced and feared as bursting or exploding.

    Comprehension of the masochistic mechanism opened the way for meinto the field of biology. Man’s pleasure anxiety became understandable as a

fundamental change in the physiological function of pleasure. Suffering and

enduring suffering are results of the loss of the organic capacity for pleasure.

  Thus,  without  intending  it,  I  had  hit  upon  the  dynamic  nature  of  all

religions  and  philosophies  of  suffering.  When,  in  my  capacity  as  a  sex

counselor, I came into contact with many Christian people, I grasped the

connection between biological functioning and religion. Religious ecstasy is

patterned precisely according to the masochistic mechanism. Release from

inner sin, i.e., from inner sexual tension—a release one is not capable of

bringing about by oneself—is expected from God, an all-powerful figure.

Such  release  is  desired  with  biological  energy.  At  the  same  time,  it  is

experienced as “sin.” Thus, it cannot be realized through one’s own volition.

Someone else has to accomplish it, be it in the form of punishment, pardon,

redemption, etc. We shall have more to say about this later. The masochistic

orgies of the Middle Ages, the Inquisition, the chastisements and tortures, the

penances,  etc.,  of  the  religious  betrayed  their  function.  They  were

unsuccessful masochistic attempts to attain sexual gratification!

  The  orgasm  disturbance  of  the  masochist  differs  from  the  orgasm

disturbance of other neurotics in that, at the moment of the highest excitation,

the masochist is seized by spasm and maintains it. In this way, he creates a

contradiction between the marked expansion that is about to occur and the

sudden contraction. All other forms of orgastic impotence inhibit before the

peak of excitation is reached. This subtle difference, which would seem to be

of academic interest only, decided the fate of my scientific work. It is clear

from my notes between 1928 and about 1934 that the groundwork for my

experimental  work  in  the  field  of  biology,  up  to  the  point  of  the  bion

experiments,  was  prepared  in  this  period.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  the

whole process. I must simplify or, to put it in a better way, I have to describe

my first fantasies, which I would never have dared to publish if they had not

been confirmed by experimental and clinical work over the course of thefollowing ten years.


                    2. THE FUNCTIONING OF A LIVING BLADDER


I had discovered the fear of bursting and the desire to be brought to the point

of exploding in one case of masochism, then in all masochists, and finally

traces of this fear and desire in all patients without exception, insofar as they

demonstrated tendencies to masochistic suffering. The refutation of the idea

that masochism is a biological instinct like other sexual instincts extended far

beyond the critique of Freud’s theory of the death instinct. As I have already

pointed out, I was continually grappling with the question as to the origin of

the idea of “bursting,” which regularly emerged in all patients shortly before

the  attainment  of  orgastic  potency.  In  most  patients,  this  idea  enters

consciousness as a kinesthetic perception of the condition of one’s own body.

When it is clearly delineated, it is always accompanied by the idea of a taut

bladder. Patients complain of “being tense to the point of bursting,” “filled to

the point of exploding.” They feel themselves to be “blown up.” They fear

any attack upon their armoring because it makes them feel as if they were

being  “pricked  open.”  Some  patients  said  that  they  were  afraid  of

“dissolving,”  of  “melting,”  of  losing  their  “grip  on  themselves”  or  their

“contour.”  They  clung  to  the  rigid  armorings  of  their  movements  and

attitudes like a drowning man to a ship’s plank. The most cherished wish of

others was “to burst.” This accounts for many suicides. The more acute the

sexual tension becomes, the more markedly these sensations are experienced.

They promptly disappear as soon as the orgasm anxiety has been eliminated

and sexual relaxation can take place. When this happens, the hard character

traits subside, the person becomes “soft” and “yielding,” and simultaneously

develops an elastic strength. The crisis of every successful character analysis

always sets in precisely at that point when powerful preorgastic sensations

are hindered from pursuing an orderly course by anxiety-induced spasms of

the musculature. If excitation has mounted to the highest peak and requirescomplete discharge, the spasm of the pelvic musculature has the same effect

as pulling the emergency brake of a car while traveling at seventy-five miles

per hour; everything is thrown into confusion. The same thing happens to the

patient in a genuine process of cure. He is faced with the decision of wholly

discarding the inhibiting somatic mechanism or relapsing into his neurosis.

The neurosis is nothing other than the sum total of all chronically automatic

inhibitions of natural sexual excitation. Everything else is the result of this

original disturbance. In 1929, I began to comprehend that the original conflict

in mental illness (the unresolved contradiction between striving for pleasure

and  moralistic  frustration  of  pleasure)  is  physiologically  and  structurally

anchored  in  a  muscular  disturbance. The  psychic  contradiction  between

sexuality and morality operates in the biological depth of the organism as the

contradiction  between  pleasurable  excitation  and  muscular  spasm.  The

masochistic attitudes assumed great importance for the sex-economic theory

of  neuroses:  there  could  not  be  a  better  example  of  this  contradiction.

Compulsion neurotics and hysterics, who circumvent the orgastic sensation

by developing anxiety or neurotic symptoms, regularly go through a phase of

masochistic suffering in the process of cure. They go through it when the fear

of sexual excitation has been eliminated to such an extent that they yield to

the  preorgastic  excitation  in  the  genitals,  without,  however,  allowing  the

climax of the excitation to take place free of inhibition, i.e., free of anxiety.

    Moreover,  masochism  became  a  central  problem  of  mass  psychology.

How it would be practically dealt with seemed of decisive importance. The

working masses suffer severe deprivations of all kinds. They are ruled and

exploited by a few people who wield power. In the form of the ideology and

practice of various patriarchal religions, masochism proliferates like weeds

and chokes every natural claim of life. It holds people in an abysmal state of

submission. It thwarts their attempts to arrive at a common rational action

and imbues them with fear of assuming responsibility for their existence. It

causes the best strivings toward the democratization of society to fail. Freudexplained the chaotic and catastrophic nature of social conditions on the basis

of  a  death  instinct,  which  wreaked  havoc  in  society.  Psychoanalysts

contended that the masses were biologically masochistic. A punitive police

force, some said, was a natural expression of biological mass masochism.

People are in fact submissive to the authoritarian leadership of the state in the

same way that the individual is obedient to the all-powerful father. Since,

however, the rebellion against dictatorial authority, against the father, was

regarded as neurotic, whereas conformity to its institutions and demands was

regarded as normal, proofs against both of these contentions were needed:

first,  that  there  is  no  biological  masochism;  second,  that  conformity  to

present-day reality, e.g., irrational upbringing or irrational politics, is itself

neurotic. I did not tackle the work with this intent in mind. In the interplay of

manifold  observations,  far  from  the  raging  clash  of  ideologies,  these  two

proofs were found. They were discovered in the simple answer to an almost

stupid question: How would an organic bladder behave if it was inflated with

air from within and was unable to burst—in other words, if its covering were

capable of being stretched but not of being torn?

  The picture of the human character as an armor around the core of the

living organism was extremely significant. If such a bladder were put into an

unresolvable  condition  of  tension  and  it  could  express  itself,  it  would

complain. Rendered helpless, it would seek the causes of its suffering outside

of itself and make reproaches. It would beg to be pricked open. It would

provoke its surroundings until it believed it had reached its goal. What it had

failed to bring about spontaneously from the inside, it would passively and

helplessly expect from the outside.

  Bearing  this  picture  of  an  armored  bladder  in  mind,  let  us  imagine  a

biopsychic  organism  whose  energy  discharge  is  impaired.  The  surface

membrane would be the character armor. The stretching is produced by the

constant  production  of  internal  energy  (sexual  energy  or  biological

excitation). The biological energy urges toward the outside, whether to seekpleasurable discharge or to seek contact with people and things. Thus, this

urge  to  expand  corresponds  to  the direction  from  within  outward.  The

surrounding  wall  of  the  armor  counteracts  this  urge.  The  armor  not  only

prevents the bursting, it exerts a pressure from the outside toward the inside.

Rigidification of the organism is its ultimate effect.

  This picture coincided with the physical processes of internal pressure

and surface tension. I had come into contact with this phenomenon in 1926,

                                                                    1
when I reviewed the highly significant book by Fr. Kraus, the famous Berlin

pathologist, for the psychoanalytic journal.
















ST = surface tension

1P = internal pressure

 
  The neurotic organism could be readily compared to such a simple system

as that of a taut and, at the same time, peripherally armored bladder. This

curious  analogy  between  a  physical  phenomenon  and  the  well-known

characterological situation stood the test of clinical scrutiny. The neurotic

patient has developed a “stiff” body periphery, while retaining a lively inner

core. He feels “uncomfortable within his own skin,” “inhibited,” unable to

“realize himself,” as if he “were immured,” “without contact,” “tense to the

point of bursting.” He strives with all available means “toward the world,”

but it is as if he “were tied down.” More than that, his efforts to come into

contact with life are often so painful, he is so ill equipped to endure the

difficulties  and  disappointments  of  life,  that  he  prefers  “to  crawl  intohimself.” Thus, the direction of the biological function “toward the world,”

“from the inside toward the outside,” is counteracted by a “moving away

from the world,” a “withdrawal into the self.”

  This  equation  between  the  highly  complicated  and  the  simple  was

fascinating. The neurotically armored organism cannot burst like an ordinary

bladder to rid itself of its inner tension. It can become “masochistic” or it can

“recover,”  i.e.,  permit  the  orgastic  discharge  of  dammed-up  energy.  This

orgastic discharge consists in a reduction of the inner tension by means of a

“discharge toward the outside,” in the form of convulsions of the entire body.

It was still not clear what was discharged toward the outside. I was still a

long way from the present insight into the functioning of biological energy.

  I also conceived of the orgasm, with its discharge of substances from the

body,  as  proliferations  from  a  highly  taut  bladder.  Following  their

detachment, both the surface tension and the inner pressure are reduced. It

was clear that the ejaculation of semen alone could not be responsible for

this, for the pleasureless ejaculation does not reduce the tension. I have never

regretted this speculation. It led me to very concrete facts.

  I remember in this connection an insignificant but impressive incident

which  took  place  in  1922.  It  was  before  the  Berlin  Congress  of

Psychoanalysts.  I  had,  still  entirely  under  the  influence  of  Semon  and

Bergson, fabricated a natural-scientific fantasy. One has, I told friends, to

take Freud’s conception of the “sending out of libido” literally and seriously.

Freud compared the stretching forth and pulling back of psychic interests to

the stretching forth and pulling back of the pseudopodia in the amoeba. The

stretching forth of sexual energy becomes visible in the erection of the male

penis. Hence, the erection must be functionally identical with the stretching

forth  of  the  pseudopodia  of  the  amoeba.  On  the  other  hand,  erective

impotence,  in  which  the  penis  shrinks,  as  a  result  of  anxiety,  would  be

identical with the retraction of the pseudopodia. My friends were appalled at

what they considered to be confused thinking. They laughed at me, and I washurt. But thirteen years later I succeeded in experimentally confirming this

assumption.  I  now  want  to  describe  how  my  findings  led  me  to  this

confirmation.


          3. THE FUNCTIONAL ANTITHESIS OF SEXUALITY AND ANXIETY


The equating of the erection with the protrusion of pseudopodia and of the

shrinking  of  the  penis  with  their  withdrawal  caused  me  to  assume  a

functional  antithesis  between  sexuality  and  anxiety.  The  antithesis  was

expressed in the direction of biological activity. I could no longer free myself

from  this  idea.  Since  everything  I  had  learned  from  Freud  about  the

psychology of instincts was in a state of flux, this image tied in with the

deeply serious question as to the biological basis of psychic processes. Freud

had  postulated  a  physiological  foundation  for  depth  psychology.  His

“unconscious” was deeply immersed in biophysiological phenomena. In the

psychic depth, the clear psychic tendencies gave way to a highly mysterious

mechanism, which could not be grasped by psychoanalytic thinking alone.

Freud had tried to apply the psychic concepts to the sources of life. This had

to  lead  to  a  personification  of  the  biological  processes  and  bring  back

metaphysical  assumptions  which  had  been  previously  dispelled  from

psychoanalytic thinking. I had learned in the study of the orgasm function

that, in the physiological realm, it is inadmissible to use the same approach

and  concepts  one  uses  in  the  psychic  realm.  In  addition  to  its  causal

legitimacy,  every  psychic  phenomenon  has  a  meaning  in  terms  of  its

relationship to the environment. The psychoanalytic interpretation revealed

this meaning. But in the physiological realm, there is no such meaning, nor

can there be, without reintroducing a supernatural power. The living merely

functions. It does not have any “meaning.”

  Natural science tries to exclude metaphysical hypotheses. Yet, when one

cannot explain why and how the living organism functions, one looks for a

“purpose” or a “meaning,” which is then introduced into the functioning. Iagain found myself grappling with the problems of the early period of my

work,  the  problems  of  mechanism  and  vitalism.  I  avoided  giving  a

speculative answer. I still did not have a method with which to arrive at a

correct solution of this problem. I was familiar with dialectical materialism,

but I did not know how I could apply it in natural-scientific research. True, I

had given a functional interpretation to Freud’s discoveries. But to make the

idea  of  the  physiological  foundation  of  psychic  phenomena  practically

applicable, I had to discover the correct method. That the soma influences the

psyche is correct, but it is one-sided. The reverse of this, i.e., that the psyche

conditions the soma, can be seen again and again. To enlarge the psychic

realm to such an extent as to make its laws valid in the somatic does not

work. The concept that the psychic and the somatic were two independent

processes,  which  merely  interact  with  one  another,  was  at  variance  with

everyday experience. I had no solution. However, this much was clear: the

experience of pleasure, of expansion, is inseparably connected with living

functioning.

  At this point, my new concept of the masochistic function aided me. The

thought ran as follows: the psyche is determined by quality, the soma by

quantity. In the former, it is the kind of idea or desire which is important; in

the  latter,  it  is  solely  the  amount  of  the  functioning  energy  which  is

important. Yet, the processes in the organism demonstrated that the quality of

a psychic attitude is dependent upon the amount of the somatic excitation

from which it is derived. In a condition of strong somatic tension, the idea of

sexual  pleasure  and  sexual  intercourse  is  intense,  vivid,  graphic.  After

gratification, this idea can be reproduced only with difficulty. I formed an

image of this as an ocean wave which, by its rising and falling, influences the

movement of a piece of wood on the surface. It was nothing more than a

vague clue that the psyche arises from or sinks into the deep biophysiological

process,  depending  upon  the  state  of  the  latter.  It  seemed  to  me  that  the

appearance  and  disappearance  of  consciousness  in  the  act  of  waking  andgoing to sleep were expressive of this wave process. It was vague, elusive. It

was merely clear that biological energy governs the psychic as well as the

somatic.  A functional unity  prevails.  To  be  sure,  while  it  is  possible  for

biological  laws  to  be  valid  in  the  psychic  realm,  psychic  characteristics

cannot be valid in the biological realm. This forced me to reconsider the

Freudian hypothesis pertaining to the instincts.

    Imagination  is  undoubtedly  a  psychic  process.  There  are  unconscious

ideas which can be inferred from their visible manifestations. According to

Freud, the unconscious itself cannot be grasped. Yet, if it is “immersed” in

the biophysiological realm, it must be possible to grasp it with a method

applicable to the common factor which determines the biopsychic apparatus

as a whole. This common factor cannot be the “meaning,” nor can it be the

“purpose.”  These  are  secondary  functions.  Viewed  from  a  consistently

functional point of view, there is no purpose or goal in the biological realm.

There is only function and development, which follow a natural course. There

remained  the  dynamic  structure,  the  play  of  forces.  This  was  valid  in  all

realms.  One  could  hold  on  to  it.  What  psychology  calls  “tension”  and

“relaxation” is a counterplay of forces. My idea of the bladder, as simple as it

was, was definitely in keeping with the idea of the unity of the soma and the

psyche. But apart from the unity, there was also antithesis. This thought was

the germ of my theory of sexuality.Soma Psyche

Psychosomatic antithesis

Psychosomatic identity

Source of biological energy
Diagram depicting psychosomatic identity and antithesis


  In 1924, I had assumed that in the orgasm an excitation concentrates at

the periphery of the organism, particularly the genital organs, then flows back

into the vegetative center and subsides there. Unexpectedly, a train of thought

was completed. What appeared earlier as psychic excitation now emerged as

a  biophysiological  current.  The  internal  pressure  and  surface  tension  of  a

bladder are, after all, nothing other than functions of the center and periphery

of an organism. They are functionally antithetical; they are opposed to one

another. The “fate” of the bladder depends upon the relationship between

internal pressure and surface tension, just as psychic health depends upon the

balance of energy in the sexual sphere. “Sexuality” could be nothing other

than the biological function of expansion “out of the self,” from the center

toward  the  periphery.  In  turn, anxiety  could  be  nothing  but  the  reversed

direction, i.e., from the periphery to the center, “back into the self.” They are

antithetical directions of one and the same excitation process. This theory was

quickly substantiated by a profusion of clinical findings. In sexual excitation,

the peripheral vessels are dilated. In anxiety, one senses a centralized inner

tension  as  if  one  would  burst;  the  peripheral  vessels  are  contracted.  Thesexually  aroused  penis  expands.  In  anxiety,  it  shrivels.  The  sources  of

functioning energy lie in the “biological energy center.” It is at the periphery

that we find its areas of functioning, in contact with the world, in the sexual

act, in orgastic discharge, in work, etc.

  These findings were already outside the framework of psychoanalysis.

They shattered a number of previous conceptions. The psychoanalysts could

not grasp what I was saying, and my position was too controversial. Hence, it

became  increasingly  difficult  to  allow  my  views  to  exist  in  the  same

organization. Freud had rejected the attempt to include the libido process in

the  autonomic  system.  As  a  prominent  psychoanalyst,  I  was  not  on

particularly good terms with the orthodox psychiatrists and other clinicians.

Owing to their mechanistic and non-analytic way of thinking, they would

have comprehended very little of what I was saying. The newly born theory

of  sexuality  found  itself  utterly  alone.  I  was  consoled  by  the  numerous

confirmations of my view which I found in experimental physiology. My

theory seemed capable of reducing to the simplest terms the diverse findings

accumulated  by  generations  of  physiologists. At  the  center  stood  the

antithesis between sympathetic and parasympathetic.


                        4. WHAT IS “BIOPSYCHIC ENERGY”?


Some  sixty  years  of  sexology,  forty  years  of  psychoanalysis,  and  almost

twenty years of my own work on the orgasm theory still had not succeeded in

providing  the  clinician  (who  was  supposed  to  cure  human  sexual

disturbances, i.e., neuroses) with an answer to this question. Let us recall the

point of departure of the orgasm theory. Neuroses and functional psychoses

are sustained by surplus, inadequately discharged sexual energy. Initially it

was  called  “psychic  energy.”  No  one  knew  what  it  really  was.  Psychic

illnesses  were  undoubtedly  rooted  “in  the  body.”  Hence,  there  was  good

reason to assume that the psychic proliferations were nourished by an energy

stasis. Only the elimination of this energy source of the neurosis through theestablishment of full orgastic potency seemed to make the patient immune

against a relapse. There could be no thought of preventing psychic illnesses

on a mass scale without a knowledge of the biological foundation of these

illnesses.  The  premise  “given  gratifying  sexuality,  there  are  no  neurotic

disturbances” was unassailable. Naturally, this contention had individual as

well  as  social  implications.  The  significance  of  the  sexual  question  is

obvious. Yet, in spite of Freud, official science wanted to know nothing about

the  implication  of  sexuality.  Psychoanalysis  itself  showed  an  increasing

tendency to shrink away from the question. In addition, the question was

imbued with the outpourings of a pathological, distorted, somehow always

pornographically tinged “sexuality,” i.e., with the sexuality which governs

human life. The clear-cut distinction between “natural” sexual expression and

pathological, culturally anchored sexual expression, between the “primary”

drives and the “secondary” drives, made it possible to persist and to pursue

the problem to its core. Reflection alone would not have produced a solution,

nor would the collation of the many brilliant insights in modern physiological

literature that, from about 1925, appeared in increasing abundance and were

condensed and compiled in Müller’s Die Lebensnerven.

  Once again clinical observation provided the correct line of approach. In

Copenhagen, in 1933, I treated a man who offered considerable resistance to

the  uncovering  of  his  passive  homosexual  fantasies.  This  resistance  was

overtly expressed in the extremely stiff atttiude of his throat and neck (“stiff-

necked”). A concentrated attack on his defense finally caused him to yield,

though  in  an  alarming  way.  For  three  days,  he  was  shaken  by  acute

manifestations of vegetative shock. The pallor of his face changed rapidly

from  white  to  yellow  to  blue.  His  skin  was  spotted  and  motley.  He

experienced violent pains in the neck and back of the head. His heartbeat was

rapid  and  pounding.  He  had  diarrhea,  felt  tired,  and  seemed  to  have  lost

control. I was uneasy. True, I had often seen similar symptoms, but never in

such  violent  form.  Something  had  happened  here  that,  while  somehow  alegitimate  part  of  the  work,  was  not  immediately  intelligible. Affects had

broken through somatically after the patient had relinquished his attitude of

psychic  defense.  Apparently,  the  stiff  neck,  which  emphasized  austere

masculinity,  had  bound  vegetative  energies  which  now  broke  loose  in  an

uncontrolled and chaotic manner. A person with an ordered sexual economy

is not capable of such a reaction. Only continuous inhibition and damming-up

of biological energy can produce it. The musculature had served the function

of  inhibition.  When  the  neck  muscles  relaxed,  powerful  impulses,  as  if

unleashed from a taut coil, broke through. The alternating pallor and flushing

of the face could be nothing other than the flowing back and forth of body

fluids,  i.e.,  the  contraction  and  dilation  of  the  blood  vessels.  This  fits  in

extremely  well  with  my  earlier  described  views  on  the  functioning  of

biological  energy.  The  direction,  “out  of  the  self  toward  the  world,”

alternated rapidly and continuously with the opposite direction, “away from

the world—back into the self.”

  By means of tensions, the musculature can obstruct the flow of blood, in

other  words  can  reduce  the  movement  of  body  fluids  to  a  minimum.  I

checked a number of other patients to see whether this observation held true

in  their  cases,  too,  and  I  also  thought  about  patients  whom  I  had  treated

earlier. All observations confirmed this phenomenon. In a short time, I had a

profusion  of  facts  at  my  disposal.  They  reduced  themselves  to  a  concise

formulation: sexual life energy can be bound by chronic muscular tensions.

Anger and anxiety can also be blocked by muscular tensions. From now on, I

found that whenever I dissolved a muscular tension, one of the three basic

biological excitations of the body, anxiety, hate, or sexual excitation, broke

through.  I  had,  of  course,  succeeded  in  doing  this  before  through  the

loosening of purely characterological inhibitions and attitudes. But now the

breakthroughs  of  vegetative  energy  were  more  complete,  more  forceful,

experienced more affectively, and occurred more rapidly. In the process, the

characterological inhibitions were loosened spontaneously. These findings,made in 1933, were published in an incomplete form in 1935. In 1937, I

                                  2
published them in more detail. Quite rapidly, a number of decisive questions

pertaining to the relationship between mind and body were clarified.

    Character  armorings  were  now  seen  to  be  functionally  identical  with

muscular  hypertonia.  The  concept,  “functional  identity,”  which  I  had  to

introduce,  means  nothing  more  than  that  muscular  attitudes  and  character

attitudes have the same function in the psychic mechanism: they can replace

one another and can be influenced by one another. Basically, they cannot be

separated. They are identical in their function.

    Postulations resulting from the connecting of facts immediately lead to

further  findings.  If  the  character  armor  could  be  expressed  through  the

muscular  armor,  and  vice  versa,  then  the  unity  of  psychic  and  somatic

functioning  had  been  grasped  in  principle,  and  could  be  influenced  in  a

practical way. From that time on, I was able to make practical use of this

unity whenever necessary. If a character inhibition did not respond to psychic

influencing, I resorted to the corresponding somatic attitude. Conversely, if I

had  difficulty  in  getting  at  a  disturbing  somatic  attitude,  I  worked  on  its

expression in the patient’s character and was able to loosen it. I was now able

to  eliminate  a  typical  friendly  smile  which  obstructed  the  analytic  work,

either by describing the expression or by directly disturbing the muscular

attitude, e.g., pulling up the chin. This was an enormous step forward. It took

another six years to develop this technique into the vegetotherapy of today.

  The  loosening  of  the  rigid  muscular  attitudes  produced  peculiar  body

sensations  in  the  patients:  involuntary  trembling  and  twitching  of  the

muscles, sensations of cold and hot, itching, the feeling of pins and needles,

prickling sensations, the feeling of having the jitters, and somatic perceptions

of anxiety, anger, and pleasure. I had to break with all the old ideas about the

mind-body relationship, if I wanted to grasp these phenomena. They were not

“results,” “causes,” “accompanying manifestations” of “psychic processes”;

they  were  simply  these  phenomena  themselves  in  the  somatic  realm.  Icategorized  as  “vegetative  currents”  all  somatic  phenomena  which,  in

contrast  to  rigid  muscular  armorings,  are  characterized  by  movement.

Immediately  the  question  arose:  are  the  vegetative  currents  merely  the

movements of fluid or are they more than that? I could not be satisfied with

the explanation that these currents were merely mechanical movements of

fluid. While purely mechanical movements could account for the hot and

cold sensations, pallor, and blushing, the “simmering of the blood,” etc., they

could not explain the feeling of pins and needles, the sensation of prickling,

shuddering,  the  sweet  preorgastic  sensations  of  pleasure,  etc.  The  crucial

problem of orgastic impotence was still unsolved: it is possible for the genital

organs to be filled with blood without a trace of excitation. Hence, sexual

excitation can certainly not be identical with, nor be the expression of the

flow of blood. There are anxiety states without any particular pallor of the

face or skin. The feeling of “tightness” in the chest (“angustiae,” anxiety), the

feeling of “constriction,” could not be traced back solely to a congestion of

blood in the central organs. If this were so, one would have to feel anxiety

after a good meal, when the blood is concentrated in the stomach. In addition

to the flow of the blood, there must be something else which, depending upon

its biological function, causes anxiety, anger, or pleasure. In this process, the

flow of blood merely represents an essential means. Perhaps this unknown

“something”  does  not  occur  when  the  movement  of  the  body  fluids  is

hindered.


5. THE ORGASM FORMULA: TENSIONS → CHARGE → DISCHARGE → RELAXATION


The unknown “something” I was looking for could be nothing other than

bioelectricity. This occurred to me one day when I tried to understand the

physiology of the process of friction which takes place between the penis and

the walls of the vaginal mucous membrane in the sexual act. Sexual friction

is  a  fundamental  biological  process.  It  is  found  throughout  the  animal

kingdom wherever reproduction takes place in the union of the two sexes.Two surfaces of the body rub against one another. In this process, biological

excitation  occurs,  together  with  congestion,  expansion,  “erection.”  On  the

basis of pioneer experiments, the Berlin internist Kraus ascertained that the

body is governed by electrical processes. It is made up of countless “border

surfaces”  between  membranes  and  electrolytic  fluids,  having  various

densities  and  compositions.  According  to  a  well-known  law  of  physics,

electrical  tensions  develop  at  the  borders  between  conducting  fluids  and

membranes. Since the concentrations and structure of the membranes are not

homogeneous, differences develop in the tensions at the border surfaces, and,

simultaneously,  differences  in  potential  of  varying  intensity.  These

differences  of  potential  may  be  likened  to  the  energy  differences  of  two

bodies at different heights. The body having the higher elevation is capable of

performing more work as it drops than the body having the lower elevation.

A weight of one kilogram will drive a stake deeper into the earth when it is

dropped from a height of three meters than when it is dropped from a height

of one meter. The “potential energy of position” is higher, and, therefore, the

“kinetic energy” which is generated will also be greater when this potential

energy  is  released.  The  principle  of  “potential  difference”  can  be  easily

applied to the difference in electrical tensions. If I attach a wire from a highly

charged body to a less highly charged one, a current will flow from the first

to the second. In this process, static electrical energy is converted into current

energy. Moreover, an equalization takes place between the two charges, in

the  same  way  that  the  water  level  in  two  vessels  becomes  the  same  if  I

connect the two by means of a pipe. The equalization of energy presupposes

a  difference  in  potential  energy.  Our  body  consists  of  billions  of  such

potential  surfaces  having  various  potential  energies.  Consequently,  the

energy in the body is in constant motion from places of higher to places of

lower potential. The tiny particles of body fluids, the ions, are the transmitters

of the electrical charges in this continuous process of equalization. These are

atoms which possess a fixed quantum of electrical charge, and, dependingupon whether they are moving toward a negative or toward a positive pole,

are called cations or anions. What has all this to do with the problem of

sexuality? A great deal!

  Sexual  tension  is  felt  throughout  the  body,  but  it  is  experienced  most

strongly in the regions of the heart and the abdomen. The excitation gradually

becomes  concentrated  in  the  sexual  organs.  They  become  congested  with

blood, and electrical charges reach the surface of the genitals. We know that

the sexual excitation of one part of the body by a gentle touch will excite

other  parts  of  the  body.  The  process  of  friction  increases  the  tension  or

excitation until it reaches a climax, the orgasm, a condition characterized by

involuntary convulsions of the musculature of the genitals and of the entire

body. It is known that muscular contraction is accompanied by the discharge

of electrical energy. This discharge can be measured and represented in the

form of a graphic curve. Some physiologists are of the opinion that the nerves

store up excitation, while the muscle contraction discharges it, for it is not the

nerve but only the muscle which can contract and is capable of discharging

energy. In the process of sexual friction, energy is at first stored up in both

bodies and then discharged in the orgasm. The orgasm can be nothing other

than an electrical discharge. The physiological structure of the genital organs

is particularly suited for this: great vascularity, dense ganglia, capacity for

erection,  and  a  musculature  which  is  especially  capable  of  spontaneous

contractions.

  If the process is investigated more closely, it is observed that there are

four stages to the course of excitation:

  1. The organs become filled with fluid: erection with mechanical tension.

  2. This produces a strong excitation which I assumed to be of an electrical

nature: electrical charge.

  3. In the orgasm, the convulsion of the musculature discharges the sexual

excitation: electrical discharge.

  4. This modulates into a relaxation of the genitals through a flowing backof the body fluid: mechanical relaxation.

  I called this four-beat process the orgasm formula: MECHANICAL TENSION

→ ELECTRICAL  CHARGE  → ELECTRICAL  DISCHARGE  → MECHANICAL

RELAXATION.

  The process it describes can be depicted simply. This brings me back to

the function of a filled elastic bladder which I had fantasized six years prior

to the discovery of the orgasm formula.

  Let us imagine two spheres: one is rigid, made of metal, the other elastic,

something like a living organism, an amoeba, a starfish, a heart.


Diagram depicting inorganic and organic living spheres














Inorganic

 

surface

Electrical energy
Fig. 1 Electrical energy (Fig. 1): on the surface only, evenly distributed, charged from the outside, the

entire system is rigid.












generotor of energy

Skin and muscles

 
Fig. 2 Electrical energy (Fig. 2): throughout whole body, unevenly distributed, supplied from its own

inner source; the entire system is capable of expanding and contracting.The  metal  sphere  would  be  hollow,  whereas  the  organic  sphere  would

surround a complicated system of fluids and membranes of various densities

having the ability to conduct electricity. The metal sphere would receive its

electrical charge from the outside, e.g., from an electrostatic machine. But the

organic sphere, e.g., a pig’s bladder, would have a charging apparatus which

operates  automatically  in  the  center.  Hence,  it  would  charge  itself

spontaneously from the inside. In keeping with basic laws of physics, the

electric charge of the metal sphere would be on the surface and only on the

surface, evenly distributed. The filled elastic bladder would be electrically

charged through and through. Owing to the differences in density and the

nature of the fluids and membranes, the charge would be greater in some

areas and less in others. In this ideally conceived organism, the electrical

charges would be in constant movement from places of higher to places of

lower potential. In general, however, one direction would predominate: from

the center, the operative source of the electrical charge, toward the periphery.

Consequently, the bladder would be found most frequently in the condition of

expansion and extension. Now and then, like the ciliate, it would return to the

form of the sphere, in which, given equal body content, the surface tension is

lowest. If the inner production of energy becomes too great, the bladder can,

by contracting a number of times, discharge the energy toward the outside, in

short,  can  regulate  its  energy.  This  energy  discharge  would  be  extremely

pleasurable because it liberates the organism from dammed-up tension. In the

state of extension, the bladder would be able to carry out various rhythmic

movements, e.g., produce a wave of alternating expansion and contraction, as

in the movement of a worm or in intestinal peristalsis.







  It  could  also  describe  a  wavy,  serpentine  movement,  using  the  entire

body.In these movements, the charged organic bladder would display a unity. If it

were capable of self-perception, it would experience the rhythmic alternation

of extension, expansion, and contraction in a pleasurable way. It would feel

like a small child who hops around rhythmically because he is happy. In the

course of these movements, bioelectrical energy would continually oscillate

between tension-charge and discharge-relaxation. It would be able to convert

itself into heat, into mechanical kinetic energy, or into work. Such a bladder

would feel at one with its surroundings, just like a small child. There would

be direct contact with other organic spheres, for they would identify with one

another on the basis of the sensations of movement and rhythm. Contempt for

natural movements would be foreign to them, just as they would have no

comprehension of unnatural behavior. Development would be provided for

and guaranteed through the continuous production of internal energy, as in

the budding of flowers, or progressive cell division after the introduction of

energy by fertilization. Moreover, there would be no end to the development.

Productivity would be within the framework of general biological activity; it

would not be at variance with it.

    Longitudinal  extension  over  longer  periods  of  time  would  cause  this

shape  to  become  fixed  and  thereby  bring  about  the  development  of  a

supportive  apparatus  in  the  organism.  While  this  fixed  extension  would

preclude a return to the spherical form, pulsating by means of flexion and

stretching would continue undisturbed. This would guarantee the metabolism

of energy. To be sure, a fixed supportive apparatus would already constitute

one  of  the  preconditions  of  being  less  protected  against  destructive

inhibitions of motility. However, it would not be an inhibition itself. Such an

inhibition could only be compared with the restricting of a snake at one point

of its body. Held fast, a snake would immediately lose its rhythm and the

unity of the organic wave movements in the remaining free parts of its body.  The animal body is comparable to the above described organic bladder.

To  complete  the  picture,  we  would  have  to  introduce  an  automatically

operating pumping system, like a heart, which causes the fluid to flow in a

continuously rhythmic cycle, from the center to the periphery and back again:

the  cardiovascular  system.  The  animal  body  at  the  very  lowest  stage  of

development possesses an apparatus that generates electricity from the center.

These are the so-called vegetative ganglia, conglomerations of nerve cells

which, arranged at regular intervals and connected with all organs and their

parts by means of very fine strands, govern the involuntary life functions.

They are the organs of vegetative feelings and sensations. They constitute a

coherent  unity,  a  so-called  “syncytium,”  which  is  divided  into  two

antithetically functioning groups: the sympathetic and the parasympathetic.

  Our  imagined  bladder  can  expand  and  contract.  It  can  expand  to  an

extraordinary  degree  and  then,  with  a  few  contractions,  relax.  It  can  be

flaccid, tense, relaxed, or excited. It can concentrate the electrical charges,

together with the fluids which transmit them from one place to another, with

varying intensity. It can keep certain parts in a state of continuous tension and

other parts in a state of continuous motion. If one were to squeeze it in one

part, increased tension and charge would immediately appear in another part.

If, indeed, one were to exert and maintain continuous pressure over the entire

surface,  i.e.,  prevent  it  from  expanding  in  spite  of  continuous  inner

production of energy, it would be in a perpetual state of anxiety; that is to

say, it would feel constricted and confined. Were it able to speak, it would

beg for “release” from this tormenting condition. The bladder would not care

what happened to it as long as movement and change were reintroduced into

its rigid, compressed condition. Since it would not be able to bring about this

change of its own accord, someone else would have to do it, e.g., by tossing itaround in space (gymnastics); by kneading (massage); by stabbing, if need be

(fantasy of being pricked open); by injury (masochistic beating fantasy, hara-

kiri);  and,  if  nothing  else  helps,  by  dissolving,  perishing,  disintegrating

(Nirvana,  sacrificial  death).  A  society  consisting  of  such  bladders  would

create the most idealistic philosophies about the “condition of non-suffering.”

Since any stretching out toward pleasure, or motivated by pleasure, could be

experienced only as painful, the bladder would develop a fear of pleasurable

excitation  (pleasure  anxiety)  and  create  theories  on  the  “wickedness,”

“sinfulness,”  and  “destructiveness”  of  pleasure.  In  short,  it  would  be  a

twentieth-century ascetic. Eventually, it would be afraid of any reminder of

the possibility of the so ardently desired relaxation; then it would hate such a

reminder, and finally it would prosecute and murder anyone who spoke about

it. It would join together with similarly constituted, peculiarly stiff beings and

concoct  rigid  rules  of  life.  These  rules  would  have  the  sole  function  of

guaranteeing  the  smallest  possible  production  of  inner  energy,  i.e.,  of

guaranteeing  quietness,  conformity,  and  the  continuance  of  accustomed

reactions. It would make inexpedient attempts to master surpluses of internal

energy  which  could  not  be  disposed  of  through  natural  pleasure  or

movement.  For  instance,  it  would  introduce  senseless  sadistic  actions  or

ceremonies which would be of an essentially automatic nature and have little

purpose (compulsive religious behavior). Realistic goals are self-developing

and, therefore, compel movement and restlessness in those who move toward

them.

  The bladder could be shaken by suddenly emerging convulsions, through

which the dammed-up energy would be discharged. For instance, it might

have hysterical or epileptic seizures. It might, on the other hand, become

completely rigid and desolate, as in catatonic schizophrenia. In any event,

this bladder would always be plagued by anxiety. Everything else follows

inevitably  from  this  anxiety,  e.g.,  religious  mysticism,  belief  in  a  Führer,

meaningless  martyrdom.  Since  everything  in  nature  moves,  changes,develops, expands, and contracts, the armored bladder would have an alien

and hostile attitude toward nature. It would conceive of itself as “something

very special,” belonging to a superior race because it is dressed in a stiff

collar or uniform. It would represent that “culture” or that “race” which is

incompatible  with  nature,  and  nature  would  be  looked  upon  as  “base,”

“demonic,”  “impulsive,”  “uncontrolled,”  “ignoble.”  At  the  same  time,

however, the bladder, still feeling some last vestiges of nature in itself, would

have to enthuse about it and to sentimentalize it, e.g., as “sublime love” or as

the  “surging  of  the  blood.”  To  associate  nature  with  bodily  convulsions

would  be  a  blasphemy.  Yet,  it  would  create  industries  for  pornography,

without being aware of the contradiction.

  The tension-charge function brought together ideas which had made an

impression on me in my study of classical biology. It was necessary to re-

examine its theoretical tenability. From the point of view of physiology, my

theory  was  substantiated  by  the  well-known  fact  that  muscles  contract

spontaneously. The muscular contraction can be brought about by electrical

stimuli. According to Galvani, however, the contraction can also be brought

about by injuring the muscle and connecting the end of the severed nerve to

the  muscle  at  the  point  of  injury.  The  contraction  is  accompanied  by  the

measurable expression of the so-called electrical action current. In injured

muscles, there is also an ordinary current. It becomes manifest when the

middle of the muscle surface is connected to the injured end by means of an

electric conductor, e.g., copper wire.

  The  study  of  muscle  contractions  had  been  an  important  area  of

investigation in physiology for decades. I did not understand why muscle

physiology did not find the connection with general animal electricity. If two

nerve-muscle preparations are placed upon one another in such a way that the

muscle of one touches the nerve of the other, and if, then, contractions are

produced in the first muscle preparation by applying an electrical current to

it, the second muscle preparation also contracts. The first muscle preparationcontracts as a response to the electrical stimulus, and, in the process, itself

develops  a  biological  action  current.  This,  in  turn,  acts  as  an  electrical

stimulus  upon  the  second  muscle  preparation,  which  responds  with  a

contraction,  thus  producing  a  second  biological  action  current.  Since  the

muscles in the body are in contact with each other and are connected with the

total organism by means of body fluid, every muscle action would have a

stimulating influence on the total organism. Naturally, this influence varies,

depending  upon  the  location  of  the  muscle,  the  initial  stimulus  and  its

strength; but it always affects the total organism. As the prototype of this

influencing,  we  have  the  orgastic  contraction  of  the  genital  musculature,

which is so strong that it is conveyed to the entire organism. I found nothing

about  this  in  the  available  literature.  Yet,  it  appeared  to  be  of  decisive

importance.

  Closer observation of the cardiac action curve confirmed my assumption

that the tension-charge process also governs the cardiac function. It runs as an

electrical wave from the auricle, via the cardiac arteries, to the apex of the

heart. The precondition for the onset of this contraction is the filling of the

auricle with blood. The result of the charge and discharge is the emptying of

the blood through the aorta due to the contraction of the heart.

    Bulk-producing medicines have a purgative effect on the intestines. The

swelling acts on the muscles like an electrical stimulus. They contract and

relax in rhythmic waves (“peristalsis”). These contractions and relaxations

cause the intestines to be emptied. The same applies to the urinary bladder. If

it is filled with fluid, it contracts, thus causing the contents to be emptied.

  In  this  description,  an  extremely  important  but  unobserved  fact  was

revealed.  It  can  be  considered  the  basic  model  for  the  refutation  of  the

absolute “teleological” thinking in the field of biology. The urinary bladder

does not contract “in order to fulfill the function of micturition” by virtue of

divine will or supernatural biological powers. It contracts in response to a

simple causal principle which is anything but divine. It contracts because itsmechanical filling induces a contraction. This principle can be applied to any

other function at will. One does not engage in sexual intercourse “in order to

produce children,” but because a congestion of fluid bioelectrically charges

the genital organs and urges toward discharge. This, in turn, is accompanied

by the discharge of sexual substances. Thus, sexuality is not in the service of

procreation; rather procreation is an incidental result of the tension-charge

process  in  the  genitals.  This  may  be  depressing  to  champions  of  eugenic

moral philosophy, but it is nonetheless true.

  In  1933,  I  came  upon  an  experimental  work  by  the  Berlin  biologist

Hartmann. In special experiments dealing with the sexuality of gametes, he

demonstrated that the male and female functions in copulation are not fixed.

A weak male gamete can behave in a feminine way toward a stronger male

gamete. Hartmann left open the question as to what determines the groupings

of  gametes  of  the  same  sex,  their  “mating,”  if  you  like.  He  assumed  the

existence of “certain” still-uninvestigated “substances.” I understood that the

groupings were determined by electrical processes. A few years later, I was

able to confirm this by means of an electrical experiment on bions. That the

grouping in the copulation of gametes takes place in one way and not another

is determined by bioelectrical forces. Around this same time, I received a

newspaper clipping that reported on experiments carried out in Moscow. A

scientist (his name has slipped my memory) succeeded in demonstrating that

egg and sperm cells produce male or female individuals, depending upon the

nature of their electrical charge.

  Thus, procreation is a function of sexuality, and not vice versa, as was

hitherto  believed.  Freud  had  maintained  the  same  thing  with  respect  to

psychosexuality, when he separated the concepts “sexual” and “genital.” But

for a reason I was not able to understand, he later stated that “sexuality in

puberty” is “in the service of procreation.” Hartmann provided proof in the

field of biology that it is not sexuality which is a function of procreation, but

the reverse: procreation is a function of sexuality. I was able to add to this athird  argument,  based  on  the  experimental  investigations  of  various

biologists: the division of the egg, like cell division in general, is an orgastic

process. It is governed by the tension-charge function. The consequence of

this finding for the moralistic appraisal of sexuality is evident: sexuality can

no longer be regarded as an unfortunate concomitant of the preservation of

the species.

  When the egg has been fertilized, when it has absorbed the energy of the

sperm cell, it first becomes tense. It absorbs fluid; its membrane becomes

taut.  This  means  that  the  surface  tension  and  the  inner  pressure  increase

simultaneously. The greater the pressure of the content of the bladder, which

here represents the egg, the more difficult it is for the surface to “hold” the

system “together.” These are processes which are still definitely governed by

the counteraction between inner pressure and surface tension. If stretched

further, a purely physical bladder would burst. In the egg cell, the process

now  commences  which  is  so  characteristic  of  the  living  function: the

stretching or expansion provokes a contraction. The growth of the egg cell is

ascribable to the active absorption of fluid, which always proceeds only to a

certain point. The nucleus of the cell begins to “radiate,” i.e., to produce

energy.  Gurwitsch  called  this  phenomenon mitogenetic radiation.  Mitosis

means division of the nucleus of the cell. Later, I learned to observe and to

assess  the  vitality  of  bion  cultures  on  the  basis  of  the  degree  of  certain

radiation phenomena inside the formation. The extreme filling of the cell, i.e.,

mechanical tension,  is  accompanied  by  an electrical charge.  At  a  certain

point,  the  membrane  begins  to  contract.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  begins  to

contract at that point where the sphere has attained the greatest circumference

and  the  greatest  tension.  This  is  always  the  equator  or,  if  one  prefers,  a

meridian of the sphere. This contraction is not, as one can observe, gradual

and  constant;  it  is  a  struggling,  contradictory  process.  The  tension  of  the

membrane at the site of the contraction struggles against the internal pressure

which has become stronger precisely owing to this contraction. It is quiteclear that inner pressure and surface tension have a mutually intensifying

effect upon one another, that they strengthen one another. This produces the

visible vibrations, undulation and contraction.

  The constriction (indentation) increases. The inner tension mounts. If the

egg cell could speak, it would express anxiety. There is only one possibility

of resolving this inner tension (apart from bursting): the “division” of the one

big bladder with its taut surface into two smaller bladders, in which the same

volume  content  is  surrounded  by  a  much  larger  and  therefore  less  taut

membrane. The egg division corresponds to the resolution of a tension. The

nucleus,  in  its  spindle  formation,  goes  through  this  process  prior  to  the

division of the cell as a whole. The spindle formation is regarded by many

biologists as an electrically determined process. If it were possible for us to

measure the electrical condition of the nucleus after the cell division, we

would very likely ascertain that a discharge had occurred. That this process

takes place is suggested by the “reduction division,” in which half of the

chromosomes  (whose  number  has  been  doubled  through  the  spindle

formation) are extruded. Each of the two daughter cells now contains the

same number of chromosomes. Reproduction is completed.ST IP

M <o

1. Eggell 1. Onset of process division

STIP STIP

o OO

NI, End of process division IV. Two daughter cslls
Inner Pressure (IP) and Surface Tension (ST) in the Division of the Egg


I.  Equilibrium  between  IP  and  ST  in  the  tension-charge  →  Beginning  of  the  process  of

    swelling

II. IP > ST, ST counteracts IP by means of “contraction”

III. Division; ST becomes greater; balance between ST and IP through expansion of surface

  IV. Relaxation; ST = IP; the same volume now distributed in two daughter cells with a larger

    combined surface


  Hence, cell division also follows the four-beat of the orgasm formula:

tension → charge → discharge → relaxation. It is the most important process

in the sphere of living functioning. The orgasm formula could also be called

the “life formula.” I did not want to publish anything about this at that time.

Rather,  I  confined  myself  to  hints  within  the  framework  of  clinical

presentations,  merely  publishing  a  short  work, Die  Fortpflanzung  als

Funktion  der  Sexualität,  1935,  based  on  the  experiments  carried  out  by

Hartmann.  The  matter  appeared  so  decisive  that,  until  I  had  carried  out

special experiments to confirm or refute the hypothesis, I wanted to forgo

publication. I was later able to demonstrate important connections between

the  vegetative  currents,  the  contractions  in  protozoa,  and  the  dynamic

interplay between surface tension and inner pressure in the energy-charged,

organic bladder.


6. PLEASURE (EXPANSION) AND ANXIETY (CONTRACTION): PRIMARY ANTITHESIS OF

                                    VEGETATIVE LIFE


In  1933,  my  idea  of  the  unity  between  psychic  and  somatic  functioning

became clear in the following direction.

  The fundamental biological functions of contraction and expansion were

applicable  to  the  psychic  as  well  as  to  the  somatic  realm.  Two  series  of

antithetical  effects  emerged,  their  elements  representing  various  depths  of

biological functioning.

  Investigation shows that the impulses and sensations are not produced bythe nerves, but are merely transmitted by them. Impulses and sensations are

biological actions of the total organism. They are present in the living system

long  before  the  development  of  an  organized  nervous  system.  Protozoa

demonstrate  fundamentally  the  same  actions  and  impulses  as  metazoa,  in

spite of the fact that they do not have an organized nervous system. The great

achievement of Kraus and Zondek was in demonstrating that the functions of

the  autonomic  nervous  system  can  not  only  be  stimulated  or  retarded  by

chemical substances; more important, they can be replaced by them.

  On the basis of his experiments, Kraus came to the conclusion that the

action of nerves, drugs, and electrolytes can be substituted for one another in

the  biological  system  with  respect  to  the  hydration  or  dehydration  of  the

tissues (which is, as we have already pointed out, the basic function of life).

  What follows is a comparative table (see below), compiled in terms of the

total function.

  The facts represented in this table show:

  1. The antithesis between the potassium (parasympathetic) group and the

calcium (sympathetic) group: expansion and contraction.

  2. The antithesis between periphery and center with respect to excitation.

  3. The functional identity of the sympathetic and parasympathetic with

the functions of substances having a chemical stimulus.

  4.  The  dependency  of  the  innervation  of  the  individual  organs  on  the

functional unity and antithesis of the total organism.VEGETATIVE GROUP

Sympathetic
Ceiclum (grour)
Adrenalin
Cholesterin
Heiom

Parasympathetic
Potassium
ol

Fectin
Of-ions

 

GENERAL EFFECT ON TISSUES

Reduction of surface
‘ension

Debydration

Striated musculatu
fiaceid or spastic

Reduction of clecrical
‘exciability

Increase of oxygen
consumption

Tncrease of blood pressure

 

Tncrease of surface tension

ncreased tonicity
Clectrical

excltabilisy

Decrease of oxygen
‘consamption

Decrease of blood pressure

  

 

peey

 

Sysoli
Heart mus-
Culature is
Stmulated

Distolic

Heart mus-
ulatore
Telaxed

ey

Vasoconstric-

Vasodilata-
tion
  As  we  have  already  pointed  out,  all  biological  impulses  and  organ

sensations  can  be  reduced  to expansion  (elongation,  dilatation)  and

contraction (shrinking, constriction).

  How  are  these  two  basic  functions  related  to  the  autonomic  nervous

system? Investigation of the very complicated vegetative innervations of the

organs shows that the parasympathetic (vagus) always functions where there

is  expansion,  dilatation,  hyperemia,  turgor,  and  pleasure.  Conversely,  the

sympathetic  nerves  function  whenever  the  organism  contracts,  blood  is

withdrawn from the periphery and pallor, anxiety, and pain appear. If we go

one step further, we grasp that the parasympathetic nervous system operates

in the direction of expansion, “out of the self—toward the world,” pleasure

and joy; whereas the sympathetic nervous system operates in the direction of

contraction, “away from the world—into the self,” sadness and unpleasure.

The life process consists of a continuous alternation between expansion and

contraction.

  Further  investigation  shows  the  identity  between  parasympathetic

function and sexual function on one hand, and sympathetic function and the

function of unpleasure or anxiety on the other. We see that in the experience

of  pleasure,  the  blood  vessels  dilate  at  the  periphery,  the  skin  becomes

flushed, pleasure is experienced from its mildest form to the highest degree of

sexual ecstasy. In the condition of anxiety, pallor, contraction of the bloodvessels,  and  unpleasure  go  together.  In  pleasure,  “the  heart  expands”

(parasympathetic dilatation) and the pulse beat is quiet and full. In anxiety,

the heart contracts and beats rapidly and forcibly. In the former, it forces the

blood through wide vessels; its work is therefore easy. In the latter, it forces

the blood through narrowed vessels; its work is hard. In the former, the blood

is  predominantly  distributed  toward  the  periphery;  in  the  latter,  the

constricted vessels cause a congestion of the blood toward the heart. Thus, it

is readily understandable that with anxiety there is a feeling of oppression

and, conversely, with a feeling of oppression there is anxiety. It is the picture

of so-called cardiovascular hypertension with which organic medicine is so

much concerned. This hypertension corresponds to a general condition of

sympatheticotonic contraction in the organism.








Peripheral yessels
Cardiac action,
Blood pressure
Pupils
Sccretion of saliva
Musculature

 

Anxiety syndrome
contracted.
accelerated

increased

dilated

decreased

‘paralyzed or in spasm

Pleasure syndrome
dilated

slowed down
decreased

constricted

increased

state of tonus, relaxed
  On  the  highest  psychic  level,  biological  expansion  is  experienced  as

pleasure; contraction is experienced as unpleasure. In the realm of instinctual

phenomena,  expansion  functions  as  sexual  excitation,  and  contraction

functions as anxiety. On a deeper physiological level, expansion corresponds

to parasympathetic functioning, and contraction to sympathetic functioning.

According to discoveries made by Kraus and Zondek, the parasympathetic

function can be replaced by the potassium ion group, and the sympathetic

function  can  be  replaced  by  the  calcium  ion  group.  Thus,  we  arrive  at  a

convincing and impressive picture of unitary functioning from the highest

psychic sensations to the deepest biological reactions.

  The  following  is  a  table  listing  the  two  series  of  functions  arranged

according to their depth:


  PleasureUnpleasure and AnxietySexualityAnxiety

  ParasympatheticSympathetic

PotassiumCalcium

LecithinCholesterin

CholinAdrenalin

OH-ions (hydrating bases)*H-ions (dehydrating acids)

Function of expansionFunction of contraction

              * The pH of the culture medium must always be basic (7.2–7.8 pH).


  On  the  basis  of  this  formulation  of  the  unitary  antithetical  body-mind

functioning,  a  number  of  previously  misunderstood  contradictions  of  the

autonomic  nerve  innervation  were  clarified.  Formerly,  the  organism’s

autonomic nerve innervation appeared to lack unity and coherence. In one

instance, it was said that the parasympathetic nervous system caused muscles

to  contract.  In  another  instance,  the  same  function  was  ascribed  to  the

sympathetic nervous system. In one instance, the functions of the glands were

said to be stimulated by the parasympathetic nervous system (genital glands);

in  another  instance,  they  were  said  to  be  stimulated  by  the  sympathetic

nervous system (sweat glands). A tabular comparison of the sympathetic and

parasympathetic innervations of the autonomically functioning organs brings

out even more clearly the apparent illogicality.

  In the course of demonstrating the two directions of biological energy, a

fact  has  appeared  to  which  we  have  given  little  attention.  The  vegetative

periphery has been clearly described. Still undetermined is the site at which

the biological energy concentrates as soon as a condition of anxiety arises.

There must be a vegetative center from which the biological energy issues

and to which it returns. This question provides the connecting link to well-

known facts of physiology. In the abdominal region, the so-called seat of the

emotions, we find the generators of biophysical energy. They are the large

centers of the autonomic nervous system, essentially the solar plexus, the

hypogastric plexus, and the lumbosacral plexus. A glance at the anatomy of

the  vegetative  nervous  system  will  easily  convince  us  that  the  vegetativeganglia are most dense in the abdominal and genital regions. The diagrams

below show the functional relation between center and periphery.Functioning of the Autonomic Nervous System

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sympathetic Efject Organ Parasympathetic Efiec
Tahibition of the m. Musculature of _ Stimulation of the m.
sphincter pupiliae: the iris ‘sphincter pupillac:
dilated pupils arrowing of the pupils
Tubibition of the lachrymal Lachrymal glands _Stmolation of the
glands: “dry eyes” Tachrymal
Depression “glowing eyes” Joy
Tobibition of the salivary  Salivary glands _ Stimulation and increased
“glands: “parched mouth” secretion of the salivary
glands: “making mouth
Sater”
Stmulation of (ke sweat  Sweat glands  Inbibition of the sweat

 
  

glands in face and bods

 

 
  
 

 

skin is moist and cold”

Contraction of the arteries: _Arterics
“Cold sweat” pallor, “freshness and Aushing
anxiety of skin, increased turgor

pilorum skin becomes
amooth and warm

  

   

 

   

 

 

 

 

   

Tahibition of the con- Bronchial mus- _ Stimulates the contraction
tractive musculature: culatore ‘of the bronchial mu
bronchi are relaxed culture: bronchi are

Stimulates cardiac action: Heart Slows cardiac actio
palpitation, sapid hease quiet heart, slower pulse
eat

Tnhibits peristal Digestive tract _ Stimulates peristalsis:
reduces sccretion of di-  from csophagus  increases sccretion of
gestive glands to rectum, liver,  digestive glands

pancreas, kidacys,
all digestive
glands

Tncreases adrenal secretion: Suprarenal gland _ Reduces adrenal secretion:
anxiety reaction pleasure reaction

Tnhibits musculature of  Urinary bladder _ Stimulates musculature of

dder, stimulates the bladder, inhibits
sphincter: the sphincter: stimulates
inhibits micturition micturition

 

Teont. on next page)
Functioning of the Autonomic Nervous System

     

 

 

 

 

Sympathetic Effect Organ Parasympaticic Effect

Tightening of the smooth _ Female sex organs _ Relaxation of (hc smooth
musculature, reduces ‘musculator:, stimulates
secretion of all glands, all gland fusctions,
decrease of blood increases blood fow,
supply, dy vagina: ‘moist vagina : inerease
reduction of sexusl of sexual fccling
fecling

Tightening of the smooth _ Male sex organs _ Relaxation of the smooth
‘musculature of the muscalature of the
scrotum, reduction of serotum, increases all
gland fonctions, sccretions, increases
ccrease of blood blood flow, erection:

 

supply, flaccid peni “intensified sexual
i mirished sevaal desire”
  The attempt to introduce meaning into the apparent illogicality succeeded

when I investigated the vegetative innervation of the respective organs, first

with  reference  to  the  biological  expansion  and  then  with  reference  to  the

contraction of the total organism. In other words, I asked myself how the

respective organs would normally function in pleasure and in anxiety, and in

which  way  the  autonomic  innervation  would  have  to  take  place  in  the

process.  When  investigated  with  reference  to  the  total  function  of  the

organism,  the  seemingly  contradictory  innervation  proved  to  be  entirely

logical and understandable. 

(pleasure)

Center
(ganglio)

 

Parasympatheic
Swellng, cxpsinion”

 

Opening up

Toward the world, away from the
et

Sexual exctation; warm, red skin

“Crrent from center. {0
riphery

‘Parasympatheticotoni
relaxation

 

per

 

    

 

process,
oscllation between

Sympathetic
(onxiety)

Periphery (skin)
Fluid
Membrane

Sympathetic
ing

Decressed trgor

High cental ension

Cidting

Rovay from the world, oward the sef

Ansiey, pallr,cold meat
erenet ™t pesiphery toward
wener

Sympatheticotonis,
“hypertension.
Diagram a): The basic functions of the vegetative nervous system


  This can be most convincingly demonstrated by the antithesis between the

innervation  of  the  heart,  i.e.,  the  “center,”  and  of  the  blood  vessels  and

muscles, i.e., the “periphery.” The parasympathetic nervous system dilates

the blood vessels, thereby enhancing the flow of blood to the periphery and

slowing  the  heart  action.  The  sympathetic  nervous  system  contracts  the

peripheral  blood  vessels,  thereby  impeding  the  flow  of  the  blood  to  the

periphery  and  stimulating  the  action  of  the  heart.  In  terms  of  the  total

organism, the antithesis in the innervation is understandable, for in anxiety,

the heart has to overcome the peripheral inhibition, whereas in pleasure, it

can  work  quietly  and  slowly. There  is  a  functional  antithesis  between

periphery and center.Secondary impulse,
neuroic symptom

Anxiety

Primary impulse
Center (biological core)
Musculor armor

Periphery

 
Diagram b): The same functions in an armored organism. The inhibition of the primary impulse

produces a secondary impulse and anxiety














 

Sympathetic Parasympathatic

Vegetative life
Diagram c): The unity and antithesis of the autonomic nervous system


  The  sympathetic  anxiety  function  becomes  coherent  and  meaningful

when we bear in mind that the same nerve which inhibits the salivary gland

stimulates adrenal secretion (i.e., produces anxiety). This is also true in the

case of the urinary bladder. The sympathetic nervous system stimulates the

muscle which prevents micturition. The parasympathetic nervous system has

the opposite effect, relaxing or inhibiting the same muscle. In terms of the

total organism, it is also significant that in pleasure the pupils are narrowed

by the parasympathetic (corresponding to the diaphragm of a camera), thus

sharpening  vision.  In  apprehensive  paralysis,  on  the  other  hand,  vision  is

dimmed, due to the dilatation of the pupils.  The  reduction  of  the  autonomic  innervations  to  the  basic  biological

functions of expansion and contraction of the total organism was of course an

important step forward, and at the same time a good test of the tenability of

my biological hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, the parasympathetic

nervous system always stimulates the organs when, whether to make them

tense  or  to  bring  about  a  relaxation,  the  total  organism  is  in  a  state  of

pleasurable expansion. On the other hand, the sympathetic nervous system

stimulates  all  organs  in  a  biologically  significant  way  when  the  total

organism is in a state of anxious contraction. This enables us to comprehend

the  life  process,  respiration  in  particular,  as  a  condition  of  continuous

oscillation,  in  which  the  organism  is  continually  alternating  between

parasympathetic  expansion  (exhalation)  and  sympathetic  contraction

(inhalation). In making these theoretical deductions, I pictured to myself the

rhythmic  movement  of  an  amoeba,  a  jellyfish,  or  an  animal  heart.  The

function of respiration is too complicated to be briefly described here in terms

of these new insights.













Expansion and movement Return to spherical shape produced
by strong electrical simulus

 
The flow of plasma in the amoeba in expansion and contraction


  If the biological oscillation is disturbed in one direction or the other, i.e.,

if the function of expansion or the function of contraction predominates, then

there must also be a disturbance of the general biological balance. Persistence

of the state of expansion is indicative of a general parasympatheticotonia.

Conversely,  the  persistence  of  a  state  of  anxious  contraction  indicatessympatheticotonia. Thus, all somatic conditions which are known clinically

as  cardiovascular  hypertension  became  understandable  as  conditions  of

chronic  sympatheticotonic  attitudes  of  anxiety.  Central  to  this  general

sympatheticotonia  is  orgasm  anxiety,  that  is,  fear  of  expansion  and

involuntary convulsion.

  The physiological literature contained many reports on investigations and

findings pertaining to the manifold facts of autonomic innervation. Initially,

my theory of sex-economy was notable not because it had discovered new

facts in this field, but because it had reduced generally known innervations to

a universally valid basic biological formula. The theory of the orgasm could

take pride in having made an important contribution to the understanding of

the physiology of the organism. This unification led to the discovery of new

facts.

  I wrote a short monograph, Der Urgegensatz des vegetativen Lebens, and

published it in Denmark, in 1934, in the Zeitschrift für Sexualökonomie und

Politische Psychologie, a periodical which came into existence following my

break  with  the  International  Psychoanalytic  Association.  It  was  not  until

several  years  later  that  this  article  received  attention  and  recognition  in

biological and psychiatric circles.

  A  detailed  report  on  the  painful  proceedings  at  the  thirteenth

psychoanalytic congress in Lucerne, in August 1934, was given in the above-

named periodical. For purposes of general orientation, therefore, I can be

very brief here. When I arrived in Lucerne, I learned from the secretary of the

German Psychoanalytic Society, of which I had been a member, that I had

been expelled in 1933, following my relocation to Vienna. I had not been

notified  of  this,  and  no  one  had  found  it  necessary  to  inform  me  of  the

reasons  for  my  expulsion.  Finally  I  was  told  that  my  work  on  mass

            3
psychology, which was directed against the irrationalism of fascism, had

placed me in a much too exposed position. Hence, my membership in the

International Psychoanalytic Association was no longer tenable. Four yearslater, Freud had to flee Vienna for London, and the psychoanalytic groups

were crushed by the fascists. By joining the Norwegian group, I could have

been reinstated as a member of the International Psychoanalytic Association.

In the interest of preserving my independence, I rejected this possibility.

    Subsequently,  I  avoided  contact  with  my  earlier  colleagues.  Their

behavior was neither better nor worse than is usual in such cases. It was low

and uninteresting. A good dose of banality is all that is needed to hush up a

matter. Only one psychoanalyst, in the general embarrassment, hit upon the

bright idea that I was schizophrenic; he was eagerly intent upon making his

diagnosis known the world over. However, since I knew I had the key to the

biological function of neurosis, there was no need for me to be irritated by

these indecencies.                                    CHAPTER VIII





THE ORGASM REFLEX AND THE TECHNIQUE


OF CHARACTER-ANALYTIC VEGETOTHERAPY




                  1. MUSCULAR ATTITUDE AND BODY EXPRESSION


In character-analytic work, we begin by trying, in a consistent and systematic

way,  to  isolate  from  one  another  the  interlaced  character  attitudes  and  to

unmask them one by one as defense functions in terms of their contemporary

meaning and effectiveness. Our purpose is to release the affects which at one

time were subject to severe inhibition and fixation. This is accomplished by

loosening the incrustations of the character. Every successful dissolution of a

character incrustation first liberates the emotions of anger or anxiety. By also

treating  these  liberated  emotions  as  psychic  defense  mechanisms,  we

eventually  succeed  in  restoring  to  the  patient  his  sexual  motility  and

biological  sensitivity.  Thus, by  dissolving  chronic  character  attitudes,  we

bring about reactions in the vegetative nervous system. The breakthrough

into the biological realm is that much more complete and energy-charged, the

more  thoroughly  we  treat  not  only  the  character  attitudes,  but  also  the

muscular attitudes corresponding to them. This causes a part of the work to

be  shifted  from  the  psychological  and  characterological  realms  to  the

immediate dissolution of the muscular armor. It has, of course, been clear for

some time that the muscular rigidity, wherever it appears, is not a “result,” an

“expression,” or a “concomitant” of the mechanism of repression. In the final

analysis,  I  could  not  rid  myself  of  the  impression  that  somatic  rigidityrepresents the most essential part in the process of repression. All our patients

report that they went through periods in childhood in which, by means of

certain  practices  in  vegetative  behavior  (holding  the  breath,  tensing  the

abdominal muscular pressure, etc.), they learned to suppress their impulses of

hate, anxiety, and love. Until now, analytic psychology has merely concerned

itself with what the child suppresses and what the motives are which cause

him to learn to control his emotions. It did not inquire into the way in which

children habitually fight against impulses. It is precisely the physiological

process of repression that deserves our keenest attention. It never ceases to be

surprising  how  the  loosening  of  a  muscular  spasm  not  only  releases  the

vegetative energy, but, over and above this, reproduces a memory of that

situation in infancy in which the repression of the instinct occurred. It can be

said that every muscular rigidity contains the history and the meaning of its

origin. It is not as if we had to derive from dreams or associations how the

muscular  armor  developed;  the  armor  is  the  form  in  which  the  infantile

experience is preserved as an impairment of functioning. For instance, the

neurosis is not solely the expression of a disturbance of psychic equilibrium;

it is, rather, in a far more justified and deeper sense, the expression of a

chronic disturbance of the vegetative equilibrium and of natural motility.

  The term “psychic structure” has, in the course of the past years of our

research,  acquired  a  special  meaning.  We  understand  by  this  term  the

characteristic  features  of  a  person’s spontaneous  reactions,  i.e.,  what

characterizes him as the result of the antithetical forces functioning within

him.  In  other  words, the  psychic  structure  is  at  the  same  time  a

biophysiological structure which represents a specific state indicative of the

interplay of a person’s vegetative forces. There can be no doubt that most of

what people are in the habit of describing as “disposition” or “instinctual

constitution”  will  prove  to  be  acquired  vegetative  behavior.  The

restructuralization  we  bring  about  is  nothing  other  than  a  change  in  the

interplay of forces in the vegetative life apparatus.  For  character-analytic  therapy,  the  muscular  attitudes  take  on  another

importance also. They offer the possibility of avoiding, when necessary, the

complicated detour via the psychic structure and of breaking through to the

affects directly from the somatic attitude. In this way, the repressed affect

appears before the corresponding remembrance. Such an approach provides a

sure  guarantee  for  the  liberation  of  the  affects,  provided  that  the  chronic

muscular attitude has been successfully understood and dissolved. When one

attempts to liberate the affects solely by means of work in the psychological

realm, one releases the affects as a matter of chance. The character-analytic

work on the layers of the character incrustation is more effective the more

completely it helps to dissolve the corresponding muscular attitude. In many

cases,  a  psychic  inhibition  will  give  way  only  to  direct  loosening  of  the

muscular contraction.

  The muscular attitude is identical with what we call “body expression.”

Very often it is not possible to know whether or not a patient is muscularly

hypertonic. Nonetheless, his whole body or parts of it “express something.”

For instance, his forehead might appear “flat,” or his pelvis might convey the

impression of being “lifeless.” His shoulders might appear “hard” or “soft.” It

is not easy to say what makes it possible for us to gain a direct impression of

a person’s body expression and to find the right words to express what we

perceive.  In  this  connection,  we  are  reminded  of  the  loss  of  spontaneous

expression in children, the first and most important manifestation of the final

sexual suppression which takes place in the fourth to fifth year of life. This

quality is always first experienced as “dying,” “being armored,” or “being

immured.” In some cases, this feeling of “dying” or “being dead” may be

later  partially  compensated  for  by  camouflaging  psychic  attitudes,  e.g.,

superficial joviality or contactless sociability.

  The  spasm  of  the  musculature  is  the  somatic  side  of  the  process  of

repression, and the basis of its continued preservation. It is never individual

muscles which become spastic, but rather muscle groups that belong to afunctional unity, in the vegetative sense. When, for example, an impulse to

cry is to be suppressed, it is not solely the lower lip which is tense but also

the entire musculature of the mouth and jaw, as well as the corresponding

musculature of the throat; in short, those organs which are brought into action

as a functional unit in the act of crying. We are reminded in this connection

of  the  well-known  phenomenon  that  hysterical  persons  demarcate  their

somatic symptoms not according to anatomical but according to functional

areas.  A  hysterical  blushing  does  not  follow  the  ramification  of  a  certain

artery;  rather  it  involves  almost  exclusively  the  neck  or  forehead.  The

vegetative body function is ignorant of the anatomical demarcations, which

are artificial designations.

  The total expression of the body can usually be condensed in a word or

formula  which,  sooner  or  later  in  the  course  of  the  character-analytic

treatment, suggests itself. Strangely enough, they are usually formulas and

names  derived  from  the  animal  kingdom,  such  as  “fox,”  “pig,”  “snake,”

“worm,” etc.

  The spastic muscle group does not reveal its function until the work of

elucidation  has  reached  it  in  a  “logical  way.”  For  instance,  it  would  be

fruitless to attempt to dissolve an abdominal tension right at the outset of the

treatment.  The  dissolving  of  the  muscle  spasm  obeys  a  law,  all  the

preconditions  of  which  are  not  yet  known.  Insofar  as  one  can  venture  a

judgment on the basis of experiences to date, the dissolving of the muscular

armor generally begins with those parts of the body, usually the head, which

are  furthest  away  from  the  genitals.  It  is  the  facial  attitude  that  is  most

conspicuous. Facial expression and tone of voice are also those functions

which the patient himself most frequently and most carefully pays attention

to and feels. The attitudes of the pelvis, shoulders, and abdomen are usually

concealed.

  I  want  now  to  describe  the  most  important  characteristics  and

mechanisms of a number of typical muscular attitudes; the list is far fromexhaustive.

  Head and neck: severe headache is a symptom found in many patients.

Very often it is localized above the neck, over the eyes, or on the forehead. In

psychopathology,  these  headaches  are  usually  described  as  “neurasthenic

symptoms.” How do they come about? If one tries to strain the musculature

of the neck for a long period of time, as if to ward off an imminent blow, one

soon senses the emergence of pain at the back of the head; as a matter of fact,

above the spot at which the musculature is being tensed. Hence, pain at the

back of the head can be traced to an overstraining of the neck muscles. This

attitude expresses a continual anxiety that something dangerous could happen

from behind, e.g., that one could be seized by the neck, knocked over the

head, etc.

  The supraorbital headache, which is felt as “a tight band around the head”

is  produced  by  a  chronic  raising  of  the  eyebrows.  This  sensation  can  be

duplicated  by  keeping  the  eyebrows  raised  over  a  period  of  time.  It  also

produces a continual tension in the muscles of the forehead, as well as in the

entire musculature of the scalp. This attitude expresses continuous anxious

expectancy in the eyes. Eyes wide with fear would correspond to the extreme

expression of this attitude.

    Fundamentally, these two symptoms, which are expressed in attitudes of

the head, belong together. In sudden fright, the eyes are opened wide, and, at

the same time, the musculature of the scalp is tensed. Some patients have a

facial expression that could be described as “haughty.” The dissolution of this

expression shows it to be a defense attitude against nervous or apprehensive

attentiveness in the face. Some patients feign “the forehead of a thinker.” It is

unusual to find such a patient who, in his childhood, has not created a fantasy

of being a genius. Usually, this facial attitude is the result of a defense against

anxiety, mostly of a masturbational nature. In other patients, we observe a

“smooth,” “flat,” or “expressionless” forehead. Fear of being struck over the

head is always the motive for this expression.  Of far greater importance, and also appearing with greater frequency, are

spasms of the mouth, chin, and throat. Many people have a masklike facial

expression. The chin is thrust forward and looks broad; the neck just below

the chin has a lifeless appearance. The two lateral neck muscles, which run

down to the breastbone, stand out as thick cords; the floor of the mouth is

tense. Such patients often suffer from nausea. Their voices are usually low,

monotonous, or “thin.” This attitude can also be tested on oneself. Imagine

that you are suppressing an impulse to cry. The muscles of the floor of the

mouth will become very tense, the entire musculature of the head will be put

in a condition of continual tension, the chin will be thrust forward, and the

mouth will be tight.

  In this condition, one will try in vain to speak loudly and resonantly.

Children often acquire such conditions at a very early age, when they are

forced  to  suppress  violent  impulses  to  cry.  Continual  concentration  of

attention on a certain part of the body invariably results in a fixation of the

corresponding innervation. If the said attitude is the same as the one which a

person would take under other circumstances, a coupling of the two functions

often occurs. Quite frequently, I have found the coupling of nausea and the

impulse  to  cry.  Closer  investigation  reveals  that  the  two  provoke

approximately the same response in the muscles of the floor of the mouth.

There is no possibility of eliminating nausea if the tension on the floor of the

mouth is not discovered, because this nausea is the result of the inhibition of

another impulse, namely the impulse to cry. Before the chronic sensation of

nausea  can  be  eliminated,  the  inhibition  of  the  impulse  to  cry  has  to  be

completely dissolved.

  The way one speaks is of special importance in the region of the head and

face. It can usually be traced back to spasms of the muscles of the jaw and

throat. In two patients, I was able to ascertain a violent defense-reflex in the

neck  which  appeared  immediately  when  I  touched,  however  slightly,  the

region of the larynx. Fantasies of being choked or having the throat cut werefound in both patients.

  The total expression of the face must be given considerable attention,

independently of the individual parts. We are familiar with the depressed face

of the melancholic person. It is remarkable how an expression of languor can

be combined with the most extreme and chronic tension of the musculature.

There are people who affect a continuously radiating face; there are those

whose cheeks are “stiff” or “sagging.” The patients themselves usually find

the  corresponding  term,  if  their  attitude  is  continuously  pointed  out  and

precisely described to them, or if it is imitated for a while.

  A female patient having “stiff cheeks” said, “My cheeks are heavy with

tears.” Suppressed crying easily leads to a masklike tightness of the facial

muscles. In very early childhood, children develop a fear of the “funny faces”

they were once so happy to make, but were threateningly told not to. The

result of an inhibition of the corresponding impulse is that they keep their

faces stiffly controlled.


                              2. ABDOMINAL TENSION


I shall defer a description of the symptoms of the chest and the shoulders,

because  it  is  more  advantageous  to  consider  them  after  discussion  of  the

abdominal musculature. There is not a single neurotic person who does not

show a “tension in the abdomen.” It would have little meaning here to list and

describe the symptoms, without understanding their function in neurosis.

  Today, it seems incomprehensible to me that it could have been possible

to  resolve  neuroses  even  to  some  extent  without  being  familiar  with  the

importance  of  the solar  plexus;  abdominal  tension  has  become  such  an

indispensable factor in our work. The respiratory disturbances in neuroses are

the symptoms which result from abdominal tensions. Imagine that you have

been frightened or that you anticipate great danger. You will involuntarily

suck in your breath and hold it. Since respiration cannot cease entirely, you

will soon breathe out again, but the exhalation will not be complete. It will beshallow. You will not exhale fully, only by snatches—not in one breath. In a

state  of  apprehension,  the  shoulders  are  involuntarily  pulled  forward  and

remain in this cramped attitude. In some instances, the shoulders are also

pulled up. If this attitude is maintained for a period of time, a pressure is felt

in  the  forehead.  I  treated  several  patients  in  whom  I  did  not  succeed  in

eliminating the pressure in the forehead until I had discovered the attitude of

fearful expectancy in the musculature of the chest.

  What  is  the  function  of  this  attitude  of  “shallow  breathing”?  If  we

examine the position of the internal organs and their relation to the solar

plexus, we shall immediately comprehend the situation we are dealing with

here. In a state of fright, one involuntarily breathes in; we are reminded of the

involuntary  inhalation  which  takes  place  in  drowning  and  actually  causes

death. The diaphragm contracts and exerts pressure upon the solar plexus

from  above.  The  function  of  this  muscular  action  becomes  completely

understandable  when  we  examine  the  results  of  the  character-analytic

investigation of early infantile defense mechanisms. It is by holding their

breath  that  children  are  in  the  habit  of  fighting  against  continual  and

tormenting conditions of anxiety which they sense in the upper abdomen.

They  do  the  same  thing  when  they  sense  pleasurable  sensations  in  the

abdomen or in the genitals, and are afraid of these sensations.

    Respiratory inhibition and the fixation of the diaphragm is doubtlessly

one of the first and most important acts in suppressing pleasurable sensations

in the abdomen, as well as curtailing “abdominal anxiety.” Added to this

respiratory attitude is the effect of abdominal pressure. Everyone is familiar

with  these  vegetative  sensations  in  the  abdomen.  They  are  described  in

various  ways.  We  hear  complaints  about  an  unbearable  “pressure”  in  the

abdomen  or  laments  about  a  girdle  around  the  upper  abdomen  which

“constricts.” In others, there is a certain place in the abdomen which is very

sensitive. Everyone is afraid of being kicked in the stomach, and this fear

becomes the center of copious fantasies. Some feel blocked in the stomach,or else feel that a foreign object is there. They say, “There is something in my

stomach  that  can’t  come  out”;  “I  feel  as  if  I  had  a  dinner  plate  in  my

stomach”; “My belly is dead”; “I have to hold my belly”; etc. Almost all

children’s fantasies about pregnancy and birth cluster around their vegetative

abdominal sensations.

  If,  without  frightening  the  patient,  pressure  is  put  on  the  abdominal

surface with two fingers about three centimeters below the lower end of the

sternum,  sooner  or  later  a  reflex-like  resistive  tension  or  a  persistent

resistance is noticed. The abdominal content is being protected. Patients who

complain about a chronic girdle-like tension, or a feeling of pressure, show a

rigid upper abdominal musculature that is as hard as a board. Thus, a double

pressure  is  exerted  upon  the  solar  plexus—by  the  abdominal  musculature

from  the  front  and  by  the  diaphragm  from  above.  As  I  have  already

established, the electrical potential of the skin of the abdomen is reduced by

10 to 30 mv when direct pressure is applied, as well as when the person

breathes in deeply.

  I  once  treated  a  female  patient  who  was  on  the  verge  of  a  severe

melancholic illness. Her musculature was in a condition of chronic tension.

She was depressed and, throughout a whole year, could not be induced to

permit the stirring of even the slightest emotion. For a long time, I did not

understand  how  she  managed  to  cope  with  the  most  difficult  situations

without affect. Finally, the situation became clear. At the slightest stirring of

feeling, she would “adjust something in her stomach,” hold her breath, and

stare blankly into space. Her eyes looked empty; they seemed to be “turned

inward.” The abdominal wall became tense, and the buttocks were pulled in.

She said later, “I make my belly dead; then I don’t feel anything any more—

otherwise my belly has a bad conscience.” What she meant was, “Otherwise

it has sexual feelings and, therefore, a bad conscience.”

  The way in which our children achieve this “shutting-off feeling in the

stomach,” with the help of respiration and abdominal pressure, is typical anduniversal.  Vegetotherapy  has  to  fight  hard  against  this  technique  of

controlling emotions, against this universal “Yogism.”

  How is it possible for the respiratory block to suppress or completely

eliminate affects? This question was of decisive importance. For it was clear

now that, as the physiological mechanism for the suppression and repression

of affects, the inhibition of respiration was the basic mechanism of neurosis

in general. Simple deliberation indicated that, biologically, respiration has the

function of introducing oxygen into the organism and of removing carbon

dioxide. The oxygen of the introduced air brings about the combustion of the

digested  foodstuffs.  Chemically  speaking,  combustion  means  everything

which  takes  place  in  the  fusion  of  substances  with  oxygen.  This  process

generates energy. Without oxygen, there is no combustion and, therefore, no

production  of  energy.  In  the  organism,  energy  is  produced  through  the

combustion of foodstuffs. In that way, heat and kinetic energy are generated.

Bioelectricity  is  also  produced  in  this  process  of  combustion.  In  reduced

respiration, less oxygen is introduced, actually only as much as is necessary

for the preservation of life. With less energy in the organism, the vegetative

excitations  are  less  intense  and,  therefore,  easier  to  control.  Viewed

biologically,  the  inhibition  of  respiration  in  neurotics  has  the  function  of

reducing the production of energy in the organism and, hence, of reducing the

production of anxiety.


                    3. THE ORGASM REFLEX—A CASE HISTORY


To  describe  the  direct  release  of  sexual  (vegetative)  energies  from  the

pathological muscular attitudes, I am choosing a patient in whom orgastic

potency was established rapidly. I want to make it quite clear at the outset

that  this  case  does  not  claim  to  represent  the  great  difficulties  which  are

usually encountered in overcoming disturbances of the orgasm.

  A twenty-seven-year-old technician came to me because of his addiction

to alcohol. He suffered from the fact that he had to give in almost every dayto the urge to become inebriated; he feared the complete ruin of his health

and capacity for work. When he was with his friends, he could do nothing

against the temptation to get drunk. His marriage was a shambles. His wife

was an extremely complicated hysteric who did not make life easy for him. It

was immediately evident that the wretchedness of this marriage constituted

an important motive for his escape into alcoholism. He further complained

that he “did not feel life.” In spite of his unhappy marriage, he could not

bring himself to form a liaison with another woman. He did not derive any

pleasure from his work; he performed it mechanically, listlessly, without any

interest. He said that if it went on like this, he would soon break down. This

condition had already lasted a number of years, and had become appreciably

worse in the last months.

    Conspicuous  among  his  pathological  traits  was  the  fact  that  he  was

incapable  of  any  aggression.  He  always  felt  compelled  to  be  “nice  and

polite,”  to  agree  with  everything  people  said,  even  when  they  expressed

opposite,  mutually  contradictory  opinions.  He  suffered  under  the

superficiality that ruled his life. He could not really and seriously devote

himself to any cause, idea, or work. He spent his leisure hours in cafés and

restaurants,  engaging  in  empty,  meaningless  chatter  and  exchanging  stale

witticisms. True, he sensed there was something pathological in his attitude;

at the same time, he was not fully aware of the pathological meaning of these

traits.  He  was  suffering  from  the  widespread  illness,  a  misconstrued

contactless  sociality,  which  becomes  rigid  compulsion  and  inwardly

devastates many people.

  The  general  impression  given  by  this  patient  was  marked  by  the

uncertainty of his movements; the forced jauntiness of his walk made him

appear somewhat awkward. The attitude of his body was not rigid; rather it

expressed  submission,  as  if  he  were  continually  on  his  guard.  His  facial

expression  was  empty  and  without  any  particular  distinguishing  features.

There was a slight shininess to the skin of his face; it was drawn tight and hadthe  effect  of  a  mask.  His  forehead  appeared  “flat.”  His  mouth  gave  the

impression of being small and tight. It hardly moved in the act of speaking;

his  lips  were  narrow,  as  if  pressed  together.  His  eyes  were  devoid  of

expression.

  In spite of this obviously severe impairment of his vegetative motility,

one  sensed  a  very  lively,  intelligent  nature  beneath  the  surface.  It  was

doubtlessly this factor that enabled him to tackle his difficulties with great

energy.

  The ensuing treatment lasted six and one half months, with one session

each day. I want to try to describe its most important stages.

  At the very first session, I was faced with the question of whether I should

first  consider  his  psychic  reserve  or  his  very  striking  facial  expression.  I

decided in favor of the latter, leaving it to the further course of the treatment

as to when and in what form I would deal with his psychic reserve. Following

the consistent description of the rigid attitude of his mouth, a clonic twitching

of  his  lips  set  in,  weak  at  first  but  growing  gradually  stronger.  He  was

surprised by the involuntary nature of this twitching and defended himself

against it. I told him to give in to every impulse. Thereupon, his lips began to

protrude  and  retract  rhythmically  and  to  hold  the  protruded  position  for

several seconds as if in a tonic spasm. In the course of these movements, his

face  took  on  the  unmistakable  expression  of  an  infant.  The  patient  was

startled, grew fearful, and asked me what this might lead to. I allayed his

fears and asked him to continue to give in to every impulse and to tell me

whenever he sensed the inhibition of an impulse.

  During  the  following  sessions,  the  various  manifestations  in  his  face

became  more  and  more  distinct,  and  they  gradually  aroused  the  patient’s

interest.  This  must  have  some  special  meaning,  he  said.  What  was  very

peculiar, however, was that he appeared not to be emotionally affected by

these  somatic  manifestations;  indeed,  he  was  able  to  speak  to  me  calmly

following such a clonic or tonic excitation of his face. During one of thesubsequent sessions, the twitching of his mouth increased to a suppressed

crying. He also uttered sounds like the outbreak of a long-suppressed, painful

sob. My insistence that he give in to every muscular impulse bore fruit. The

described  activity  of  his  face  grew  more  complicated.  While  his  mouth

became twisted into a spasmodic crying, this expression did not resolve itself

into tears. To our surprise, it passed over into a distorted expression of anger.

Strangely  enough,  however,  the  patient  did  not  feel  the  slightest  anger,

though he knew quite well that it was anger.

  When  these  muscular  actions  grew  especially  strong,  making  his  face

blue, he became apprehensive and restless. He repeatedly wanted to know

where this was leading and what was happening to him in these actions. I

began now to draw his attention to the fact that his fear of an unexpected

happening was entirely in keeping with his general character attitude, namely

that he was dominated by a vague fear of the unforeseeable, of something

that might suddenly overwhelm him.

  Since  I  did  not  want  to  abandon  the  consistent  pursuit  of  a  somatic

attitude once I had attacked it, I had first to ascertain how his muscular facial

actions were related to the general defense attitude of his character. If the

muscular rigidity had not been so distinct, I would have begun by working on

the  character  defense  as  manifested  in  his  reserve.  However,  I  was  now

forced to conclude that there was obviously a split in the psychic conflict

which dominated him. The defense function was performed at this time by

his  general  psychic  reserve,  while  that  which  he  warded  off,  i.e.,  the

vegetative  excitation,  was  revealed  in  the  muscle  actions  of  his  face.

Fortunately, it occurred to me that not only the warded-off affect but also the

defense was represented in his muscular attitude. The smallness and cramped

attitude of his mouth could, of course, be nothing other than the expression of

its  opposite,  the  protruding,  twitching,  crying  mouth.  I  now  proceeded  to

carry out the experiment of consistently destroying the defense forces, not

from the psychic but from the muscular side.  Thus, I worked on all the muscular attitudes of his face which, I assumed,

represented  spasms,  i.e.,  hypertonic  defenses  against  the  corresponding

muscular actions. Several weeks passed before the actions of the musculature

of his face and neck intensified into the following picture: the contracted

attitude of his mouth first gave way to a clonic twitching and then became

transformed into a protrusion of the lips. This protrusion resolved itself into

crying, which, however, did not break out completely. In turn, the crying was

replaced by an exceedingly strong reaction of anger on his face. His mouth

became distorted, the musculature of his jaws became as stiff as a board, and

he grit his teeth. In addition, there were other expressive movements. The

patient sat half up on the couch, shook with anger, raised his fist as if he were

going to strike a blow, without, however, following through. Then, out of

breath,  he  sank  back  exhausted.  The  whole  action  dissolved  into  a

whimpering kind of weeping. These actions expressed “impotent rage,” as is

often experienced by children with adults.

  When this attack had subsided, he spoke about it tranquilly, as if nothing

had  happened.  It  was  clear  that  somewhere  there  was  a  break  in  the

connection  between  his  vegetative  muscular  excitation  and  the  psychic

perception of this excitation. Naturally, I continually discussed with him not

only  the  sequence  and  the  content  of  his  muscular  actions,  but  also  the

strange phenomenon of his psychic detachment from these actions. What was

particularly striking to both of us was the fact that, in spite of his lack of

emotional involvement, he had an immediate comprehension of the function

and meaning of these episodes. I did not even have to interpret them to him.

On the contrary, he surprised me again and again with elucidations that were

immediately evident to him. I found this most gratifying. I recalled the many

years of painstaking work of interpreting symptoms, in the process of which

the  analyst  inferred  an  anger  or  anxiety  on  the  basis  of  associations  or

symptoms and then, through months and years, tried, at least to some extent,

to  make  the  patient  aware  of  it.  How  seldom  and  how  ineffectively  onesucceeded  in  those  days  in  arriving  at  anything  more  than  an  intellectual

understanding. Thus, I had good reason to be pleased that the patient had an

immediate grasp of the meaning of his action, without any explanation on my

part. He knew that he was expressing an overwhelming anger which he had

kept locked up in himself for decades. The emotional detachment subsided

when an attack produced the remembrance of his older brother, who had very

much dominated and mistreated him as a child.

  He understood now without any promptings from me that he had at that

time suppressed his anger against his brother, who had been his mother’s

darling.  To  ward  off  this  anger,  he  had  adopted  toward  his  brother  an

agreeable  and  loving  attitude,  which  was  at  violent  odds  with  his  true

feelings. He had not wanted to incur his mother’s displeasure. The anger

which had not been expressed at that time now rose up in his actions, as if

unaffected by the intervening decades.

  At this point, we have to pause a moment and form a clear picture of the

psychic  situation  with  which  we  are  dealing.  Analysts  who  use  the  old

technique of symptom interpretation know that they work with remembrances

and have to leave it more or less to chance whether

  1. the corresponding remembrances of earlier experiences also emerge,

and

  2. the emerging experiences are actually those in which the strongest and,

in  terms  of  the  patient’s  future,  the  most  important  excitations  were

developed.

  In vegetotherapy, on the other hand, the vegetative behavior necessarily

produces the memory which was decisive for the development of the neurotic

character trait.

  It  is  known  that  the  approach  which  proceeds  solely  on  the  basis  of

remembrances accomplishes this task to a very limited degree. In assessing

the changes in a patient after years of this kind of treatment, one realizes that

they are not worth the expenditure of so much time and energy. The patientsin whom one succeeds in getting directly at the vegetative sexual energy

bound in the musculature produce the affect before they know what affect

they  are  dealing  with.  Furthermore,  the  memory  of  the  experience  which

originally produced the affect automatically emerges without any effort. An

example of this would be our patient’s remembrance of the situation with his

brother,  who  was  preferred  by  the  mother.  This  fact  cannot  be

overemphasized; it is as important as it is typical. It is not that under certain

circumstances a memory brings about an affect, but that the concentration of

a vegetative excitation and its breakthrough reproduces the remembrance.

Freud continually stressed that, in analysis, the analyst was dealing solely

with “derivatives of the unconscious,” that the unconscious was like “a thing

in itself,” i.e., was not really tangible. This contention was correct, but not

absolute.  It  pertained  to  the  methods  used  at  that  time,  by  which  the

unconscious could be inferred only through its derivatives, and could not be

grasped  in  its  actual  form.  Today,  we  succeed  in  comprehending  the

unconscious not in its derivatives, but in its reality, by directly attacking the

binding of vegetative energy. For instance, our patient did not deduce his

hatred of his brother from vague associations having but little affect. Rather,

he acted as he would have acted in the original situation, as he would have

acted if his hatred of his brother had not been offset by the fear of losing his

mother’s  love.  Moreover,  we  know  that  there  are  childhood  experiences

which have never become conscious. It became evident from the subsequent

course of the analysis that, while the patient had always been intellectually

conscious of his envy of his brother, he had no awareness of the extent and

intensity of the rage he had actually mobilized in himself. As we know, the

effects of a psychic experience are determined not by its content, but by the

amount of vegetative energy which is mobilized by this experience. In the

compulsion  neurosis,  for  instance,  even  incest  desires  are  sometimes

conscious. We contend, however, that they are “unconscious” because they

have lost their emotional charge. And we have all had the experience that,using  the  conventional  analytic  method,  it  is  not  possible  to  make  the

compulsion neurotic conscious of the incest desire, except in an intellectual

form.  Frankly  speaking,  this  means  that  the  repression  has  not  been

eliminated. To illustrate, let us return to the further course of this treatment.

  The more intense the muscular actions of the face became, the more the

somatic  excitation,  still  wholly  cut  off  from  psychic  recognition,  spread

toward the chest and abdomen. Several weeks later, the patient reported that

in the course of twitchings in his chest, but especially when these twitchings

subsided, he sensed “currents” moving toward his lower abdomen. During

this time, he left his wife with the intention of forming a liaison with another

woman. However, it was revealed in the course of the following weeks that

the intended liaison had not materialized. Initially, the patient was indifferent

to this. Only after I had drawn his attention to it did he try, after venturing a

number of seemingly plausible explanations, to take an interest in the matter.

But it was quite evident that an inner prohibition prevented him from dealing

with this problem in a really affective manner. Since it is not customary in

character-analytic work to deal with a subject, no matter how topical, unless

the  patient  enters  upon  it  of  his  own  accord  in  a  fully  affective  way,  I

postponed a discussion of this problem and continued to pursue the approach

dictated by the spreading of his muscular actions.

  The  tonic  spasm  of  the  musculature  spread  to  his  chest  and  upper

abdomen. In these attacks, it was as if an inner force lifted him up from the

couch against his will and held him up. The muscles of his abdominal wall

and  chest  were  boardlike.  It  took  some  time  before  I  understood  why  a

further spreading downward of the excitation failed to occur. I had expected

that the vegetative excitation would now spread from the abdomen to the

pelvis, but this did not happen. Instead, there were strong, clonic twitchings

of the musculature of the legs, and a marked intensification of the patellar

reflex. To my complete amazement, the patient told me that he experienced

the  twitchings  of  his  leg  musculature  in  a  highly  agreeable  way.  Quiteinvoluntarily,  I  was  reminded  of  epileptic  clonisms,  and  my  view  was

confirmed that in both the epileptic and epileptiform muscular convulsions,

we are dealing with the release of anxiety which can only be experienced in

an agreeable, i.e., pleasurable manner. There were times in the treatment of

this patient when I was uncertain whether or not I was confronted with a true

epileptic.  Superficially,  at  least,  the  patient’s  attacks,  which  commenced

tonically and occasionally subsided clonically, showed very little difference

from epileptic seizures. I want to stress that, at this stage of the treatment,

which had been in progress for roughly three months, the musculature of his

head,  chest,  and  upper  abdomen,  as  well  as  the  musculature  of  his  legs,

particularly of his knees and upper thighs, had been mobilized. His lower

abdomen  and  pelvis  were  and  remained  immobile.  The  gap  between  his

muscular  actions  and  the  patient’s  perception  of  them  also  remained

unchanged. The patient knew about the attack. He was able to comprehend its

significance, but he did not experience it emotionally. The main question

continued to be: what caused this gap? It became increasingly clear that the

patient was resisting the comprehension of the whole in all of its parts. We

both knew that he was very cautious. It was not only in his psychic attitude

that this caution was expressed, nor in the fact that up to a certain point he

was cooperative and adapted himself to the requirements of his work, and

that  when  the  work  transgressed  certain  limits  he  somehow  became

unfriendly  and  cold.  This  “caution”  was  also  contained  in  his  muscular

activity;  it  was,  so  to  speak,  doubly  preserved.  He  himself  described  and

comprehended his situation as follows: he is a boy being pursued by a man

who wants to beat him. While making his escape, he dodges to the side a

number of times, glances apprehensively over his shoulder, and pulls in his

buttocks,  as  if  to  put  them  out  of  reach  of  the  pursuer.  In  conventional

analytic language, it would have been said that behind his fear of the blows,

there is a fear of a homosexual attack. As a matter of fact, the patient had

spent roughly a year in symptom interpretation analysis, during which hispassive  homosexuality  had  been  continually  interpreted.  “In  itself,”  this

interpretation  had  been  correct.  From  the  point  of  view  of  our  present

knowledge, however, it is clear that it had been meaningless. There were too

many factors in the patient which opposed a really affective comprehension

of his homosexual attitude. For example, his characterological caution and

the muscular binding of his energy, which were still far from resolved.

  Now I began to deal with his caution, not from the psychic side, as I am

usually in the habit of doing in character analysis, but from the somatic side.

For instance, I pointed out again and again that, while it was true he revealed

his anger in his muscular actions, he never followed through, never really

struck with his clenched and raised fist. Several times, at the very moment the

fist was about to strike the couch, his anger disappeared. From now on, I

concentrated my effort on the blocking of the completion of the muscular

action, always guided by the understanding that it was precisely his caution

which he was expressing in this inhibition. After consistently working on the

defense against the muscular action for a number of sessions, the following

episode from his fifth year of life suddenly occurred to him: as a small boy he

had lived near a cliff, which dropped off precipitously to the sea. One day, he

was intensely involved in building a fire at the edge of the rocks; he was so

immersed in his play that he was in danger of falling into the sea. His mother

appeared  in  the  doorway  of  their  home,  saw  what  he  was  doing,  was

frightened, and sought to draw him away from the cliff. She knew him to be a

hyperactive child, and, precisely for this reason she was very much afraid.

She lured him to her in a sweet voice, promising to give him candy. When he

ran up to her, instead of keeping her promise, she gave him a terrible beating.

This experience had made a deep impression on him, but now he understood

it in connection with his defensive attitude toward women and the caution he

demonstrated toward the treatment.

  Yet, this did not put an end to the matter. The caution continued. One day,

in the interval between two attacks, he humorously told me that he was anenthusiastic trout fisherman. He gave me a very impressive description of the

joys of trout fishing; he enacted the corresponding movements, describing

how one catches sight of the trout and how one throws out the line. In the act

of telling and demonstrating this to me, he had an enormously greedy, almost

sadistic expression on his face. It struck me that, while he gave an exact

description of the entire procedure, he omitted one detail, namely the moment

at which the trout bites into the hook. I understood the connection, but saw

that he was unaware of the omission. In conventional psychoanalysis, the

analyst would have told him the connection or would have encouraged him to

comprehend it himself. For me, however, it was precisely this point that was

of utmost importance, namely to find out why he had not described the actual

catch, why he had omitted this detail. Roughly four weeks elapsed before the

following took place: the twitching of various parts of his body lost more and

more their spasmodic tonic character. The clonus also diminished and strange

twitchings appeared in the abdomen. They were not new to me, for I had seen

them in many other patients, but not in the connection in which they now

revealed themselves. The upper part of his body jerked forward, the middle

of his abdomen remained still, and the lower part of his body jerked toward

the upper part. The entire response was an organic unitary movement. There

were  sessions  in  which  this  movement  was  repeated  continuously.

Alternating  with  this  jerking  of  his  entire  body,  there  were  sensations  of

current in some parts of his body, particularly in his legs and abdomen, which

he experienced as pleasurable. The attitude of his mouth and face changed a

little. In one such attack, his face had the unmistakable expression of a fish.

Without any prompting on my part, before I had drawn his attention to it, the

patient said, “I feel like a primordial animal,” and shortly afterward, “I feel

like a fish.” What did all this mean? Without having any inkling of it, without

having worked out a connection through associations, the patient represented

in the movements of his body an obviously hooked, flapping fish. Expressed

in the language of analytic interpretation, it would be said “he acted out” thecaught  trout.  Everything  about  him  expressed  this:  his  mouth  was

spasmodically  protruded,  rigid,  and  distorted.  His  body  jerked  from  the

shoulders to the legs. His back was as stiff as a board. Not entirely intelligible

in this phase was the fact that, with each jerk of his body, the patient for a

time thrust his arms forward as if embracing someone. I no longer remember

whether  I  drew  the  patient’s  attention  to  the  relationship  between  these

actions and the story of the trout, or whether he grasped it of his own accord.

But  he  very  definitely  felt  the  connection  immediately  and  had  not  the

slightest doubt that he represented the trout as well as the trout fisherman.

    Naturally, the whole incident was directly related to his disappointments

in his mother. From a certain point in childhood, she had neglected him,

treated  him  badly,  and  often  beaten  him.  Quite  often,  he  had  expected

something very nice or good from her, and had received the exact opposite.

His caution became understandable now. He did not trust anyone; he did not

want to be caught. This was the deepest reason for his superficiality, his fear

of  surrendering,  of  assuming  real  responsibility,  etc.  In  the  process  of

working through this connection, his personality underwent a conspicuous

change. His superficiality disappeared; he became serious. The seriousness

appeared very suddenly during one of the sessions. The patient said literally,

“I  don’t  understand;  everything  has  become  so  deadly  serious  all  of  a

sudden.” Thus, he did not merely recall the serious emotional attitude he had

had at a certain period of his childhood; he actually changed from being

superficial to being serious. It became clear that his pathological relationship

to women, i.e., his fear of forming a liaison with a woman, of giving himself

to  a  woman,  was  connected  with  this  anxiety  which  was  rooted  in  his

character and had become part of his structure. He was a man whom women

found very attractive; strangely enough, he had made little use of this fact.

  From  now  on,  the  somatic  sensations  of  current  increased  visibly  and

rapidly,  first  in  his  abdomen,  then  also  in  his  legs  and  upper  body.  He

described these sensations not only as currents, but also as voluptuous and“sweet.”  This  was  especially  the  case  when  strong,  lively,  and  rapid

abdominal twitchings occurred.

  Let us pause a moment to review the patient’s situation at this stage of the

treatment.

  The abdominal twitchings were nothing other than the expression of the

fact  that  the  tonic  tension  of  the  musculature  of  his  abdominal  wall  was

subsiding.  The  entire  reaction  was  like  a  reflex.  When  his  abdomen  was

tapped  lightly,  the  twitching  was  immediately  evoked.  After  several

twitchings,  the  abdominal  wall  was  soft  and  could  be  pressed  in  deeply.

Previously, it had been extremely taut and displayed a phenomenon which,

conditionally,  I  should  like  to  call  abdominal  defense.  This  phenomenon

exists in all neurotics, without exception, whenever they are told to breathe

out fully and a slight pressure is applied to the abdominal wall approximately

three centimeters below the end of the sternum. When this is done, there is

either a strong resistance inside the abdomen or pain is experienced similar to

that felt when pressure is exerted on the testicles. A glance at the position of

the abdominal contents and of the solar plexus shows us that, together with

other phenomena still to be discussed, abdominal tension has the function of

enclosing the plexus. The abdominal wall exerts pressure on it. The same

function is fulfilled by the tense and downward-extended diaphragm. This,

too, is a typical symptom. A tonic contraction of the diaphragm is discernible,

without exception, in all individuals who are neurotic; it is expressed in a

tendency  to  breathe  out  only  in  a  shallow  and  interrupted  manner.  The

diaphragm  is  raised  in  exhalation;  the  pressure  on  the  organs  below  it,

including  the  solar  plexus,  is  diminished.  Apparently,  a  freeing  of  the

autonomic plexus from the pressure exerted upon it is dependent upon the

relaxation of the diaphragm and the musculature of the abdominal wall. It is

manifested in the appearance of a sensation like that experienced in the upper

abdomen in swinging, in the descent of an elevator, and in falling. On the

basis of my experiences, I have to assume that we are dealing here with anextremely  important  phenomenon.  Almost  all  patients  remember  that  as

children  they  held  down  and  suppressed  these  sensations  in  the  upper

abdomen which are felt quite intensely in anger or anxiety. They learned to

do this spontaneously by holding their breath and pulling in their abdomen.

    Knowledge of how pressure on the solar plexus develops is indispensable

for an understanding of the further course of our patient’s treatment. What

followed was definitely in agreement with the above assumption; indeed, it

confirmed it. The more carefully I had the patient observe and describe the

behavior of the musculature in the region of his upper abdomen, the more

intense the jerking became, the more intense also became the sensations of

currents  following  their  cessation,  and  the  more  the  wavelike,  serpentine

movements of the body spread. But his pelvis continued to remain stiff, until

I began to make the patient aware of the rigidity of his pelvic musculature.

During the movements, the entire lower part of his body jerked forward. The

pelvis, however, did not move by itself; it moved together with his hips and

thighs. I asked the patient to pay attention to the inhibition which obstructed

the  separate  movement  of  his  pelvis.  It  took  him  about  two  weeks  to

thoroughly perceive the muscular block in his pelvis and to overcome the

inhibition. He gradually learned to include his pelvis in the twitchings. Now,

a previously unfamiliar sensation of current also appeared in his genitals. He

had erections during the session and a strong urge to ejaculate. Thus, the

jerkings of his pelvis, his upper body, and abdomen were the same as those

which are produced and experienced in orgastic clonus.

  From this point on, the work was concentrated on the patient’s behavior

in the sexual act, which he was asked to describe precisely. This description

exposed what is found not only in all neurotics, but in the overwhelming

majority of all men and women: movement in the sexual act is artificially

forced, without the person being aware of it. Usually, it is not the pelvis itself

that moves, but the abdomen, pelvis, and upper thigh as one unit. This does

not correspond to the natural vegetative movement of the pelvis in the sexualact; it is, on the contrary, an inhibition of the orgastic reflex. It is voluntary

movement, as opposed to involuntary reflex action. Its function is to reduce

or wholly cut off the orgastic sensation of current in the genitals.

  Proceeding on the basis of these experiences, I was now able to make

rapid headway with the patient. It became evident that his pelvic floor was

held in a state of chronic tension. It was this case that finally enabled me to

understand an error which I had committed formerly. In my previous efforts

to eliminate the orgastic inhibitions, I had, of course, treated the contraction

of  the  pelvic  floor  and  had  attempted  to  loosen  it.  However,  I  had  been

continually haunted by the impression that this was not enough, that the result

was somehow incomplete. Now I understood that the pressure exerted upon

the  solar  plexus  from  above  by  the  diaphragm,  from  the  front  by  the

abdominal wall and, from below, by the contracted pelvic floor considerably

reduced the abdominal cavity. I shall speak later about the significance of

these findings with respect to the development and preservation of neurotic

situations.

  After  a  few  more  weeks,  I  succeeded  in  completely  dissolving  the

patient’s muscular armor. The isolated abdominal twitchings decreased to the

extent  to  which  the  sensations  of  current  in  the  genitals  increased.  His

emotional  life  grew  more  serious.  In  this  connection,  he  remembered  an

experience from the time he was about two years old.

  He was alone with his mother at a summer resort. It was a clear starry

night. His mother was asleep and breathing deeply; outside he could hear the

steady pounding of the waves on the beach. The mood he had felt then was

the  same  deeply  serious,  somewhat  sad  and  melancholy  mood  which  he

experienced now. We can say that he remembered one of the situations from

earliest childhood in which he had still allowed himself to experience his

vegetative (orgastic) longing. Following the disappointment in his mother,

which had occurred when he was five years old, he had begun to fight against

the  full  expression  of  his  vegetative  energies  and  had  become  cold  andsuperficial. In short, he had developed the character which he presented at the

outset of the treatment.

  Following the increase of the sensations of current in the genitals, the

feeling of a “peculiar contact with the world” intensified. He assured me that

there  was  a  complete  identity  between  the  emotional  seriousness  which

overcame him now and the sensations which he had experienced as a small

child with his mother, especially on that night. He described it as follows: “It

is as if I were at one with the world. It is as if everything inside of me and

outside of me were whirling. It is as if all stimuli emerged much slower, as in

waves. It is like a protective husk around a child. It is incredible how I now

sense the depth of the world.” There was no need for me to tell him; he

grasped it spontaneously: the feeling of unity with the mother is the same as

the feeling of unity with nature. The equating of mother and earth or universe

takes on a deeper meaning when it is understood from the point of view of

the vegetative harmony between self and world.

  On one of the following days, the patient experienced a severe attack of

anxiety. He jumped up, his mouth contorted with pain; beads of perspiration

covered his forehead; his musculature was as stiff as a board. He hallucinated

an animal, an ape. In doing so, his hand had the bent attitude of an ape’s paw,

and he uttered sounds from the depth of his chest, “as if without vocal cords,”

he himself said afterward. It was as if someone had come very close to him

and threatened him. Then, trance-like, he cried out, “Don’t be angry, I only

want to suck.” The anxiety attack subsided, the patient grew calm again, and

in subsequent sessions, we concentrated our work on this experience. Among

many other things, he remembered that at about the age of two (which was

established by the fact that they had lived in a particular apartment at that

time), he had seen Brehm’s Tierleben for the first time and had looked at a

gorilla with great admiration and astonishment. He was not aware of having

experienced  the  same  anxiety  then,  but  the  anxiety  that  occurred  in  the

session undoubtedly corresponded to that experience.  In spite of the fact that anxiety had not become manifest at that time, it

had  subsequently  dominated  his  entire  life.  Now  it  had  finally  broken

through. The gorilla represented his father, the threatening figure who wanted

to obstruct his sucking. Thus, his relationship to his mother had remained

fixated at this level and had broken through right at the beginning of the

treatment in the form of sucking movements of his mouth. But this did not

become spontaneously intelligible to him until after his entire muscular armor

had been dissolved. It was not necessary to spend five years searching for the

early sucking experience on the basis of memory traces. In the treatment, he

actually  was  an  infant  with  the  facial  expression  of  an  infant,  and  the

anxieties he had experienced as an infant.

  I can briefly summarize the remainder of the treatment. Following the

dissolution  of  the  two  main  fixations  in  the  childhood  situation,  his

disappointment  in  his  mother  and  his  fear  of  yielding,  genital  excitation

increased rapidly. Within a few days, he met a pretty young woman, with

whom he easily formed a friendship. After the second or third sexual act, he

came to the treatment beaming and reported in complete amazement that his

pelvis had moved “so curiously by itself.” From his detailed description it

was apparent that he still had a slight inhibition at the moment of ejaculation.

However, since the pelvic movement had already been liberated, it required

but little effort to eliminate this final inhibitory trace. It was a matter of not

holding  back  at  the  moment  of  ejaculation,  but  of  surrendering  himself

completely to the vegetative movements. He had not the slightest doubt that

the  twitchings  he  had  experienced  during  the  treatment  had  been  nothing

other than the suppressed vegetative orgastic movements of coitus. However,

as it was later shown, the orgasm reflex had not developed wholly free of

disturbance.  The  orgastic  contractions  were  still  jerky.  He  was  still  very

hesitant to allow his head to fall back, i.e., to assume the attitude of surrender.

However,  the  patient  soon  overcame  this  resistance  against  a  soft,

coordinated course of the movement. Following this, the final trace of hisdisturbance, which had not appeared so clearly before, was resolved. The

hard,  forceful  form  of  the  orgastic  convulsion  corresponded  to  a  psychic

attitude which said, “A man is hard and unyielding; any form of surrender is

feminine.”

    Immediately  following  this  realization,  his  infantile  conflict  with  his

father  was  resolved.  On  one  hand,  he  felt  sheltered  and  protected  by  his

father.  He  knew  that,  no  matter  how  difficult  matters  might  be,  it  would

always be possible to “retreat” to the parental home. At the same time, he

strove to stand on his own feet and to be independent of his father. He looked

upon his need to be protected as feminine, and he wanted to rid himself of it.

Thus,  the  desire  to  be  independent  and  the  need  for  passive-feminine

protection conflicted with one another. Both were contained in the form of

the orgasm reflex. The resolution of the psychic conflict took place hand in

hand with the elimination of the hard, thrustlike form of the orgasm reflex,

and its unmasking as a warding off of the gentle, surrendering movement.

When he finally experienced surrender in the reflex, he was deeply baffled by

it. “I would never have thought,” he said, “that a man can surrender, too. I

have always regarded surrender as a characteristic of the female sex.” In this

way, his own warded-off femininity was connected with the natural form of

orgastic surrender, and thus disturbed the latter.

  It is interesting to note how society’s double standard of morality was

reflected  and  anchored  in  this  patient’s  structure.  In  customary  social

ideology,  we  also  find  that  surrender  is  emotionally  associated  with

femininity,  and  unyielding  hardness  is  associated  with  masculinity.

Accordingly, it is inconceivable that an independent person can give himself

and that a person who does give himself can be independent. Just as, on the

basis of this false association, women protest against their femininity and

want to be masculine, men rebel against their natural sexual rhythm out of

fear  of  appearing  feminine;  and  it  is  from  this  false  assessment  that  the

difference in the view of sexuality in man and in woman derives its seemingjustification.

  During  the  ensuing  months,  every  change  became  integrated  in  the

transformation  of  his  personality.  While  he  did  not  deny  himself  an

occasional social drink, he ceased to drink excessively. He made a suitable

arrangement with his wife and formed a happy liaison with another woman.

Most important, he showed great interest and enthusiasm in a new job.

  The superficiality of his character had completely disappeared. He was no

longer capable of engaging in empty talk in cafés or of undertaking other

things that did not have some objective interest. I want to make it quite clear

that it would not have occurred to me to guide or to influence him morally. I

myself was surprised by the spontaneous transformation of his personality.

He  became  objective  and  serious.  He  grasped  the  basic  concepts  of  sex-

economy less on the basis of his treatment, which was of short duration, than

spontaneously on the basis of his changed structure, the feeling of his body,

i.e., on the basis of the vegetative motility he now experienced.

  Over the course of the next four years, the patient showed considerable

improvement  in  the  integration  of  his  personality,  in  his  capacity  for

happiness, and in the rational management of difficult situations.

  I have now been practicing the technique of vegetotherapy for six years

with students and patients and can see that it provides great advantages for

the treatment of character neuroses. The results are better than they were

previously,  and  the  duration  of  the  treatments  are  shorter.  A  number  of

physicians  and  teachers  have  already  learned  to  use  character-analytic

vegetotherapy.


                4. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF NATURAL RESPIRATION


Before I describe the details of this technique, it is necessary to give a brief

summary of a few fundamental facts. A knowledge of these facts will clarify

every  individual  technical  measure  which,  taken  by  itself,  appears  to  be

meaningless.  The vegetotherapeutic treatment of muscular attitudes is interlaced in a

very definite way with the work on character attitudes. Thus, it in no way

excludes the character-analytic work. Rather it supplements it or, expressed

differently,  vegetotherapy  means  the  same  work  at  a  deeper  layer  of  the

biological  system.  For,  according  to  our  therapeutic  views,  the  character

armor  and  the  muscular  armor  are  functionally  identical.  There  would  be

good  reason  to  call  vegetotherapy  “character  analysis”  in  the  realm  of

biophysical functioning.

  However, the identity between character armor and muscular armor has a

counterpart.  Character  attitudes  can  be  dissolved  by  the  overcoming  of

muscular armorings, just as muscular attitudes can be dissolved through the

removal of character attitudes. Once the force of muscular vegetotherapy has

been experienced, there is a temptation to give up the work on character

incrustations  altogether  and  to  concentrate  solely  on  vegetotherapy.  But

practical experience soon teaches us that it is just as inadmissible to exclude

one form of work as it is to exclude the other. With one patient, work on the

muscular attitude will predominate from the beginning, while with another,

work on the character attitudes will be emphasized. We also encounter a third

type of patient with whom the work on the character and the work on the

musculature proceed partly simultaneously and partly alternatingly. But it is

the work on the muscular armoring that gains the greater importance and

scope  toward  the  end  of  the  treatment.  It  is  concentrated  on  the  task  of

restoring the orgasm reflex, which is naturally present but disturbed in all

neurotic patients. This task is accomplished in various ways.

  In the effort to release the orgasm reflex, a great number of details are

learned  which  provide  the  correct  understanding  of  natural  movement,  as

opposed  to  unnatural,  neurotically  restricted  movement.  Sometimes  the

vegetative impulse and the vegetative inhibition of the same impulse can be

localized in the same muscle group. For instance, the impulse to butt a person

in the stomach with one’s head, as well as the inhibition of this impulse,might be contained in a stooped attitude of the head. The conflict between

impulse and defense, with which we are so familiar in the psychic realm, has

a direct correlation in physiological behavior. At other times, impulse and

inhibition are distributed among various muscle groups. For example, there

are  patients  in  whom  the  vegetative  impulse  is  expressed  in  involuntary

twitchings of the muscles of the upper abdomen. However, the inhibition of

this vegetative impulse is found in a different place, e.g., in a spasm of the

uterus.  These  spasms  can  be  felt  as  isolated  spherical  lumps  when  one

carefully  palpates  the  lower  abdomen.  They  are  vegetative  hypertonic

conditions  of  the  musculature;  the  lumps  disappear  as  the  orgasm  reflex

develops. In fact, the lumps will occasionally appear and disappear several

times within the same session.

  It is particularly important to mention this, for the release of the orgasm

reflex  is  essentially  brought  about  by  the  intensification  of  the  vegetative

inhibitions. The patient, of course, knows nothing about his muscular blocks.

He must first feel them before he is in a position to focus his attention on

them. There would be no point in intensifying his vegetative impulses before

the inhibitions have been dissolved.

  We  want  to  cite  an  example  to  facilitate  our  understanding  of  this

phenomenon. A snake or a worm demonstrates a uniform, wavelike, rhythmic

movement which governs the entire organism. Now let us imagine that some

segments of the body are paralyzed or somehow restricted, so that they are

not able to move with the rhythm of the entire body. In such a case, the other

parts of the body would not, as before, move in one unit; the total rhythm

would  be  disturbed,  owing  to  the  exclusion  of  individual  muscle  groups.

Thus, the completeness of the body harmony and motility is dependent upon

the uniformity, totality, and freedom from disturbance of the impulses of the

body. A person who holds back in the pelvis is inhibited in his attitude and

movement, no matter how mobile he is otherwise. The orgasm reflex consists

precisely of the fact that a wave of excitation and movement runs from thevegetative center over the head, neck, chest, upper and lower abdomen, to the

pelvis  and  then  to  the  legs.  If  this  wave  is  obstructed,  slowed  down,  or

blocked  at  some  point,  the  reflex  is  “disrupted.”  Our  patients  usually

demonstrate not one but many such blocks and inhibitions of the orgasm

reflex at various parts of the body. There are two points where the inhibition

is always found: the throat and the anus. That this is connected with the

embryonic character of both openings can only be conjectured, in as much as

the throat and the anus are the two openings of the primordial intestinal tract.

  The vegetotherapist locates the individual sites at which the orgasm reflex

is inhibited and intensifies the inhibitions. Then the body itself seeks the path

prescribed by the course of the vegetative excitation. It is surprising how

“logically” the body integrates the total reflex. When, for example, a stiffness

of the neck has been dissolved, or a spasm of the throat or chin has been

eliminated, some impulse almost invariably becomes manifest in the chest or

shoulders. However, it is not long before this impulse, too, is obstructed by a

corresponding inhibition. If, now, this new inhibition is removed, an impulse

makes itself felt in the abdomen until it, too, meets an inhibition. Hence, it

becomes clear that it is not possible to loosen the vegetative motility of the

pelvis until the inhibitions which lie above it have been eliminated.

  This description should not be viewed too schematically. Although there

can be no doubt that every dissolution of an inhibition enables a part of a

vegetative impulse to become manifest “farther down,” it is also true that

often  a  throat  spasm  can  be  dissolved  completely  only  after  stronger

vegetative  impulses  have  already  broken  through  in  the  abdomen.  In  the

breakthrough of new vegetative impulses, previously concealed inhibitions

clearly emerge. In many cases, a severe throat spasm is not discovered until

the vegetative excitation in the pelvis has developed to a certain extent. This

increase  in  vegetative  excitation  mobilizes  the  remainder  of  the  available

inhibitory mechanisms.

    Particularly important in this connection are the substitute movements.Very often a vegetative impulse is feigned where there is only an acquired,

half-voluntary movement. The basic vegetative impulse is liberated only after

the substitute movement has been unmasked and eliminated. For instance,

many patients suffer from a chronic tension of the musculature of the jaws,

which makes the lower half of the face look “mean.” In attempting to push

the chin downward, a strong resistance, a rigidity, is noticed. If the patient is

told to open and close his mouth, he carries out this movement only after

some hesitation and with evident effort. But the patient must first be made to

experience this artificial form of opening and closing his mouth before he can

be convinced that the motility of his chin is inhibited.

  Hence,  the  voluntary  movements  of  muscle  groups  can  function  as  a

warding off of involuntary movements. It is also possible for involuntary

muscle  actions  to  function  as  a  warding  off  of  other  involuntary  muscle

actions, e.g., a rhythmic movement of the musculature of the eyelids (“tic”)

can  function  as  a  warding  off  of  strained  staring.  Then  again,  voluntary

muscle actions can coincide entirely with the direction of involuntary muscle

actions; thus, the conscious imitation of a pelvic movement can produce an

involuntary vegetative pelvic movement.

  The basic principles in freeing the orgasm reflex are:

  1. To locate the inhibitions, and where the fragmentation obstructs the

unification of the orgasm reflex.

  2. To intensify the involuntary inhibitory mechanisms and impulses, e.g.,

the  forward  movement  of  the  pelvis,  which  are  capable  of  completely

releasing the blocked vegetative impulse.

  The most important means of freeing the orgasm reflex is a breathing

technique, which developed itself in the course of the work. There is not a

single neurotic person who is capable of breathing out deeply and evenly in

one breath. Patients have concocted every conceivable means of preventing

deep exhalation. They exhale in a fragmentary manner, or quickly revert to a

position of inhalation. Some patients describe the inhibition they sense in thiskind of breathing as follows: “It is as if an ocean wave dashed against a

boulder. It doesn’t go any farther.”

  This  inhibition  is  experienced  in  the  upper  or  middle  region  of  the

abdomen.  In  breathing  out  deeply,  strong  feelings  of  pleasure  or  anxiety

appear in the abdomen. But it is precisely the avoidance of these feelings that

is  accomplished  by  the  respiratory  block.  By  way  of  preparing  for  and

bringing about the orgasm reflex, I first have my patients breathe in and out

deeply and encourage them “to get into the swing of it.” If the patient is told

to breathe deeply, he usually forces his breath in and out artificially. This

voluntary behavior serves only to obstruct the natural vegetative rhythm of

breathing. It is unmasked as an inhibition; the patient is asked to breathe “in

an entirely normal way,” i.e., not to engage in any respiratory exercises, as he

would like to. After five to ten breaths, respiration usually deepens, and the

first inhibitions emerge. When a person breathes out naturally and deeply, his

head spontaneously moves back at the end of the breath. Patients cannot let

their heads move back spontaneously in a natural way. They stretch their

heads forward to avoid “moving back,” or they move them with a violent jerk

to the side; in any case, in a way different from natural movement.

  In deep exhalation, the shoulders relax in a natural way and move gently

and  lightly  forward.  It  is  precisely  at  the  end  of  the  exhalation  that  our

patients hold their shoulders tight or lift them up; in short, they carry out

various movements of the shoulders to prevent the spontaneous vegetative

movement from taking place.

  Another means of releasing the orgasm reflex is to apply a gentle pressure

to the upper abdomen. I place the fingertips of both hands approximately in

the middle of the upper abdomen between umbilicus and sternum, and tell the

patient to breathe in and out deeply. During exhalation, I gradually apply a

gentle pressure to the upper abdomen. This produces very different reactions

in various patients. In some, the solar plexus proves to be highly sensitive to

pressure; in others, there is a countermovement in which the back is arched.These are the patients who suppress every orgastic excitation in the sexual act

by pulling back the pelvis and arching the back. Then, there are patients in

whom  continual  pressure  upon  the  upper  abdomen  produces  wavelike

contractions in the abdomen. This sometimes releases the orgasm reflex. If

deep exhalation is continued for some time, an abdominal wall which is tense

and hard will invariably soften. It can be pressed in more easily. The patients

report that they “feel better,” a statement that cannot be taken at face value. In

my practice, I make use of a formulation which patients grasp spontaneously.

I tell them to “give in” completely. The attitude of yielding is the same as that

of  surrender:  the  head  glides  backward,  the  shoulders  move  forward  and

upward, the middle of the abdomen draws in, the pelvis moves forward, and

the legs move apart spontaneously. Deep exhalation spontaneously produces

the attitude of (sexual) surrender. This explains the inhibition of the orgasm

in  those  people,  incapable  of  surrendering,  who  hold  their  breath  as  the

excitation mounts to a climax.

  Many patients keep their backs arched, so that the pelvis is pushed back

and the upper abdomen is pushed forward. If the therapist places his hand

under the middle of the patient’s back, and tells him to press down on it,

resistance will be noticed. Yielding in the bodily attitude is expressively the

same thing as the attitude of surrender in the sexual act, or in the state of

sexual excitation. Once the patient has grasped and assumed the attitude of

surrender, the first precondition for the establishment of the orgasm reflex

has been created. A relaxed opening of the mouth seems to contribute to the

establishment  of  the  attitude  of  surrender.  In  the  course  of  this  work,

numerous inhibitions, previously unseen, appear. For example, many patients

knit their eyebrows, stretch their legs and their feet in a spastic manner, etc.

Hence, the elimination of the inhibitions and the establishment of the orgasm

reflex cannot be separated from one another. Rather, it is only in the process

of  reunifying  the  disrupted  organic  rhythm  of  the  total  body  that  all  the

muscular  actions  and  inhibitions  are  unmasked  which  had  previouslyobstructed the sexual function and vegetative motility of the patient’s life.

  It is only in the course of this work that the machinations are revealed

which the patients used as children to master their instinctual impulses and

the “butterflies in their stomachs.” As heroically as they once wrestled with

the “devil” in themselves, i.e., sexual pleasure, they now senselessly defend

themselves against the cherished capacity for pleasure. I shall mention only a

few of the typical forms of the somatic mechanisms of repression. If the

excitations in the abdomen become too strong in the process of releasing the

orgasm reflex, some patients stare blankly into a corner or out of a window.

If one inquires further into this behavior, the patients remember that this is

something they practiced consciously as children when they had to learn to

control anger toward their parents, brothers and sisters, or teachers. Holding

one’s breath for a long time was considered an heroic achievement of self-

control,  as  was  making  the  head  and  shoulders  rigid.  “Grit  your  teeth”

became a moralistic command. Here, language is a direct reflection of the

somatic  process  of  self-control.  Certain  phrases,  commonly  heard  in

conventional  upbringing,  exactly  represent  what  we  describe  as  muscular

armoring: “A man must exercise self-control”; “a big boy doesn’t cry”; “pull

yourself together”; “don’t let yourself go”; “don’t be a yellow belly”; “don’t

vent  your  spleen”;  “grit  your  teeth”;  “grin  and  bear  it”;  “hold  your  head

high”; etc. Initially, such typical admonitions are rejected by children, then

accepted and carried out against their will. They always weaken the backbone

of the child’s character, crush his spirit, destroy the life in him, and turn him

into a well-behaved puppet.

  An educated mother told me about her eleven-year-old daughter, who had

been strictly forbidden to masturbate until she was five years old. When she

was around nine, she saw a children’s play in which there was a magician

whose fingers were artificially elongated and unevenly shaped. Even at that

time, she had been disturbed by his very large forefinger and, in later anxiety

fantasies, the magician had always reappeared.  “You know,” she told her mother, “when I get afraid, it always starts in

my stomach [she bent over as if in pain]. Then I have to hold still. I mustn’t

move anything. I am only allowed to play with the little part down there [she

means the clitoris], that I push back and forth like crazy. The magician says,

‘You must not move. Only down there, you may move.’ When the fear gets

worse, I want to switch on the light. But every big movement makes me

afraid again. Only when I make very small movements, it gets better. But

when there is light again and I have rubbed enough down below, I grow

calmer and then afterward it is all over. The magician is just like Nana, she

too always says, ‘Don’t move, lie still.’ [She imitates a stern face.] When I

had my hands underneath the covers one time, she came and pulled them

out.”

  Because she had her hand on her genitals practically every minute of the

day, her mother asked her why she did that. The girl was not even aware she

had her hand there so often. Then she described the nature of her various

sensations. “Sometimes I just want to play, then I don’t have to rub. But

when I am frozen stiff with fear, then I have to push and pull down below

like crazy. When everybody is away, and there is no one with whom I can

talk to about anything, then the fear gets worse and I always have to do

something down below.” Somewhat later she added, “When the fear is there,

I get very stubborn. Then I want to fight against something, but I don’t know

against  what.  Don’t  think  that  I  want  to  fight  against  the  magician  [the

mother had not mentioned him]; I am much too afraid of him. It is something

which I don’t know.” This child gives a good description of her abdominal

sensations and the way in which she, with the help of the fantasy of the

magician, tried to control them.

  Another example will illustrate what importance respiration has for the

activity of the abdominal vegetative ganglia. In the course of repeated deep

exhalations, one patient became aware of a strong sensitivity in the pelvic

region. He reacted to this by severely restricting his breathing. If one touchedhis  upper  thigh  or  lower  abdomen  ever  so  lightly,  he  would  contract

instantaneously. However, if I made him breathe out deeply several times, he

would not react to touch. If the breath was held again, the irritability of his

pelvic  region  promptly  reappeared.  This  could  be  repeated  at  will.  This

clinical detail is very revealing. Deep inhalation produces a damming-up of

the biological activity of the vegetative centers, resulting in increased reflex

irritability. Repeated exhalation reduces the stasis and, with it, the anxious

irritability. Thus, the blocking of deep exhalation creates a contradiction: the

block serves to dampen the pleasurable excitations arising from the central

vegetative  apparatus.  However,  it  is  precisely  this  block  that  creates  an

increased susceptibility to anxiety and reflex irritability. This enables us to

comprehend  a  further  aspect  of  the  conversion  of  suppressed  sexual

excitation into anxiety, just as does the clinical finding that, in the process of

re-establishing  the  capacity  for  pleasure,  it  is  the  physiological  anxiety

reflexes  we  encounter  first.  Anxiety  is  the  negative  counterpart  of  sexual

excitation; at the same time, it is identical with it in terms of energy. So-

called nervous irritability is nothing other than a series of short circuits in the

discharge  of  the  electricity  of  the  tissues,  caused  by  the  blocking  of  the

energy from orgastic discharge. One is “as if electrified.”

  I once had a patient in whom the central and most persistent character

                                                      1
resistance was expressed in a continual chatter. However, his mouth was felt

as “alien” and “dead,” as if it “did not belong.” The patient repeatedly passed

his hand over his mouth as if to convince himself that it was still there. His

pleasure in telling gossipy stories was unmasked as an attempt to overcome

the  feeling  of  a  “dead  mouth.”  After  this  defense  function  had  been

eliminated, his mouth began spontaneously to assume an infantile attitude of

sucking, which alternated with a mean, hard facial expression. During these

changes, his head was inclined sharply to the right. One day I had the impulse

to feel the patient’s neck to convince myself that there was nothing wrong

with  it.  To  my  enormous  surprise,  the  patient  immediately  assumed  theattitude of a hanged person: his head sank limply to the side, his tongue

protruded, his mouth remained rigidly opened. And this happened, although I

had merely touched his neck. A straight path led from this incident to his

early childhood fear of being hanged for a transgression (masturbation).

  The reflex just described occurred only when the breath was held and

deep exhalation was avoided. The reflex reaction disappeared as the patient

gradually began to overcome the fear of breathing out. Thus, the neurotically

inhibited respiratory activity is a central factor of the neurotic mechanism in

general. It blocks the vegetative activity of the organism, thus creating the

energy source for symptoms and neurotic fantasies of all kinds.

  Another patient suffered from a very “bad feeling about himself.” He felt

he was a “pig.” Essentially, his neurosis consisted in abortive attempts to

overcome  his  poor  opinion  of  himself  by  means  of  obtruding  himself  on

others.  His  pathological  behavior  had  but  one  result:  people  insulted  him

mercilessly.  This  intensified  and  confirmed  the  poor  opinion  he  had  of

himself. Now he began to muse about what people were saying about him,

why they were so mean to him, how he could improve the situation, etc. In

the process, he became aware of a pressure in his chest. The harder he tried to

overcome his lack of self-esteem through compulsive ruminating, the more

intense the pressure became. It took a long time to discover the connection

between  the  compulsive  ruminating  and  the  “pressure  in  his  chest.”  This

whole experience was preceded by a somatic sensation of which he had never

been conscious: “Something begins to stir in the chest, then it shoots up to the

head; I feel as if my head were going to burst open. A kind of mist settles

around my eyes. I can’t think any more. I lose all feeling of what is going on

around me. It is as if I were going to sink, as if I were losing contact with

myself and everything around me.” Such reactions always appeared when an

excitation failed to reach the genitals and was diverted “upward.” This is the

physiological basis for what psychoanalysts called “displacement from below

upward.” This neurotic condition led to fantasies of being a genius, dreamsabout a glorious future, etc.; they were all the more grotesque, the less they

were in keeping with his actual achievements.

  There  are  people  who  claim  they  have  never  experienced  the  familiar

feeling of gnawing or longing in the upper abdomen. They are usually hard,

cold,  and  ill-natured  persons.  I  had  two  patients  who  had  developed  a

pathological compulsion to eat as a means of suppressing their abdominal

sensations. They would gorge themselves as soon as a sensation of anxiety or

depression appeared. Following an unsatisfying sexual act, some women (I

have not yet had occasion to observe this in men) have, as one such patient

expressed it, “to shove something into the stomach.” In others, there is a

feeling of “having something in the intestines which can’t come out.”


                    5. THE MOBILIZATION OF THE “DEAD PELVIS”


The orgasm reflex does not suddenly emerge completely intact; rather it is a

product  of  the  gradual  integration  of  separate  parts  involved  in  the  total

function. Initially, there is merely a wave of excitation which runs from the

neck, over the chest and upper abdomen, to the lower abdomen. The pelvis is

immobile during this action. Some patients describe it as follows: “It is as if

the movement were stopped at a certain spot down below.” The pelvis does

not participate in the wavelike course of the excitation. If an effort is made to

locate the inhibition which causes this, it is usually found that the pelvis is

held in a retracted position. An arching of the spine, causing the abdomen to

protrude,  sometimes  goes  together  with  this  retraction  of  the  pelvis.  For

instance, it is easy to push one’s hand between the patient’s back and the

couch. The immobility of the pelvis creates the impression of deadness. In

the majority of cases, this is combined with a feeling of “emptiness in the

pelvis”  or  a  feeling  of  “weakness  in  the  genitals.”  This  phenomenon  is

especially pronounced in patients who suffer from chronic constipation. We

shall have a better understanding of this connection when we bear in mind

that chronic constipation corresponds to an overexcitation of the sympathetic.The same applies to the holding back in the pelvis. The patients are unable to

move the pelvis. Instead, they move the abdomen, pelvis, and upper thighs as

one  unit.  Accordingly,  the  first  task  of  therapeutic  work  is  to  make  the

patients fully aware of the absence of pelvic excitation. As a rule, they offer

considerable resistance to moving the pelvis by itself, particularly to moving

it  forward  and  upward.  Comparison  of  patients  suffering  from  genital

anesthesia shows that the lack of sensation in the genitals, i.e., the feeling of

emptiness, debility, etc., is that much more intense the more the pelvis has

forfeited  its  motility.  Such  patients  are  always  severely  disturbed  in  the

sexual act. The women lie motionless, or they try to overcome the inhibition

of vegetative motility in the pelvis by means of forced movements of trunk

and  pelvis.  In  men,  the  disturbance  is  expressed  in  hurried,  abrupt,  and

voluntary movements of the entire lower part of the body. The sensation of

vegetative orgastic current cannot be demonstrated in any of these patients.

  It  is  necessary  to  lay  particular  stress  upon  some  details  of  this

phenomenon.  The  genital  musculature  (bulbo-cavernosus  and  ischio-

cavernosus) is tense, and this tenseness precludes the contractions brought on

by  friction.  The  musculature  of  the  buttocks  is  also  tense.  Patients  often

overcome the absence of excitability in these muscles by trying to produce

voluntary contractions and relaxations in them.

  The pelvic floor is pulled up. This contracted position of the pelvic floor

below, together with the downward fixation of the diaphragm above and the

tension of the abdominal wall in front, blocks the movement of vegetative

current in the abdomen.

  This attitude of the pelvis always appears in childhood as a result of two

fundamental  disturbances  of  development.  Its  groundwork  is  prepared  by

brutal  toilet  training  in  which  the  child  is  forced  to  control  his  bowel

movements  at  a  very  early  age.  Severe  punishment  for  bed  wetting  also

causes a spasm of the pelvis. Far more important, however, is the spasm of

the pelvis that is initiated as soon as the child begins to combat the intensegenital excitations which urge toward masturbation.

  Every sensation of genital pleasure can be deadened through the chronic

contraction  of  the  pelvic  musculature.  This  is  proven  by  the  fact  that

sensations of current in the genitals begin to appear when the pelvic spasm is

relieved. To bring this about, it is first necessary to make the patient aware of

the pelvic attitude, i.e., the patient must have the immediate sensation that he

or she is “holding” the pelvis “still.” In addition, all voluntary movements

which prevent the natural vegetative movements of the pelvis have to be

exposed. The voluntary movement of the abdomen, pelvis, and upper thighs

as a single unit is undoubtedly the most important and frequent means of

preventing the pelvis from moving by itself. It is utterly useless to have the

patient carry out pelvic exercises, as some gymnastics instructors attempt. As

long as the concealing and defensive muscular attitudes and actions have not

been eliminated, the natural movement of the pelvis cannot develop.

  The more intensely the inhibition of the pelvic movement is worked on,

the  more  completely  the  pelvis  participates  in  the  wave  of  excitation.  It

begins to move forward and upward without any conscious effort on the part

of the patient. It is as if it were drawn up toward the umbilicus by an external

force. At the same time, the upper thighs remain motionless. It is extremely

important to grasp the difference between the defensive movement of the

pelvis and its natural vegetative movement. When the wave runs from the

neck over the chest and abdomen to the pelvis, then the character of the entire

reflex is changed. If, until this point, the orgasm reflex was experienced in an

essentially unpleasurable way, occasionally even as painful, it now begins to

become pleasurable. If, until this point, defensive movements appeared, e.g.,

protruding  abdomen  and  arched  back,  now  the  entire  trunk  presents  the

appearance of a fish in motion. The sensations of genital pleasure and the

sensations  of  current  in  the  total  organism,  which  now  grow  increasingly

strong,  leave  no  doubt  that  we  are  dealing  with  the  natural  vegetative

movement of coitus. The character of this movement differs completely fromall earlier reflexes and reactions of the body. The feeling of emptiness in the

genitals gives way gradually or rapidly to a sensation of fullness and urgency.

This brings about the spontaneous establishment of the capacity for orgastic

experience  in  the  sexual  act.  The  very  movement  which,  carried  out  by

individual muscle groups, represents pathological reactions of the body and

serves to ward off sexual pleasure, is, in its totality as a wave movement of

the total body, the basis of the capacity for spontaneous vegetative pleasure.

The arc de cercle of the hysteric, in which the abdomen and the chest are

arched  forward  while  the  shoulders  and  the  pelvis  are  pulled  back,  now

becomes comprehensible as the exact opposite of the attitude in the orgasm

reflex.








9 < ~>

Orgasm reflex Arc de cercle
  As long as these facts were still unknown to me, I was forced to have the

patient overcome the inhibition of the pelvic movement partly by means of

“exercises.”  The  incompleteness  of  the  results  caused  me  to  reject  these

artificial measures and to search for the inhibitions of natural motility. The

warding off of the orgasm reflex causes a number of vegetative disturbances,

e.g.,  chronic  constipation,  muscular  rheumatism,  sciatica,  etc.  In  many

patients, constipation disappears, even if it has existed for decades, with the

development of the orgasm reflex. Its full development is often preceded by

nausea and feelings of. giddiness, in addition to spastic conditions of the

throat, isolated twitchings of the abdominal musculature, the diaphragm, the

pelvis, etc. But all these symptoms disappear as soon as the orgasm reflex has

been fully developed.

  The  “stiff,  dead,  retracted  pelvis”  is  one  of  man’s  most  frequent

vegetative  disturbances.  It  is  responsible  for  lumbago  as  well  as  forhemorrhoidal  disturbances.  Elsewhere,  we  shall  demonstrate  an  important

connection between these disturbances and genital cancer in women, which is

so common.

  Thus,  the  “deadening  of  the  pelvis”  has  the  same  function  as  the

deadening  of  the  abdomen,  i.e.,  to  avoid  feelings,  particularly  those  of

pleasure and anxiety.

  Now  that  the  various  manifestations  and  forms  of  the  attitude  and

expression of the body, with respect to the orgasm reflex and the defense

against it, can be understood, many phenomena in therapeutic work are made

comprehensible. I am reminded of a diaphragmatic tic in a forty-five-year-old

woman whom I treated at the Vienna Psychoanalytic Clinic some fourteen

years before and partially cured by making it possible for her to masturbate. I

described this case in the article “Der Tic als Onanieäquivalent,” published in

the Zeitschrift für Sexualwissenschaft, 1924. The patient had suffered from

very disturbing diaphragmatic movements, accompanied by noises, since her

adolescence,  i.e.,  for  more  than  thirty  years.  There  was  a  remarkable

abatement in the tic as it became possible for her to masturbate. It is clear to

me  today  that  the  improvement  was  due  to  the  partial  loosening  of  the

chronic inspiratory position of the diaphragm. At that time, I could merely

say, in a very general way, that sexual gratification had eliminated a portion

of the sexual stasis and thus weakened the tic. But I would not have been able

to say anything about the form in which this stasis had been maintained,

where it had discharged itself, and how the sexual gratification had reduced

the  stasis.  The  tic  had  represented  an  inadequate  effort  to  overcome  the

diaphragmatic contraction.

  My  present  experiences  remind  me  of  the  cases  of  epilepsy  with

abdominal aura in which I could not comprehend what part of the body was

involved,  what  was  its  function,  and  what  was  its  relationship  to  the

vegetative nervous system. It has become clear now that the epileptic seizures

represent convulsions of the vegetative apparatus in which the dammed-upbiopsychic  energy  is  discharged  solely  through  the  musculature,  with  the

exclusion of the genitals. The epileptic seizure is an extragenital, muscular

        2
orgasm.  This  also  clarified  those  cases  in  which  occasional  involuntary

fluttering of the abdominal musculature can be observed in the course of the

treatment. These movements are attempts to bring about a relaxation of the

tense abdominal wall.

  Though  never  overtly  expressed,  there  was  in  many  patients  a  hidden

maliciousness  which,  though  I  sensed  it,  I  would  not  have  been  able  to

localize. Treatment of the vegetative behavior makes it possible to determine

where the meanness is located somatically. There are patients who express

friendliness with their eyes and cheeks, but whose chin and mouth express

the exact opposite. The expression of the lower half of the face is completely

different from that of the upper half. The dissolution of the attitude of the

mouth and chin releases an unbelievable amount of anger.

  In  other  patients,  one  senses  the  falsity  of  conventional  politeness;  it

conceals the opposite, a cunning malice, which might be expressed in chronic

constipation. The bowels are immobile, and their function must be kept active

through  the  constant  use  of  purgatives.  As  children,  such  patients  had  to

control their anger and “to lock their wickedness in the stomach.” The way in

which  patients  describe  their  body  sensations  is  almost  always  an  exact

repetition of often-heard sentences from their early toilet training, e.g., “the

belly is naughty when it makes ‘poo-poo.’” A “well-brought-up” child is very

prone to respond to these admonitions with a “poo.” But he must soon rid

himself of this habit, and he can do this only by “hiding the ‘poo’ in the

belly.”  To  accomplish  this,  the  child  has  to  suppress  every  excitation  he

senses  in  the  abdomen,  including  genital  excitation,  by  withdrawing  into

himself, “making the belly crawl into itself.” The abdomen becomes hard,

tense; it has “locked in the wickedness.”

  It  would  be  worthwhile  to  describe,  historically  and  functionally,  the

complicated  development  of  the  symptoms  of  body  attitudes  as  they  aremanifested in various patients. For the moment, let it suffice to indicate a few

typical facts.

  It  is  extremely  instructive  to  see  that  the  body  is  just  as  capable  of

functioning  as  a  unified  organism  as  it  is  of  dividing  itself,  one  part

functioning parasympathetically, the other sympathetically. I once treated a

female  patient  who,  at  a  certain  stage  of  the  treatment,  was  already

completely  relaxed  in  the  upper  abdomen;  she  experienced  the  familiar

sensations  of  current,  and  the  abdominal  wall  could  be  pressed  in  easily.

There were no longer any interruptions in the sensation between the upper

abdomen, the chest, and the neck. But the lower abdomen behaved as if it

were separated from these parts by a line. When the lower abdominal wall

was pressed in, a hard lump about the size of an infant’s head could be felt. It

would be impossible today to give an exact anatomical explanation of how

such a lump is produced, i.e., which organs are involved in its formation, but

it can be palpated unequivocally. During a later phase of the treatment, there

were days when the lump alternately appeared and disappeared. It always

appeared  when  the  patient  was  afraid  of,  and  therefore  struggled  against,

emerging genital excitation. It disappeared when she felt capable of allowing

genital excitation to become manifest.

  The  somatic  manifestations  of  schizophrenia,  particularly  its  catatonic

form, will have to be discussed in a separate essay based on new material.

The catatonic stereotypes, perseverations, automatisms of all kind, can be

traced back to muscular armorings and breakthroughs of vegetative energy.

This is especially true of the catatonic rage reaction. In the simple neurosis,

there is only a surface restriction of vegetative motility, which allows room

for inner excitations and discharges in “fantasy.” If the armoring reaches into

the depth, if it blocks central areas of the biological organism and completely

takes  hold  of  the  musculature,  there  are  only  two  possibilities:  forceful

breakthrough (violent rage, which is experienced as release) or the gradual,

complete deterioration of the vital apparatus.  A  number  of  organic  diseases,  such  as  gastric  ulcer,  muscular

rheumatism, and cancer, tie in with the problem at this point.

  I  have  no  doubt  that,  in  their  clinical  practice,  psychotherapists  can

observe any number of such symptoms. However, these symptoms cannot be

treated individually; they can be understood only in connection with the total

biological functioning of the body, and in relation to the functions of pleasure

and anxiety. It is impossible to master the vast complexity of body attitudes

and expressions, if anxiety is looked upon as a cause and not essentially as

the result of sexual stasis. “Stasis” means nothing other than an inhibition of

vegetative expansion and a blocking of the activity and motility of the central

vegetative  organs.  The  discharge  of  excitation  is  blocked;  the  biological

energy is bound.

  The orgasm reflex is a unitary response of the total body. In the orgasm,

we are nothing but a pulsating mass of plasm. After fifteen years of research

on the orgasm reflex, it was finally possible to penetrate to the biological core

of psychic illnesses. The orgasm reflex is found in all creatures that copulate.

Among more primitive biological organisms as, for example, protozoa, it is

                                                    3
found in the form of plasmatic contractions. The most elementary stage at

which it can be found is the division of single cells.

  There are some difficulties in arriving at an answer to the question of

what  takes  the  place  of  contraction  in  more  highly  organized  organisms,

when  the  organism  can  no  longer  contract  to  a  spherical  form  like  a

protozoon. From a certain stage of development, the metazoa have a skeletal

frame.  This  obstructs  the  function,  native  to  molluscs  and  protozoa,  of

becoming spherical in the act of contracting. Let us imagine a flexible tube,

into which our biological bladder has developed. Let us further imagine that

we introduce a rod into it which is capable of bending only in one direction.

This would represent the spine. Let us imagine that the impulse to contract is

now introduced into this longitudinally stretched bladder. We can see that the

bladder  has  but  one  possibility  when,  in  spite  of  its  inability  to  becomespherical, it wants to contract. It has to bend, to the greatest possible extent,

and rapidly.







  Viewed biologically, the orgasm reflex is nothing else. The body attitude

displayed in it is characteristic of many insects, and is particularly evident in

the attitude of the embryo.

  Hysterical persons have a special tendency to develop muscular spasms in

parts of the organism that have an annular musculature, most notably the

throat and the anus. Embryologically, these two places correspond to the two

openings of the primal intestine.









Stomach

Yy

g:o:u::g@

Primitive Primitive

mouth-openi Arc de cercle

intestine

 
  In addition, annular musculature is found at the entrance to and exit from

the stomach. Spasms develop at these two openings which often have severe

consequences for one’s general condition. Those places of the body that are

especially disposed to continual contractions and biologically correspond to

very  primitive  stages  of  development  are  the  most  frequent  locations  of

spastic  disorders.  If  the  throat  and  the  anus  are  blocked,  the  orgastic

contraction becomes impossible. The somatic “holding back” is expressed in

an attitude that is the exact opposite of the orgasm reflex: the back is arched,

the neck stiff, the anus blocked, the chest forward, the shoulders tensed. The

hysterical arc de cercle is the exact opposite of the orgasm reflex and is the

prototype of the defense against sexuality.

  Every psychic impulse is functionally identical with a definite somaticexcitation. The view that the psychic apparatus functions solely by itself and

influences the somatic apparatus, which likewise functions by itself, cannot

be in keeping with the actual facts. A leap from the psychic to the somatic is

not conceivable, for the presupposition of two separate realms does not apply

here. Nor can the content of a psychic function, such as the idea of hitting

somebody,  induce  somatic  expression,  unless  it  is  itself  already  the

expression of a vegetative impulse to move. How an idea originates from a

vegetative impulse is one of the most difficult questions of psychology. On

the basis of clinical experiences, it is clear that the somatic symptom, as well

as the unconscious psychic idea, is a sequel of a contradictory vegetative

innervation. This is not at variance with the fact that the somatic symptom

can be eliminated by making its psychic meaning conscious, for any change

in the sphere of psychic ideas must of necessity be functionally identical with

changes of vegetative excitation. Thus, it is not solely the making conscious

of an unconscious idea that cures, but the modification brought about by the

excitation.

  Hence, we have the following sequence of functions when an idea in the

psychic realm exerts an influence on the soma:

  1.  The  psychic  excitation  is  functionally  identical  with  the  somatic

excitation.

  2. The fixation of a psychic excitation is produced by the establishment of

a specific state of vegetative innervation.

  3. The altered vegetative state changes the functioning of the organ.

  4. The “psychic meaning of the organic symptom” is nothing other than

the somatic attitude in which the “psychic meaning” is expressed. Psychic

reserve expresses itself in vegetative rigidity. Psychic hatred expresses itself

in a definite vegetative attitude of hate. They are inseparable and identical.

  5. The fixed vegetative state has a repercussive effect on the psychic state.

The  perception  of  a  real  danger  functions  identically  with  a

sympatheticotonic  innervation.  This,  in  turn,  intensifies  the  anxiety.  Theintensified anxiety requires an armoring, which is synonymous with a binding

of vegetative energy in the muscular armor. This armoring, in turn, disturbs

the possibility of discharge and increases the tension, etc.

    Bioenergetically,  the  psyche  and  the  soma  function  as  a  mutually

conditioning as well as a unitary system.

  Let us use a specific clinical case to make this clearer.

  A  female  patient  who  was  exceptionally  pretty  and  sexually  attractive

complained about feelings of being ugly, because she did not feel her body as

a unified whole. She described her condition as follows: “Every part of my

body goes its own way. My legs are here and my head is there, and I never

quite know where my hands are. I don’t have my body together.” In short,

she suffered from the well-known disturbance of self-perception, which is

especially  pronounced  in  schizoid  depersonalization.  During  the

vegetotherapeutic work, the various functions of the muscular attitudes of her

face demonstrated a very peculiar relationship. Right at the beginning of the

treatment,  the  “indifference”  of  her  facial  expression  was  conspicuous.

Gradually, the expression of indifference became so strong that the patient

began to suffer from it quite noticeably. When spoken to, even about serious

matters, she always stared into a corner of the room or out of the window,

with an expression of indifference on her face. At those times, her eyes had

an  empty,  “lost”  look.  After  this  expression  of  indifference  had  been

thoroughly analyzed and eliminated, another trait appeared in her face, only

intimations of which had been visible before. The region of her mouth and

chin were “vicious,” while her eyes and forehead were “dead.” These words

reflected the patient’s inner feelings. To begin with, I separated the attitude

expressed in her mouth and chin. In the course of this work, increasingly

strong  reactions  of  a  previously  suppressed  fierce  desire  to  bite  became

manifest.  She  had  developed  these  impulses  toward  her  husband  and  her

father, but had not allowed them to be expressed. The impulses of anger

expressed  in  the  attitude  of  her  chin  and  mouth  had  been  previouslycamouflaged by an attitude of indifference in her face as a whole; and it was

the elimination of this indifference that brought to light the angry expression

of her mouth. The indifference had the function of keeping the patient from

being continually at the mercy of the tormenting sensation of hate around her

mouth.  After  treating  the  region  of  her  mouth  for  about  two  weeks,  the

malicious expression disappeared completely in connection with the working

out  of  the  patient’s  very  strong  reaction  of  disappointment.  One  of  her

character traits was the compulsion to continually demand love. She would

become angry when her impossible demands were not gratified. After the

attitude of her mouth and chin had been dissolved, preorgastic contractions

appeared  in  her  whole  body,  at  first  in  the  form  of  serpentine,  wavelike

movements which also included the pelvis. However, genital excitation was

inhibited at a definite place. In the search for the inhibiting mechanism, the

expression of her forehead and eyes gradually became very pronounced. It

became an expression of vicious, observant, critical, and attentive staring.

With that, the patient realized she had constantly “to be on guard” and she

had never been capable of “losing her head.”

  The emergence and coming into focus of somatic vegetative impulses is

no doubt the strangest phenomenon we encounter in vegetotherapy. It is very

difficult to describe; it has to be clinically experienced. Thus, the “dead”

forehead had concealed the “critical forehead.” The next thing was to find out

what  function  the  “critical,”  malicious  forehead  had.  The  analysis  of  the

details of the function of her genital excitation revealed that her forehead paid

strict  “attention  to  what  her  genital  was  doing.”  Historically,  the  severe

expression of her eyes and forehead was derived from an identification with

her very moralistic and ascetically oriented father. Already at a very early

age, her father had continually impressed upon her that it was dangerous to

give  in  to  sexual  desires;  more  than  anything  else,  he  had  depicted  the

ravages of the body produced by syphilis. Thus, her forehead stood guard in

place of her father when she wanted to give in to a sexual impulse. Theinterpretation that she identified with her father was in no way sufficient. The

most  important  question  was  why  she  had  carried  out  this  identification

precisely on the forehead and what maintained the function. We have to make

a clear distinction between the historical explanation of a function and its

contemporary dynamic explanation. These are two entirely different things.

We do not eliminate a somatic symptom merely by making it historically

comprehensible.  We  cannot  get  along  without  the  knowledge  of  the

contemporary  function  of  the  symptom.  (Not  to  be  confused  with  the

“contemporary conflict”!) The derivation of the attentiveness of her forehead

from her infantile identification with her critical father would not have had

the slightest effect upon the orgastic disturbance. The subsequent course of

this patient’s treatment proved the correctness of this view; to the same extent

to which the observant and critical expression replaced the dead expression,

the  total  defense  in  the  genital  region  became  intensified.  Gradually,  the

severe expression alternated with a cheerful, somewhat childlike expression

of her forehead and eyes. Thus, one time she was in accord with her genital

desire;  another  time  she  was  critical  and  adverse  toward  it.  With  the

replacement of the critical attitude of her forehead by the cheerful attitude,

the inhibition of genital excitation also disappeared.

  I have presented this case in such detail because it is characteristic of a

number of disturbances of the tension-charge process in the genital apparatus.

“Keep your wits about you” is a widespread attitude.

  Our  patient  suffered  from  the  sensation  of  having  a  divided,  non-

integrated, non-unified body. Hence, she also lacked the consciousness and

sensation of her sexual and vegetative gracefulness. How is it possible that an

organism  which  constitutes  a  unified  whole  can  “fall  to  pieces”  in  its

perception?  The  term  “depersonalization”  indicates  nothing,  for  it  itself

requires explanation. What we must ask ourselves is how it is possible for

parts of the organism to function by themselves, independent of the total

organism. Psychological explanations do not help us here, for in its emotionalfunction the psyche is completely dependent upon the functions of expansion

and  contraction  of  the  autonomic  nervous  system.  Its  structure  is  non-

homogeneous. Experimentation and clinical evidence show that the tension-

charge process can comprise the entire body, as well as individual groups of

organs. It is possible for the vegetative apparatus to be parasympathetic in the

upper abdomen and sympathetic, hypertonic in the lower abdomen. It is also

possible for it to create tension in the muscles of the shoulders, while causing

a relaxation or even flaccidity in the legs. And the vegetative apparatus is

capable of doing this simply because it is not a homogeneous apparatus. In

sexual activity, the zone of the mouth can be excited, while the genitals are

completely unexcited or even adverse to the sexual activity. Or the reverse of

this could be the case. On the basis of these clinical facts, we have sound

criteria for determining whether a function is “healthy” or “sick” in terms of

sex-economy. The capacity of the vegetative organism to participate in the

tension-charge function in a unified and total way is undoubtedly the basic

characteristic of psychic and vegetative health. On the other hand, we have to

describe as pathological the exclusion of individual organs or even groups of

organs from the totality and unity of the vegetative tension-charge function,

when it is chronic and continually disturbs the total function.

  Clinical observation further teaches us that disturbances of self-perception

do not really disappear until the orgasm reflex has been fully developed into a

unified whole. Then it is as if all organs and organ systems of the body are

integrated  by  a  single  function,  with  respect  to  contraction  as  well  as

expansion.

  Thus, depersonalization becomes understandable as a lack of charge, i.e.,

as a disturbance of the vegetative innervation of individual organs or organ

systems (e.g., the fingertips, the arms, the head, the legs, the genitals, etc.).

The lack of unity in self-perception is also caused by the fact that the current

of  excitation  in  the  body  is  interrupted  in  one  place  or  another.  This  is

especially true of two regions of the body. One is the neck which, when it isspastic, blocks the excitation wave in its path from the chest to the head; the

other is the musculature of the pelvis which, when it is contracted, disturbs

the course of the excitation from the abdomen to the genitals and the legs.

  On the basis of psychoanalytic research, we understand the individual

history of a neurosis, the external conditions of its genesis, the inner motive

of the psychic conflict, and, finally, the consequences of sexual repression,

e.g.,  neurotic  symptoms  and  character  traits.  However,  psychoanalytic

research does not enable us to comprehend the mechanism by which a child’s

fate, an external trauma or an internal psychic conflict, chronically retains a

pathological reaction.

  We  see  women  living  under  the  best  external  sexual  and  economic

conditions and nonetheless holding on to their neuroses. We see children of

all  economic  strata,  occasionally  living  under  favorable  sex-economic

conditions, who not only become neurotic but remain neurotic. Moreover, we

witness  the  hitherto  mystically  conceived  and  represented  “repetition

compulsion,”  i.e.,  the  compulsion  of  so  many  people  to  continually  put

themselves  in  detrimental  situations.  None  of  these  phenomena  can  be

explained on the basis of previous views.

  The most impressive evidence of the tendency to hold on to a neurosis is

seen  at  the  end  of  treatment,  when  the  attempt  is  made  to  establish  the

capacity  for  orgastic  surrender.  Precisely  at  that  point,  when  the  patient

should be on the verge of health, the worst possible reactions set in against it.

The  patients  are  dominated  by  a  fear  of  pleasure,  which  is  diametrically

opposed to the pleasure principle of life.

  The  fear  of  punishment  for  sexual  activities,  which  the  patient

experiences as a child, becomes chronically anchored in the form of pleasure

anxiety.  We  recall  that,  when  its  course  is  inhibited,  pleasure  has  the

characteristic of turning into unpleasure. When, in spite of continual very

high  sexual  excitation,  a  person  is  not  capable  of  experiencing  final

gratification, a fear eventually develops not only of the final gratification, butalso of the excitation which precedes it. The pleasurable excitation process

itself becomes a source of unpleasure. The normal sensation of pleasure is

inhibited by a muscular spasm which can become extremely painful, quite

apart from the fact that it increases the stasis. It is the fixation of a condition

of physiological spasm in the genitals that causes children and adolescents to

reject sexual activity. This fixation causes every pleasurable excitation to be

converted  into  its  opposite,  no  matter  how  correct  one’s  intellectual  and

emotional  attitude  might  be.  Also  connected  with  this  spastic  state  is  the

inability to endure even mild excitations. It is in the function of the muscular

spasm  during  the  intensification  of  pleasure  that  we  must  look  for  the

structural  and  physiological  basis  of  characterological  resignation  and

modesty.

  Thus, psychopathological conditions and symptoms are the results of a

disturbance  of  the  vegetative  (sex-economic)  regulation  of  energy.  Every

impairment of total somatic sensation simultaneously affects self-confidence

and the unity of body feeling. At the same time, these impairments urge the

body  to  make  compensations.  The  feeling  of  vegetative  integrity,  which

becomes the natural and optimal basis of strong self-confidence, is disturbed

in  all  neurotics.  This  is  expressed  in  the  most  varied  forms,  including  a

complete  splitting  of  the  personality.  Between  the  simplest  sensations  of

being cold or stiff on one hand, and schizophrenic splitting, contactlessness,

and  depersonalization  on  the  other,  there  are  no  principle  but  merely

quantitative differences, which are also expressed qualitatively. The sensation

of integrity is connected with the sensation of having an immediate contact

with  the  world.  The  unification  of  the  orgasm  reflex  also  restores  the

sensations of depth and seriousness. The patients remember the time in their

early childhood when the unity of their body sensation was not disturbed.

Seized with emotion, they tell of the time as children when they felt at one

with  nature,  with  everything  that  surrounded  them,  of  the  time  they  felt

“alive,”  and  how  finally  all  this  had  been  shattered  and  crushed  by  theireducation.  In  the  disruption  of  the  unity  of  body  feeling  by  sexual

suppression, and in the continual longing to re-establish contact with oneself

and with the world, lies the root of all sex-negating religions. “God” is the

mysticized idea of the vegetative harmony between self and nature. From this

viewpoint,  religion  can  be  reconciled  with  natural  science  only  if  God

personifies the natural laws and man is included in the natural process.

  I must leave it to others more versed in Indian and Chinese culture to

trace  the  connections  in  detail.  The  clinical  findings  I  have  attempted  to

describe here open a wide perspective for the understanding of those human

cultures  in  which  strict  familial  patriarchy,  the  most  severe  sexual

suppression of small children and adolescents, and the ideology of reserve

and “self-control” are part and parcel of all cultural circles. This is especially

true of the cultures of India, China, and Japan. When a strict, sex-negating

patriarchy  wants  to  reproduce  itself,  it  must  severely  suppress  the  sexual

impulses of children. This results in acute anxiety and anger, both of which

are detrimental to the culture of the patriarchal family and necessitate the

ideology of self-control, the power not to move a muscle no matter how great

the pain; indeed, they necessitate the overcoming of emotionality altogether,

pleasure as well as suffering. This is the essence of the Buddhist ideology of

Nirvana. This ideology also provides an insight into the breathing exercises

of the Yogas. The breathing technique taught by Yogas is the exact opposite

of  the  breathing  technique  we  use  to  reactivate  the  vegetative  emotional

excitations  in  our  patients.  The  aim  of  the  Yoga  breathing  exercise  is  to

combat affective impulses; its aim is to obtain peace. The rite is reminiscent

of the ambiguity of compulsive actions. The counterpart of the longing for

Nirvana is, as I have been told, the act of putting oneself into a state of

tranquility, indeed ecstasy, by means of a definite breathing technique. The

masklike, rigid facial expression of the typical Indian, Chinese, and Japanese

finds its extreme antipode in the capacity for intoxicated ecstasy. That the

Yoga technique was able to spread to Europe and America is ascribable to thefact that the people of these cultures seek a means of gaining control over

their  natural  vegetative  impulses  and  at  the  same  time  of  eliminating

conditions of anxiety. They are not that far from an inkling of the orgastic

function of life.

  Very briefly, I want to allude to another phenomenon here which plays a

destructive role in our present-day social life: namely, the “military attitude,”

especially  as  it  is  prescribed  and  carried  out  by  the  fascists.  The  “rigid

military attitude” is the exact opposite of the natural, loose, agile attitude. The

neck has to be rigid, the head stretched forward; the eyes have to stare rigidly

straight ahead; the chin and mouth have to have a “manly” expression; the

chest has to be thrust out; the arms have to be held closely and rigidly against

the  body;  the  hands  have  to  be  stretched  along  the  crease  of  the  pants.

Doubtlessly, the most important indication of the sexually suppressive intent

of this military technique is the proverbial command: stomach in, chest out.

The legs are stiff and rigid. Picture, if you will, the position of patients who

are struggling with and are making every effort to control affective impulses.

Their shoulders are hard, their necks tense, their abdomens sucked in, their

pelvises retracted, arms held rigidly against their bodies, their legs rigidly

stretched. Indeed, the identity goes further: the stretching of the ankles is a

typical clinical indication of the artificial control of affects. It is also a strict

requirement of the Prussian goose step. People who are brought up in such a

way, and are forced to retain this physical attitude, are incapable of natural

vegetative  impulses.  They  become  machines,  blindly  carrying  out

mechanized manual exercises; obediently snapping out, “Yes, sir, Captain”;

mechanically shooting their own brothers, fathers, mothers, sisters. Bringing

people up to assume a rigid, unnatural attitude is one of the most essential

means used by a dictatorial social system to produce will-less, automatically

functioning organisms. This kind of upbringing is not confined to individuals;

it is a problem which pertains to the core of the structure and formation of

modern man’s character. It affects large cultural circles, and destroys the joyof  life  and  capacity  for  happiness  in  millions  upon  millions  of  men  and

women. Thus, we see a single thread stretching from the childhood practice

of holding the breath in order not to have to masturbate, to the muscular

block  of  our  patients,  to  the  stiff  posturing  of  militarists,  and  to  the

destructive artificial techniques of self-control of entire cultural circles.

  I have to content myself with this sketch. There can be no doubt that the

importance of the attitude of the body for the structural reproduction of the

social order will one day be understood and practically mastered on a large

scale.

  As intensely as they long for vegetative liveliness and freedom, children

shrink from it and voluntarily suppress their impulses when they do not find a

congenial environment in which to live out their fresh vitality relatively free

of conflicts. It is one of the great secrets of mass psychology that the average

adult, the average child, and the average adolescent are far more prone to

resign themselves to the absence of happiness than to continue to struggle for

the joy of life, when the latter entails too much pain. Thus, until the psychic

and social preconditions necessary for vital life have been understood and

established, the ideology of happiness must remain mere verbalization.

  No purpose is served when “rebellious characters” rail against education.

What we need is:

  1. The most precise understanding of the mechanisms by which emotions

are pathologically controlled.

  2. The gathering of the widest possible experience in practical work with

children to discover what attitude the children themselves take toward their

natural impulses under the existing conditions.

  3. The working out of the educational conditions necessary to establish a

harmony between vegetative motility and sociality.

  4. The creation of the general socio-economic foundation for the above.

  Man  has  made  enormous  progress  in  the  construction  and  control  of

machines. It is hardly forty years since he began to comprehend himself.Unless he can develop the capacity to regulate his own biological energy, it

will not be possible to master the psychic plague that is laying waste our

century. The path of scientific research and mastery of life’s problems is long

and arduous; it is the exact opposite of the ignorance and impertinence of

politicians. We have reason to hope that science will one day succeed in

utilizing biological energy as it now does electricity. Not until then will the

human psychic plague meet its master.


6. TYPICAL PSYCHOSOMATIC DISEASES: RESULTS OF CHRONIC SYMPATHETICOTONIA


We now have sufficient information about the nature of sympatheticotonia to

take a cursory look at a number of organic diseases which owe their existence

to  man’s  orgastic  impotence.  Orgasm  anxiety  produces  chronic

sympatheticotonia; this, in turn, produces orgastic impotence, which, for its

part, reinforces the sympatheticotonia. Its basic characteristic is the chronic

inspiratory attitude of inhalation of the thorax and the curtailment of full

(parasympathetic) exhalation. Essentially, the sympatheticotonic inspiratory

attitude has the function of blocking the organ sensations and affects that

normal exhalation would provoke.

  The following malfunctionings result from the chronic attitude of anxiety.


1. Cardiovascular Hypertension

  The peripheral blood vessels are chronically contracted and thus restricted

in  their  pulsatory  movement.  This  means  that  the  heart  is  continually

overexerted, having to pump blood through rigid blood vessels. Tachycardia,

high  blood  pressure,  and  feelings  of  constriction  in  the  chest  are  also

symptoms of hyperthyroidism. Of importance in this connection is the extent

to which the disturbance of the thyroid function is primary and the extent to

which  it  is  only  a  secondary  symptom  of  general  sympatheticotonia.

Arteriosclerosis, a disease in which there is a calcification of the walls of the

blood vessels, is also found with surprising frequency in people who havesuffered from functional hypertension for many years. It is quite likely that

even valvular disease and other forms of organic heart disease represent a

reaction of the organism to chronic hypertension of the vascular system.


2. Muscular Rheumatism

  In the long run, the chronic attitude of inhalation is not enough to master

the bioenergetic excitations of the autonomic life system. It is reinforced by

chronic muscular tension, i.e., the muscular armor. If hypertonicity of the

musculature continues for years and decades, it leads to chronic contracture

and to rheumatic nodules as a result of the depositing of solid substances in

the muscle bundles. In this last stage, the rheumatic process is no longer

reversible.  It  is  conspicuous  in  the  vegetotherapy  of  rheumatism  that  it

typically takes hold of those muscle groups which play an essential part in the

suppression  of  the  affects  and  organ  sensations.  Muscular  rheumatism  is

particularly  common  in  the  musculature  of  the  neck  (“stiff-necked,”

obstinate) and between the shoulder blades, where the pulling back of the

shoulders gives the impression, from the viewpoint of character analysis, of

“self-control” and “holding back.” This illness usually involves the two thick

muscles  of  the  neck  which  run  from  the  occiput  to  the  clavicle  (Mm.

sternocleidomastoidei). These muscles become chronically hypertonic when

anger is unconsciously and continuously suppressed. A rheumatic patient hit

upon the descriptive term of “spite muscles” for these muscle groups. Added

to these is the chronic spasm of the masseters, which gives the lower half of

the face an obstinate and sullen expression.

  Especially affected in the lower part of the body are those muscles which

retract  the  pelvis  and  thus  produce  a  lordosis.  We  already  know  that  the

chronic  retraction  of  the  pelvis  has  the  function  of  suppressing  genital

excitation. Lumbago requires detailed investigation in this connection. It is

found very frequently in patients whose buttocks musculature is in a state of

chronic tension which holds back anal sensations. Another muscle group in

which  we  frequently  find  muscular  rheumatism  comprises  the  deep  andsuperficial  adductors  of  the  upper  thighs,  which  keep  the  legs  pressed

together. They have the function, especially in women, of suppressing genital

excitation. In vegetotherapeutic work, we have adopted the term “morality

muscles” to describe them. The Viennese anatomist Julius Tandler jokingly

referred to them as custodes virginitatis (“guardians of virginity”). In people

suffering from muscular rheumatism, but also in an extremely large number

of  character  neurotics,  these  muscle  groups  can  be  palpated  as  thick,

chronically tense, sensitive bulges located on the inner sides of the upper part

of the thighs. Also a part of this group are the muscles which, as flexors of

the knee joints, run from the lower pelvic bone to the upper end of the tibia.

They become chronically contracted when the organ sensations of the pelvic

floor are suppressed.

  The large anterior chest muscles (pectorales) are in a state of chronic

tension and stand out rigidly when the attitude of inhalation is chronically

fixated. Intercostal neuralgias can be traced to this disturbance and overcome

by relieving the muscular tension.


3. Pulmonary Emphysema

  We  have  every  reason  to  assume  that  pulmonary  emphysema,

characterized  by  the  barrel-form  of  the  air-filled  thorax,  is  a  result  of  a

chronic and extreme attitude of inspiration. It must be borne in mind that any

chronic fixation of a certain attitude impairs the elasticity of the tissues; this

is the case in emphysema with respect to the elastic fibers of the bronchi.


4. Nervous Bronchial Asthma

  Its connections with sympatheticotonia are not yet clear.


5. Peptic Ulcer

    According to the table here, chronic sympatheticotonia is accompanied by

a surplus of acidity. This can be seen in gastric hyperacidity. Alkalization is

reduced. The mucous membrane of the stomach is exposed to the effect ofthe acid. Typically, the peptic ulcer is located approximately in the middle of

the  posterior  wall  of  the  stomach,  in  front  of  the  pancreas  and  the  solar

plexus. There is every indication that in sympatheticotonia the autonomic

nerves at the posterior wall retract, thus reducing the resistance of the mucous

membrane to the attack of the acid. Peptic ulcer as the byproduct of a chronic

affective disturbance is so frequent that there can no longer be any doubt as

to its psychosomatic nature.


6. Spasms of Annular Muscles

  a. Spastic attacks at the entrance to the stomach, cardiospasm, and at the

exit of the stomach, pylorospasm.

  b. Chronic constipation, as a result of the cessation or reduction of the

tension-charge function in the intestines. It is always accompanied by general

sympatheticotonia and a chronic inspiratory attitude. It is one of the most

widespread chronic diseases.

  c. Hemorrhoids, as a result of a chronic spasm of the anal sphincter. The

blood in the veins peripheral to the spastic anal sphincter is mechanically

dammed up, causing the vessel walls to dilate.

  d.  Vaginismus,  as  the  expression  of  a  contraction  of  the  annular

musculature of the vagina.


7. Blood Diseases

  In his well-known work, Die Lebensnerven, Müller describes a number of

blood  diseases,  such  as  chlorosis  and  other  forms  of  anemia,  as

sympatheticotonic diseases.


8. Excess of Carbon Dioxide in the Blood and Tissues

  On the basis of Warburg’s pioneer work on tissue asphyxiation in cancer

(CO excess), it has become clear that the chronic restriction of exhalation
  2

due to sympatheticotonia represents an essential element of the disposition to

cancer. The reduced external respiration results in a poor internal respiration.Organs  whose  respiration  is  chronically  impaired  and  bioenergetic  charge

reduced are more susceptible to cancer-producing stimuli than organs with

good  respiration.  The  connection  between  the  expiratory  inhibition  of

sympatheticotonic  character  neurotics  and  the  respiratory  disturbance  of

cancerous organs discovered by Warburg became the point of departure for

the sex-economic study of cancer. However, we cannot pursue this subject

any further here. Only the extremely important fact that cancer in women

predominantly affects the genital organs belongs in the context of this book.

  It goes without saying that this summary is in no way intended to take the

place of the necessary detailed investigation that no one person could ever

accomplish.  Such  an  investigation  requires  the  cooperation  of  many

physicians  and  scientists.  It  has  merely  been  my  intent  to  indicate  an

important field of organ pathology, which is closely related to the subject of

the function of the orgasm; to emphasize hitherto overlooked connections; to

appeal  to  the  conscience  of  the  medical  profession  to  take  the  sexual

disturbances of men and women as seriously as they deserve; and to impress

upon medical students the necessity of studying the theory of the orgasm and

general sexology correctly, to enable them to meet the tremendous need of

the population. The medical man must be careful not to confine himself to the

microscopic slide, but to correlate what he sees in the microscope with the

autonomic life function of the total organism. He should master this total

function  in  its  biological  and  psychic  components  and  realize  that  the

influence exerted by society on the tension-charge function of the organism

and its organs has a decisive influence on the health or sickness of those

whom he has in his care. Psychosomatic medicine, today the special province

of enthusiasts and specialists, could soon be what it promises to become: the

general framework for the medicine of the future. 

T

Disturbance of the function of tension and charge

!

Chronic inspiratory affitude
Pleasure anxiety
Chronic sympatheticotonia

/\

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

“Psyehic distrbances” “Somatic disturbances”
Impotence and frigidity Disposition to concer (CO;-excess)
Symptom neurass Cordiovoscular hypertension
Choracter neurosis Hyperthyroidism
Perversion Enphyseno
Piychopothy Rheumatism
Preudo-ebility Corstipotion, hemorr
Paychosis Generol distrbonce of vegetotive
Neurotic crininality eqilibrion

Chorea

Eilepsy

Roynoud's disecse

Chlorosis

Peptic ulcer

Tie

Obesity
Diagram depicting the social causation of diseases through the disturbance of the tension-charge

function


  It is quite evident that this general framework cannot be safeguarded if

the sexual function of the living organism continues to be confused with the

pathological expressions of neurotic men and women and the pornographic

industry.                                      CHAPTER IX





    FROM PSYCHOANALYSIS TO BIOGENESIS




            1. THE BIOELECTRIC FUNCTION OF PLEASURE AND ANXIETY


Until 1934, I had applied my clinical theory, which had been obtained in the

field of sex-economy, only to the general field of biophysiology. This was by

no means a culmination of the work. On the contrary, now more than ever, it

seemed absolutely necessary to provide experimental proof of the correctness

of  the  orgasm  formula.  In  the  summer  of  1934,  the  director  of  the

Psychological Institute of the University of Oslo, Dr. Schjelderup, came to

Denmark to participate in a course in this new field which I was giving to

Scandinavian,  German,  and  Austrian  colleagues.  He  wanted  to  learn  the

technique  of  character  analysis,  but  was  unable  to  continue  the  work  in

Denmark; thus I accepted his suggestion that I continue my experiments at

the Institute in Oslo. In Oslo I taught character analysis and, as recompense

for  this,  I  was  given  the  opportunity  to  carry  out  the  physiological

experiments I had planned.

  I realized that in the beginning I would need the technical assistance of

specialists in each phase of the experiments. A preliminary discussion with

the assistant of the Physiological Institute of Oslo showed me I would have

no  trouble  reaching  an  understanding  with  the  expert  physiologists.  My

theory  sounded  plausible  to  him.  The  basic  question  was  whether  sexual

organs in a state of excitation would show an increase of bioelectric charge.

On the basis of my theoretical data, the physiologist sketched a plan for anapparatus. The magnitude of the phenomena to be measured was unknown.

Such experiments had never been carried out. Would the surface charges in

the  sexual  zone  be  one  thousandth  of  a  volt  or  one  half  a  volt?  The

physiological literature provided no clues to the answering of such questions.

Even the idea of a charge on the surface of the organism was not generally

known. When, in December 1934, I asked the director of a physiological

institute in London how the charge of the skin could be measured, he found

the question itself peculiar. Tarchanoff and Veraguth, even before the turn of

the  century,  had  discovered  the  “psychogalvanic  phenomenon,”  which

revealed that psychic excitations become manifest as potential oscillations on

the skin. However, sexual pleasure had never been measured.

  After considering the matter for several months, it was decided to build an

apparatus  consisting  of  a  chain  of  electron  tubes.  The  idea  was  that  the

electric  potential  of  the  body  would  disturb  the  steady  current  (“anode

current”) of the tubes, would be amplified by the apparatus, transmitted to an

electromagnetic  oscillograph,  and  made  visible  on  a  strip  of  paper  by

reflection from a mirror. The apparatus was ready in February 1935. Some of

my  Norwegian  friends  and  students  and  I  served  as  subjects  of  the

experiment.

  It  was  surprising  that  the  electrical  cardiac-action  curves  were

exceptionally  small  in  comparison  with  the  oscillations  of  the  surface

charges.  After  a  number  of  tentative  preliminary  experiments,  the  picture

became clear. I shall pass over the many details of trial and error and present

only the essential findings. The experiments were carried out over a period of

two years. I published the results in a monograph to which anyone interested

                                                                            1
in the technical arrangements and control experiments is referred.

  The entire surface of the organism constitutes a “porous membrane.” This

membrane exhibits an electric potential with respect to any part of the body

where  the  epidermis  has  been  abraded.  Under  normal  circumstances,  the

undamaged  skin  possesses  a  steady  or  basic  potential.  This  potentialrepresents  the  normal  biological  potential  of  the  body  surface.  It  is

symmetrical on both sides of the body and is approximately the same over the

entire surface of the body (cf., Fig. 2). It differs only slightly (10 to 20 mv)

from person to person. The steady potential appears on the electrogram as an

even, horizontal line. At regular intervals, the peaks of the electrocardiogram

are superimposed on the steady potential. The cardiac peaks correspond to a

change in the steady potential of the skin through the electrical pulsations

transmitted by the heart.

  There are certain parts of the surface where the reaction is fundamentally

different from the other surfaces of the skin. These are the erogenous zones:

the lips, mucous membrane of the anus, the nipples, the surface of the penis,

the mucous membrane of the vagina, the ear lobes, the tongue, the palms, and

—strangely enough—also the forehead. Their charge can be within the range

of the potential of the other parts of the skin, but they can also exhibit a much

higher  or  a  much  lower  steady  potential  than  the  ordinary  skin.  In

vegetatively alive, uninhibited men and women, the potential of one and the

same sexual zone is seldom constant. Oscillations of up to 50 mv and more

can be observed in the sexual zones. This is definitely in keeping with the

fact that the sexual zones are endowed with a high and extremely variable

intensity of sensation and capacity for excitation. Subjectively, the excitation

of the sexual zones is experienced as a streaming of current, an itching, a

surging, a feeling of soothing warmth or of “sweetness.” The areas of the skin

that are not specifically erogenous exhibit these characteristics to a far lesser

extent or not at all.

  Whereas skin ordinarily registers the amplitude of its biological charge in

a fairly undeviating horizontal line (cf. Fig. 1), the various potentials of the

erogenous  zones  exhibit  a  more  or  less  steeply  ascending  or  descending,

gentle  wavelike  line.  Let  us  call  this  steady  changing  of  the  potential

“wandering” or “drifting” (cf. Fig. 3).

  Insofar as it does not approximate the amplitude of the other parts, thepotential  of  the  erogenous  zone  drifts  i.e.,  it  increases  or  decreases.  The

ascent of the wavelike curve indicates an increase, its descent a decrease of

the  charge  at  the  surface. The  potential  at  an  erogenous  zone  does  not

increase unless a streaming sensation of pleasure is experienced at that zone.

For  instance,  a  nipple  can  become  erect  without  an  increase  in  potential

taking  place.  The  increase  in  the  potential  at  the  sexual  zone  is  always

accompanied  by  an  intensification  of  the  sensation  of  pleasure  and,

conversely,  a  decrease  of  the  potential  with  a  decline  of  the  pleasurable

sensation.

  These experimental findings confirm the tension-charge formula. They

indicate  that  the  congestion  or  tumescence  in  an  organ  is  not  in  itself

sufficient to transmit the vegetative sensation of pleasure. An increase in the

bioelectric charge has to be added to the mechanical congestion of the organ

to  make  the  process  perceptible  as  a  sensation  of  pleasure.  The  psychic

intensity  of  the  sensation  of  pleasure  corresponds  to  the  physiological

magnitude of the bioelectric potential.

  Control  experiments  on  non-living  matter  demonstrated  that  this  slow

organic drifting of the potential is a specific characteristic of living matter.

Non-living  material  does  not  react  to  “stimuli”  at  all,  or  it  reacts  like

electrically charged bodies, e.g., a flashlight, with predictably angular, erratic,

irregular fluctuations of potential (cf. Figs. 6 & 7).

  Let us call the potential that drifts upward the preorgastic potential. It is

different in the same sexual organ at various times. It is also different in the

same organ in different people. It corresponds to the preorgastic excitation or

current in the vegetatively active organ. The increase in charge is the organ’s

response to an agreeable stimulus.

  If  an  electrode  is  attached  to  an  erogenous  zone  evenly  and  without

pressure, and this zone is then tickled with a dry pledget of cotton, so that a

sensation  of  pleasure  is  produced,  the  potential  demonstrates  a  wavelike

oscillation,  the  so-called tickling phenomenon (cf., Fig.  K  to  *). Ticklingrepresents  a  variation  of  sexual  friction,  a  basic  life  phenomenon.  The

sensation  of  itching  also  belongs  here,  for  it  automatically  produces  the

impulse to scratch or rub. Both bear a relationship to sexual friction.

  From  our  clinical  experience  in  orgasmotherapy,  we  know  that  the

sensations of sexual pleasure cannot always be brought about consciously.

Nor can a bioelectric excitation be immediately produced in an erogenous

zone by means of pleasurable stimuli. It depends entirely upon the state of the

organ  whether  or  not  it  will  respond  with  excitation  to  a  stimulus.  This

peculiar feature has to be given strict attention in experimentation.

  The tickling phenomenon can be demonstrated on all parts of the surface

of the organism. It is absent when moistened, inorganic material is rubbed

with dry cotton. The positive ascending curve of the tickling oscillation is

usually steeper than the descending curve. The wavelike line of the tickling

phenomenon produced by a zone which is not specifically sexual is more or

less horizontal. In sexual zones, the tickling oscillation is superimposed on

the  wandering  electrical  excitation,  in  the  same  way  as  the  peaks  of  the

cardiac action.

  Pressure of any kind reduces the charge of the surface. If the pressure is

removed,  the  charge  returns  exactly  to  the  original  level.  Thus,  if  a

pleasurable upward drift of the potential is interrupted by pressure, there is a

sharp drop in the potential. If the pressure is removed, the drift continues at

the level at which it was interrupted (cf. Fig. 9).

  The level of increase of an electrical excitation in an erogenous zone is

dependent upon the softness of the stimulus—the gentler the stimulus, the

steeper  the  increase.  The  level  of  increase  is  also  dependent  upon  the

psychophysical readiness of the zone to respond to the stimulus. The greater

the readiness, the steeper, i.e., the more rapid, the increase.

  Whereas pleasurable stimuli always yield an increase of potential, stimuli

that  cause  anxiety  or  unpleasure  reduce  the  surface  charge  more  or  less

rapidly and steeply. Naturally, this reaction also depends upon the readinessof  the  organism  to  react. Affect-blocked  and  vegetatively  rigid  men  and

women, e.g., catatonics, produce no or only very weak reactions. In these

individuals, the biological excitation of the sexual zones lies within the range

of excitation of the remainder of the body surface. Thus, in investigating the

phenomena  of  electrical  oscillation,  it  is  necessary  to  select  persons

specifically  suited  for  this  type  of  experimentation.  Negating  reactions  of

anxiety  in  the  form  of  rapid  reduction  of  the  surface  charge  could  be

ascertained  in  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  vagina,  the  tongue,  and  the

palms. Unexpected fright, produced by screaming, the bursting of a balloon,

the stroke of a loud gong, are particularly well suited as stimuli.

  Like anxiety and pressure, vexation also causes the bioelectrical charge to

be  reduced  at  zones  capable  of  being  sexually  stimulated.  In  a  state  of

apprehension, all electrical reactions are reduced; increases in the positive

surface  charge  cannot  be  brought  about.  Reactions  of  anxiety  are  usually

easier to evoke than reactions of pleasure. Most significant are the reductions

of the charge in the case of fright (cf. Figs. 10 & 11).

  It is much more difficult to produce reactions of pleasure after a reaction

of  fright  has  occurred.  It  is  as  if  the  vegetative  system  had  become

“cautious.”

  A concentrated solution of sugar used as an electrode fluid on the tongue

produces a rapid increase in the potential of the tongue. If a salt solution is

applied immediately afterward, the potential drops in the opposite, negative

direction (cf. Figs. 12 & 13). If now sugar is again applied, an increase in the

potential is no longer achieved. The tongue is “cautious” or “disappointed.” If

sugar  alone  is  placed  on  the  tongue  of  a  subject  a  number  of  times  in

succession,  the  level  of  increase  in  potential  is  reduced  with  each  new

experiment.  It  is  as  if  the  tongue  had  become  “used  to”  the  agreeable

stimulus. Disappointed and habituated organs react sluggishly to pleasurable

stimuli.

  In its flaccid state, the male sexual organ reveals a much lower potentialthan other parts of the skin surface. If the root of the penis is squeezed, thus

producing a congestion of blood in it, no drift of the potential occurs. This

control experiment confirms that increased bioelectric charge at the surface is

brought  about  by  pleasurable  excitation  and  not  by  mere  mechanical

congestion.

  If, instead of direct attachment of the electrode to the sexual zone, an

indirect connection is used, the same phenomena are produced. If a male and

a female subject dip a finger of either hand in an electrode fluid which is

connected to an oscillograph, the touching of their lips in the act of kissing

produces a strong positive wandering potential. In short, the phenomenon is

independent of the locality to which the electrode is brought into contact with

the  skin.  If  one  of  the  subjects  of  the  experiment  performs  the  action

unwillingly, the same stimulus produces a descending reaction of unpleasure,

instead of an ascending reaction of pleasure. The same results are produced

when the two persons bring their free hands into contact with one another.

Gentle stroking yields positive oscillations. Pressure or strong rubbing of the

palms cause reductions in the charge.

  How is bioelectric energy transmitted from the vegetative center to the

vegetative periphery, and vice versa?

    According to the traditional view, the bioelectric energy moves along the

paths  of  the  nerve  fibers,  presupposing  that  the  nerve  fibers  are  non-

contractile. Thus far, however, all observations necessitate the assumption

that the syncytial vegetative plexuses are themselves contractile; i.e., they can

expand  and  contract.  Accordingly,  the  amoeba  continues  to  exist  in  all

animals, including man, in the form of the contractile autonomic nervous

system.  This  assumption  is  confirmed  microscopically.  For  example,

movements of expansion and contraction in small translucent worms can be

easily observed under the microscope. These movements of the autonomic

life apparatus take place independently of the movements of the total body,

and they precede them.  If the subject in an experiment is told to breathe in deeply, or to press as if

to  defecate,  and  the  differential  electrode  is  placed  at  the  middle  of  the

abdominal skin above the umbilicus, there is a more or less sharp decrease

in the surface potential in inhalation, which increases again in exhalation.

This result was repeatedly obtained in a large number of subjects. However,

it was not obtained in persons having a severe affect-block or a pronounced

muscular  rigidity.  This  finding,  added  to  the  clinical  observation  that

inhalation reduces affects, led to the following assumption:

  In  inhalation,  the  diaphragm  is  depressed  and  exerts  pressure  on  the

abdominal organs; it constricts the abdominal cavity. In exhalation, on the

other hand, the diaphragm is elevated; the pressure on the abdominal organs

is reduced and the abdominal cavity is thereby enlarged. In breathing, the

cavities of the chest and abdomen are alternately enlarged and constricted, a

fact which shall be considered elsewhere. Since pressure always lowers the

potential, there is nothing particularly remarkable about the lowering of the

potential of the skin in inspiration. What is remarkable is that the potential

decreases, although the pressure is exerted not on the surface of the skin, but

in the center of the organism.

  The  existence  of a  continuous  bioelectric  field  of  excitation  between

center and periphery is the only possible explanation for the fact that inner

pressure is manifested on the abdominal skin. The transmission of bioenergy

cannot be relegated solely to the nerve tracts; rather it follows the path of all

membranes and fluids of the organism. This ties in very well with our earlier

representation of the organism as a membranous bladder, and confirms the

theory of Fr. Kraus.

  This hypothesis received further confirmation when the investigation of a

number  of  emotionally  disturbed  patients  with  restricted  expiratory

movement showed minimal or no fluctuations in the charge of the abdominal

skin.

  Let us summarize these findings with reference to our basic problem.  It is only biological pleasure, accompanied by the sensation of current

and  sensualness,  that  produces  an  increase  in  the  bioelectric  charge.  All

other excitations, pain, fright, anxiety, pressure, vexation, depression, are

accompanied by a reduction of surface charge of the organism.

  There are basically four kinds of reduction of charge at the periphery of

the organism:

  a. A withdrawal of the surface charge prior to an intended strong charge.

This reaction is comparable to the suspended tension of a tiger on the verge

of leaping.

  b.  In  contrast  to  the  preorgastic  excitation,  the  orgastic  discharge

demonstrates  a  lowering  of  the  potential.  The  orgasm’s  bioelectric  curve

corresponds to the curve of the sensations.

  c. In a state of anxiety, the peripheral charge is lowered.

  d. In dying, the tissues lose their charge; we observe negative reactions.

The source of energy is extinguished.










ourface Charge

Increased Decreased
Pleasure of any kind Central tension before an action
Peripheral orgastic discharge
Aniety, vexation, pressure, unpleas
ute, depression
Death (extinction of the source of

i)

 
  Thus, sexual  excitation  is  functionally  identical  with  the  bioelectric

charge of the periphery of the organism. Freud’s concept of the libido as a

measure of psychic energy is no longer merely a simile. It refers to concrete

bioelectric  processes.  Sexual  excitation  alone  represents  bioelectric

functioning in the direction of the periphery (“from within outward”).

  Pleasure and anxiety are the two primal excitations or primal emotions of

living substance. Their bioelectric functioning aligns them, in principle, with

the general electrical phenomena of nature.

  Subjects in an experiment who are not emotionally disturbed and who are

capable of orgastic sensations, i.e., persons who are not emotionally cold, arecapable  of  stating  what  is  objectively  taking  place  at  the  apparatus  in  an

adjacent room on the basis of their subjective sensations in the process of

excitation. The  intensity  of  the  sensation  of  pleasure  corresponds  to  the

quantity  of  the  bioelectric  charge  at  the  surface,  and  vice  versa.  The

sensation  of  “being  cold,”  “being  dead,”  the  “contactlessness”  of  the

psychiatric patient, are expressions of a deficiency of bioelectric charge at the

periphery of the body.

  The tension-charge formula is valid. Biological excitation is a process

which, in addition to mechanical tumescence, also requires bioelectric charge.

Orgastic gratification is a bioelectric discharge, followed by a mechanical

detumescence.

  The biological process of expansion, illustrated by organ erection or the

extension  of  pseudopodia  in  the  amoeba,  is  the  overt  manifestation  of  a

movement  of  bioelectric  energy  from  the  center  to  the  periphery  of  the

organism. What moves here, in both the psychic as well as the somatic sense,

is the bioelectric charge itself.

  Since  only  vegetative  sensations  of  pleasure  are  accompanied  by  an

increase of the charge at the surface of the organism, pleasurable excitation

has to be regarded as the specifically productive process in the biological

system. All other affects, e.g., unpleasure, vexation, anxiety, pressure, are, in

terms of energy, opposed to this process and hence represent life-negating

functions. Thus, the process of sexual pleasure is the life process per se. This

is not a manner of speaking; it is an experimentally proven fact.

    Anxiety, as the basic direction opposed to that of sexuality, coincides with

the process of dying. It is not identical with dying, for the central source of

energy, the process of charge, is extinguished in dying. In anxiety, on the

other hand, the energy source in the center of the organism is dammed up,

owing to the withdrawal of excitation from the periphery, thus creating the

subjective sensation of constriction (angustiae).

  These  findings  provide  the  concept  of sex-economy  with  a  concrete,natural-scientific  meaning.  Sex-economy  refers  to  the  manner  in  which

bioelectric energy is regulated or, what is the same thing, to the regulation of

a person’s sexual energy. It refers to the way in which the individual deals

with his bioelectric energy, how much he dams up and how much of it he

discharges orgastically. Since the organism’s bioelectric energy is the basic

fact from which we have to proceed, we gain a new insight into the nature of

organic disease.

  From this point on, neuroses appear in a fundamentally different light

than they did in psychoanalysis. They are not solely the results of unresolved

psychic conflicts and infantile fixations. These fixations and psychic conflicts

cause fundamental disturbances in the regulation of bioelectric energy and,

in this way, become somatically anchored. For this reason, it is not possible,

nor  is  it  admissible,  to  separate  psychic  and  somatic  processes.  Psychic

disturbances are biological illnesses that are expressed in the somatic as well

as in the psychic realm. A deflection in the natural course of the biological

energy lies at the basis of these disturbances.

  Mind and body constitute a functional unity, having at the same time an

antithetical relationship. Both function on the basis of biological laws. The

modification of these laws is a result of social influences. The psychosomatic

structure is the result of the clash between social and biological functions.

  The  function  of  the  orgasm  becomes  the  yardstick  of  psychophysical

functioning, because the function of biological energy is expressed in it.


  2. THE THEORETICAL SOLUTION OF THE CONFLICT BETWEEN MECHANISM AND

                                        VITALISM


When it was established that the tension-charge formula was valid for all

involuntary functions of living substance, one was prompted to ask whether it

was also applicable to processes in non-living matter. Neither in the literature

of  physics  nor  in  conversations  with  physicists  could  references  to  an

inorganic function be found in which a mechanical tension (brought about bya filling with fluid) would lead to an electrical charge and culminate in an

electrical discharge and mechanical relaxation (emptying of fluid). While it is

true  that  all  the  physical  elements  of  the  formula  are  found  in  inorganic

nature, they are found only individually and not in the particular sequence in

which they appear in living matter. (For instance, we find mechanical tension

caused by filling, and relaxation brought about by emptying. We also find

electrical  charge  and  discharge.)  Thus,  it  seemed  quite  evident  that the

particular  combination  of  mechanical  and  electrical  functions  had  to  be

specific to living functioning.

  I was now in the position to make a significant contribution to the age-old

controversy between the vitalists and the mechanists. The vitalists had always

contended that nonliving matter is fundamentally different from living matter.

They  always  adduced  a  metaphysical  principle,  such  as  “entelechy,”  to

explain  living  functioning  per  se.  On  the  other  hand,  the  mechanists

contended  that,  physically  and  chemically,  living  matter  is  in  no  way

different  from  non-living  matter;  it  simply  had  not  yet  been  sufficiently

investigated.  Thus,  the  mechanists  denied  that  there  is  a  fundamental

difference between living and non-living matter. The tension-charge formula

was able to prove the correctness of both views, though in a manner different

than either would have thought.

  Living matter does indeed function on the basis of the same physical laws

as non-living matter, as the mechanists contended. At the same time, it is

fundamentally different from non-living matter, as the vitalists maintained. In

living matter, the functions of mechanics (tension-relaxation) and those of

electricity (charge-discharge) are combined in a way which is alien to non-

living matter. However, this difference in the functioning of living matter

cannot, as the vitalists believe, be traced back to a metaphysical principle

existing beyond matter and energy. Rather, it can be comprehended on the

basis of laws governing matter and energy. In its functioning, living matter is

simultaneously identical with and different from non-living matter.  It is to be expected that the vitalists and spiritualists will take issue with

this statement by pointing out that consciousness and self-perception are still

unexplained.  This  is  correct,  but  it  does  not  justify  the  assumption  of  a

metaphysical  principle.  Moreover,  consciousness  and  self-perception  can

anticipate a final clarification. The electrical experiments demonstrated that

the biological excitation of pleasure and the biological excitation of anxiety

are functionally identical with their perception. We are justified in assuming,

therefore, that even the most primitive organisms have organ sensations of

pleasure and anxiety.


      3. “BIOLOGICAL ENERGY” IS ATMOSPHERIC (COSMIC) ORGONE ENERGY


I have reached the end of the description of the orgasm theory. It is still in the

process  of  development.  The  results  of  the  bioelectric  experiments  left  a

number of difficult problems unsolved. Two peculiar facts revealed by the

following experiments cannot be explained within the framework of known

forms of energy. First:

  1. If the surface of the body is tickled close to an attached electrode which

is connected to an oscillograph, the tickling phenomenon is revealed as an

oscillation of the electrical potential of the skin.

  2. If  the  same  experiment  is  carried  out  with  a  moistened  cloth,  the

tickling phenomenon does not occur. Thus, a moistened cloth does not “live.”

  3. If, however, one places a hand on the moistened cloth, attaches the

electrodes at about 30 cm. distance from each other and “tickles” the cloth

with a dry pledget of cotton approximately 2 to 5 cm. away from the hand,

the tickling phenomenon is again demonstrated.

  To explain this, it could be readily pointed out that the phenomenon takes

place  because  the  body  is  connected  to  the  arrangement.  However,  this

explanation is not satisfactory.

  The tickling phenomenon on the skin could be explained on the basis of

the oscillations of bioelectric energy in the organism, oscillations producedby the body in response to the tickling stimulus. In the third experiment, this

reaction is relayed from within the boundaries of the organism to a region

outside  of  it,  namely  to  the  non-living,  moistened  cloth.  It  is  as  if  the

moistened cloth “lived” when it was touched by a living organism. The cloth

responded to the tickling stimulus in the same way as the living organism.

  The second fact revealed by the electrical experiments appears even more

significant.  Electromagnetic  energy  moves  at  the  speed  of  light,  i.e.,  at

approximately 186,000 miles per second. Observation of the nature of the

curves  and  the  time  measurements  which  characterize  the  movement  of

bioelectric  energy  demonstrate  that the  movement  of  bioelectric  energy  is

fundamentally  different  from  the  known  speed  and  type  of  movement  of

electromagnetic  energy.  Bioelectric  energy  moves  extremely  slowly,  at  a

speed measurable in millimeters per second. (The speed can be measured by

counting the number of cardiac peaks, cf. Fig. 8) The form of the movement

is slow and wavelike. It resembles the movements of an intestine or a snake.

The movement also corresponds to the slow surging of an organ sensation or

vegetative excitation. It could be maintained that it is the great resistance of

the  animal  tissues  that  slows  down  the  speed  of  the  organism’s  electric

energy. This explanation is unsatisfying. When an electric stimulus is applied

to the body, it is experienced immediately and responded to.

  In  an  unusual  way,  the  knowledge  of  the  biological  tension-charge

function led me to the discovery of energy processes in bions, in the human

organism, and in the radiation of the sun.

  In the summer of 1939, I published a short paper, Drei Versuche mit

Gummi  am  statischen  Elektroskop.  Rubber  and  cotton  exposed  to  a  bion

culture obtained from ocean sand produced a sharp deflection of the indicator

of a static electroscope. The same substances brought into contact with a

vegetatively  undisturbed  human  body,  particularly  in  the  region  of  the

abdomen  and  genitals,  for  approximately  fifteen  to  twenty  minutes,  will

similarly  influence  the  electroscope.  In  the  final  analysis,  the  sand  fromwhich the bions develop through heating and swelling is nothing other than

solidified solar energy. Now, the idea occurred to expose rubber and cotton to

bright  sunshine,  after  they  had  been  shown  to  be  indifferent  at  the

electroscope.  It  was  demonstrated  that  the  sun  emits  an  energy  which

influences rubber and cotton in the same manner in which it influences the

bion culture and the human organism after full respiration in a vegetatively

undisturbed state. I called this energy, which is capable of charging organic

matter, orgone.

  At this point, the investigation of the living organism went beyond the

boundaries  of  depth  psychology  and  physiology;  it  entered  unexplored

biological territory. For the past five years, the investigation of the bion has

absorbed  all  available  attention.  The  “bions”  are  microscopic  vesicles

charged  with  orgone  energy;  they  are  developed  from  inorganic  matter

through  heating  and  swelling.  They  propagate  like  bacteria.  They  also

develop spontaneously in the earth or, as in cancer, from decayed organic

matter.  My  book Die Bione,  1938,  shows  the  importance  of  the  tension-

charge formula for the experimental investigation of the natural organization

of living substance from non-living matter.

  Orgone  energy  is  also  demonstrable  visually,  thermically,  and

electroscopically,  in  the  soil,  in  the  atmosphere,  and  in  plant  and  animal

organisms.  The  flickering  of  the  sky,  which  some  physicists  ascribe  to

terrestrial magnetism, and the glimmering of stars on clear dry nights, are

direct expressions of the movement of the atmospheric orgone. The “electric

storms”  of  the  atmosphere  which  disturb  electrical  equipment  during

intensified sun-spot activity are, as can be experimentally demonstrated, an

effect of the atmospheric orgone energy. Previously, they had been tangible

only as disturbances of electrical currents.

  The  color  of  orgone  energy  is blue  or blue-gray.  In  our  laboratory,

atmospheric orgone is accumulated or concentrated by means of an apparatus

specifically constructed for this purpose. We succeeded in making it visibleby arranging certain materials in a specific way. The blocking of the orgone’s

kinetic energy is expressed as an increase in temperature. Its concentration or

density is indicated on the static electroscope by the differences in the speed

of the discharge. The spontaneous discharge of electroscopes in non-ionized

air, a phenomenon designated as “natural leak” by physicists, is the effect of

atmospheric  orgone  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  dampness.  The  orgone

contains  three  kinds  of  rays:  blue-gray,  foglike  vapors;  deep  blue-violet

expanding and contracting dots of light; and white-yellow, rapidly moving

rays  of  dots  and  streaks.  The  blue  color  of  the  sky  and  the  blue-gray  of

atmospheric  haze  on  hot  summer  days  are  direct  reflections  of  the

atmospheric orgone. The blue-gray, cloudlike Northern lights, the so-called

St. Elmo’s fire, and the bluish formations recently observed in the sky by

astronomers  during  increased  sun-spot  activity  are  also  manifestations  of

orgone energy.

  The hitherto misunderstood formations of clouds and thunderstorms are

dependent upon changes in the concentration of the atmospheric orgone. This

can  be  simply  demonstrated  by  measuring  the  speed  of  the  electroscopic

discharges.

  The living organism contains orgone energy in each one of its cells, and

continuously charges itself orgonotically from the atmosphere by means of

respiration.  The  “red”  blood  corpuscles  are  microscopic,  orgone-charged

vesicles having a blue glimmer; they carry biological energy from the surface

of the alveoli of the lungs to the body tissues. The chlorophyll of plants,

which  is  related  to  the  iron-containing  protein  of  animal  blood,  contains

orgone  and  absorbs  orgone  directly  from  the  atmosphere  and  from  solar

radiation.

  When magnified at more than 2000×, the existence of orgone energy in

cells and colloids can be demonstrated in the blue (blue-gray or blue-green)

coloration  of  the  protoplasm  and  in  the  content  of  organic  vesicles.  All

cooked  food  consists  of  blue,  orgone-containing  vesicles.  The  vesicles  ofhumus or of gonadal cells and energy vesicles or bions obtained through the

heating  and  swelling  of  inorganic  matter  also  contain  orgone.  Protozoa,

cancer  cells,  etc.,  also  consist  of  orgone-containing,  blue  energy  vesicles.

Orgone  has  a  parasympatheticotonic  effect  and  charges  living  tissue,

particularly the red blood corpuscles. It kills cancer cells and many kinds of

bacteria. Our experiments with cancer therapy are based on these biological

characteristics.

  Numerous observations by biologists (Meisenheimer, Linné, and others)

make it possible to understand the blue coloration of frogs in a state of sexual

excitation or the blue luminescence of plant buds as biological (orgonotic)

excitation  of  the  organism.  The  bion  cultures  obtained  from  sea  sand,  in

which I discovered orgone radiation in January 1939, had the same effect on

color film in complete darkness as sunlight; i.e., it made the film blue.

  The human organism is surrounded by an orgonotic energy field whose

range depends on the organism’s vegetative liveliness. Proof of this is simple.

The orgone excites organic substances, e.g., cellulose. Thus, placing a one-

foot-square cellulose plate about 3 to 5 cm. in front of a silver electrode,

which is connected to the grid of an oscillograph, we observe that movements

of  inorganic  substances  in  front  of  the  cellulose  do  not  produce  any

oscillation on the oscillograph, provided the inorganic material is moved in

such a way that no part of our organism moves in front of the plate. However,

if we move our finger or hand toward or away from the cellulose plate at a

distance  of  0.5  to  3  meters,  we  can,  without  establishing  any  metallic

connection, obtain lively deflections of the light or galvanometer indicator. If

we  remove  the  cellulose  plate,  the  effects  at  a  distance  are  reduced  to  a

minimum,  or  they  disappear  completely. In  contrast  to  electromagnetic

energy,  orgone  energy  is  capable  of  charging  non-conducting  organic

material.

  The second volume of this book will describe how bion research led to

the discovery of atmospheric orgone energy, how the existence of orgone canbe  objectively  demonstrated,  and  the  importance  of  its  discovery  for  the

understanding  of  biophysical  functioning.  However,  it  was  the  consistent

pursuit of the biological phenomenon of the orgasm that led to the discovery

of  the  orgone,  thus  to  the  cosmic  energy  which  has  a  specific  biological

effect.

  Having arrived at the conclusion of this book, the reader, like the author

himself, will not be able to avoid the impression that the study of the orgasm,

the stepchild of natural science, has led us deep into the secrets of nature. The

investigation of living matter went beyond the confines of depth psychology

and physiology and entered unexplored biological territory. Sexuality and the

living  process  became  identical,  and  a  new  avenue  of  approach  to  the

problem of biogenesis was opened. What was psychology became biophysics

and  a  part  of  genuine,  experimental  natural  science.  Its  core  remains,  as

always, the enigma of love, to which we owe our being. 
 
Amplifier and silver electrodes.-
-t’

0 Dm0 wm

g
Fig. 1. Average skin potential (skin of the abdomen, right and left). 
Fig. 2. Symmetrical normal potentials of a right and left palm.Fig. 3. “Wandering” of the potential of a palm.Fig. 4. Mucous membrane of the anus in a woman in a state of sexual excitation.Fig. 5. The same mucous membrane in a state of depression (menstruation). 
Fig. 6. Control experiment with wet towel. 
Fig. 7. Changes of potential produced by an electric flashlight. 
Fig. 8. Mucous membrane of the lip. K to * = tickling phenomenon. (The cardiac peal are visible at

regular intervals). 
Fig. 9. Mucous membrane of the tongue. a = wandering; b = tickling phenomenon; D = pressure. 
Fig. 10. x = reaction of vaginal mucous membrane to a stimulus of annoyance. 
Fig. 11. Tongue. K = tickling; E = fright.Fig. 12. Reaction of tongue to sugar (about + 70 MV; in this experiment, the first application of sugar

resulted in a reaction way out of the field: I, arrow).Fig. 13. Reaction of same tongue to salt (— 60 MV).Fig. 14. Excitation with a kiss (changes in the bio-electrical excitation of the lips, up to 40 MV).                                    NOTES






II: Peer Gynt

1. Cf. Reich, Der triebhafte Charakter, Internationaler Psychoanalystischer Verlag, 1925.


IV: The Development of the Orgasm Theory

1. Controversy still rages on this subject. Masters and Johnson are the most recent authorities to deny
that there is a distinction. Yet it would seem that the only true authority is the woman who has
  experienced both clitoral and vaginal orgasms. Invariably, she will insist that there is a distinct
  difference. [Editor]
2. Roger Du Teil did control work on the bion experiments at the University in Nice. [Editor]
3. The arabic figures in the text correspond to the arabic figures in the legend to the diagram.
4. Cf. Reich, The Sexual Revolution, 1973, The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality, 1971, and The
Mass Psychology of Fascism, 1970, all Farrar, Straus and Giroux.


V: The Development of the Character Analytic Technique

1.  Carl  M.  Herold  underestimated  the  difference  between  character  analysis  and  psychoanalytic
technique when he described them as being merely technical finesses instead of a fundamental
  theoretical nature. (“A Controversy about Technique,” The Psychoanalytic Quarterly, Vol. VIII,
  1939, No. 2.) However, the following argument is correct:
    “We often hear raised at this point in the controversy the objection that all this is not new and is
  practiced by every good analyst. This is a very elegant way of suggesting modestly that one is a
really good analyst but it leaves unanswered the question why these really good analysts did not
  trouble themselves to state these things with such clarity, especially as they should have known that,
among the younger analysts, there was a keen desire for such technical advice. This desire must
  indeed have been very strong, judging from the eagerness with which Reich’s book and ideas were
  absorbed by the younger German analysts. They had been stuffed with complicated theories but
given very few cues as to how to use them in practice. Reich offered a clear summing up of the
  theoretical aspects of the practical situation in which a young analyst finds himself, not elaborate
  enough perhaps to include all the intricate details, but simple enough to be readily usable in practical
  work.”
2. The special article I wrote about these two types was published in the psychoanalytic journal and was
well received by psychoanalysts. In 1933, it was incorporated into my book Character Analysis.
3. I gave a thorough presentation of the problem of sexual reform in my book The Sexual Revolution
  [1936]. It is, therefore, not discussed in the present volume.VI: An Abortive Biological Revolution

1. The term is used here in its vernacular meaning. In reality, Epicurus and his school have, apart from
the name, nothing in common with the so-called epicurean philosophy of life. Epicurus’ serious
natural philosophy was misconstrued by the half-educated and uneducated masses of people. It was
taken to mean the gratification of secondary impulses. There is no way of defending oneself against
such falsifications of true ideas. Sex-economy is threatened with the same fate by those who suffer
from pleasure anxiety and by a science which fears sexuality.
2. Cf. Lewis Morgan, Ancient Society.
3. Cf. Reich, Dialektischer Materialismus und Psychoanalyse, “Unter dem Banner des Marxismus,”
  1929.
4. He who has Science and has Art, Religion, too, has he; /Who has not Science, has not Art, Let him
  religious be!—Goethe. (From the translation of Das Unbehagen in der Kultur by Joan Riviere.)
5. Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents, translated from the German by James Strachey.
New York: Norton & Company, 1962.
6. Ibid. [Italics are Reich’s.]
7. Cf. Reich, Geschlechtsreife, Enthaltsamkeit, Ehemoral, Münsterverlag, 1930. Part I of Die Sexualität
im Kulturkampf, Sexpol Verlag, 1936.
8. Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents.
9. Ibid.
10. The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1971.


VII: The Breakthrough into the Biological Realm

1. Fr. Kraus, Allgemeine und spezielle Pathologie der Person. I. Teil, Tiefenperson. Leipzig: Thieme,
  1926.
2. Cf. Reich, Psychischer Kontakt und vegetative Strömung, 1934; and Orgasmusreflex, Muskelhaltung
und Körperausdruck, Sexpol Verlag, 1937.
3. Cf. Reich, The Mass Psychology of Fascism, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1970.


VIII: The Orgasm Reflex and the Technique of Character-Analytic

Vegetotherapy

1. Talking is one of the favorite means of suppressing vegetative sensations. This explains compulsive
  neurotic talking. In such cases, I tell the patient to keep quiet, until a condition of restlessness
appears.
2. Cf. Reich, “Über den epileptischen Anfall,” Internationale Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, 17, 1931.
3. Cf. Reich, Die Bione. Sexpol Verlag, 1938.


IX: From Psychoanalysis to Biogenesis

1. Cf. Reich, Experimentelle Ergebnisse über die elektrische Funktion von Sexualität und Angst. Sexpol
Verlag, 1937.                                    INDEX






The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the

pages in your eBook. Please use the search function on your eReading device

to search for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that appear in the

print index are listed below.


Abraham, Karl; on character traits; on melancholia; on duration of treatment; at Psychoanalytic

Congress (1924)

Actual neurosis; cure of; see also Stasis neurosis

Adler, Alfred; theory of the “nervous character”;

character theory

Aggression

Alexander, Franz

Allers, Rudolf

Antisemitism

Anxiety, anxiety neurosis; and sexuality; and muscular tension; and pleasure

Authoritarian dictatorship

Authoritarian family, and structuring of masses; and the neurotic plague; and fascism


Bachofen, J. J.

Barasch

Beethoven, Ludwig van

Bergson, Henri

Bioenergy, biological energy; transmission of; see also Orgone

Bions, bion research; and Brownian movement

Bleuler, E.

Bloch, Jwan

Bohr

BucuraCancer; and sexual gratification; tissue asphyxiation in

Cardiovascular hypertension

Castration

Catatonic stupor

Character analysis, character analytic, theory of structure; development of; concept of “affect block”;

task of; technique; crisis in

Character armor, characterological armoring; theory of; stratification of; function of; dissolution of; in

moralistic structure; in sex-economically regulated structure; and muscular hypertonia; see also

Muscular armor

Character, character structure, of modern man; theory of; in Psychoanalytic Association; impulsive;

definition of; and social structure; and education; see also Human structure

Chrobak

Compulsive character, compulsion neurotic, therapeutic difficulties in; in the genital embrace; genital

disturbance in; and incest desires

Constipation


Darwin, Charles, theory of natural selection

Death instinct, early hints of; and sexual instinct; in psychoanalytic theory; and orgasm; as destructive

impulse

Deutsch, Helene

de Vries

Driesch, Hans

Du Teil, Roger


Economo

Einstein, Albert

Emotional plague

Engels, Friedrich

Epilepsy, epileptic seizures

Exhibitionism


Fascism, fascistic irrationalism

Ferenczi, Sandor, on “free association”; and genital sexuality; theory of genitality; and character;

“active technique”

Fliess, Wilhelm

Forel, August

Freud, Sigmund; first reading of; and sexuality; and “libido”; interpretation of symbols; analytic

technique; on cure; personality of; on madness; as a speaker; on “drives”; “The Ego and the Id”; and

the death instinct; and “character”; on instincts; History of an Infantile Neuroses; and causal

psychotherapy; on actual neuroses; on neurasthenia; on psychoneurosis; and philosophic discussions;and Charcot; on organotherapy; on libido development; theory of anxiety; Hemmung, Symptom und

Angst; contradiction in; and the “unconscious”; “primary masochism”; and liberated natural sexuality;

and Die Funktion des Orgasmus; on interpretation; and prophylaxis of neuroses; sublimation theories;

Civilization and its Discontents; on religion; and politics; pessimism and resignation; and Russian

Revolution; tragedy of; on narcotics; theory of civilization; discovery of child sexuality; and sexual

latency


Galileo

Galvani

Genital character; attitude of; characterized by

Genitality, theory of

Grimm, George

Groddeck

Gurwitsch


Hartmann, Heinz

Heisenberg

Hemorrhoids

Herold, Carl M.

Hertwig, O.

Hitler, Adolf

Hitschmann, Eduard

Human structure; see also Character structure

Hysterical character, hysteric, hysteria, childhood of; therapeutic difficulties in; sexual etiology of;

genital disturbance in; “arc de cercle”; muscular spasms in


Ibsen, Henrik, and Peer Gynt; and Brand

Impulsive character, Der triebhafte Charakter

International Psychoanalytic Association; Congress in Lucerne, 1934


Jaspers, K.

Jesus

Johnson, V.

Jones, Ernest

Jung, C. G.


Kammerer, Paul

Kant

Kipling, Rudyard

KraepelinKraus, Fr.


Lange, F. A.

Lenin, N.

Libido concept, theory to pre-Freudian writers; and biogenesis; destruction of

Linné

Löwenfeld

Lumbago


Malinowski, Bronislaw, and the Oedipus complex; The Sexual Life of Savages

Marriage problem

Masochism, masochistic; beating fantasy; and religion; in mass psychology

Masters, W.

Masturbation; in neurasthenia; prohibition of; and diaphragmatic tic

Meisenheimer

Mendel

Mental hygiene, pivotal question of

Moll, Albert; and sexuality

Morgan, Lewis H.

Müller, L. R.

Müller-Lyer

Muscular armor; and orgasm reflex; and rheumatism; see also Character armor

Muscular rheumatism


Napoleon

Narcotics

“Negative therapeutic reaction”

Nero

Neurasthenia, according to Freud; genital disturbance in

Neurotic character

Nietzsche, Friedrich

Numberg, Hermann

Nymphomania


Oedipus complex, according to Adler; and energy stasis; patients’ use of; among the Trobrianders

Orgasm anxiety, definition of; forms of; in masochists; and sympatheticotonia; see pleasure anxiety

Orgasm formula

Orgasm reflex; and natural movement; and breathing

Orgasm theory, development of; in sex-economy; and character-analytic techniques; and pregenitality;

and health; and sexual energy; point of departure ofOrgastic impotence; role in sex-economy; and psychic illness; in the masochist; and chronic

sympatheticotonia

Orgastic potency, natural-scientific substantiation of; in relation to psychic health; differentiation from

orgastic impotence; definition of; as goal of therapy; and negative therapeutic reaction; establishment

of; and sadism; and sociality

Orgone, orgone energy; discovery of; radiation; see also Bioenergy

Orgone biophysics, introduction to


Pasteur

Patriarchy, emergence of

Peptic ulcer

Phallic, narcissistic character, genital disturbance in

Pilcz

Planck, Max

Pleasure anxiety; in the masochist; see also Orgasm anxiety

Pleasure principle

Pötzl

Prophylaxis of neuroses; and Freud; central point in

Psychic structure, layering of

Psychoanalytic theory, and female sexuality

Puberty problem

Pulmonary emphysema


Rank, Otto, Trauma der Geburt

Reik, Theodor; and the death instinct

Resistance analysis

Roheim, Géza, on potency


Sadism

Schizophrenia, schizophrenic, Freud’s theory of; Tausk’s theory of; sexual etiology of; and organ

sensations; somatic manifestations of

Schilder, Paul; and the Freudian unconscious

Schjelderup, H.

Self-regulation, principle of; in contrast with moral regulation

Semon, Richard

Sex-economy, sexual economy, sex-economic and sexuality; development of; theory of; and political

organizations; and the Freudian “unconscious”; cancer research; theory of character; and

destructiveness; self-regulation; and psychic economy; threat to; and mythology; and human striving;

ordered; and innervations; criteria for health or pathology; meaning of

Sex-politics, sex-politicalStasis, definition of

Stasis neurosis; see also Actual neurosis

Steinach, E.

Steiner, Rudolf

Stekel, Wilhelm

Streicher, Julius

Swoboda, Hermann


Tandler, Julius

Tarchanoff

Tausk, Viktor, on schizophrenia

Transference

Trobriander society


Vaginismus

Van de Velde

“Vegetative currents”

Vegetotherapy, character-analytic vegetotherapy; basic principle of; and “Yogism”; and memory

Veraguth

Vienna Psychoanalytic Clinic

Vienna Psychoanalytic Society

Vienna seminar on sexology

Vienna seminar on technique, origin of; and the death instinct


Wagner-Jauregg; and sexual symbolism

Warburg, Otto

Work democracy

Wulffen

Wundt, Wilhelm


Yoga


Zondek                        ALSO BY WILHELM REICH


                                  Beyond Psychology

          The Bioelectrical Investigation of Sexuality and Anxiety

                                The Bion Experiments

                                The Cancer Biopathy

                                  Character Analysis

                                Children of the Future

                            Early Writings, Volume One

                Ether, God and Devil / Cosmic Superimposition

                                        Genitality

                    The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality

                                  Listen, Little Man!

                        The Mass Psychology of Fascism

                                The Murder of Christ

                                  Passion of Youth

                                  People in Trouble

                                Record of a Friendship

                                Reich Speaks of Freud

                                  Selected Writings

                              The Sexual RevolutionFarrar, Straus and Giroux

19 Union Square West, New York 10003

This translation copyright © 1973 by Mary Boyd Higgins as Trustee of the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust

Fund

Die Entdeckung des Orgons, Erster Teil: Die Function des Orgasmus, copyright © 1968 by Mary Boyd

Higgins as Trustee of the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund

All rights reserved

Earlier translation published under the title The Discovery of the Orgasm, Volume 1: The Function of

the Orgasm, copyright 1942, 1948 by the Orgone Institute Press, Inc.

First Farrar, Straus and Giroux paperback edition, 1973

Library of Congress catalog card number: 72-81011

Paperback ISBN: 0-374-50204-8

www.fsgbooks.com

eISBN 9781466846913

First eBook edition: May 2013