must"-for even we thinkers have our idiosyncrasies of " unfree will"-: the

question is whether one can really get there. That may depend on manifold

conditions: in the main it is a question of how light or how heavy we are, the

problem of our "specific gravity." One must be very light in order to impel

one's will to knowledge to such a distance, and as it were beyond one's age,

in order to create eyes for oneself for the survey of millenniums, and a pure

heaven in these eyes besides! One must have freed oneself from many things

by which we Europeans of to-day are oppressed, hindered, held down, and

made heavy. The man of such a " Beyond," who wants to get even in sight of

the highest standards of worth of his age, must first of all "surmount" this age

in himself-it is the test of his power-and consequently not only his age, but

also his past aversion and opposition to his age, his suffering caused by his

age, his unseasonableness, his Romanticism. . . .

  381

  The  Question  of  Intelligibility.-One  not  only  wants  to  be  understood

when one writes, but also -quite as certainly-not to be understood. It is by no

means an objection to a book when someone finds it unintelligible : perhaps

this might just have been the intention of its author,-perhaps he did not want

to be understood by " anyone." A distinguished intellect and taste, when it

wants to communicate its thoughts, always selects its hearers; by selecting

them, it at the same time closes its barriers against " the others." It is there

that all the more refined laws of style have their origin: they at the same time

keep off, they create distance, they prevent " access" (intelligibility, as we

have said,)-while they open the ears of those who are acoustically related to

them. And to say it between ourselves and with reference to my own case,-I

do not desire that either my ignorance, or the vivacity of my temperament,

should prevent me being understood by you, my friends : I certainly do not

desire that my vivacity should have that effect, however much it may impel

me to arrive quickly at an object, in order to arrive at it at all. For I think it is

best to do with profound problems as with a cold bath-quickly in, quickly out.

That one does not thereby get into the depths, that one does not get deep

enough down-is a superstition of the hydrophobic, the enemies of cold water;

they speak without experience. Oh! the great cold makes one quick!-And let

me ask by the way: Is it a fact that a thing has been misunderstood and

unrecognised when it has only been touched upon in passing, glanced at,

flashed at? Must one absolutely sit upon it in the first place? Must one have

brooded on it as on an egg ? Diu noctuque incubando, as Newton said ofhimself? At least there are truths of a peculiar shyness and ticklishness which

one can only get hold of suddenly, and in no other way,-which one must

either  take  by  surprise,  or  leave  alone.  .  .  .  Finally,  my  brevity  has  still

another value: on those questions which pre-occupy me, I must say a great

deal briefly, in order that it may be heard yet more briefly. For as immoralist,

one has to take care lest one ruins innocence, I mean the asses and old maids

of both sexes, who get nothing from life but their innocence ; moreover my

writings are meant to fill them with enthusiasm, to elevate them, to encourage

them in virtue. I should be at a loss to know of anything more amusing than

to see enthusiastic old asses and maids moved by the sweet feelings of virtue

: and " that have I seen "-spake Zara-thustra. So much with respect to brevity;

the matter stands worse as regards my ignorance, of which I make no secret

to myself. There are hours in which I am ashamed of it; to be sure there are

likewise  hours  in  which  I  am  ashamed  of  this  shame.  Perhaps  we

philosophers, all of us, are badly placed at present with regard to knowledge:

science is growing, the most learned of us are on the point of discovering that

we know too little. But it would be worse still if it were otherwise,- if we

knew too much; our duty is and remains first of all, not to get into confusion

about ourselves. We are different from the learned; although it cannot be

denied  that  amongst  other  things  we  are  also  learned.  We  have  different

needs, a different growth, a different digestion : we need more, we need also

less.  There  is  no  formula  as  to  how  much  an  intellect  needs  for  its

nourishment ; if, however, its taste be in the direction of independence, rapid

coming  and  going,  travelling,  and  perhaps  adventure  for  which  only  the

swiftest are qualified, it prefers rather to live free on poor fare, than to be

unfree and plethoric. Not fat, but the greatest suppleness and power is what a

good dancer wishes from his nourishment,-and I know not what the spirit of a

philosopher would like better than to be a good dancer. For the dance is his

ideal, and also his art, in the end likewise his sole piety, his " divine service."

. . .

  382

  Great Healthiness.- We, the new, the nameless, the hard-to-understand,

we firstlings of a yet untried future-we require for a new end also a new

means,  namely,  a  new  healthiness,  stronger,  sharper,  tougher,  bolder  and

merrier than any healthiness until now. He whose soul longs to experience

the  whole  range  of  until  now  recognised  values  and  desirabilities,  and  to

circumnavigate all the coasts of this ideal " Mediterranean Sea," who, fromthe adventures of his most personal experience, wants to know how it feels to

be a conqueror and discoverer of the ideal-as likewise how it is with the

artist, the saint, the legislator, the sage, the scholar, the devotee, the prophet,

and the godly Nonconformist of the old style:-requires one thing above all for

that purpose, great healthiness- such healthiness as one not only possesses,

but  also  constantly  acquires  and  must  acquire,  because  one  continually

sacrifices it again, and must sacrifice it!-And now, after having been long on

the way in this fashion, we Argonauts of the ideal, who are more courageous

perhaps than prudent, and often enough shipwrecked and brought to grief,

nevertheless,  as  said  above,  healthier  than  people  would  like  to  admit,

dangerously  healthy,  always  healthy  again,-it  would  seem,  as  if  in

recompense for it all, that we have a still undiscovered country before us, the

boundaries  of  which  no  one  has  yet  seen,  a  beyond  to  all  countries  and

corners of the ideal known until now, a world so over-rich in the beautiful,

the strange, the questionable, the frightful, and the divine, that our curiosity

as well as our thirst for possession thereof, have got out of hand- alas ! that

nothing will now any longer satisfy us! How could we still be content with

the man of the present day after such peeps, and with such a craving in our

conscience and consciousness? What a pity; but it is unavoidable that we

should look on the worthiest aims and hopes of the man of the present day

with ill-concealed amusement, and perhaps should no longer look at them.

Another ideal runs on before us, a strange, tempting ideal, full of danger, to

which we should not like to persuade any one, because we do not so readily

acknowledge any one's right thereto: the ideal of a spirit who plays naively

(that is to say involuntarily and from overflowing abundance and power) with

everything that has until now been called holy, good, inviolable, divine ; to

whom the loftiest conception which the people have reasonably made their

measure of value, would already imply danger, ruin, abasement, or at least

relaxation, blindness, or temporary self-forgetfulness ; the ideal of a humanly

superhuman  welfare  and  benevolence,  which  may  often  enough  appear

inhuman, for example, when put by the side of all past seriousness on earth,

and  in  comparison  with  all  past  solemnities  in  bearing,  word,  tone,  look,

morality  and  pursuit,  as  their  truest  involuntary  parody,-  but  with  which,

nevertheless,  perhaps  the  great  seriousness  only  commences,  the  proper

interrogation  mark  is  set  up,  the  fate  of  the  soul  changes,  the  hour-hand

moves, and tragedy begins. . . . Epilogue.-But while I slowly, slowly finish

the  painting  of  this  sombre  interrogation-mark,  and  am  still  inclined  toremind  my  readers  of  the  virtues  of  right  reading-oh,  what  forgotten  and

unknown virtues-it comes to pass that the wickedest, merriest, gnome-like

laughter resounds around me : the spirits of my book themselves pounce

upon me, pull me by the ears, and call me to order. " We cannot endure it any

longer," they shout to me, "away, away with this raven-black music. Is it not

clear morning round about us ? And green, soft ground and turf, the domain

of the dance? Was there ever a better hour in which to be joyful ? Who will

sing us a song, a morning song, so sunny, so light and so fledged that it will

not scare the tantrums,-but will rather invite them to take part in the singing

and dancing. And better a simple rustic bagpipe than such weird sounds, such

toad-croakings, grave-voices and marmot-pipings, with which you have until

now regaled us in your wilderness, Mr Anchorite and Musician of the Future!

No! Not such tones ! But let us strike up something more agreeable and more

joyful!"-You  would  like  to  have  it  so,  my  impatient  friends?  Well!  Who

would not willingly accede to your wishes ? My bagpipe is waiting, and my

voice also-it may sound a little hoarse; take it as it is! don't forget we are in

the mountains! But what you will hear is at least new; and if you do not

understand it, if you misunderstand the minstrel, what does it matter ! That-

has always been " The Minstrel's Curse." * So much the more distinctly can

you hear his music and melody, so much the better also can you-dance to his

piping. Would you like to do that ? . . .



    THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA - A BOOK FOR ALL AND NONE

              Translated by Thomas Common Notes by A.M. Ludovici

            INTRODUCTION BY MRS FORSTER-NIETZSCH - HOW

                      ZARATHUSTRA CAME INTO BEING.

    "Zarathustra" is my brother's most personal work; it is the history of his

most  individual  experiences,  of  his  friendships,  ideals,  raptures,  bitterest

disappointments  and  sorrows.  Above  it  all,  however,  there  soars,

transfiguring  it,  the  image  of  his  greatest  hopes  and  remotest  aims.  My

brother had the figure of Zarathustra in his mind from his very earliest youth:

he once told me that even as a child he had dreamt of him. At different

periods  in  his  life,  he  would  call  this  haunter  of  his  dreams  by  different

names; "but in the end," he declares in a note on the subject, "I had to do a

PERSIAN  the  honour  of  identifying  him  with  this  creature  of  my  fancy.

Persians were the first to take a broad and comprehensive view of history.Every  series  of  evolutions,  according  to  them,  was  presided  over  by  a

prophet; and every prophet had his 'Hazar,'--his dynasty of a thousand years."

  All Zarathustra's views, as also his personality, were early conceptions of

my brother's mind. Whoever reads his posthumously published writings for

the years 1869-82 with care, will constantly meet with passages suggestive of

Zarathustra's thoughts and doctrines. For instance, the ideal of the Superman

is put forth quite clearly in all his writings during the years 1873-75; and in

"We Philologists", the following remarkable observations occur:--

  "How can one praise and glorify a nation as a whole?--Even among the

Greeks, it was the INDIVIDUALS that counted."

  "The Greeks are interesting and extremely important because they reared

such a vast number of great individuals. How was this possible? The question

is one which ought to be studied.

  "I am interested only in the relations of a people to the rearing of the

individual  man,  and  among  the  Greeks  the  conditions  were  unusually

favourable for the development of the individual; not by any means owing to

the goodness of the people, but because of the struggles of their evil instincts.

  "WITH  THE  HELP  OF  FAVOURLE  MEASURES  GREAT

INDIVIDUALS  MIGHT  BE  REARED  WHO  WOULD  BE  BOTH

DIFFERENT FROM AND HIGHER THAN THOSE WHO HERETOFORE

HAVE OWED THEIR EXISTENCE TO MERE CHANCE. Here we may

still be hopeful: in the rearing of exceptional men."

  The  notion  of  rearing  the  Superman  is  only  a  new  form  of  an  ideal

Nietzsche  already  had  in  his  youth,  that  "THE  OBJECT  OF  MANKIND

SHOULD  LIE  IN  ITS  HIGHEST  INDIVIDUALS"  (or,  as  he  writes  in

"Schopenhauer as Educator": "Mankind ought constantly to be striving to

produce great men--this and nothing else is its duty.") But the ideals he most

revered in those days are no longer held to be the highest types of men. No,

around  this  future  ideal  of  a  coming  humanity--the  Superman--the  poet

spread the veil of becoming. Who can tell to what glorious heights man can

still ascend? That is why, after having tested the worth of our noblest ideal--

that of the Saviour, in the light of the new valuations, the poet cries with

passionate emphasis in "Zarathustra":

  "Never yet hath there been a Superman. Naked have I seen both of them,

the greatest and the smallest man:--

    All-too-similar are they still to each other. Verily even the greatest found

I--all-too-human!"--  The  phrase  "the  rearing  of  the  Superman,"  has  very  often  been

misunderstood.  By  the  word  "rearing,"  in  this  case,  is  meant  the  act  of

modifying by means of new and higher values--values which, as laws and

guides of conduct and opinion, are now to rule over mankind. In general the

doctrine of the Superman can only be understood correctly in conjunction

with other ideas of the author's, such as:--the Order of Rank, the Will to

Power, and the Transvaluation of all Values. He assumes that Christianity, as

a product of the resentment of the botched and the weak, has put in ban all

that is beautiful, strong, proud, and powerful, in fact all the qualities resulting

from strength, and that, in consequence, all forces which tend to promote or

elevate life have been seriously undermined. Now, however, a new table of

valuations must be placed over mankind--namely, that of the strong, mighty,

and magnificent man, overflowing with life and elevated to his zenith--the

Superman, who is now put before us with overpowering passion as the aim of

our life, hope, and will. And just as the old system of valuing, which only

extolled  the  qualities  favourable  to  the  weak,  the  suffering,  and  the

oppressed, has succeeded in producing a weak, suffering, and "modern" race,

so this new and reversed system of valuing ought to rear a healthy, strong,

lively, and courageous type, which would be a glory to life itself. Stated

briefly, the leading principle of this new system of valuing would be: "All

that proceeds from power is good, all that springs from weakness is bad."

  This type must not be regarded as a fanciful figure: it is not a nebulous

hope which is to be realised at some indefinitely remote period, thousands of

years hence; nor is it a new species (in the Darwinian sense) of which we can

know nothing, and which it would therefore be somewhat absurd to strive

after.  But  it  is  meant  to  be  a  possibility  which  men  of  the  present  could

realise with all their spiritual and physical energies, provided they adopted

the new values.

  The author of "Zarathustra" never lost sight of that egregious example of

a transvaluation of all values through Christianity, whereby the whole of the

deified mode of life and thought of the Greeks, as well as strong Romedom,

was almost annihilated or transvalued in a comparatively short time. Could

not a rejuvenated Graeco-Roman system of valuing (once it had been refined

and  made  more  profound  by  the  schooling  which  two  thousand  years  of

Christianity had provided) effect another such revolution within a calculable

period of time, until that glorious type of manhood shall finally appear which

is to be our new faith and hope, and in the creation of which Zarathustraexhorts us to participate?

  In  his  private  notes  on  the  subject  the  author  uses  the  expression

"Superman"  (always  in  the  singular,  by-the-bye),  as  signifying  "the  most

thoroughly well-constituted type," as opposed to "modern man"; above all,

however, he designates Zarathustra himself as an example of the Superman.

In "Ecco Homo" he is careful to enlighten us concerning the precursors and

prerequisites  to  the  advent  of  this  highest  type,  in  referring  to  a  certain

passage in the "Gay Science":--

  "In order to understand this type, we must first be quite clear in regard to

the leading physiological condition on which it depends: this condition is

what I call GREAT HEALTHINESS. I know not how to express my meaning

more plainly or more personally than I have done already in one of the last

Chapters (Aphorism 382) of the fifth book of the 'Gaya Scienza'."

  "We, the new, the nameless, the hard-to-understand,"--it says there,--"we

firstlings of a yet untried future--we require for a new end also a new means,

namely, a new healthiness, stronger, sharper, tougher, bolder and merrier than

all healthiness hitherto. He whose soul longeth to experience the whole range

of hitherto recognised values and desirabilities, and to circumnavigate all the

coasts of this ideal 'Mediterranean Sea', who, from the adventures of his most

personal  experience,  wants  to  know  how  it  feels  to  be  a  conqueror,  and

discoverer of the ideal--as likewise how it is with the artist, the saint, the

legislator, the sage, the scholar, the devotee, the prophet, and the godly non-

conformist of the old style:--requires one thing above all for that purpose,

GREAT HEALTHINESS--such healthiness as one not only possesses, but

also constantly acquires and must acquire, because one unceasingly sacrifices

it again, and must sacrifice it!--And now, after having been long on the way

in this fashion, we Argonauts of the ideal, more courageous perhaps than

prudent, and often enough shipwrecked and brought to grief, nevertheless

dangerously  healthy,  always  healthy  again,--it  would  seem  as  if,  in

recompense for it all, that we have a still undiscovered country before us, the

boundaries  of  which  no  one  has  yet  seen,  a  beyond  to  all  countries  and

corners of the ideal known hitherto, a world so over-rich in the beautiful, the

strange, the questionable, the frightful, and the divine, that our curiosity as

well  as  our  thirst  for  possession  thereof,  have  got  out  of  hand--alas!  that

nothing will now any longer satisfy us!--

  "How could we still be content with THE MAN OF THE PRESENT

DAY after such outlooks, and with such a craving in our conscience andconsciousness? Sad enough; but it is unavoidable that we should look on the

worthiest aims and hopes of the man of the present day with ill-concealed

amusement, and perhaps should no longer look at them. Another ideal runs

on before us, a strange, tempting ideal full of danger, to which we should not

like to persuade any one, because we do not so readily acknowledge any

one's RIGHT THERETO: the ideal of a spirit who plays naively (that is to

say  involuntarily  and  from  overflowing  abundance  and  power)  with

everything that has hitherto been called holy, good, intangible, or divine; to

whom the loftiest conception which the people have reasonably made their

measure of value, would already practically imply danger, ruin, abasement, or

at least relaxation, blindness, or temporary self-forgetfulness; the ideal of a

humanly  superhuman  welfare  and  benevolence,  which  will  often  enough

appear INHUMAN, for example, when put alongside of all past seriousness

on earth, and alongside of all past solemnities in bearing, word, tone, look,

morality, and pursuit, as their truest involuntary parody--and WITH which,

nevertheless, perhaps THE GREAT SERIOUSNESS only commences, when

the proper interrogative mark is set up, the fate of the soul changes, the hour-

hand moves, and tragedy begins..."

    Although the figure of Zarathustra and a large number of the leading

thoughts in this work had appeared much earlier in the dreams and writings

of the author, "Thus Spake Zarathustra" did not actually come into being until

the month of August 1881 in Sils Maria; and it was the idea of the Eternal

Recurrence of all things which finally induced my brother to set forth his new

views in poetic language. In regard to his first conception of this idea, his

autobiographical  sketch,  "Ecce  Homo",  written  in  the  autumn  of  1888,

contains the following passage:--

  "The fundamental idea of my work--namely, the Eternal Recurrence of all

things--this highest of all possible formulae of a Yea-saying philosophy, first

occurred to me in August 1881. I made a note of the thought on a sheet of

paper,  with  the  postscript:  6,000  feet  beyond  men  and  time!  That  day  I

happened  to  be  wandering  through  the  woods  alongside  of  the  lake  of

Silvaplana, and I halted beside a huge, pyramidal and towering rock not far

from Surlei. It was then that the thought struck me. Looking back now, I find

that exactly two months previous to this inspiration, I had had an omen of its

coming in the form of a sudden and decisive alteration in my tastes--more

particularly in music. It would even be possible to consider all 'Zarathustra' as

a  musical  composition.  At  all  events,  a  very  necessary  condition  in  itsproduction  was  a  renaissance  in  myself  of  the  art  of  hearing.  In  a  small

mountain resort (Recoaro) near Vicenza, where I spent the spring of 1881, I

and my friend and Maestro, Peter Gast--also one who had been born again--

discovered that the phoenix music that hovered over us, wore lighter and

brighter plumes than it had done theretofore."

  During  the  month  of  August  1881  my  brother  resolved  to  reveal  the

teaching  of  the  Eternal  Recurrence,  in  dithyrambic  and  psalmodic  form,

through the mouth of Zarathustra. Among the notes of this period, we found a

page on which is written the first definite plan of "Thus Spake Zarathustra":--

  "MIDDAY AND ETERNITY."

    "GUIDE-POSTS TO A NEW WAY OF LIVING."

  Beneath this is written:--

    "Zarathustra born on lake Urmi; left his home in his thirtieth year, went

into the province of Aria, and, during ten years of solitude in the mountains,

composed the Zend-Avesta."

  "The sun of knowledge stands once more at midday; and the serpent of

eternity lies coiled in its light--: It is YOUR time, ye midday brethren."

  In  that  summer  of  1881,  my  brother,  after  many  years  of  steadily

declining  health,  began  at  last  to  rally,  and  it  is  to  this  first  gush  of  the

recovery of his once splendid bodily condition that we owe not only "The

Gay  Science",  which  in  its  mood  may  be  regarded  as  a  prelude  to

"Zarathustra",  but  also  "Zarathustra"  itself.  Just  as  he  was  beginning  to

recuperate his health, however, an unkind destiny brought him a number of

most  painful  personal  experiences.  His  friends  caused  him  many

disappointments, which were the more bitter to him, inasmuch as he regarded

friendship as such a sacred institution; and for the first time in his life he

realised the whole horror of that loneliness to which, perhaps, all greatness is

condemned. But to be forsaken is something very different from deliberately

choosing  blessed  loneliness.  How  he  longed,  in  those  days,  for  the  ideal

friend who would thoroughly understand him, to whom he would be able to

say all, and whom he imagined he had found at various periods in his life

from his earliest youth onwards. Now, however, that the way he had chosen

grew ever more perilous and steep, he found nobody who could follow him:

he therefore created a perfect friend for himself in the ideal form of a majestic

philosopher, and made this creation the preacher of his gospel to the world.

  Whether my brother would ever have written "Thus Spake Zarathustra"

according to the first plan sketched in the summer of 1881, if he had not hadthe disappointments already referred to, is now an idle question; but perhaps

where "Zarathustra" is concerned, we may also say with Master Eckhardt:

"The fleetest beast to bear you to perfection is suffering."

  My  brother  writes  as  follows  about  the  origin  of  the  first  part  of

"Zarathustra":--"In the winter of 1882-83, I was living on the charming little

Gulf of Rapallo, not far from Genoa, and between Chiavari and Cape Porto

Fino. My health was not very good; the winter was cold and exceptionally

rainy; and the small inn in which I lived was so close to the water that at

night my sleep would be disturbed if the sea were high. These circumstances

were surely the very reverse of favourable; and yet in spite of it all, and as if

in demonstration of my belief that everything decisive comes to life in spite

of every obstacle, it was precisely during this winter and in the midst of these

unfavourable circumstances that my 'Zarathustra' originated. In the morning I

used to start out in a southerly direction up the glorious road to Zoagli, which

rises aloft through a forest of pines and gives one a view far out into the sea.

In the afternoon, as often as my health permitted, I walked round the whole

bay from Santa Margherita to beyond Porto Fino. This spot was all the more

interesting  to  me,  inasmuch  as  it  was  so  dearly  loved  by  the  Emperor

Frederick III. In the autumn of 1886 I chanced to be there again when he was

revisiting this small, forgotten world of happiness for the last time. It was on

these  two  roads  that  all  'Zarathustra'  came  to  me,  above  all  Zarathustra

himself as a type;--I ought rather to say that it was on these walks that these

ideas waylaid me."

  The first part of "Zarathustra" was written in about ten days--that is to

say, from the beginning to about the middle of February 1883. "The last lines

were written precisely in the hallowed hour when Richard Wagner gave up

the ghost in Venice."

  With the exception of the ten days occupied in composing the first part of

this book, my brother often referred to this winter as the hardest and sickliest

he had ever experienced. He did not, however, mean thereby that his former

disorders were troubling him, but that he was suffering from a severe attack

of influenza which he had caught in Santa Margherita, and which tormented

him for several weeks after his arrival in Genoa. As a matter of fact, however,

what he complained of most was his spiritual condition--that indescribable

forsakenness--to  which  he  gives  such  heartrending  expression  in

"Zarathustra". Even the reception which the first part met with at the hands of

friends and acquaintances was extremely disheartening: for almost all thoseto whom he presented copies of the work misunderstood it. "I found no one

ripe for many of my thoughts; the case of 'Zarathustra' proves that one can

speak  with  the  utmost  clearness,  and  yet  not  be  heard  by  any  one."  My

brother was very much discouraged by the feebleness of the response he was

given,  and  as  he  was  striving  just  then  to  give  up  the  practice  of  taking

hydrate of chloral--a drug he had begun to take while ill with influenza,--the

following spring, spent in Rome, was a somewhat gloomy one for him. He

writes about it as follows:--"I spent a melancholy spring in Rome, where I

only just managed to live,--and this was no easy matter. This city, which is

absolutely unsuited to the poet-author of 'Zarathustra', and for the choice of

which I was not responsible, made me inordinately miserable. I tried to leave

it. I wanted to go to Aquila--the opposite of Rome in every respect, and

actually founded in a spirit of enmity towards that city (just as I also shall

found a city some day), as a memento of an atheist and genuine enemy of the

Church--a person very closely related to me,--the great Hohenstaufen, the

Emperor Frederick II. But Fate lay behind it all: I had to return again to

Rome. In the end I was obliged to be satisfied with the Piazza Barberini, after

I had exerted myself in vain to find an anti-Christian quarter. I fear that on

one occasion, to avoid bad smells as much as possible, I actually inquired at

the Palazzo del Quirinale whether they could not provide a quiet room for a

philosopher. In a chamber high above the Piazza just mentioned, from which

one obtained a general view of Rome and could hear the fountains plashing

far below, the loneliest of all songs was composed--'The Night-Song'. About

this time I was obsessed by an unspeakably sad melody, the refrain of which I

recognised in the words, 'dead through immortality.'"

  We remained somewhat too long in Rome that spring, and what with the

effect  of  the  increasing  heat  and  the  discouraging  circumstances  already

described, my brother resolved not to write any more, or in any case, not to

proceed with "Zarathustra", although I offered to relieve him of all trouble in

connection with the proofs and the publisher. When, however, we returned to

Switzerland towards the end of June, and he found himself once more in the

familiar and exhilarating air of the mountains, all his joyous creative powers

revived, and in a note to me announcing the dispatch of some manuscript, he

wrote as follows: "I have engaged a place here for three months: forsooth, I

am the greatest fool to allow my courage to be sapped from me by the climate

of Italy. Now and again I am troubled by the thought: WHAT NEXT? My

'future' is the darkest thing in the world to me, but as there still remains agreat deal for me to do, I suppose I ought rather to think of doing this than of

my future, and leave the rest to THEE and the gods."

  The second part of "Zarathustra" was written between the 26th of June

and the 6th July. "This summer, finding myself once more in the sacred place

where the first thought of 'Zarathustra' flashed across my mind, I conceived

the second part. Ten days sufficed. Neither for the second, the first, nor the

third part, have I required a day longer."

  He  often  used  to  speak  of  the  ecstatic  mood  in  which  he  wrote

"Zarathustra"; how in his walks over hill and dale the ideas would crowd into

his mind, and how he would note them down hastily in a note-book from

which  he  would  transcribe  them  on  his  return,  sometimes  working  till

midnight. He says in a letter to me: "You can have no idea of the vehemence

of such composition," and in "Ecce Homo" (autumn 1888) he describes as

follows  with  passionate  enthusiasm  the  incomparable  mood  in  which  he

created Zarathustra:--

  "--Has any one at the end of the nineteenth century any distinct notion of

what poets of a stronger age understood by the word inspiration? If not, I will

describe it. If one had the smallest vestige of superstition in one, it would

hardly  be  possible  to  set  aside  completely  the  idea  that  one  is  the  mere

incarnation,  mouthpiece  or  medium  of  an  almighty  power.  The  idea  of

revelation in the sense that something becomes suddenly visible and audible

with indescribable certainty and accuracy, which profoundly convulses and

upsets  one--describes  simply  the  matter  of  fact.  One  hears--one  does  not

seek; one takes--one does not ask who gives: a thought suddenly flashes up

like lightning, it comes with necessity, unhesitatingly--I have never had any

choice in the matter. There is an ecstasy such that the immense strain of it is

sometimes relaxed by a flood of tears, along with which one's steps either

rush  or  involuntarily  lag,  alternately.  There  is  the  feeling  that  one  is

completely out of hand, with the very distinct consciousness of an endless

number of fine thrills and quiverings to the very toes;--there is a depth of

happiness in which the painfullest and gloomiest do not operate as antitheses,

but as conditioned, as demanded in the sense of necessary shades of colour in

such an overflow of light. There is an instinct for rhythmic relations which

embraces wide areas of forms (length, the need of a wide-embracing rhythm,

is almost the measure of the force of an inspiration, a sort of counterpart to its

pressure  and  tension).  Everything  happens  quite  involuntarily,  as  if  in  a

tempestuous outburst of freedom, of absoluteness, of power and divinity. Theinvoluntariness of the figures and similes is the most remarkable thing; one

loses all perception of what constitutes the figure and what constitutes the

simile; everything seems to present itself as the readiest, the correctest and

the  simplest  means  of  expression.  It  actually  seems,  to  use  one  of

Zarathustra's own phrases, as if all things came unto one, and would fain be

similes: 'Here do all things come caressingly to thy talk and flatter thee, for

they want to ride upon thy back. On every simile dost thou here ride to every

truth. Here fly open unto thee all being's words and word-cabinets; here all

being wanteth to become words, here all becoming wanteth to learn of thee

how to talk.' This is MY experience of inspiration. I do not doubt but that one

would have to go back thousands of years in order to find some one who

could say to me: It is mine also!--"

  In the autumn of 1883 my brother left the Engadine for Germany and

stayed there a few weeks. In the following winter, after wandering somewhat

erratically through Stresa, Genoa, and Spezia, he landed in Nice, where the

climate so happily promoted his creative powers that he wrote the third part

of "Zarathustra". "In the winter, beneath the halcyon sky of Nice, which then

looked  down  upon  me  for  the  first  time  in  my  life,  I  found  the  third

'Zarathustra'--and came to the end of my task; the whole having occupied me

scarcely a year. Many hidden corners and heights in the landscapes round

about  Nice  are  hallowed  to  me  by  unforgettable  moments.  That  decisive

Chapter entitled 'Old and New Tables' was composed in the very difficult

ascent from the station to Eza--that wonderful Moorish village in the rocks.

My most creative moments were always accompanied by unusual muscular

activity. The body is inspired: let us waive the question of the 'soul.' I might

often have been seen dancing in those days. Without a suggestion of fatigue I

could then walk for seven or eight hours on end among the hills. I slept well

and laughed well--I was perfectly robust and patient."

  As we have seen, each of the three parts of "Zarathustra" was written,

after  a  more  or  less  short  period  of  preparation,  in  about  ten  days.  The

composition of the fourth part alone was broken by occasional interruptions.

The first notes relating to this part were written while he and I were staying

together  in  Zurich  in  September  1884.  In  the  following  November,  while

staying at Mentone, he began to elaborate these notes, and after a long pause,

finished the manuscript at Nice between the end of January and the middle of

February 1885. My brother then called this part the fourth and last; but even

before, and shortly after it had been privately printed, he wrote to me sayingthat he still intended writing a fifth and sixth part, and notes relating to these

parts are now in my possession. This fourth part (the original MS. of which

contains this note: "Only for my friends, not for the public") is written in a

particularly personal spirit, and those few to whom he presented a copy of it,

he pledged to the strictest secrecy concerning its contents. He often thought

of making this fourth part public also, but doubted whether he would ever be

able to do so without considerably altering certain portions of it. At all events

he  resolved  to  distribute  this  manuscript  production,  of  which  only  forty

copies were printed, only among those who had proved themselves worthy of

it, and it speaks eloquently of his utter loneliness and need of sympathy in

those days, that he had occasion to present only seven copies of his book

according to this resolution.

  Already at the beginning of this history I hinted at the reasons which led

my brother to select a Persian as the incarnation of his ideal of the majestic

philosopher. His reasons, however, for choosing Zarathustra of all others to

be his mouthpiece, he gives us in the following words:--"People have never

asked me, as they should have done, what the name Zarathustra precisely

means  in  my  mouth,  in  the  mouth  of  the  first  Immoralist;  for  what

distinguishes that philosopher from all others in the past is the very fact that

he was exactly the reverse of an immoralist. Zarathustra was the first to see in

the struggle between good and evil the essential wheel in the working of

things. The translation of morality into the metaphysical, as force, cause, end

in  itself,  was  HIS  work.  But  the  very  question  suggests  its  own  answer.

Zarathustra  CREATED  the  most  portentous  error,  MORALITY,

consequently he should also be the first to PERCEIVE that error, not only

because he has had longer and greater experience of the subject than any

other thinker--all history is the experimental refutation of the theory of the so-

called moral order of things:--the more important point is that Zarathustra

was more truthful than any other thinker. In his teaching alone do we meet

with  truthfulness  upheld  as  the  highest  virtue--i.e.:  the  reverse  of  the

COWARDICE of the 'idealist' who flees from reality. Zarathustra had more

courage in his body than any other thinker before or after him. To tell the

truth  and  TO  AIM  STRAIGHT:  that  is  the  first  Persian  virtue.  Am  I

understood?...  The  overcoming  of  morality  through  itself--through

truthfulness,  the  overcoming  of  the  moralist  through  his  opposite--

THROUGH ME--: that is what the name Zarathustra means in my mouth."

  ELIZETH FORSTER-NIETZSCHE.  Nietzsche Archives,

    Weimar, December 1905.

                FIRST PART. ZARATHUSTRA'S DISCOURSES.

                            ZARATHUSTRA'S PROLOGUE.

  1.

  When Zarathustra was thirty years old, he left his home and the lake of

his  home,  and  went  into  the  mountains.  There  he  enjoyed  his  spirit  and

solitude, and for ten years did not weary of it. But at last his heart changed,--

and rising one morning with the rosy dawn, he went before the sun, and

spake thus unto it:

  Thou great star! What would be thy happiness if thou hadst not those for

whom thou shinest!

  For ten years hast thou climbed hither unto my cave: thou wouldst have

wearied of thy light and of the journey, had it not been for me, mine eagle,

and my serpent.

  But we awaited thee every morning, took from thee thine overflow and

blessed thee for it.

  Lo! I am weary of my wisdom, like the bee that hath gathered too much

honey; I need hands outstretched to take it.

  I would fain bestow and distribute, until the wise have once more become

joyous in their folly, and the poor happy in their riches.

  Therefore must I descend into the deep: as thou doest in the evening,

when thou goest behind the sea, and givest light also to the nether-world,

thou exuberant star!

  Like thee must I GO DOWN, as men say, to whom I shall descend.

  Bless  me,  then,  thou  tranquil  eye,  that  canst  behold  even  the  greatest

happiness without envy!

  Bless the cup that is about to overflow, that the water may flow golden

out of it, and carry everywhere the reflection of thy bliss!

  Lo! This cup is again going to empty itself, and Zarathustra is again going

to be a man.

  Thus began Zarathustra's down-going.

  2.

    Zarathustra went down the mountain alone, no one meeting him. When he

entered the forest, however, there suddenly stood before him an old man, who

had left his holy cot to seek roots. And thus spake the old man to Zarathustra:

  "No  stranger  to  me  is  this  wanderer:  many  years  ago  passed  he  by.Zarathustra he was called; but he hath altered.

  Then thou carriedst thine ashes into the mountains: wilt thou now carry

thy fire into the valleys? Fearest thou not the incendiary's doom?

  Yea,  I  recognise  Zarathustra.  Pure  is  his  eye,  and  no  loathing  lurketh

about his mouth. Goeth he not along like a dancer?

  Altered is Zarathustra; a child hath Zarathustra become; an awakened one

is Zarathustra: what wilt thou do in the land of the sleepers?

  As in the sea hast thou lived in solitude, and it hath borne thee up. Alas,

wilt thou now go ashore? Alas, wilt thou again drag thy body thyself?"

    Zarathustra answered: "I love mankind."

  "Why," said the saint, "did I go into the forest and the desert? Was it not

because I loved men far too well?

  Now I love God: men, I do not love. Man is a thing too imperfect for me.

Love to man would be fatal to me."

    Zarathustra answered: "What spake I of love! I am bringing gifts unto

men."

  "Give them nothing," said the saint. "Take rather part of their load, and

carry it along with them--that will be most agreeable unto them: if only it be

agreeable unto thee!

  If, however, thou wilt give unto them, give them no more than an alms,

and let them also beg for it!"

  "No," replied Zarathustra, "I give no alms. I am not poor enough for that."

  The saint laughed at Zarathustra, and spake thus: "Then see to it that they

accept thy treasures! They are distrustful of anchorites, and do not believe

that we come with gifts.

  The fall of our footsteps ringeth too hollow through their streets. And just

as at night, when they are in bed and hear a man abroad long before sunrise,

so they ask themselves concerning us: Where goeth the thief?

  Go not to men, but stay in the forest! Go rather to the animals! Why not

be like me--a bear amongst bears, a bird amongst birds?"

  "And what doeth the saint in the forest?" asked Zarathustra.

  The saint answered: "I make hymns and sing them; and in making hymns

I laugh and weep and mumble: thus do I praise God.

  With singing, weeping, laughing, and mumbling do I praise the God who

is my God. But what dost thou bring us as a gift?"

  When Zarathustra had heard these words, he bowed to the saint and said:

"What should I have to give thee! Let me rather hurry hence lest I take aughtaway from thee!"--And thus they parted from one another, the old man and

Zarathustra, laughing like schoolboys.

  When Zarathustra was alone, however, he said to his heart: "Could it be

possible! This old saint in the forest hath not yet heard of it, that GOD IS

DEAD!"

  3.

  When Zarathustra arrived at the nearest town which adjoineth the forest,

he  found  many  people  assembled  in  the  market-place;  for  it  had  been

announced that a rope-dancer would give a performance. And Zarathustra

spake thus unto the people:

  I  TEACH  YOU  THE  SUPERMAN.  Man  is  something  that  is  to  be

surpassed. What have ye done to surpass man?

  All beings hitherto have created something beyond themselves: and ye

want to be the ebb of that great tide, and would rather go back to the beast

than surpass man?

  What is the ape to man? A laughing-stock, a thing of shame. And just the

same shall man be to the Superman: a laughing-stock, a thing of shame.

  Ye have made your way from the worm to man, and much within you is

still worm. Once were ye apes, and even yet man is more of an ape than any

of the apes.

  Even the wisest among you is only a disharmony and hybrid of plant and

phantom. But do I bid you become phantoms or plants?

  Lo, I teach you the Superman!

  The  Superman  is  the  meaning  of  the  earth.  Let  your  will  say:  The

Superman SHALL BE the meaning of the earth!

  I  conjure  you,  my  brethren,  REMAIN  TRUE  TO  THE  EARTH,  and

believe not those who speak unto you of superearthly hopes! Poisoners are

they, whether they know it or not.

    Despisers of life are they, decaying ones and poisoned ones themselves,

of whom the earth is weary: so away with them!

  Once blasphemy against God was the greatest blasphemy; but God died,

and therewith also those blasphemers. To blaspheme the earth is now the

dreadfulest  sin,  and  to  rate  the  heart  of  the  unknowable  higher  than  the

meaning of the earth!

  Once  the  soul  looked  contemptuously  on  the  body,  and  then  that

contempt was the supreme thing:--the soul wished the body meagre, ghastly,

and famished. Thus it thought to escape from the body and the earth.  Oh, that soul was itself meagre, ghastly, and famished; and cruelty was

the delight of that soul!

  But ye, also, my brethren, tell me: What doth your body say about your

soul? Is your soul not poverty and pollution and wretched self-complacency?

  Verily, a polluted stream is man. One must be a sea, to receive a polluted

stream without becoming impure.

  Lo,  I  teach  you  the  Superman:  he  is  that  sea;  in  him  can  your  great

contempt be submerged.

  What  is  the  greatest  thing  ye  can  experience?  It  is  the  hour  of  great

contempt. The hour in which even your happiness becometh loathsome unto

you, and so also your reason and virtue.

  The hour when ye say: "What good is my happiness! It is poverty and

pollution and wretched self-complacency. But my happiness should justify

existence itself!"

  The  hour  when  ye  say:  "What  good  is  my  reason!  Doth  it  long  for

knowledge as the lion for his food? It is poverty and pollution and wretched

self-complacency!"

  The hour when ye say: "What good is my virtue! As yet it hath not made

me passionate. How weary I am of my good and my bad! It is all poverty and

pollution and wretched self-complacency!"

  The hour when ye say: "What good is my justice! I do not see that I am

fervour and fuel. The just, however, are fervour and fuel!"

  The hour when ye say: "What good is my pity! Is not pity the cross on

which he is nailed who loveth man? But my pity is not a crucifixion."

  Have ye ever spoken thus? Have ye ever cried thus? Ah! would that I had

heard you crying thus!

  It is not your sin--it is your self-satisfaction that crieth unto heaven; your

very sparingness in sin crieth unto heaven!

  Where is the lightning to lick you with its tongue? Where is the frenzy

with which ye should be inoculated?

  Lo, I teach you the Superman: he is that lightning, he is that frenzy!--

  When Zarathustra had thus spoken, one of the people called out: "We

have now heard enough of the rope-dancer; it is time now for us to see him!"

And all the people laughed at Zarathustra. But the rope-dancer, who thought

the words applied to him, began his performance.

  4.

    Zarathustra, however, looked at the people and wondered. Then he spakethus:

  Man is a rope stretched between the animal and the Superman--a rope

over an abyss.

  A dangerous crossing, a dangerous wayfaring, a dangerous looking-back,

a dangerous trembling and halting.

  What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a goal: what is lovable

in man is that he is an OVER-GOING and a DOWN-GOING.

  I love those that know not how to live except as down-goers, for they are

the over-goers.

  I love the great despisers, because they are the great adorers, and arrows

of longing for the other shore.

  I love those who do not first seek a reason beyond the stars for going

down and being sacrifices, but sacrifice themselves to the earth, that the earth

of the Superman may hereafter arrive.

  I love him who liveth in order to know, and seeketh to know in order that

the Superman may hereafter live. Thus seeketh he his own down-going.

  I love him who laboureth and inventeth, that he may build the house for

the Superman, and prepare for him earth, animal, and plant: for thus seeketh

he his own down-going.

  I love him who loveth his virtue: for virtue is the will to down-going, and

an arrow of longing.

  I love him who reserveth no share of spirit for himself, but wanteth to be

wholly the spirit of his virtue: thus walketh he as spirit over the bridge.

  I love him who maketh his virtue his inclination and destiny: thus, for the

sake of his virtue, he is willing to live on, or live no more.

  I love him who desireth not too many virtues. One virtue is more of a

virtue than two, because it is more of a knot for one's destiny to cling to.

  I love him whose soul is lavish, who wanteth no thanks and doth not give

back: for he always bestoweth, and desireth not to keep for himself.

  I love him who is ashamed when the dice fall in his favour, and who then

asketh: "Am I a dishonest player?"--for he is willing to succumb.

  I love him who scattereth golden words in advance of his deeds, and

always doeth more than he promiseth: for he seeketh his own down-going.

  I love him who justifieth the future ones, and redeemeth the past ones: for

he is willing to succumb through the present ones.

  I love him who chasteneth his God, because he loveth his God: for he

must succumb through the wrath of his God.  I love him whose soul is deep even in the wounding, and may succumb

through a small matter: thus goeth he willingly over the bridge.

  I love him whose soul is so overfull that he forgetteth himself, and all

things are in him: thus all things become his down-going.

  I love him who is of a free spirit and a free heart: thus is his head only the

bowels of his heart; his heart, however, causeth his down-going.

  I love all who are like heavy drops falling one by one out of the dark

cloud that lowereth over man: they herald the coming of the lightning, and

succumb as heralds.

  Lo, I am a herald of the lightning, and a heavy drop out of the cloud: the

lightning, however, is the SUPERMAN.--

  5.

  When Zarathustra had spoken these words, he again looked at the people,

and was silent. "There they stand," said he to his heart; "there they laugh:

they understand me not; I am not the mouth for these ears.

  Must one first batter their ears, that they may learn to hear with their

eyes? Must one clatter like kettledrums and penitential preachers? Or do they

only believe the stammerer?

  They have something whereof they are proud. What do they call it, that

which maketh them proud? Culture, they call it; it distinguisheth them from

the goatherds.

  They dislike, therefore, to hear of 'contempt' of themselves. So I will

appeal to their pride.

  I will speak unto them of the most contemptible thing: that, however, is

THE LAST MAN!"

  And thus spake Zarathustra unto the people:

  It is time for man to fix his goal. It is time for man to plant the germ of

his highest hope.

  Still is his soil rich enough for it. But that soil will one day be poor and

exhausted, and no lofty tree will any longer be able to grow thereon.

  Alas! there cometh the time when man will no longer launch the arrow of

his longing beyond man--and the string of his bow will have unlearned to

whizz!

  I tell you: one must still have chaos in one, to give birth to a dancing star.

I tell you: ye have still chaos in you.

  Alas! There cometh the time when man will no longer give birth to any

star. Alas! There cometh the time of the most despicable man, who can nolonger despise himself.

  Lo! I show you THE LAST MAN.

  "What is love? What is creation? What is longing? What is a star?"--so

asketh the last man and blinketh.

  The earth hath then become small, and on it there hoppeth the last man

who maketh everything small. His species is ineradicable like that of the

ground-flea; the last man liveth longest.

  "We have discovered happiness"--say the last men, and blink thereby.

  They have left the regions where it is hard to live; for they need warmth.

One still loveth one's neighbour and rubbeth against him; for one needeth

warmth.

  Turning ill and being distrustful, they consider sinful: they walk warily.

He is a fool who still stumbleth over stones or men!

  A little poison now and then: that maketh pleasant dreams. And much

poison at last for a pleasant death.

  One  still  worketh,  for  work  is  a  pastime.  But  one  is  careful  lest  the

pastime should hurt one.

  One no longer becometh poor or rich; both are too burdensome. Who still

wanteth to rule? Who still wanteth to obey? Both are too burdensome.

  No shepherd, and one herd! Every one wanteth the same; every one is

equal: he who hath other sentiments goeth voluntarily into the madhouse.

  "Formerly all the world was insane,"--say the subtlest of them, and blink

thereby.

  They are clever and know all that hath happened: so there is no end to

their  raillery.  People  still  fall  out,  but  are  soon  reconciled--otherwise  it

spoileth their stomachs.

  They have their little pleasures for the day, and their little pleasures for

the night, but they have a regard for health.

  "We have discovered happiness,"--say the last men, and blink thereby.--

  And here ended the first discourse of Zarathustra, which is also called

"The Prologue": for at this point the shouting and mirth of the multitude

interrupted him. "Give us this last man, O Zarathustra,"--they called out--

"make  us  into  these  last  men!  Then  will  we  make  thee  a  present  of  the

Superman!" And all the people exulted and smacked their lips. Zarathustra,

however, turned sad, and said to his heart:

  "They understand me not: I am not the mouth for these ears.

  Too  long,  perhaps,  have  I  lived  in  the  mountains;  too  much  have  Ihearkened unto the brooks and trees: now do I speak unto them as unto the

goatherds.

  Calm is my soul, and clear, like the mountains in the morning. But they

think me cold, and a mocker with terrible jests.

  And now do they look at me and laugh: and while they laugh they hate

me too. There is ice in their laughter."

  6.

  Then, however, something happened which made every mouth mute and

every eye fixed. In the meantime, of course, the rope-dancer had commenced

his performance: he had come out at a little door, and was going along the

rope  which  was  stretched  between  two  towers,  so  that  it  hung  above  the

market-place and the people. When he was just midway across, the little door

opened once more, and a gaudily-dressed fellow like a buffoon sprang out,

and went rapidly after the first one. "Go on, halt-foot," cried his frightful

voice, "go on, lazy-bones, interloper, sallow-face!--lest I tickle thee with my

heel! What dost thou here between the towers? In the tower is the place for

thee, thou shouldst be locked up; to one better than thyself thou blockest the

way!"--And with every word he came nearer and nearer the first one. When,

however, he was but a step behind, there happened the frightful thing which

made every mouth mute and every eye fixed--he uttered a yell like a devil,

and jumped over the other who was in his way. The latter, however, when he

thus saw his rival triumph, lost at the same time his head and his footing on

the rope; he threw his pole away, and shot downwards faster than it, like an

eddy of arms and legs, into the depth. The market-place and the people were

like the sea when the storm cometh on: they all flew apart and in disorder,

especially where the body was about to fall.

    Zarathustra,  however,  remained  standing,  and  just  beside  him  fell  the

body,  badly  injured  and  disfigured,  but  not  yet  dead.  After  a  while

consciousness returned to the shattered man, and he saw Zarathustra kneeling

beside him. "What art thou doing there?" said he at last, "I knew long ago that

the devil would trip me up. Now he draggeth me to hell: wilt thou prevent

him?"

  "On mine honour, my friend," answered Zarathustra, "there is nothing of

all that whereof thou speakest: there is no devil and no hell. Thy soul will be

dead even sooner than thy body: fear, therefore, nothing any more!"

  The man looked up distrustfully. "If thou speakest the truth," said he, "I

lose nothing when I lose my life. I am not much more than an animal whichhath been taught to dance by blows and scanty fare."

  "Not at all," said Zarathustra, "thou hast made danger thy calling; therein

there is nothing contemptible. Now thou perishest by thy calling: therefore

will I bury thee with mine own hands."

  When Zarathustra had said this the dying one did not reply further; but he

moved his hand as if he sought the hand of Zarathustra in gratitude.

  7.

    Meanwhile the evening came on, and the market-place veiled itself in

gloom.  Then  the  people  dispersed,  for  even  curiosity  and  terror  become

fatigued. Zarathustra, however, still sat beside the dead man on the ground,

absorbed in thought: so he forgot the time. But at last it became night, and a

cold wind blew upon the lonely one. Then arose Zarathustra and said to his

heart:

  Verily, a fine catch of fish hath Zarathustra made to-day! It is not a man

he hath caught, but a corpse.

  Sombre is human life, and as yet without meaning: a buffoon may be

fateful to it.

  I want to teach men the sense of their existence, which is the Superman,

the lightning out of the dark cloud--man.

  But still am I far from them, and my sense speaketh not unto their sense.

To men I am still something between a fool and a corpse.

  Gloomy is the night, gloomy are the ways of Zarathustra. Come, thou

cold and stiff companion! I carry thee to the place where I shall bury thee

with mine own hands.

  8.

  When Zarathustra had said this to his heart, he put the corpse upon his

shoulders and set out on his way. Yet had he not gone a hundred steps, when

there stole a man up to him and whispered in his ear--and lo! he that spake

was the buffoon from the tower. "Leave this town, O Zarathustra," said he,

"there are too many here who hate thee. The good and just hate thee, and call

thee their enemy and despiser; the believers in the orthodox belief hate thee,

and call thee a danger to the multitude. It was thy good fortune to be laughed

at: and verily thou spakest like a buffoon. It was thy good fortune to associate

with the dead dog; by so humiliating thyself thou hast saved thy life to-day.

Depart,  however,  from  this  town,--or  tomorrow  I  shall  jump  over  thee,  a

living  man  over  a  dead  one."  And  when  he  had  said  this,  the  buffoon

vanished; Zarathustra, however, went on through the dark streets.  At the gate of the town the grave-diggers met him: they shone their torch

on  his  face,  and,  recognising  Zarathustra,  they  sorely  derided  him.

"Zarathustra is carrying away the dead dog: a fine thing that Zarathustra hath

turned  a  grave-digger!  For  our  hands  are  too  cleanly  for  that  roast.  Will

Zarathustra steal the bite from the devil? Well then, good luck to the repast!

If only the devil is not a better thief than Zarathustra!--he will steal them

both, he will eat them both!" And they laughed among themselves, and put

their heads together.

    Zarathustra made no answer thereto, but went on his way. When he had

gone on for two hours, past forests and swamps, he had heard too much of the

hungry howling of the wolves, and he himself became a-hungry. So he halted

at a lonely house in which a light was burning.

  "Hunger attacketh me," said Zarathustra, "like a robber. Among forests

and swamps my hunger attacketh me, and late in the night.

    "Strange humours hath my hunger. Often it cometh to me only after a

repast, and all day it hath failed to come: where hath it been?"

  And thereupon Zarathustra knocked at the door of the house. An old man

appeared, who carried a light, and asked: "Who cometh unto me and my bad

sleep?"

  "A living man and a dead one," said Zarathustra. "Give me something to

eat and drink, I forgot it during the day. He that feedeth the hungry refresheth

his own soul, saith wisdom."

  The  old  man  withdrew,  but  came  back  immediately  and  offered

Zarathustra bread and wine. "A bad country for the hungry," said he; "that is

why I live here. Animal and man come unto me, the anchorite. But bid thy

companion eat and drink also, he is wearier than thou." Zarathustra answered:

"My companion is dead; I shall hardly be able to persuade him to eat." "That

doth not concern me," said the old man sullenly; "he that knocketh at my

door must take what I offer him. Eat, and fare ye well!"--

  Thereafter Zarathustra again went on for two hours, trusting to the path

and the light of the stars: for he was an experienced night-walker, and liked to

look  into  the  face  of  all  that  slept.  When  the  morning  dawned,  however,

Zarathustra  found  himself  in  a  thick  forest,  and  no  path  was  any  longer

visible. He then put the dead man in a hollow tree at his head--for he wanted

to protect him from the wolves--and laid himself down on the ground and

moss. And immediately he fell asleep, tired in body, but with a tranquil soul.

  9.  Long slept Zarathustra; and not only the rosy dawn passed over his head,

but also the morning. At last, however, his eyes opened, and amazedly he

gazed into the forest and the stillness, amazedly he gazed into himself. Then

he  arose  quickly,  like  a  seafarer  who  all  at  once  seeth  the  land;  and  he

shouted for joy: for he saw a new truth. And he spake thus to his heart:

  A light hath dawned upon me: I need companions--living ones; not dead

companions and corpses, which I carry with me where I will.

  But I need living companions, who will follow me because they want to

follow themselves--and to the place where I will.

  A light hath dawned upon me. Not to the people is Zarathustra to speak,

but to companions! Zarathustra shall not be the herd's herdsman and hound!

  To allure many from the herd--for that purpose have I come. The people

and the herd must be angry with me: a robber shall Zarathustra be called by

the herdsmen.

    Herdsmen, I say, but they call themselves the good and just. Herdsmen, I

say, but they call themselves the believers in the orthodox belief.

  Behold the good and just! Whom do they hate most? Him who breaketh

up their tables of values, the breaker, the lawbreaker:--he, however, is the

creator.

  Behold the believers of all beliefs! Whom do they hate most? Him who

breaketh up their tables of values, the breaker, the law-breaker--he, however,

is the creator.

    Companions, the creator seeketh, not corpses--and not herds or believers

either. Fellow-creators the creator seeketh--those who grave new values on

new tables.

    Companions, the creator seeketh, and fellow-reapers: for everything is

ripe  for  the  harvest  with  him.  But  he  lacketh  the  hundred  sickles:  so  he

plucketh the ears of corn and is vexed.

    Companions, the creator seeketh, and such as know how to whet their

sickles. Destroyers, will they be called, and despisers of good and evil. But

they are the reapers and rejoicers.

    Fellow-creators, Zarathustra seeketh; fellow-reapers and fellow-rejoicers,

Zarathustra  seeketh:  what  hath  he  to  do  with  herds  and  herdsmen  and

corpses!

  And thou, my first companion, rest in peace! Well have I buried thee in

thy hollow tree; well have I hid thee from the wolves.

  But I part from thee; the time hath arrived. 'Twixt rosy dawn and rosydawn there came unto me a new truth.

  I am not to be a herdsman, I am not to be a grave-digger. Not any more

will I discourse unto the people; for the last time have I spoken unto the dead.

  With  the  creators,  the  reapers,  and  the  rejoicers  will  I  associate:  the

rainbow will I show them, and all the stairs to the Superman.

  To the lone-dwellers will I sing my song, and to the twain-dwellers; and

unto him who hath still ears for the unheard, will I make the heart heavy with

my happiness.

  I make for my goal, I follow my course; over the loitering and tardy will I

leap. Thus let my on-going be their down-going!

  10.

  This had Zarathustra said to his heart when the sun stood at noon-tide.

Then he looked inquiringly aloft,--for he heard above him the sharp call of a

bird. And behold! An eagle swept through the air in wide circles, and on it

hung a serpent, not like a prey, but like a friend: for it kept itself coiled round

the eagle's neck.

  "They are mine animals," said Zarathustra, and rejoiced in his heart.

  "The proudest animal under the sun, and the wisest animal under the sun,-

-they have come out to reconnoitre.

  They want to know whether Zarathustra still liveth. Verily, do I still live?

  More  dangerous  have  I  found  it  among  men  than  among  animals;  in

dangerous paths goeth Zarathustra. Let mine animals lead me!

  When Zarathustra had said this, he remembered the words of the saint in

the forest. Then he sighed and spake thus to his heart:

    "Would that I were wiser! Would that I were wise from the very heart,

like my serpent!

  But I am asking the impossible. Therefore do I ask my pride to go always

with my wisdom!

  And if my wisdom should some day forsake me:--alas! it loveth to fly

away!--may my pride then fly with my folly!"

  Thus began Zarathustra's down-going.

                        I. THE THREE METAMORPHOSES.

  Three metamorphoses of the spirit do I designate to you: how the spirit

becometh a camel, the camel a lion, and the lion at last a child.

  Many heavy things are there for the spirit, the strong load-bearing spirit in

which reverence dwelleth: for the heavy and the heaviest longeth its strength.

  What is heavy? so asketh the load-bearing spirit; then kneeleth it downlike the camel, and wanteth to be well laden.

  What is the heaviest thing, ye heroes? asketh the load-bearing spirit, that I

may take it upon me and rejoice in my strength.

  Is it not this: To humiliate oneself in order to mortify one's pride? To

exhibit one's folly in order to mock at one's wisdom?

  Or is it this: To desert our cause when it celebrateth its triumph? To

ascend high mountains to tempt the tempter?

  Or is it this: To feed on the acorns and grass of knowledge, and for the

sake of truth to suffer hunger of soul?

  Or is it this: To be sick and dismiss comforters, and make friends of the

deaf, who never hear thy requests?

  Or is it this: To go into foul water when it is the water of truth, and not

disclaim cold frogs and hot toads?

  Or is it this: To love those who despise us, and give one's hand to the

phantom when it is going to frighten us?

  All these heaviest things the load-bearing spirit taketh upon itself: and

like the camel, which, when laden, hasteneth into the wilderness, so hasteneth

the spirit into its wilderness.

  But in the loneliest wilderness happeneth the second metamorphosis: here

the spirit becometh a lion; freedom will it capture, and lordship in its own

wilderness.

  Its last Lord it here seeketh: hostile will it be to him, and to its last God;

for victory will it struggle with the great dragon.

  What is the great dragon which the spirit is no longer inclined to call Lord

and God? "Thou-shalt," is the great dragon called. But the spirit of the lion

saith, "I will."

    "Thou-shalt," lieth in its path, sparkling with gold--a scale-covered beast;

and on every scale glittereth golden, "Thou shalt!"

  The values of a thousand years glitter on those scales, and thus speaketh

the mightiest of all dragons: "All the values of things--glitter on me.

  All  values  have  already  been  created,  and  all  created  values--do  I

represent.  Verily,  there  shall  be  no  'I  will'  any  more.  Thus  speaketh  the

dragon.

  My  brethren,  wherefore  is  there  need  of  the  lion  in  the  spirit?  Why

sufficeth not the beast of burden, which renounceth and is reverent?

  To create new values--that, even the lion cannot yet accomplish: but to

create itself freedom for new creating--that can the might of the lion do.  To create itself freedom, and give a holy Nay even unto duty: for that, my

brethren, there is need of the lion.

  To  assume  the  right  to  new  values--that  is  the  most  formidable

assumption for a load-bearing and reverent spirit. Verily, unto such a spirit it

is preying, and the work of a beast of prey.

  As its holiest, it once loved "Thou-shalt": now is it forced to find illusion

and arbitrariness even in the holiest things, that it may capture freedom from

its love: the lion is needed for this capture.

  But tell me, my brethren, what the child can do, which even the lion could

not do? Why hath the preying lion still to become a child?

  Innocence is the child, and forgetfulness, a new beginning, a game, a self-

rolling wheel, a first movement, a holy Yea.

  Aye, for the game of creating, my brethren, there is needed a holy Yea

unto life: ITS OWN will, willeth now the spirit; HIS OWN world winneth the

world's outcast.

  Three metamorphoses of the spirit have I designated to you: how the

spirit became a camel, the camel a lion, and the lion at last a child.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra. And at that time he abode in the town which is

called The Pied Cow.

                    II. THE ACADEMIC CHAIRS OF VIRTUE.

  People  commended  unto  Zarathustra  a  wise  man,  as  one  who  could

discourse well about sleep and virtue: greatly was he honoured and rewarded

for it, and all the youths sat before his chair. To him went Zarathustra, and sat

among the youths before his chair. And thus spake the wise man:

  Respect and modesty in presence of sleep! That is the first thing! And to

go out of the way of all who sleep badly and keep awake at night!

  Modest is even the thief in presence of sleep: he always stealeth softly

through the night. Immodest, however, is the night-watchman; immodestly he

carrieth his horn.

  No small art is it to sleep: it is necessary for that purpose to keep awake

all day.

  Ten times a day must thou overcome thyself: that causeth wholesome

weariness, and is poppy to the soul.

  Ten  times  must  thou  reconcile  again  with  thyself;  for  overcoming  is

bitterness, and badly sleep the unreconciled.

  Ten truths must thou find during the day; otherwise wilt thou seek truth

during the night, and thy soul will have been hungry.  Ten times must thou laugh during the day, and be cheerful; otherwise thy

stomach, the father of affliction, will disturb thee in the night.

  Few people know it, but one must have all the virtues in order to sleep

well. Shall I bear false witness? Shall I commit adultery?

  Shall I covet my neighbour's maidservant? All that would ill accord with

good sleep.

  And even if one have all the virtues, there is still one thing needful: to

send the virtues themselves to sleep at the right time.

  That they may not quarrel with one another, the good females! And about

thee, thou unhappy one!

  Peace with God and thy neighbour: so desireth good sleep. And peace

also with thy neighbour's devil! Otherwise it will haunt thee in the night.

  Honour  to  the  government,  and  obedience,  and  also  to  the  crooked

government! So desireth good sleep. How can I help it, if power like to walk

on crooked legs?

  He who leadeth his sheep to the greenest pasture, shall always be for me

the best shepherd: so doth it accord with good sleep.

  Many honours I want not, nor great treasures: they excite the spleen. But

it is bad sleeping without a good name and a little treasure.

  A small company is more welcome to me than a bad one: but they must

come and go at the right time. So doth it accord with good sleep.

  Well, also, do the poor in spirit please me: they promote sleep. Blessed

are they, especially if one always give in to them.

  Thus passeth the day unto the virtuous. When night cometh, then take I

good care not to summon sleep. It disliketh to be summoned--sleep, the lord

of the virtues!

  But  I  think  of  what  I  have  done  and  thought  during  the  day.  Thus

ruminating, patient as a cow, I ask myself: What were thy ten overcomings?

  And what were the ten reconciliations, and the ten truths, and the ten

laughters with which my heart enjoyed itself?

  Thus pondering, and cradled by forty thoughts, it overtaketh me all at

once--sleep, the unsummoned, the lord of the virtues.

  Sleep  tappeth  on  mine  eye,  and  it  turneth  heavy.  Sleep  toucheth  my

mouth, and it remaineth open.

  Verily,  on  soft  soles  doth  it  come  to  me,  the  dearest  of  thieves,  and

stealeth from me my thoughts: stupid do I then stand, like this academic

chair.  But not much longer do I then stand: I already lie.--

  When Zarathustra heard the wise man thus speak, he laughed in his heart:

for thereby had a light dawned upon him. And thus spake he to his heart:

  A fool seemeth this wise man with his forty thoughts: but I believe he

knoweth well how to sleep.

  Happy  even  is  he  who  liveth  near  this  wise  man!  Such  sleep  is

contagious--even through a thick wall it is contagious.

  A magic resideth even in his academic chair. And not in vain did the

youths sit before the preacher of virtue.

  His wisdom is to keep awake in order to sleep well. And verily, if life had

no  sense,  and  had  I  to  choose  nonsense,  this  would  be  the  desirablest

nonsense for me also.

  Now know I well what people sought formerly above all else when they

sought teachers of virtue. Good sleep they sought for themselves, and poppy-

head virtues to promote it!

  To all those belauded sages of the academic chairs, wisdom was sleep

without dreams: they knew no higher significance of life.

  Even at present, to be sure, there are some like this preacher of virtue, and

not always so honourable: but their time is past. And not much longer do they

stand: there they already lie.

  Blessed are those drowsy ones: for they shall soon nod to sleep.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                              III. BACKWORLDSMEN.

  Once  on  a  time,  Zarathustra  also  cast  his  fancy  beyond  man,  like  all

backworldsmen. The work of a suffering and tortured God, did the world

then seem to me.

  The  dream--and  diction--of  a  God,  did  the  world  then  seem  to  me;

coloured vapours before the eyes of a divinely dissatisfied one.

  Good and evil, and joy and woe, and I and thou--coloured vapours did

they seem to me before creative eyes. The creator wished to look away from

himself,--thereupon he created the world.

    Intoxicating joy is it for the sufferer to look away from his suffering and

forget himself. Intoxicating joy and self-forgetting, did the world once seem

to me.

  This world, the eternally imperfect, an eternal contradiction's image and

imperfect image--an intoxicating joy to its imperfect creator:--thus did the

world once seem to me.  Thus,  once  on  a  time,  did  I  also  cast  my  fancy  beyond  man,  like  all

backworldsmen. Beyond man, forsooth?

  Ah, ye brethren, that God whom I created was human work and human

madness, like all the Gods!

  A man was he, and only a poor fragment of a man and ego. Out of mine

own ashes and glow it came unto me, that phantom. And verily, it came not

unto me from the beyond!

  What happened, my brethren? I surpassed myself, the suffering one; I

carried mine own ashes to the mountain; a brighter flame I contrived for

myself. And lo! Thereupon the phantom WITHDREW from me!

  To me the convalescent would it now be suffering and torment to believe

in such phantoms: suffering would it now be to me, and humiliation. Thus

speak I to backworldsmen.

    Suffering  was  it,  and  impotence--that  created  all  backworlds;  and  the

short madness of happiness, which only the greatest sufferer experienceth.

    Weariness, which seeketh to get to the ultimate with one leap, with a

death-leap; a poor ignorant weariness, unwilling even to will any longer: that

created all Gods and backworlds.

  Believe me, my brethren! It was the body which despaired of the body--it

groped with the fingers of the infatuated spirit at the ultimate walls.

  Believe me, my brethren! It was the body which despaired of the earth--it

heard the bowels of existence speaking unto it.

  And then it sought to get through the ultimate walls with its head--and not

with its head only--into "the other world."

  But that "other world" is well concealed from man, that dehumanised,

inhuman world, which is a celestial naught; and the bowels of existence do

not speak unto man, except as man.

  Verily, it is difficult to prove all being, and hard to make it speak. Tell

me, ye brethren, is not the strangest of all things best proved?

  Yea,  this  ego,  with  its  contradiction  and  perplexity,  speaketh  most

uprightly  of  its  being--this  creating,  willing,  evaluing  ego,  which  is  the

measure and value of things.

  And this most upright existence, the ego--it speaketh of the body, and still

implieth the body, even when it museth and raveth and fluttereth with broken

wings.

  Always  more  uprightly  learneth  it  to  speak,  the  ego;  and  the  more  it

learneth, the more doth it find titles and honours for the body and the earth.  A new pride taught me mine ego, and that teach I unto men: no longer to

thrust one's head into the sand of celestial things, but to carry it freely, a

terrestrial head, which giveth meaning to the earth!

  A  new  will  teach  I  unto  men:  to  choose  that  path  which  man  hath

followed blindly, and to approve of it--and no longer to slink aside from it,

like the sick and perishing!

  The sick and perishing--it was they who despised the body and the earth,

and invented the heavenly world, and the redeeming blood-drops; but even

those sweet and sad poisons they borrowed from the body and the earth!

  From their misery they sought escape, and the stars were too remote for

them. Then they sighed: "O that there were heavenly paths by which to steal

into  another  existence  and  into  happiness!"  Then  they  contrived  for

themselves their by-paths and bloody draughts!

  Beyond  the  sphere  of  their  body  and  this  earth  they  now  fancied

themselves transported, these ungrateful ones. But to what did they owe the

convulsion and rapture of their transport? To their body and this earth.

  Gentle is Zarathustra to the sickly. Verily, he is not indignant at their

modes of consolation and ingratitude. May they become convalescents and

overcomers, and create higher bodies for themselves!

  Neither is Zarathustra indignant at a convalescent who looketh tenderly

on his delusions, and at midnight stealeth round the grave of his God; but

sickness and a sick frame remain even in his tears.

  Many sickly ones have there always been among those who muse, and

languish for God; violently they hate the discerning ones, and the latest of

virtues, which is uprightness.

    Backward  they  always  gaze  toward  dark  ages:  then,  indeed,  were

delusion and faith something different. Raving of the reason was likeness to

God, and doubt was sin.

  Too well do I know those godlike ones: they insist on being believed in,

and that doubt is sin. Too well, also, do I know what they themselves most

believe in.

  Verily, not in backworlds and redeeming blood-drops: but in the body do

they also believe most; and their own body is for them the thing-in-itself.

  But it is a sickly thing to them, and gladly would they get out of their

skin. Therefore hearken they to the preachers of death, and themselves preach

backworlds.

  Hearken rather, my brethren, to the voice of the healthy body; it is a moreupright and pure voice.

  More uprightly and purely speaketh the healthy body, perfect and square-

built; and it speaketh of the meaning of the earth.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                      IV. THE DESPISERS OF THE BODY.

  To the despisers of the body will I speak my word. I wish them neither to

learn afresh, nor teach anew, but only to bid farewell to their own bodies,--

and thus be dumb.

  "Body am I, and soul"--so saith the child. And why should one not speak

like children?

  But the awakened one, the knowing one, saith: "Body am I entirely, and

nothing more; and soul is only the name of something in the body."

  The body is a big sagacity, a plurality with one sense, a war and a peace,

a flock and a shepherd.

  An instrument of thy body is also thy little sagacity, my brother, which

thou callest "spirit"--a little instrument and plaything of thy big sagacity.

  "Ego," sayest thou, and art proud of that word. But the greater thing--in

which thou art unwilling to believe--is thy body with its big sagacity; it saith

not "ego," but doeth it.

  What the sense feeleth, what the spirit discerneth, hath never its end in

itself. But sense and spirit would fain persuade thee that they are the end of

all things: so vain are they.

    Instruments and playthings are sense and spirit: behind them there is still

the Self. The Self seeketh with the eyes of the senses, it hearkeneth also with

the ears of the spirit.

  Ever  hearkeneth  the  Self,  and  seeketh;  it  compareth,  mastereth,

conquereth, and destroyeth. It ruleth, and is also the ego's ruler.

  Behind thy thoughts and feelings, my brother, there is a mighty lord, an

unknown sage--it is called Self; it dwelleth in thy body, it is thy body.

  There is more sagacity in thy body than in thy best wisdom. And who

then knoweth why thy body requireth just thy best wisdom?

  Thy Self laugheth at thine ego, and its proud prancings. "What are these

prancings and flights of thought unto me?" it saith to itself. "A by-way to my

purpose. I am the leading-string of the ego, and the prompter of its notions."

  The Self saith unto the ego: "Feel pain!" And thereupon it suffereth, and

thinketh  how  it  may  put  an  end  thereto--and  for  that  very  purpose  it  IS

MEANT to think.  The Self saith unto the ego: "Feel pleasure!" Thereupon it rejoiceth, and

thinketh how it may ofttimes rejoice--and for that very purpose it IS MEANT

to think.

  To the despisers of the body will I speak a word. That they despise is

caused by their esteem. What is it that created esteeming and despising and

worth and will?

  The creating Self created for itself esteeming and despising, it created for

itself joy and woe. The creating body created for itself spirit, as a hand to its

will.

  Even in your folly and despising ye each serve your Self, ye despisers of

the body. I tell you, your very Self wanteth to die, and turneth away from life.

  No longer can your Self do that which it desireth most:--create beyond

itself. That is what it desireth most; that is all its fervour.

  But it is now too late to do so:--so your Self wisheth to succumb, ye

despisers of the body.

  To  succumb--so  wisheth  your  Self;  and  therefore  have  ye  become

despisers of the body. For ye can no longer create beyond yourselves.

  And  therefore  are  ye  now  angry  with  life  and  with  the  earth.  And

unconscious envy is in the sidelong look of your contempt.

  I go not your way, ye despisers of the body! Ye are no bridges for me to

the Superman!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                              V. JOYS AND PASSIONS.

  My brother, when thou hast a virtue, and it is thine own virtue, thou hast

it in common with no one.

  To be sure, thou wouldst call it by name and caress it; thou wouldst pull

its ears and amuse thyself with it.

  And lo! Then hast thou its name in common with the people, and hast

become one of the people and the herd with thy virtue!

  Better for thee to say: "Ineffable is it, and nameless, that which is pain

and sweetness to my soul, and also the hunger of my bowels."

  Let thy virtue be too high for the familiarity of names, and if thou must

speak of it, be not ashamed to stammer about it.

  Thus speak and stammer: "That is MY good, that do I love, thus doth it

please me entirely, thus only do I desire the good.

  Not as the law of a God do I desire it, not as a human law or a human

need do I desire it; it is not to be a guide-post for me to superearths andparadises.

  An earthly virtue is it which I love: little prudence is therein, and the least

everyday wisdom.

  But that bird built its nest beside me: therefore, I love and cherish it--now

sitteth it beside me on its golden eggs."

  Thus shouldst thou stammer, and praise thy virtue.

  Once hadst thou passions and calledst them evil. But now hast thou only

thy virtues: they grew out of thy passions.

  Thou implantedst thy highest aim into the heart of those passions: then

became they thy virtues and joys.

  And  though  thou  wert  of  the  race  of  the  hot-tempered,  or  of  the

voluptuous, or of the fanatical, or the vindictive;

  All thy passions in the end became virtues, and all thy devils angels.

  Once hadst thou wild dogs in thy cellar: but they changed at last into

birds and charming songstresses.

  Out of thy poisons brewedst thou balsam for thyself; thy cow, affliction,

milkedst thou--now drinketh thou the sweet milk of her udder.

  And nothing evil groweth in thee any longer, unless it be the evil that

groweth out of the conflict of thy virtues.

  My brother, if thou be fortunate, then wilt thou have one virtue and no

more: thus goest thou easier over the bridge.

    Illustrious is it to have many virtues, but a hard lot; and many a one hath

gone into the wilderness and killed himself, because he was weary of being

the battle and battlefield of virtues.

  My  brother,  are  war  and  battle  evil?  Necessary,  however,  is  the  evil;

necessary are the envy and the distrust and the back-biting among the virtues.

  Lo! how each of thy virtues is covetous of the highest place; it wanteth

thy  whole  spirit  to  be  ITS  herald,  it  wanteth  thy  whole  power,  in  wrath,

hatred, and love.

    Jealous is every virtue of the others, and a dreadful thing is jealousy.

Even virtues may succumb by jealousy.

  He whom the flame of jealousy encompasseth, turneth at last, like the

scorpion, the poisoned sting against himself.

  Ah! my brother, hast thou never seen a virtue backbite and stab itself?

  Man is something that hath to be surpassed: and therefore shalt thou love

thy virtues,--for thou wilt succumb by them.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.                              VI. THE PALE CRIMINAL.

  Ye do not mean to slay, ye judges and sacrificers, until the animal hath

bowed its head? Lo! the pale criminal hath bowed his head: out of his eye

speaketh the great contempt.

  "Mine ego is something which is to be surpassed: mine ego is to me the

great contempt of man": so speaketh it out of that eye.

  When  he  judged  himself--that  was  his  supreme  moment;  let  not  the

exalted one relapse again into his low estate!

  There is no salvation for him who thus suffereth from himself, unless it

be speedy death.

  Your slaying, ye judges, shall be pity, and not revenge; and in that ye

slay, see to it that ye yourselves justify life!

  It is not enough that ye should reconcile with him whom ye slay. Let your

sorrow be love to the Superman: thus will ye justify your own survival!

  "Enemy" shall ye say but not "villain," "invalid" shall ye say but not

"wretch," "fool" shall ye say but not "sinner."

  And thou, red judge, if thou would say audibly all thou hast done in

thought, then would every one cry: "Away with the nastiness and the virulent

reptile!"

  But one thing is the thought, another thing is the deed, and another thing

is the idea of the deed. The wheel of causality doth not roll between them.

  An idea made this pale man pale. Adequate was he for his deed when he

did it, but the idea of it, he could not endure when it was done.

  Evermore did he now see himself as the doer of one deed. Madness, I call

this: the exception reversed itself to the rule in him.

  The streak of chalk bewitcheth the hen; the stroke he struck bewitched his

weak reason. Madness AFTER the deed, I call this.

  Hearken, ye judges! There is another madness besides, and it is BEFORE

the deed. Ah! ye have not gone deep enough into this soul!

  Thus speaketh the red judge: "Why did this criminal commit murder? He

meant to rob." I tell you, however, that his soul wanted blood, not booty: he

thirsted for the happiness of the knife!

  But his weak reason understood not this madness, and it persuaded him.

"What matter about blood!" it said; "wishest thou not, at least, to make booty

thereby? Or take revenge?"

  And he hearkened unto his weak reason: like lead lay its words upon him-

-thereupon he robbed when he murdered. He did not mean to be ashamed ofhis madness.

  And now once more lieth the lead of his guilt upon him, and once more is

his weak reason so benumbed, so paralysed, and so dull.

  Could he only shake his head, then would his burden roll off; but who

shaketh that head?

  What  is  this  man?  A  mass  of  diseases  that  reach  out  into  the  world

through the spirit; there they want to get their prey.

  What is this man? A coil of wild serpents that are seldom at peace among

themselves--so they go forth apart and seek prey in the world.

  Look  at  that  poor  body!  What  it  suffered  and  craved,  the  poor  soul

interpreted to itself--it interpreted it as murderous desire, and eagerness for

the happiness of the knife.

  Him who now turneth sick, the evil overtaketh which is now the evil: he

seeketh to cause pain with that which causeth him pain. But there have been

other ages, and another evil and good.

  Once was doubt evil, and the will to Self. Then the invalid became a

heretic or sorcerer; as heretic or sorcerer he suffered, and sought to cause

suffering.

  But this will not enter your ears; it hurteth your good people, ye tell me.

But what doth it matter to me about your good people!

  Many things in your good people cause me disgust, and verily, not their

evil. I would that they had a madness by which they succumbed, like this pale

criminal!

  Verily, I would that their madness were called truth, or fidelity, or justice:

but  they  have  their  virtue  in  order  to  live  long,  and  in  wretched  self-

complacency.

  I am a railing alongside the torrent; whoever is able to grasp me may

grasp me! Your crutch, however, I am not.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                          VII. READING AND WRITING.

  Of all that is written, I love only what a person hath written with his

blood. Write with blood, and thou wilt find that blood is spirit.

  It is no easy task to understand unfamiliar blood; I hate the reading idlers.

  He who knoweth the reader, doeth nothing more for the reader. Another

century of readers--and spirit itself will stink.

  Every one being allowed to learn to read, ruineth in the long run not only

writing but also thinking.  Once spirit was God, then it became man, and now it even becometh

populace.

  He that writeth in blood and proverbs doth not want to be read, but learnt

by heart.

  In the mountains the shortest way is from peak to peak, but for that route

thou must have long legs. Proverbs should be peaks, and those spoken to

should be big and tall.

  The atmosphere rare and pure, danger near and the spirit full of a joyful

wickedness: thus are things well matched.

  I want to have goblins about me, for I am courageous. The courage which

scareth away ghosts, createth for itself goblins--it wanteth to laugh.

  I no longer feel in common with you; the very cloud which I see beneath

me, the blackness and heaviness at which I laugh--that is your thunder-cloud.

  Ye look aloft when ye long for exaltation; and I look downward because I

am exalted.

  Who among you can at the same time laugh and be exalted?

  He who climbeth on the highest mountains, laugheth at all tragic plays

and tragic realities.

    Courageous, unconcerned, scornful, coercive--so wisdom wisheth us; she

is a woman, and ever loveth only a warrior.

  Ye tell me, "Life is hard to bear." But for what purpose should ye have

your pride in the morning and your resignation in the evening?

  Life is hard to bear: but do not affect to be so delicate! We are all of us

fine sumpter asses and assesses.

  What have we in common with the rose-bud, which trembleth because a

drop of dew hath formed upon it?

  It is true we love life; not because we are wont to live, but because we are

wont to love.

  There is always some madness in love. But there is always, also, some

method in madness.

  And to me also, who appreciate life, the butterflies, and soap-bubbles, and

whatever is like them amongst us, seem most to enjoy happiness.

  To  see  these  light,  foolish,  pretty,  lively  little  sprites  flit  about--that

moveth Zarathustra to tears and songs.

  I should only believe in a God that would know how to dance.

  And  when  I  saw  my  devil,  I  found  him  serious,  thorough,  profound,

solemn: he was the spirit of gravity--through him all things fall.  Not by wrath, but by laughter, do we slay. Come, let us slay the spirit of

gravity!

  I learned to walk; since then have I let myself run. I learned to fly; since

then I do not need pushing in order to move from a spot.

  Now am I light, now do I fly; now do I see myself under myself. Now

there danceth a God in me.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                          VIII. THE TREE ON THE HILL.

    Zarathustra's eye had perceived that a certain youth avoided him. And as

he walked alone one evening over the hills surrounding the town called "The

Pied Cow," behold, there found he the youth sitting leaning against a tree,

and gazing with wearied look into the valley. Zarathustra thereupon laid hold

of the tree beside which the youth sat, and spake thus:

  "If I wished to shake this tree with my hands, I should not be able to do

so.

  But the wind, which we see not, troubleth and bendeth it as it listeth. We

are sorest bent and troubled by invisible hands."

  Thereupon the youth arose disconcerted, and said: "I hear Zarathustra,

and just now was I thinking of him!" Zarathustra answered:

  "Why art thou frightened on that account?--But it is the same with man as

with the tree.

  The more he seeketh to rise into the height and light, the more vigorously

do his roots struggle earthward, downward, into the dark and deep--into the

evil."

  "Yea, into the evil!" cried the youth. "How is it possible that thou hast

discovered my soul?"

    Zarathustra  smiled,  and  said:  "Many  a  soul  one  will  never  discover,

unless one first invent it."

  "Yea, into the evil!" cried the youth once more.

  "Thou saidst the truth, Zarathustra. I trust myself no longer since I sought

to rise into the height, and nobody trusteth me any longer; how doth that

happen?

  I change too quickly: my to-day refuteth my yesterday. I often overleap

the steps when I clamber; for so doing, none of the steps pardons me.

  When aloft, I find myself always alone. No one speaketh unto me; the

frost of solitude maketh me tremble. What do I seek on the height?

  My contempt and my longing increase together; the higher I clamber, themore do I despise him who clambereth. What doth he seek on the height?

  How ashamed I am of my clambering and stumbling! How I mock at my

violent panting! How I hate him who flieth! How tired I am on the height!"

  Here the youth was silent. And Zarathustra contemplated the tree beside

which they stood, and spake thus:

  "This tree standeth lonely here on the hills; it hath grown up high above

man and beast.

  And if it wanted to speak, it would have none who could understand it: so

high hath it grown.

  Now it waiteth and waiteth,--for what doth it wait? It dwelleth too close

to the seat of the clouds; it waiteth perhaps for the first lightning?"

  When  Zarathustra  had  said  this,  the  youth  called  out  with  violent

gestures: "Yea, Zarathustra, thou speakest the truth. My destruction I longed

for, when I desired to be on the height, and thou art the lightning for which I

waited! Lo! what have I been since thou hast appeared amongst us? It is mine

envy  of  thee  that  hath  destroyed  me!"--Thus  spake  the  youth,  and  wept

bitterly. Zarathustra, however, put his arm about him, and led the youth away

with him.

  And when they had walked a while together, Zarathustra began to speak

thus:

  It rendeth my heart. Better than thy words express it, thine eyes tell me all

thy danger.

  As yet thou art not free; thou still SEEKEST freedom. Too unslept hath

thy seeking made thee, and too wakeful.

  On the open height wouldst thou be; for the stars thirsteth thy soul. But

thy bad impulses also thirst for freedom.

  Thy wild dogs want liberty; they bark for joy in their cellar when thy

spirit endeavoureth to open all prison doors.

  Still  art  thou  a  prisoner--it  seemeth  to  me--who  deviseth  liberty  for

himself: ah! sharp becometh the soul of such prisoners, but also deceitful and

wicked.

  To purify himself, is still necessary for the freedman of the spirit. Much

of the prison and the mould still remaineth in him: pure hath his eye still to

become.

  Yea, I know thy danger. But by my love and hope I conjure thee: cast not

thy love and hope away!

  Noble  thou  feelest  thyself  still,  and  noble  others  also  feel  thee  still,though  they  bear  thee  a  grudge  and  cast  evil  looks.  Know  this,  that  to

everybody a noble one standeth in the way.

  Also to the good, a noble one standeth in the way: and even when they

call him a good man, they want thereby to put him aside.

  The new, would the noble man create, and a new virtue. The old, wanteth

the good man, and that the old should be conserved.

  But it is not the danger of the noble man to turn a good man, but lest he

should become a blusterer, a scoffer, or a destroyer.

  Ah! I have known noble ones who lost their highest hope. And then they

disparaged all high hopes.

  Then lived they shamelessly in temporary pleasures, and beyond the day

had hardly an aim.

  "Spirit is also voluptuousness,"--said they. Then broke the wings of their

spirit; and now it creepeth about, and defileth where it gnaweth.

  Once they thought of becoming heroes; but sensualists are they now. A

trouble and a terror is the hero to them.

  But by my love and hope I conjure thee: cast not away the hero in thy

soul! Maintain holy thy highest hope!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

  IX. THE PREACHERS OF DEATH.

  There  are  preachers  of  death:  and  the  earth  is  full  of  those  to  whom

desistance from life must be preached.

  Full is the earth of the superfluous; marred is life by the many-too-many.

May they be decoyed out of this life by the "life eternal"!

  "The yellow ones": so are called the preachers of death, or "the black

ones." But I will show them unto you in other colours besides.

  There are the terrible ones who carry about in themselves the beast of

prey, and have no choice except lusts or self-laceration. And even their lusts

are self-laceration.

  They have not yet become men, those terrible ones: may they preach

desistance from life, and pass away themselves!

  There are the spiritually consumptive ones: hardly are they born when

they begin to die, and long for doctrines of lassitude and renunciation.

  They would fain be dead, and we should approve of their wish! Let us

beware of awakening those dead ones, and of damaging those living coffins!

  They meet an invalid, or an old man, or a corpse--and immediately they

say: "Life is refuted!"  But they only are refuted, and their eye, which seeth only one aspect of

existence.

  Shrouded in thick melancholy, and eager for the little casualties that bring

death: thus do they wait, and clench their teeth.

  Or else, they grasp at sweetmeats, and mock at their childishness thereby:

they cling to their straw of life, and mock at their still clinging to it.

  Their wisdom speaketh thus: "A fool, he who remaineth alive; but so far

are we fools! And that is the foolishest thing in life!"

  "Life is only suffering": so say others, and lie not. Then see to it that YE

cease! See to it that the life ceaseth which is only suffering!

  And let this be the teaching of your virtue: "Thou shalt slay thyself! Thou

shalt steal away from thyself!"--

  "Lust is sin,"--so say some who preach death--"let us go apart and beget

no children!"

  "Giving  birth  is  troublesome,"--say  others--"why  still  give  birth?  One

beareth only the unfortunate!" And they also are preachers of death.

  "Pity is necessary,"--so saith a third party. "Take what I have! Take what

I am! So much less doth life bind me!"

  Were they consistently pitiful, then would they make their neighbours

sick of life. To be wicked--that would be their true goodness.

  But they want to be rid of life; what care they if they bind others still

faster with their chains and gifts!--

  And ye also, to whom life is rough labour and disquiet, are ye not very

tired of life? Are ye not very ripe for the sermon of death?

  All ye to whom rough labour is dear, and the rapid, new, and strange--ye

put up with yourselves badly; your diligence is flight, and the will to self-

forgetfulness.

  If ye believed more in life, then would ye devote yourselves less to the

momentary. But for waiting, ye have not enough of capacity in you--nor even

for idling!

    Everywhere resoundeth the voices of those who preach death; and the

earth is full of those to whom death hath to be preached.

  Or "life eternal"; it is all the same to me--if only they pass away quickly!-

-

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                              X. WAR AND WARRIORS.

  By our best enemies we do not want to be spared, nor by those eitherwhom we love from the very heart. So let me tell you the truth!

  My brethren in war! I love you from the very heart. I am, and was ever,

your counterpart. And I am also your best enemy. So let me tell you the truth!

  I know the hatred and envy of your hearts. Ye are not great enough not to

know of hatred and envy. Then be great enough not to be ashamed of them!

  And if ye cannot be saints of knowledge, then, I pray you, be at least its

warriors. They are the companions and forerunners of such saintship.

  I see many soldiers; could I but see many warriors! "Uniform" one calleth

what they wear; may it not be uniform what they therewith hide!

  Ye shall be those whose eyes ever seek for an enemy--for YOUR enemy.

And with some of you there is hatred at first sight.

  Your enemy shall ye seek; your war shall ye wage, and for the sake of

your thoughts! And if your thoughts succumb, your uprightness shall still

shout triumph thereby!

  Ye shall love peace as a means to new wars--and the short peace more

than the long.

  You I advise not to work, but to fight. You I advise not to peace, but to

victory. Let your work be a fight, let your peace be a victory!

  One can only be silent and sit peacefully when one hath arrow and bow;

otherwise one prateth and quarrelleth. Let your peace be a victory!

  Ye say it is the good cause which halloweth even war? I say unto you: it

is the good war which halloweth every cause.

  War and courage have done more great things than charity. Not your

sympathy, but your bravery hath hitherto saved the victims.

  "What is good?" ye ask. To be brave is good. Let the little girls say: "To

be good is what is pretty, and at the same time touching."

  They call you heartless: but your heart is true, and I love the bashfulness

of your goodwill. Ye are ashamed of your flow, and others are ashamed of

their ebb.

  Ye are ugly? Well then, my brethren, take the sublime about you, the

mantle of the ugly!

  And when your soul becometh great, then doth it become haughty, and in

your sublimity there is wickedness. I know you.

  In  wickedness  the  haughty  man  and  the  weakling  meet.  But  they

misunderstand one another. I know you.

  Ye shall only have enemies to be hated, but not enemies to be despised.

Ye must be proud of your enemies; then, the successes of your enemies arealso your successes.

    Resistance--that is the distinction of the slave. Let your distinction be

obedience. Let your commanding itself be obeying!

  To the good warrior soundeth "thou shalt" pleasanter than "I will." And

all that is dear unto you, ye shall first have it commanded unto you.

  Let your love to life be love to your highest hope; and let your highest

hope be the highest thought of life!

  Your highest thought, however, ye shall have it commanded unto you by

me--and it is this: man is something that is to be surpassed.

  So live your life of obedience and of war! What matter about long life!

What warrior wisheth to be spared!

  I spare you not, I love you from my very heart, my brethren in war!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                  XI. THE NEW IDOL.

    Somewhere  there  are  still  peoples  and  herds,  but  not  with  us,  my

brethren: here there are states.

  A state? What is that? Well! open now your ears unto me, for now will I

say unto you my word concerning the death of peoples.

  A state, is called the coldest of all cold monsters. Coldly lieth it also; and

this lie creepeth from its mouth: "I, the state, am the people."

  It is a lie! Creators were they who created peoples, and hung a faith and a

love over them: thus they served life.

    Destroyers, are they who lay snares for many, and call it the state: they

hang a sword and a hundred cravings over them.

  Where there is still a people, there the state is not understood, but hated as

the evil eye, and as sin against laws and customs.

  This sign I give unto you: every people speaketh its language of good and

evil: this its neighbour understandeth not. Its language hath it devised for

itself in laws and customs.

  But the state lieth in all languages of good and evil; and whatever it saith

it lieth; and whatever it hath it hath stolen.

  False is everything in it; with stolen teeth it biteth, the biting one. False

are even its bowels.

    Confusion of language of good and evil; this sign I give unto you as the

sign of the state. Verily, the will to death, indicateth this sign! Verily, it

beckoneth unto the preachers of death!

  Many too many are born: for the superfluous ones was the state devised!  See  just  how  it  enticeth  them  to  it,  the  many-too-many!  How  it

swalloweth and cheweth and recheweth them!

  "On earth there is nothing greater than I: it is I who am the regulating

finger of God"--thus roareth the monster. And not only the long-eared and

short-sighted fall upon their knees!

  Ah! even in your ears, ye great souls, it whispereth its gloomy lies! Ah! it

findeth out the rich hearts which willingly lavish themselves!

  Yea, it findeth you out too, ye conquerors of the old God! Weary ye

became of the conflict, and now your weariness serveth the new idol!

  Heroes and honourable ones, it would fain set up around it, the new idol!

Gladly it basketh in the sunshine of good consciences,--the cold monster!

    Everything  will  it  give  YOU,  if  YE  worship  it,  the  new  idol:  thus  it

purchaseth the lustre of your virtue, and the glance of your proud eyes.

  It seeketh to allure by means of you, the many-too-many! Yea, a hellish

artifice hath here been devised, a death-horse jingling with the trappings of

divine honours!

  Yea, a dying for many hath here been devised, which glorifieth itself as

life: verily, a hearty service unto all preachers of death!

  The state, I call it, where all are poison-drinkers, the good and the bad:

the state, where all lose themselves, the good and the bad: the state, where the

slow suicide of all--is called "life."

  Just see these superfluous ones! They steal the works of the inventors and

the  treasures  of  the  wise.  Culture,  they  call  their  theft--and  everything

becometh sickness and trouble unto them!

  Just see these superfluous ones! Sick are they always; they vomit their

bile and call it a newspaper. They devour one another, and cannot even digest

themselves.

  Just see these superfluous ones! Wealth they acquire and become poorer

thereby. Power they seek for, and above all, the lever of power, much money-

-these impotent ones!

  See them clamber, these nimble apes! They clamber over one another,

and thus scuffle into the mud and the abyss.

    Towards the throne they all strive: it is their madness--as if happiness sat

on  the  throne!  Ofttimes  sitteth  filth  on  the  throne.--and  ofttimes  also  the

throne on filth.

  Madmen they all seem to me, and clambering apes, and too eager. Badly

smelleth their idol to me, the cold monster: badly they all smell to me, theseidolaters.

  My brethren, will ye suffocate in the fumes of their maws and appetites!

Better break the windows and jump into the open air!

  Do go out of the way of the bad odour! Withdraw from the idolatry of the

superfluous!

  Do go out of the way of the bad odour! Withdraw from the steam of these

human sacrifices!

  Open still remaineth the earth for great souls. Empty are still many sites

for lone ones and twain ones, around which floateth the odour of tranquil

seas.

  Open still remaineth a free life for great souls. Verily, he who possesseth

little is so much the less possessed: blessed be moderate poverty!

  There, where the state ceaseth--there only commenceth the man who is

not superfluous: there commenceth the song of the necessary ones, the single

and irreplaceable melody.

  There, where the state CEASETH--pray look thither, my brethren! Do ye

not see it, the rainbow and the bridges of the Superman?--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                    XII. THE FLIES IN THE MARKET-PLACE.

  Flee, my friend, into thy solitude! I see thee deafened with the noise of

the great men, and stung all over with the stings of the little ones.

  Admirably do forest and rock know how to be silent with thee. Resemble

again  the  tree  which  thou  lovest,  the  broad-branched  one--silently  and

attentively it o'erhangeth the sea.

  Where solitude endeth, there beginneth the market-place; and where the

market-place beginneth, there beginneth also the noise of the great actors, and

the buzzing of the poison-flies.

  In  the  world  even  the  best  things  are  worthless  without  those  who

represent them: those representers, the people call great men.

  Little do the people understand what is great--that is to say, the creating

agency. But they have a taste for all representers and actors of great things.

  Around  the  devisers  of  new  values  revolveth  the  world:--invisibly  it

revolveth. But around the actors revolve the people and the glory: such is the

course of things.

  Spirit,  hath  the  actor,  but  little  conscience  of  the  spirit.  He  believeth

always in that wherewith he maketh believe most strongly--in HIMSELF!

    Tomorrow he hath a new belief, and the day after, one still newer. Sharpperceptions hath he, like the people, and changeable humours.

  To upset--that meaneth with him to prove. To drive mad--that meaneth

with  him  to  convince.  And  blood  is  counted  by  him  as  the  best  of  all

arguments.

  A  truth  which  only  glideth  into  fine  ears,  he  calleth  falsehood  and

trumpery. Verily, he believeth only in Gods that make a great noise in the

world!

  Full of clattering buffoons is the market-place,--and the people glory in

their great men! These are for them the masters of the hour.

  But the hour presseth them; so they press thee. And also from thee they

want Yea or Nay. Alas! thou wouldst set thy chair betwixt For and Against?

  On account of those absolute and impatient ones, be not jealous, thou

lover of truth! Never yet did truth cling to the arm of an absolute one.

  On account of those abrupt ones, return into thy security: only in the

market-place is one assailed by Yea? or Nay?

  Slow is the experience of all deep fountains: long have they to wait until

they know WHAT hath fallen into their depths.

  Away from the market-place and from fame taketh place all that is great:

away from the market-Place and from fame have ever dwelt the devisers of

new values.

  Flee,  my  friend,  into  thy  solitude:  I  see  thee  stung  all  over  by  the

poisonous flies. Flee thither, where a rough, strong breeze bloweth!

  Flee into thy solitude! Thou hast lived too closely to the small and the

pitiable. Flee from their invisible vengeance! Towards thee they have nothing

but vengeance.

  Raise no longer an arm against them! Innumerable are they, and it is not

thy lot to be a fly-flap.

    Innumerable  are  the  small  and  pitiable  ones;  and  of  many  a  proud

structure, rain-drops and weeds have been the ruin.

  Thou art not stone; but already hast thou become hollow by the numerous

drops. Thou wilt yet break and burst by the numerous drops.

  Exhausted I see thee, by poisonous flies; bleeding I see thee, and torn at a

hundred spots; and thy pride will not even upbraid.

  Blood they would have from thee in all innocence; blood their bloodless

souls crave for--and they sting, therefore, in all innocence.

  But thou, profound one, thou sufferest too profoundly even from small

wounds; and ere thou hadst recovered, the same poison-worm crawled overthy hand.

  Too proud art thou to kill these sweet-tooths. But take care lest it be thy

fate to suffer all their poisonous injustice!

  They  buzz  around  thee  also  with  their  praise:  obtrusiveness,  is  their

praise. They want to be close to thy skin and thy blood.

  They flatter thee, as one flattereth a God or devil; they whimper before

thee, as before a God or devil. What doth it come to! Flatterers are they, and

whimperers, and nothing more.

  Often, also, do they show themselves to thee as amiable ones. But that

hath ever been the prudence of the cowardly. Yea! the cowardly are wise!

  They  think  much  about  thee  with  their  circumscribed  souls--thou  art

always suspected by them! Whatever is much thought about is at last thought

suspicious.

  They punish thee for all thy virtues. They pardon thee in their inmost

hearts only--for thine errors.

  Because thou art gentle and of upright character, thou sayest: "Blameless

are  they  for  their  small  existence."  But  their  circumscribed  souls  think:

"Blamable is all great existence."

  Even  when  thou  art  gentle  towards  them,  they  still  feel  themselves

despised by thee; and they repay thy beneficence with secret maleficence.

  Thy silent pride is always counter to their taste; they rejoice if once thou

be humble enough to be frivolous.

  What we recognise in a man, we also irritate in him. Therefore be on your

guard against the small ones!

  In thy presence they feel themselves small, and their baseness gleameth

and gloweth against thee in invisible vengeance.

  Sawest thou not how often they became dumb when thou approachedst

them, and how their energy left them like the smoke of an extinguishing fire?

  Yea, my friend, the bad conscience art thou of thy neighbours; for they

are  unworthy  of  thee.  Therefore  they  hate  thee,  and  would  fain  suck  thy

blood.

  Thy neighbours will always be poisonous flies; what is great in thee--that

itself must make them more poisonous, and always more fly-like.

  Flee,  my  friend,  into  thy  solitude--and  thither,  where  a  rough  strong

breeze bloweth. It is not thy lot to be a fly-flap.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                    XIII. CHASTITY.  I love the forest. It is bad to live in cities: there, there are too many of the

lustful.

  Is it not better to fall into the hands of a murderer, than into the dreams of

a lustful woman?

  And just look at these men: their eye saith it--they know nothing better on

earth than to lie with a woman.

  Filth is at the bottom of their souls; and alas! if their filth hath still spirit

in it!

  Would that ye were perfect--at least as animals! But to animals belongeth

innocence.

  Do I counsel you to slay your instincts? I counsel you to innocence in

your instincts.

  Do I counsel you to chastity? Chastity is a virtue with some, but with

many almost a vice.

  These are continent, to be sure: but doggish lust looketh enviously out of

all that they do.

  Even into the heights of their virtue and into their cold spirit doth this

creature follow them, with its discord.

  And how nicely can doggish lust beg for a piece of spirit, when a piece of

flesh is denied it!

  Ye love tragedies and all that breaketh the heart? But I am distrustful of

your doggish lust.

  Ye have too cruel eyes, and ye look wantonly towards the sufferers. Hath

not your lust just disguised itself and taken the name of fellow-suffering?

  And also this parable give I unto you: Not a few who meant to cast out

their devil, went thereby into the swine themselves.

  To whom chastity is difficult, it is to be dissuaded: lest it become the road

to hell--to filth and lust of soul.

  Do I speak of filthy things? That is not the worst thing for me to do.

  Not when the truth is filthy, but when it is shallow, doth the discerning

one go unwillingly into its waters.

  Verily, there are chaste ones from their very nature; they are gentler of

heart, and laugh better and oftener than you.

  They laugh also at chastity, and ask: "What is chastity?

  Is chastity not folly? But the folly came unto us, and not we unto it.

  We offered that guest harbour and heart: now it dwelleth with us--let it

stay as long as it will!"--  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                  XIV. THE FRIEND.

  "One, is always too many about me"--thinketh the anchorite. "Always

once one--that maketh two in the long run!"

  I  and  me  are  always  too  earnestly  in  conversation:  how  could  it  be

endured, if there were not a friend?

  The friend of the anchorite is always the third one: the third one is the

cork which preventeth the conversation of the two sinking into the depth.

  Ah! there are too many depths for all anchorites. Therefore, do they long

so much for a friend, and for his elevation.

  Our  faith  in  others  betrayeth  wherein  we  would  fain  have  faith  in

ourselves. Our longing for a friend is our betrayer.

  And often with our love we want merely to overleap envy. And often we

attack and make ourselves enemies, to conceal that we are vulnerable.

  "Be at least mine enemy!"--thus speaketh the true reverence, which doth

not venture to solicit friendship.

  If one would have a friend, then must one also be willing to wage war for

him: and in order to wage war, one must be CAPLE of being an enemy.

  One ought still to honour the enemy in one's friend. Canst thou go nigh

unto thy friend, and not go over to him?

  In one's friend one shall have one's best enemy. Thou shalt be closest unto

him with thy heart when thou withstandest him.

  Thou wouldst wear no raiment before thy friend? It is in honour of thy

friend that thou showest thyself to him as thou art? But he wisheth thee to the

devil on that account!

  He who maketh no secret of himself shocketh: so much reason have ye to

fear nakedness! Aye, if ye were Gods, ye could then be ashamed of clothing!

  Thou canst not adorn thyself fine enough for thy friend; for thou shalt be

unto him an arrow and a longing for the Superman.

  Sawest thou ever thy friend asleep--to know how he looketh? What is

usually  the  countenance  of  thy  friend?  It  is  thine  own  countenance,  in  a

coarse and imperfect mirror.

  Sawest thou ever thy friend asleep? Wert thou not dismayed at thy friend

looking so? O my friend, man is something that hath to be surpassed.

  In  divining  and  keeping  silence  shall  the  friend  be  a  master:  not

everything must thou wish to see. Thy dream shall disclose unto thee what

thy friend doeth when awake.  Let thy pity be a divining: to know first if thy friend wanteth pity. Perhaps

he loveth in thee the unmoved eye, and the look of eternity.

  Let thy pity for thy friend be hid under a hard shell; thou shalt bite out a

tooth upon it. Thus will it have delicacy and sweetness.

  Art  thou  pure  air  and  solitude  and  bread  and  medicine  to  thy  friend?

Many a one cannot loosen his own fetters, but is nevertheless his friend's

emancipator.

  Art thou a slave? Then thou canst not be a friend. Art thou a tyrant? Then

thou canst not have friends.

  Far too long hath there been a slave and a tyrant concealed in woman. On

that account woman is not yet capable of friendship: she knoweth only love.

  In woman's love there is injustice and blindness to all she doth not love.

And  even  in  woman's  conscious  love,  there  is  still  always  surprise  and

lightning and night, along with the light.

  As yet woman is not capable of friendship: women are still cats, and

birds. Or at the best, cows.

  As yet woman is not capable of friendship. But tell me, ye men, who of

you are capable of friendship?

  Oh! your poverty, ye men, and your sordidness of soul! As much as ye

give to your friend, will I give even to my foe, and will not have become

poorer thereby.

  There is comradeship: may there be friendship!

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                    XV. THE THOUSAND AND ONE GOALS.

  Many lands saw Zarathustra, and many peoples: thus he discovered the

good and bad of many peoples. No greater power did Zarathustra find on

earth than good and bad.

  No people could live without first valuing; if a people will maintain itself,

however, it must not value as its neighbour valueth.

  Much that passed for good with one people was regarded with scorn and

contempt by another: thus I found it. Much found I here called bad, which

was there decked with purple honours.

  Never  did  the  one  neighbour  understand  the  other:  ever  did  his  soul

marvel at his neighbour's delusion and wickedness.

  A table of excellencies hangeth over every people. Lo! it is the table of

their triumphs; lo! it is the voice of their Will to Power.

  It is laudable, what they think hard; what is indispensable and hard theycall good; and what relieveth in the direst distress, the unique and hardest of

all,--they extol as holy.

    Whatever maketh them rule and conquer and shine, to the dismay and

envy of their neighbours, they regard as the high and foremost thing, the test

and the meaning of all else.

  Verily, my brother, if thou knewest but a people's need, its land, its sky,

and its neighbour, then wouldst thou divine the law of its surmountings, and

why it climbeth up that ladder to its hope.

    "Always shalt thou be the foremost and prominent above others: no one

shall thy jealous soul love, except a friend"--that made the soul of a Greek

thrill: thereby went he his way to greatness.

  "To speak truth, and be skilful with bow and arrow"--so seemed it alike

pleasing  and  hard  to  the  people  from  whom  cometh  my  name--the  name

which is alike pleasing and hard to me.

  "To honour father and mother, and from the root of the soul to do their

will"--this table of surmounting hung another people over them, and became

powerful and permanent thereby.

  "To have fidelity, and for the sake of fidelity to risk honour and blood,

even  in  evil  and  dangerous  courses"--teaching  itself  so,  another  people

mastered itself, and thus mastering itself, became pregnant and heavy with

great hopes.

  Verily, men have given unto themselves all their good and bad. Verily,

they took it not, they found it not, it came not unto them as a voice from

heaven.

  Values did man only assign to things in order to maintain himself--he

created  only  the  significance  of  things,  a  human  significance!  Therefore,

calleth he himself "man," that is, the valuator.

  Valuing  is  creating:  hear  it,  ye  creating  ones!  Valuation  itself  is  the

treasure and jewel of the valued things.

  Through valuation only is there value; and without valuation the nut of

existence would be hollow. Hear it, ye creating ones!

  Change of values--that is, change of the creating ones. Always doth he

destroy who hath to be a creator.

  Creating ones were first of all peoples, and only in late times individuals;

verily, the individual himself is still the latest creation.

  Peoples once hung over them tables of the good. Love which would rule

and love which would obey, created for themselves such tables.  Older is the pleasure in the herd than the pleasure in the ego: and as long

as the good conscience is for the herd, the bad conscience only saith: ego.

  Verily, the crafty ego, the loveless one, that seeketh its advantage in the

advantage of many--it is not the origin of the herd, but its ruin.

  Loving ones, was it always, and creating ones, that created good and bad.

Fire of love gloweth in the names of all the virtues, and fire of wrath.

  Many lands saw Zarathustra, and many peoples: no greater power did

Zarathustra find on earth than the creations of the loving ones--"good" and

"bad" are they called.

  Verily,  a  prodigy  is  this  power  of  praising  and  blaming.  Tell  me,  ye

brethren, who will master it for me? Who will put a fetter upon the thousand

necks of this animal?

  A thousand goals have there been hitherto, for a thousand peoples have

there been. Only the fetter for the thousand necks is still lacking; there is

lacking the one goal. As yet humanity hath not a goal.

  But pray tell me, my brethren, if the goal of humanity be still lacking, is

there not also still lacking--humanity itself?--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                              XVI. NEIGHBOUR-LOVE.

  Ye crowd around your neighbour, and have fine words for it. But I say

unto you: your neighbour-love is your bad love of yourselves.

  Ye flee unto your neighbour from yourselves, and would fain make a

virtue thereof: but I fathom your "unselfishness."

  The THOU is older than the I; the THOU hath been consecrated, but not

yet the I: so man presseth nigh unto his neighbour.

  Do I advise you to neighbour-love? Rather do I advise you to neighbour-

flight and to furthest love!

  Higher than love to your neighbour is love to the furthest and future ones;

higher still than love to men, is love to things and phantoms.

  The phantom that runneth on before thee, my brother, is fairer than thou;

why dost thou not give unto it thy flesh and thy bones? But thou fearest, and

runnest unto thy neighbour.

  Ye  cannot  endure  it  with  yourselves,  and  do  not  love  yourselves

sufficiently: so ye seek to mislead your neighbour into love, and would fain

gild yourselves with his error.

  Would that ye could not endure it with any kind of near ones, or their

neighbours; then would ye have to create your friend and his overflowingheart out of yourselves.

  Ye call in a witness when ye want to speak well of yourselves; and when

ye have misled him to think well of you, ye also think well of yourselves.

  Not only doth he lie, who speaketh contrary to his knowledge, but more

so,  he  who  speaketh  contrary  to  his  ignorance.  And  thus  speak  ye  of

yourselves in your intercourse, and belie your neighbour with yourselves.

  Thus  saith  the  fool:  "Association  with  men  spoileth  the  character,

especially when one hath none."

  The one goeth to his neighbour because he seeketh himself, and the other

because he would fain lose himself. Your bad love to yourselves maketh

solitude a prison to you.

  The furthest ones are they who pay for your love to the near ones; and

when there are but five of you together, a sixth must always die.

  I love not your festivals either: too many actors found I there, and even

the spectators often behaved like actors.

  Not the neighbour do I teach you, but the friend. Let the friend be the

festival of the earth to you, and a foretaste of the Superman.

  I teach you the friend and his overflowing heart. But one must know how

to be a sponge, if one would be loved by overflowing hearts.

  I teach you the friend in whom the world standeth complete, a capsule of

the good,--the creating friend, who hath always a complete world to bestow.

  And as the world unrolled itself for him, so rolleth it together again for

him in rings, as the growth of good through evil, as the growth of purpose out

of chance.

  Let the future and the furthest be the motive of thy to-day; in thy friend

shalt thou love the Superman as thy motive.

  My brethren, I advise you not to neighbour-love--I advise you to furthest

love!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                  XVII. THE WAY OF THE CREATING ONE.

  Wouldst thou go into isolation, my brother? Wouldst thou seek the way

unto thyself? Tarry yet a little and hearken unto me.

  "He who seeketh may easily get lost himself. All isolation is wrong": so

say the herd. And long didst thou belong to the herd.

  The voice of the herd will still echo in thee. And when thou sayest, "I

have no longer a conscience in common with you," then will it be a plaint and

a pain.  Lo, that pain itself did the same conscience produce; and the last gleam of

that conscience still gloweth on thine affliction.

  But thou wouldst go the way of thine affliction, which is the way unto

thyself? Then show me thine authority and thy strength to do so!

  Art thou a new strength and a new authority? A first motion? A self-

rolling wheel? Canst thou also compel stars to revolve around thee?

  Alas!  there  is  so  much  lusting  for  loftiness!  There  are  so  many

convulsions  of  the  ambitions!  Show  me  that  thou  art  not  a  lusting  and

ambitious one!

  Alas! there are so many great thoughts that do nothing more than the

bellows: they inflate, and make emptier than ever.

  Free, dost thou call thyself? Thy ruling thought would I hear of, and not

that thou hast escaped from a yoke.

  Art thou one ENTITLED to escape from a yoke? Many a one hath cast

away his final worth when he hath cast away his servitude.

  Free from what? What doth that matter to Zarathustra! Clearly, however,

shall thine eye show unto me: free FOR WHAT?

  Canst thou give unto thyself thy bad and thy good, and set up thy will as a

law over thee? Canst thou be judge for thyself, and avenger of thy law?

  Terrible is aloneness with the judge and avenger of one's own law. Thus

is a star projected into desert space, and into the icy breath of aloneness.

  To-day sufferest thou still from the multitude, thou individual; to-day hast

thou still thy courage unabated, and thy hopes.

  But one day will the solitude weary thee; one day will thy pride yield, and

thy courage quail. Thou wilt one day cry: "I am alone!"

  One day wilt thou see no longer thy loftiness, and see too closely thy

lowliness; thy sublimity itself will frighten thee as a phantom. Thou wilt one

day cry: "All is false!"

  There are feelings which seek to slay the lonesome one; if they do not

succeed, then must they themselves die! But art thou capable of it--to be a

murderer?

  Hast thou ever known, my brother, the word "disdain"? And the anguish

of thy justice in being just to those that disdain thee?

  Thou  forcest  many  to  think  differently  about  thee;  that,  charge  they

heavily to thine account. Thou camest nigh unto them, and yet wentest past:

for that they never forgive thee.

  Thou goest beyond them: but the higher thou risest, the smaller doth theeye of envy see thee. Most of all, however, is the flying one hated.

  "How could ye be just unto me!"--must thou say--"I choose your injustice

as my allotted portion."

  Injustice and filth cast they at the lonesome one: but, my brother, if thou

wouldst be a star, thou must shine for them none the less on that account!

  And be on thy guard against the good and just! They would fain crucify

those who devise their own virtue--they hate the lonesome ones.

  Be on thy guard, also, against holy simplicity! All is unholy to it that is

not simple; fain, likewise, would it play with the fire--of the fagot and stake.

  And be on thy guard, also, against the assaults of thy love! Too readily

doth the recluse reach his hand to any one who meeteth him.

  To many a one mayest thou not give thy hand, but only thy paw; and I

wish thy paw also to have claws.

  But the worst enemy thou canst meet, wilt thou thyself always be; thou

waylayest thyself in caverns and forests.

  Thou lonesome one, thou goest the way to thyself! And past thyself and

thy seven devils leadeth thy way!

  A heretic wilt thou be to thyself, and a wizard and a sooth-sayer, and a

fool, and a doubter, and a reprobate, and a villain.

  Ready must thou be to burn thyself in thine own flame; how couldst thou

become new if thou have not first become ashes!

  Thou lonesome one, thou goest the way of the creating one: a God wilt

thou create for thyself out of thy seven devils!

  Thou lonesome one, thou goest the way of the loving one: thou lovest

thyself, and on that account despisest thou thyself, as only the loving ones

despise.

  To create, desireth the loving one, because he despiseth! What knoweth

he of love who hath not been obliged to despise just what he loved!

  With thy love, go into thine isolation, my brother, and with thy creating;

and late only will justice limp after thee.

  With my tears, go into thine isolation, my brother. I love him who seeketh

to create beyond himself, and thus succumbeth.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                        XVIII. OLD AND YOUNG WOMEN.

  "Why stealest thou along so furtively in the twilight, Zarathustra? And

what hidest thou so carefully under thy mantle?

  Is it a treasure that hath been given thee? Or a child that hath been bornthee? Or goest thou thyself on a thief's errand, thou friend of the evil?"--

  Verily, my brother, said Zarathustra, it is a treasure that hath been given

me: it is a little truth which I carry.

  But  it  is  naughty,  like  a  young  child;  and  if  I  hold  not  its  mouth,  it

screameth too loudly.

  As I went on my way alone to-day, at the hour when the sun declineth,

there met me an old woman, and she spake thus unto my soul:

  "Much hath Zarathustra spoken also to us women, but never spake he

unto us concerning woman."

  And  I  answered  her:  "Concerning  woman,  one  should  only  talk  unto

men."

  "Talk also unto me of woman," said she; "I am old enough to forget it

presently."

  And I obliged the old woman and spake thus unto her:

    Everything  in  woman  is  a  riddle,  and  everything  in  woman  hath  one

solution--it is called pregnancy.

  Man is for woman a means: the purpose is always the child. But what is

woman for man?

  Two  different  things  wanteth  the  true  man:  danger  and  diversion.

Therefore wanteth he woman, as the most dangerous plaything.

  Man shall be trained for war, and woman for the recreation of the warrior:

all else is folly.

  Too  sweet  fruits--these  the  warrior  liketh  not.  Therefore  liketh  he

woman;--bitter is even the sweetest woman.

  Better  than  man  doth  woman  understand  children,  but  man  is  more

childish than woman.

  In the true man there is a child hidden: it wanteth to play. Up then, ye

women, and discover the child in man!

  A  plaything  let  woman  be,  pure  and  fine  like  the  precious  stone,

illumined with the virtues of a world not yet come.

  Let the beam of a star shine in your love! Let your hope say: "May I bear

the Superman!"

  In your love let there be valour! With your love shall ye assail him who

inspireth you with fear!

  In your love be your honour! Little doth woman understand otherwise

about honour. But let this be your honour: always to love more than ye are

loved, and never be the second.  Let man fear woman when she loveth: then maketh she every sacrifice,

and everything else she regardeth as worthless.

  Let man fear woman when she hateth: for man in his innermost soul is

merely evil; woman, however, is mean.

  Whom hateth woman most?--Thus spake the iron to the loadstone: "I hate

thee most, because thou attractest, but art too weak to draw unto thee."

  The happiness of man is, "I will." The happiness of woman is, "He will."

  "Lo! now hath the world become perfect!"--thus thinketh every woman

when she obeyeth with all her love.

  Obey,  must  the  woman,  and  find  a  depth  for  her  surface.  Surface,  is

woman's soul, a mobile, stormy film on shallow water.

  Man's soul, however, is deep, its current gusheth in subterranean caverns:

woman surmiseth its force, but comprehendeth it not.--

  Then answered me the old woman: "Many fine things hath Zarathustra

said, especially for those who are young enough for them.

  Strange!  Zarathustra  knoweth  little  about  woman,  and  yet  he  is  right

about them! Doth this happen, because with women nothing is impossible?

  And now accept a little truth by way of thanks! I am old enough for it!

  Swaddle it up and hold its mouth: otherwise it will scream too loudly, the

little truth."

  "Give me, woman, thy little truth!" said I. And thus spake the old woman:

  "Thou goest to women? Do not forget thy whip!"--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                          XIX. THE BITE OF THE ADDER.

  One day had Zarathustra fallen asleep under a fig-tree, owing to the heat,

with his arms over his face. And there came an adder and bit him in the neck,

so that Zarathustra screamed with pain. When he had taken his arm from his

face  he  looked  at  the  serpent;  and  then  did  it  recognise  the  eyes  of

Zarathustra, wriggled awkwardly, and tried to get away. "Not at all," said

Zarathustra, "as yet hast thou not received my thanks! Thou hast awakened

me in time; my journey is yet long." "Thy journey is short," said the adder

sadly; "my poison is fatal." Zarathustra smiled. "When did ever a dragon die

of a serpent's poison?"--said he. "But take thy poison back! Thou art not rich

enough to present it to me." Then fell the adder again on his neck, and licked

his wound.

  When Zarathustra once told this to his disciples they asked him: "And

what, O Zarathustra, is the moral of thy story?" And Zarathustra answeredthem thus:

  The destroyer of morality, the good and just call me: my story is immoral.

  When, however, ye have an enemy, then return him not good for evil: for

that would abash him. But prove that he hath done something good to you.

  And rather be angry than abash any one! And when ye are cursed, it

pleaseth me not that ye should then desire to bless. Rather curse a little also!

  And should a great injustice befall you, then do quickly five small ones

besides. Hideous to behold is he on whom injustice presseth alone.

  Did ye ever know this? Shared injustice is half justice. And he who can

bear it, shall take the injustice upon himself!

  A small revenge is humaner than no revenge at all. And if the punishment

be not also a right and an honour to the transgressor, I do not like your

punishing.

  Nobler is it to own oneself in the wrong than to establish one's right,

especially if one be in the right. Only, one must be rich enough to do so.

  I do not like your cold justice; out of the eye of your judges there always

glanceth the executioner and his cold steel.

  Tell me: where find we justice, which is love with seeing eyes?

  Devise me, then, the love which not only beareth all punishment, but also

all guilt!

  Devise me, then, the justice which acquitteth every one except the judge!

  And would ye hear this likewise? To him who seeketh to be just from the

heart, even the lie becometh philanthropy.

  But how could I be just from the heart! How can I give every one his

own! Let this be enough for me: I give unto every one mine own.

  Finally, my brethren, guard against doing wrong to any anchorite. How

could an anchorite forget! How could he requite!

  Like a deep well is an anchorite. Easy is it to throw in a stone: if it should

sink to the bottom, however, tell me, who will bring it out again?

  Guard against injuring the anchorite! If ye have done so, however, well

then, kill him also!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                            XX. CHILD AND MARRIAGE.

  I have a question for thee alone, my brother: like a sounding-lead, cast I

this question into thy soul, that I may know its depth.

  Thou art young, and desirest child and marriage. But I ask thee: Art thou

a man ENTITLED to desire a child?  Art thou the victorious one, the self-conqueror, the ruler of thy passions,

the master of thy virtues? Thus do I ask thee.

  Or doth the animal speak in thy wish, and necessity? Or isolation? Or

discord in thee?

  I would have thy victory and freedom long for a child. Living monuments

shalt thou build to thy victory and emancipation.

  Beyond thyself shalt thou build. But first of all must thou be built thyself,

rectangular in body and soul.

  Not  only  onward  shalt  thou  propagate  thyself,  but  upward!  For  that

purpose may the garden of marriage help thee!

  A higher body shalt thou create, a first movement, a spontaneously rolling

wheel--a creating one shalt thou create.

  Marriage: so call I the will of the twain to create the one that is more than

those who created it. The reverence for one another, as those exercising such

a will, call I marriage.

  Let this be the significance and the truth of thy marriage. But that which

the many-too-many call marriage, those superfluous ones--ah, what shall I

call it?

  Ah, the poverty of soul in the twain! Ah, the filth of soul in the twain! Ah,

the pitiable self-complacency in the twain!

  Marriage they call it all; and they say their marriages are made in heaven.

  Well, I do not like it, that heaven of the superfluous! No, I do not like

them, those animals tangled in the heavenly toils!

  Far from me also be the God who limpeth thither to bless what he hath

not matched!

  Laugh not at such marriages! What child hath not had reason to weep

over its parents?

  Worthy did this man seem, and ripe for the meaning of the earth: but

when I saw his wife, the earth seemed to me a home for madcaps.

  Yea, I would that the earth shook with convulsions when a saint and a

goose mate with one another.

  This one went forth in quest of truth as a hero, and at last got for himself

a small decked-up lie: his marriage he calleth it.

  That one was reserved in intercourse and chose choicely. But one time he

spoilt his company for all time: his marriage he calleth it.

  Another sought a handmaid with the virtues of an angel. But all at once

he became the handmaid of a woman, and now would he need also to becomean angel.

    Careful, have I found all buyers, and all of them have astute eyes. But

even the astutest of them buyeth his wife in a sack.

  Many short follies--that is called love by you. And your marriage putteth

an end to many short follies, with one long stupidity.

  Your love to woman, and woman's love to man--ah, would that it were

sympathy for suffering and veiled deities! But generally two animals alight

on one another.

  But even your best love is only an enraptured simile and a painful ardour.

It is a torch to light you to loftier paths.

  Beyond yourselves shall ye love some day! Then LEARN first of all to

love. And on that account ye had to drink the bitter cup of your love.

    Bitterness is in the cup even of the best love: thus doth it cause longing

for the Superman; thus doth it cause thirst in thee, the creating one!

  Thirst in the creating one, arrow and longing for the Superman: tell me,

my brother, is this thy will to marriage?

  Holy call I such a will, and such a marriage.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                            XXI. VOLUNTARY DEATH.

  Many  die  too  late,  and  some  die  too  early.  Yet  strange  soundeth  the

precept: "Die at the right time!

  Die at the right time: so teacheth Zarathustra.

  To be sure, he who never liveth at the right time, how could he ever die at

the right time? Would that he might never be born!--Thus do I advise the

superfluous ones.

  But even the superfluous ones make much ado about their death, and even

the hollowest nut wanteth to be cracked.

  Every one regardeth dying as a great matter: but as yet death is not a

festival. Not yet have people learned to inaugurate the finest festivals.

  The consummating death I show unto you, which becometh a stimulus

and promise to the living.

  His  death,  dieth  the  consummating  one  triumphantly,  surrounded  by

hoping and promising ones.

  Thus should one learn to die; and there should be no festival at which

such a dying one doth not consecrate the oaths of the living!

  Thus to die is best; the next best, however, is to die in battle, and sacrifice

a great soul.  But to the fighter equally hateful as to the victor, is your grinning death

which stealeth nigh like a thief,--and yet cometh as master.

  My death, praise I unto you, the voluntary death, which cometh unto me

because I want it.

  And when shall I want it?--He that hath a goal and an heir, wanteth death

at the right time for the goal and the heir.

  And out of reverence for the goal and the heir, he will hang up no more

withered wreaths in the sanctuary of life.

  Verily, not the rope-makers will I resemble: they lengthen out their cord,

and thereby go ever backward.

  Many a one, also, waxeth too old for his truths and triumphs; a toothless

mouth hath no longer the right to every truth.

  And whoever wanteth to have fame, must take leave of honour betimes,

and practise the difficult art of--going at the right time.

  One must discontinue being feasted upon when one tasteth best: that is

known by those who want to be long loved.

  Sour apples are there, no doubt, whose lot is to wait until the last day of

autumn: and at the same time they become ripe, yellow, and shrivelled.

  In some ageth the heart first, and in others the spirit. And some are hoary

in youth, but the late young keep long young.

  To many men life is a failure; a poison-worm gnaweth at their heart. Then

let them see to it that their dying is all the more a success.

  Many never become sweet; they rot even in the summer. It is cowardice

that holdeth them fast to their branches.

  Far too many live, and far too long hang they on their branches. Would

that a storm came and shook all this rottenness and worm-eatenness from the

tree!

  Would that there came preachers of SPEEDY death! Those would be the

appropriate storms and agitators of the trees of life! But I hear only slow

death preached, and patience with all that is "earthly."

  Ah! ye preach patience with what is earthly? This earthly is it that hath

too much patience with you, ye blasphemers!

  Verily, too early died that Hebrew whom the preachers of slow death

honour: and to many hath it proved a calamity that he died too early.

  As yet had he known only tears, and the melancholy of the Hebrews,

together with the hatred of the good and just--the Hebrew Jesus: then was he

seized with the longing for death.  Had he but remained in the wilderness, and far from the good and just!

Then,  perhaps,  would  he  have  learned  to  live,  and  love  the  earth--and

laughter also!

  Believe  it,  my  brethren!  He  died  too  early;  he  himself  would  have

disavowed his doctrine had he attained to my age! Noble enough was he to

disavow!

  But he was still immature. Immaturely loveth the youth, and immaturely

also hateth he man and earth. Confined and awkward are still his soul and the

wings of his spirit.

  But  in  man  there  is  more  of  the  child  than  in  the  youth,  and  less  of

melancholy: better understandeth he about life and death.

  Free  for  death,  and  free  in  death;  a  holy  Naysayer,  when  there  is  no

longer time for Yea: thus understandeth he about death and life.

  That your dying may not be a reproach to man and the earth, my friends:

that do I solicit from the honey of your soul.

  In your dying shall your spirit and your virtue still shine like an evening

after-glow around the earth: otherwise your dying hath been unsatisfactory.

  Thus will I die myself, that ye friends may love the earth more for my

sake; and earth will I again become, to have rest in her that bore me.

  Verily, a goal had Zarathustra; he threw his ball. Now be ye friends the

heirs of my goal; to you throw I the golden ball.

  Best of all, do I see you, my friends, throw the golden ball! And so tarry I

still a little while on the earth--pardon me for it!

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                          XXII. THE BESTOWING VIRTUE.

  1.

  When Zarathustra had taken leave of the town to which his heart was

attached, the name of which is "The Pied Cow," there followed him many

people who called themselves his disciples, and kept him company. Thus

came they to a crossroad. Then Zarathustra told them that he now wanted to

go alone; for he was fond of going alone. His disciples, however, presented

him at his departure with a staff, on the golden handle of which a serpent

twined  round  the  sun.  Zarathustra  rejoiced  on  account  of  the  staff,  and

supported himself thereon; then spake he thus to his disciples:

  Tell  me,  pray:  how  came  gold  to  the  highest  value?  Because  it  is

uncommon,  and  unprofiting,  and  beaming,  and  soft  in  lustre;  it  always

bestoweth itself.  Only  as  image  of  the  highest  virtue  came  gold  to  the  highest  value.

Goldlike,  beameth  the  glance  of  the  bestower.  Gold-lustre  maketh  peace

between moon and sun.

    Uncommon is the highest virtue, and unprofiting, beaming is it, and soft

of lustre: a bestowing virtue is the highest virtue.

  Verily,  I  divine  you  well,  my  disciples:  ye  strive  like  me  for  the

bestowing virtue. What should ye have in common with cats and wolves?

  It is your thirst to become sacrifices and gifts yourselves: and therefore

have ye the thirst to accumulate all riches in your soul.

  Insatiably striveth your soul for treasures and jewels, because your virtue

is insatiable in desiring to bestow.

  Ye constrain all things to flow towards you and into you, so that they

shall flow back again out of your fountain as the gifts of your love.

  Verily, an appropriator of all values must such bestowing love become;

but healthy and holy, call I this selfishness.--

  Another  selfishness  is  there,  an  all-too-poor  and  hungry  kind,  which

would always steal--the selfishness of the sick, the sickly selfishness.

  With the eye of the thief it looketh upon all that is lustrous; with the

craving of hunger it measureth him who hath abundance; and ever doth it

prowl round the tables of bestowers.

    Sickness speaketh in such craving, and invisible degeneration; of a sickly

body, speaketh the larcenous craving of this selfishness.

  Tell me, my brother, what do we think bad, and worst of all? Is it not

DEGENERATION?--And  we  always  suspect  degeneration  when  the

bestowing soul is lacking.

  Upward goeth our course from genera on to super-genera. But a horror to

us is the degenerating sense, which saith: "All for myself."

  Upward soareth our sense: thus is it a simile of our body, a simile of an

elevation. Such similes of elevations are the names of the virtues.

  Thus goeth the body through history, a becomer and fighter. And the

spirit--what is it to the body? Its fights' and victories' herald, its companion

and echo.

    Similes, are all names of good and evil; they do not speak out, they only

hint. A fool who seeketh knowledge from them!

  Give heed, my brethren, to every hour when your spirit would speak in

similes: there is the origin of your virtue.

    Elevated is then your body, and raised up; with its delight, enraptureth itthe spirit; so that it becometh creator, and valuer, and lover, and everything's

benefactor.

  When your heart overfloweth broad and full like the river, a blessing and

a danger to the lowlanders: there is the origin of your virtue.

  When  ye  are  exalted  above  praise  and  blame,  and  your  will  would

command all things, as a loving one's will: there is the origin of your virtue.

  When ye despise pleasant things, and the effeminate couch, and cannot

couch far enough from the effeminate: there is the origin of your virtue.

  When ye are willers of one will, and when that change of every need is

needful to you: there is the origin of your virtue.

  Verily, a new good and evil is it! Verily, a new deep murmuring, and the

voice of a new fountain!

  Power is it, this new virtue; a ruling thought is it, and around it a subtle

soul: a golden sun, with the serpent of knowledge around it.

  2.

  Here  paused  Zarathustra  awhile,  and  looked  lovingly  on  his  disciples.

Then he continued to speak thus--and his voice had changed:

  Remain true to the earth, my brethren, with the power of your virtue! Let

your bestowing love and your knowledge be devoted to be the meaning of the

earth! Thus do I pray and conjure you.

  Let it not fly away from the earthly and beat against eternal walls with its

wings! Ah, there hath always been so much flown-away virtue!

  Lead, like me, the flown-away virtue back to the earth--yea, back to body

and life: that it may give to the earth its meaning, a human meaning!

  A hundred times hitherto hath spirit as well as virtue flown away and

blundered. Alas! in our body dwelleth still all this delusion and blundering:

body and will hath it there become.

  A hundred times hitherto hath spirit as well as virtue attempted and erred.

Yea, an attempt hath man been. Alas, much ignorance and error hath become

embodied in us!

  Not only the rationality of millenniums--also their madness, breaketh out

in us. Dangerous is it to be an heir.

  Still fight we step by step with the giant Chance, and over all mankind

hath hitherto ruled nonsense, the lack-of-sense.

  Let your spirit and your virtue be devoted to the sense of the earth, my

brethren: let the value of everything be determined anew by you! Therefore

shall ye be fighters! Therefore shall ye be creators!    Intelligently doth the body purify itself; attempting with intelligence it

exalteth  itself;  to  the  discerners  all  impulses  sanctify  themselves;  to  the

exalted the soul becometh joyful.

  Physician, heal thyself: then wilt thou also heal thy patient. Let it be his

best cure to see with his eyes him who maketh himself whole.

  A  thousand  paths  are  there  which  have  never  yet  been  trodden;  a

thousand  salubrities  and  hidden  islands  of  life.  Unexhausted  and

undiscovered is still man and man's world.

  Awake and hearken, ye lonesome ones! From the future come winds with

stealthy pinions, and to fine ears good tidings are proclaimed.

  Ye lonesome ones of to-day, ye seceding ones, ye shall one day be a

people: out of you who have chosen yourselves, shall a chosen people arise:--

and out of it the Superman.

  Verily, a place of healing shall the earth become! And already is a new

odour diffused around it, a salvation-bringing odour--and a new hope!

  3.

  When Zarathustra had spoken these words, he paused, like one who had

not said his last word; and long did he balance the staff doubtfully in his

hand. At last he spake thus--and his voice had changed:

  I now go alone, my disciples! Ye also now go away, and alone! So will I

have it.

  Verily,  I  advise  you:  depart  from  me,  and  guard  yourselves  against

Zarathustra! And better still: be ashamed of him! Perhaps he hath deceived

you.

  The man of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies, but also

to hate his friends.

  One requiteth a teacher badly if one remain merely a scholar. And why

will ye not pluck at my wreath?

  Ye venerate me; but what if your veneration should some day collapse?

Take heed lest a statue crush you!

  Ye say, ye believe in Zarathustra? But of what account is Zarathustra! Ye

are my believers: but of what account are all believers!

  Ye  had  not  yet  sought  yourselves:  then  did  ye  find  me.  So  do  all

believers; therefore all belief is of so little account.

  Now do I bid you lose me and find yourselves; and only when ye have all

denied me, will I return unto you.

  Verily, with other eyes, my brethren, shall I then seek my lost ones; withanother love shall I then love you.

  And once again shall ye have become friends unto me, and children of

one hope: then will I be with you for the third time, to celebrate the great

noontide with you.

  And it is the great noontide, when man is in the middle of his course

between animal and Superman, and celebrateth his advance to the evening as

his highest hope: for it is the advance to a new morning.

  At such time will the down-goer bless himself, that he should be an over-

goer; and the sun of his knowledge will be at noontide.

  "DEAD  ARE  ALL  THE  GODS:  NOW  DO  WE  DESIRE  THE

SUPERMAN TO LIVE."--Let this be our final will at the great noontide!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                      SECOND PART

  "--and only when ye have all denied me, will I return unto you.

  Verily, with other eyes, my brethren, shall I then seek my lost ones; with

another love shall I then love you."--ZARATHUSTRA, I., "The Bestowing

Virtue."

                    XXIII. THE CHILD WITH THE MIRROR.

  After this Zarathustra returned again into the mountains to the solitude of

his cave, and withdrew himself from men, waiting like a sower who hath

scattered his seed. His soul, however, became impatient and full of longing

for those whom he loved: because he had still much to give them. For this is

hardest of all: to close the open hand out of love, and keep modest as a giver.

  Thus  passed  with  the  lonesome  one  months  and  years;  his  wisdom

meanwhile increased, and caused him pain by its abundance.

  One  morning,  however,  he  awoke  ere  the  rosy  dawn,  and  having

meditated long on his couch, at last spake thus to his heart:

  Why did I startle in my dream, so that I awoke? Did not a child come to

me, carrying a mirror?

  "O Zarathustra"--said the child unto me--"look at thyself in the mirror!"

  But when I looked into the mirror, I shrieked, and my heart throbbed: for

not myself did I see therein, but a devil's grimace and derision.

  Verily, all too well do I understand the dream's portent and monition: my

DOCTRINE is in danger; tares want to be called wheat!

  Mine enemies have grown powerful and have disfigured the likeness of

my doctrine, so that my dearest ones have to blush for the gifts that I gave

them.  Lost are my friends; the hour hath come for me to seek my lost ones!--

  With these words Zarathustra started up, not however like a person in

anguish seeking relief, but rather like a seer and a singer whom the spirit

inspireth. With amazement did his eagle and serpent gaze upon him: for a

coming bliss overspread his countenance like the rosy dawn.

  What hath happened unto me, mine animals?--said Zarathustra. Am I not

transformed? Hath not bliss come unto me like a whirlwind?

  Foolish is my happiness, and foolish things will it speak: it is still too

young--so have patience with it!

    Wounded am I by my happiness: all sufferers shall be physicians unto

me!

  To  my  friends  can  I  again  go  down,  and  also  to  mine  enemies!

Zarathustra can again speak and bestow, and show his best love to his loved

ones!

  My impatient love overfloweth in streams,--down towards sunrise and

sunset. Out of silent mountains and storms of affliction, rusheth my soul into

the valleys.

  Too  long  have  I  longed  and  looked  into  the  distance.  Too  long  hath

solitude possessed me: thus have I unlearned to keep silence.

    Utterance have I become altogether, and the brawling of a brook from

high rocks: downward into the valleys will I hurl my speech.

  And let the stream of my love sweep into unfrequented channels! How

should a stream not finally find its way to the sea!

  Forsooth, there is a lake in me, sequestered and self-sufficing; but the

stream of my love beareth this along with it, down--to the sea!

  New paths do I tread, a new speech cometh unto me; tired have I become-

- like all creators--of the old tongues. No longer will my spirit walk on worn-

out soles.

  Too slowly runneth all speaking for me:--into thy chariot, O storm, do I

leap! And even thee will I whip with my spite!

  Like a cry and an huzza will I traverse wide seas, till I find the Happy

Isles where my friends sojourn;--

  And mine enemies amongst them! How I now love every one unto whom

I may but speak! Even mine enemies pertain to my bliss.

  And when I want to mount my wildest horse, then doth my spear always

help me up best: it is my foot's ever ready servant:--

  The  spear  which  I  hurl  at  mine  enemies!  How  grateful  am  I  to  mineenemies that I may at last hurl it!

  Too great hath been the tension of my cloud: 'twixt laughters of lightnings

will I cast hail-showers into the depths.

    Violently will my breast then heave; violently will it blow its storm over

the mountains: thus cometh its assuagement.

  Verily, like a storm cometh my happiness, and my freedom! But mine

enemies shall think that THE EVIL ONE roareth over their heads.

  Yea,  ye  also,  my  friends,  will  be  alarmed  by  my  wild  wisdom;  and

perhaps ye will flee therefrom, along with mine enemies.

  Ah, that I knew how to lure you back with shepherds' flutes! Ah, that my

lioness  wisdom  would  learn  to  roar  softly!  And  much  have  we  already

learned with one another!

  My wild wisdom became pregnant on the lonesome mountains; on the

rough stones did she bear the youngest of her young.

  Now runneth she foolishly in the arid wilderness, and seeketh and seeketh

the soft sward--mine old, wild wisdom!

  On the soft sward of your hearts, my friends!--on your love, would she

fain couch her dearest one!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                            XXIV. IN THE HAPPY ISLES.

  The figs fall from the trees, they are good and sweet; and in falling the

red skins of them break. A north wind am I to ripe figs.

  Thus, like figs, do these doctrines fall for you, my friends: imbibe now

their juice and their sweet substance! It is autumn all around, and clear sky,

and afternoon.

  Lo, what fullness is around us! And out of the midst of superabundance, it

is delightful to look out upon distant seas.

  Once did people say God, when they looked out upon distant seas; now,

however, have I taught you to say, Superman.

  God is a conjecture: but I do not wish your conjecturing to reach beyond

your creating will.

  Could ye CREATE a God?--Then, I pray you, be silent about all Gods!

But ye could well create the Superman.

  Not perhaps ye yourselves, my brethren! But into fathers and forefathers

of the Superman could ye transform yourselves: and let that be your best

creating!--

  God is a conjecture: but I should like your conjecturing restricted to theconceivable.

  Could ye CONCEIVE a God?--But let this mean Will to Truth unto you,

that everything be transformed into the humanly conceivable, the humanly

visible, the humanly sensible! Your own discernment shall ye follow out to

the end!

  And what ye have called the world shall but be created by you: your

reason, your likeness, your will, your love, shall it itself become! And verily,

for your bliss, ye discerning ones!

  And how would ye endure life without that hope, ye discerning ones?

Neither in the inconceivable could ye have been born, nor in the irrational.

  But that I may reveal my heart entirely unto you, my friends: IF there

were gods, how could I endure it to be no God! THEREFORE there are no

Gods.

  Yea, I have drawn the conclusion; now, however, doth it draw me.--

  God  is  a  conjecture:  but  who  could  drink  all  the  bitterness  of  this

conjecture without dying? Shall his faith be taken from the creating one, and

from the eagle his flights into eagle-heights?

  God is a thought--it maketh all the straight crooked, and all that standeth

reel. What? Time would be gone, and all the perishable would be but a lie?

  To think this is giddiness and vertigo to human limbs, and even vomiting

to the stomach: verily, the reeling sickness do I call it, to conjecture such a

thing.

  Evil do I call it and misanthropic: all that teaching about the one, and the

plenum, and the unmoved, and the sufficient, and the imperishable!

  All the imperishable--that's but a simile, and the poets lie too much.--

  But of time and of becoming shall the best similes speak: a praise shall

they be, and a justification of all perishableness!

    Creating--that is the great salvation from suffering, and life's alleviation.

But  for  the  creator  to  appear,  suffering  itself  is  needed,  and  much

transformation.

  Yea, much bitter dying must there be in your life, ye creators! Thus are ye

advocates and justifiers of all perishableness.

  For the creator himself to be the new-born child, he must also be willing

to be the child-bearer, and endure the pangs of the child-bearer.

  Verily, through a hundred souls went I my way, and through a hundred

cradles and birth-throes. Many a farewell have I taken; I know the heart-

breaking last hours.  But  so  willeth  it  my  creating  Will,  my  fate.  Or,  to  tell  you  it  more

candidly: just such a fate--willeth my Will.

  All FEELING suffereth in me, and is in prison: but my WILLING ever

cometh to me as mine emancipator and comforter.

  Willing emancipateth: that is the true doctrine of will and emancipation--

so teacheth you Zarathustra.

  No longer willing, and no longer valuing, and no longer creating! Ah, that

that great debility may ever be far from me!

  And also in discerning do I feel only my will's procreating and evolving

delight; and if there be innocence in my knowledge, it is because there is will

to procreation in it.

  Away from God and Gods did this will allure me; what would there be to

create if there were--Gods!

  But to man doth it ever impel me anew, my fervent creative will; thus

impelleth it the hammer to the stone.

  Ah, ye men, within the stone slumbereth an image for me, the image of

my visions! Ah, that it should slumber in the hardest, ugliest stone!

  Now rageth my hammer ruthlessly against its prison. From the stone fly

the fragments: what's that to me?

  I will complete it: for a shadow came unto me--the stillest and lightest of

all things once came unto me!

  The beauty of the Superman came unto me as a shadow. Ah, my brethren!

Of what account now are--the Gods to me!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                  XXV. THE PITIFUL.

  My friends, there hath arisen a satire on your friend: "Behold Zarathustra!

Walketh he not amongst us as if amongst animals?"

  But it is better said in this wise: "The discerning one walketh amongst

men AS amongst animals."

  Man himself is to the discerning one: the animal with red cheeks.

  How hath that happened unto him? Is it not because he hath had to be

ashamed too oft?

  O my friends! Thus speaketh the discerning one: shame, shame, shame--

that is the history of man!

  And on that account doth the noble one enjoin upon himself not to abash:

bashfulness doth he enjoin on himself in presence of all sufferers.

  Verily, I like them not, the merciful ones, whose bliss is in their pity: toodestitute are they of bashfulness.

  If I must be pitiful, I dislike to be called so; and if I be so, it is preferably

at a distance.

  Preferably also do I shroud my head, and flee, before being recognised:

and thus do I bid you do, my friends!

  May my destiny ever lead unafflicted ones like you across my path, and

those with whom I MAY have hope and repast and honey in common!

  Verily, I have done this and that for the afflicted: but something better did

I always seem to do when I had learned to enjoy myself better.

  Since humanity came into being, man hath enjoyed himself too little: that

alone, my brethren, is our original sin!

  And when we learn better to enjoy ourselves, then do we unlearn best to

give pain unto others, and to contrive pain.

  Therefore do I wash the hand that hath helped the sufferer; therefore do I

wipe also my soul.

  For in seeing the sufferer suffering--thereof was I ashamed on account of

his shame; and in helping him, sorely did I wound his pride.

  Great obligations do not make grateful, but revengeful; and when a small

kindness is not forgotten, it becometh a gnawing worm.

  "Be shy in accepting! Distinguish by accepting!"--thus do I advise those

who have naught to bestow.

  I, however, am a bestower: willingly do I bestow as friend to friends.

Strangers, however, and the poor, may pluck for themselves the fruit from my

tree: thus doth it cause less shame.

  Beggars, however, one should entirely do away with! Verily, it annoyeth

one to give unto them, and it annoyeth one not to give unto them.

  And likewise sinners and bad consciences! Believe me, my friends: the

sting of conscience teacheth one to sting.

  The worst things, however, are the petty thoughts. Verily, better to have

done evilly than to have thought pettily!

  To be sure, ye say: "The delight in petty evils spareth one many a great

evil deed." But here one should not wish to be sparing.

  Like a boil is the evil deed: it itcheth and irritateth and breaketh forth--it

speaketh honourably.

  "Behold, I am disease," saith the evil deed: that is its honourableness.

  But like infection is the petty thought: it creepeth and hideth, and wanteth

to be nowhere--until the whole body is decayed and withered by the pettyinfection.

  To him however, who is possessed of a devil, I would whisper this word

in the ear: "Better for thee to rear up thy devil! Even for thee there is still a

path to greatness!"--

  Ah, my brethren! One knoweth a little too much about every one! And

many  a  one  becometh  transparent  to  us,  but  still  we  can  by  no  means

penetrate him.

  It is difficult to live among men because silence is so difficult.

  And not to him who is offensive to us are we most unfair, but to him who

doth not concern us at all.

  If, however, thou hast a suffering friend, then be a resting-place for his

suffering; like a hard bed, however, a camp-bed: thus wilt thou serve him

best.

  And if a friend doeth thee wrong, then say: "I forgive thee what thou hast

done unto me; that thou hast done it unto THYSELF, however--how could I

forgive that!"

  Thus speaketh all great love: it surpasseth even forgiveness and pity.

  One should hold fast one's heart; for when one letteth it go, how quickly

doth one's head run away!

  Ah,  where  in  the  world  have  there  been  greater  follies  than  with  the

pitiful? And what in the world hath caused more suffering than the follies of

the pitiful?

  Woe unto all loving ones who have not an elevation which is above their

pity!

  Thus spake the devil unto me, once on a time: "Even God hath his hell: it

is his love for man."

  And lately, did I hear him say these words: "God is dead: of his pity for

man hath God died."--

  So be ye warned against pity: FROM THENCE there yet cometh unto

men a heavy cloud! Verily, I understand weather-signs!

  But attend also to this word: All great love is above all its pity: for it

seeketh--to create what is loved!

    "Myself  do  I  offer  unto  my  love,  AND  MY  NEIGHBOUR  AS

MYSELF"--such is the language of all creators.

  All creators, however, are hard.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                  XXVI. THE PRIESTS.  And one day Zarathustra made a sign to his disciples, and spake these

words unto them:

  "Here are priests: but although they are mine enemies, pass them quietly

and with sleeping swords!

  Even  among  them  there  are  heroes;  many  of  them  have  suffered  too

much--: so they want to make others suffer.

  Bad enemies are they: nothing is more revengeful than their meekness.

And readily doth he soil himself who toucheth them.

  But my blood is related to theirs; and I want withal to see my blood

honoured in theirs."--

  And when they had passed, a pain attacked Zarathustra; but not long had

he struggled with the pain, when he began to speak thus:

  It moveth my heart for those priests. They also go against my taste; but

that is the smallest matter unto me, since I am among men.

  But I suffer and have suffered with them: prisoners are they unto me, and

stigmatised ones. He whom they call Saviour put them in fetters:--

  In fetters of false values and fatuous words! Oh, that some one would

save them from their Saviour!

  On an isle they once thought they had landed, when the sea tossed them

about; but behold, it was a slumbering monster!

  False values and fatuous words: these are the worst monsters for mortals--

long slumbereth and waiteth the fate that is in them.

  But at last it cometh and awaketh and devoureth and engulfeth whatever

hath built tabernacles upon it.

  Oh,  just  look  at  those  tabernacles  which  those  priests  have  built

themselves! Churches, they call their sweet-smelling caves!

  Oh, that falsified light, that mustified air! Where the soul--may not fly

aloft to its height!

  But so enjoineth their belief: "On your knees, up the stair, ye sinners!"

  Verily, rather would I see a shameless one than the distorted eyes of their

shame and devotion!

  Who created for themselves such caves and penitence-stairs? Was it not

those who sought to conceal themselves, and were ashamed under the clear

sky?

  And only when the clear sky looketh again through ruined roofs, and

down upon grass and red poppies on ruined walls--will I again turn my heart

to the seats of this God.  They called God that which opposed and afflicted them: and verily, there

was much hero-spirit in their worship!

  And they knew not how to love their God otherwise than by nailing men

to the cross!

  As corpses they thought to live; in black draped they their corpses; even

in their talk do I still feel the evil flavour of charnel-houses.

  And he who liveth nigh unto them liveth nigh unto black pools, wherein

the toad singeth his song with sweet gravity.

  Better songs would they have to sing, for me to believe in their Saviour:

more like saved ones would his disciples have to appear unto me!

    Naked,  would  I  like  to  see  them:  for  beauty  alone  should  preach

penitence. But whom would that disguised affliction convince!

  Verily, their Saviours themselves came not from freedom and freedom's

seventh heaven! Verily, they themselves never trod the carpets of knowledge!

  Of defects did the spirit of those Saviours consist; but into every defect

had they put their illusion, their stop-gap, which they called God.

  In  their  pity  was  their  spirit  drowned;  and  when  they  swelled  and

o'erswelled with pity, there always floated to the surface a great folly.

  Eagerly and with shouts drove they their flock over their foot-bridge; as if

there were but one foot-bridge to the future! Verily, those shepherds also

were still of the flock!

  Small spirits and spacious souls had those shepherds: but, my brethren,

what small domains have even the most spacious souls hitherto been!

    Characters of blood did they write on the way they went, and their folly

taught that truth is proved by blood.

  But blood is the very worst witness to truth; blood tainteth the purest

teaching, and turneth it into delusion and hatred of heart.

  And when a person goeth through fire for his teaching--what doth that

prove! It is more, verily, when out of one's own burning cometh one's own

teaching!

  Sultry heart and cold head; where these meet, there ariseth the blusterer,

the "Saviour."

  Greater ones, verily, have there been, and higher-born ones, than those

whom the people call Saviours, those rapturous blusterers!

  And by still greater ones than any of the Saviours must ye be saved, my

brethren, if ye would find the way to freedom!

  Never yet hath there been a Superman. Naked have I seen both of them,the greatest man and the smallest man:--

    All-too-similar are they still to each other. Verily, even the greatest found

I--all-too-human!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                XXVII. THE VIRTUOUS.

  With  thunder  and  heavenly  fireworks  must  one  speak  to  indolent  and

somnolent senses.

  But  beauty's  voice  speaketh  gently:  it  appealeth  only  to  the  most

awakened souls.

  Gently vibrated and laughed unto me to-day my buckler; it was beauty's

holy laughing and thrilling.

  At you, ye virtuous ones, laughed my beauty to-day. And thus came its

voice unto me: "They want--to be paid besides!"

  Ye want to be paid besides, ye virtuous ones! Ye want reward for virtue,

and heaven for earth, and eternity for your to-day?

  And now ye upbraid me for teaching that there is no reward-giver, nor

paymaster? And verily, I do not even teach that virtue is its own reward.

  Ah!  this  is  my  sorrow:  into  the  basis  of  things  have  reward  and

punishment been insinuated--and now even into the basis of your souls, ye

virtuous ones!

  But like the snout of the boar shall my word grub up the basis of your

souls; a ploughshare will I be called by you.

  All the secrets of your heart shall be brought to light; and when ye lie in

the sun, grubbed up and broken, then will also your falsehood be separated

from your truth.

  For  this  is  your  truth:  ye  are  TOO  PURE  for  the  filth  of  the  words:

vengeance, punishment, recompense, retribution.

  Ye love your virtue as a mother loveth her child; but when did one hear of

a mother wanting to be paid for her love?

  It is your dearest Self, your virtue. The ring's thirst is in you: to reach

itself again struggleth every ring, and turneth itself.

  And like the star that goeth out, so is every work of your virtue: ever is its

light on its way and travelling--and when will it cease to be on its way?

  Thus is the light of your virtue still on its way, even when its work is

done. Be it forgotten and dead, still its ray of light liveth and travelleth.

  That your virtue is your Self, and not an outward thing, a skin, or a cloak:

that is the truth from the basis of your souls, ye virtuous ones!--  But sure enough there are those to whom virtue meaneth writhing under

the lash: and ye have hearkened too much unto their crying!

  And others are there who call virtue the slothfulness of their vices; and

when once their hatred and jealousy relax the limbs, their "justice" becometh

lively and rubbeth its sleepy eyes.

  And others are there who are drawn downwards: their devils draw them.

But the more they sink, the more ardently gloweth their eye, and the longing

for their God.

  Ah! their crying also hath reached your ears, ye virtuous ones: "What I

am NOT, that, that is God to me, and virtue!"

  And  others  are  there  who  go  along  heavily  and  creakingly,  like  carts

taking stones downhill: they talk much of dignity and virtue--their drag they

call virtue!

  And others are there who are like eight-day clocks when wound up; they

tick, and want people to call ticking--virtue.

  Verily, in those have I mine amusement: wherever I find such clocks I

shall wind them up with my mockery, and they shall even whirr thereby!

  And others are proud of their modicum of righteousness, and for the sake

of  it  do  violence  to  all  things:  so  that  the  world  is  drowned  in  their

unrighteousness.

  Ah! how ineptly cometh the word "virtue" out of their mouth! And when

they say: "I am just," it always soundeth like: "I am just--revenged!"

  With their virtues they want to scratch out the eyes of their enemies; and

they elevate themselves only that they may lower others.

  And again there are those who sit in their swamp, and speak thus from

among the bulrushes: "Virtue--that is to sit quietly in the swamp.

  We bite no one, and go out of the way of him who would bite; and in all

matters we have the opinion that is given us."

  And again there are those who love attitudes, and think that virtue is a

sort of attitude.

  Their knees continually adore, and their hands are eulogies of virtue, but

their heart knoweth naught thereof.

  And  again  there  are  those  who  regard  it  as  virtue  to  say:  "Virtue  is

necessary"; but after all they believe only that policemen are necessary.

  And many a one who cannot see men's loftiness, calleth it virtue to see

their baseness far too well: thus calleth he his evil eye virtue.--

  And some want to be edified and raised up, and call it virtue: and otherswant to be cast down,--and likewise call it virtue.

  And thus do almost all think that they participate in virtue; and at least

every one claimeth to be an authority on "good" and "evil."

  But Zarathustra came not to say unto all those liars and fools: "What do

YE know of virtue! What COULD ye know of virtue!"--

  But that ye, my friends, might become weary of the old words which ye

have learned from the fools and liars:

  That  ye  might  become  weary  of  the  words  "reward,"  "retribution,"

"punishment," "righteous vengeance."--

  That  ye  might  become  weary  of  saying:  "That  an  action  is  good  is

because it is unselfish."

  Ah! my friends! That YOUR very Self be in your action, as the mother is

in the child: let that be YOUR formula of virtue!

  Verily,  I  have  taken  from  you  a  hundred  formulae  and  your  virtue's

favourite playthings; and now ye upbraid me, as children upbraid.

  They  played  by  the  sea--then  came  there  a  wave  and  swept  their

playthings into the deep: and now do they cry.

  But the same wave shall bring them new playthings, and spread before

them new speckled shells!

  Thus will they be comforted; and like them shall ye also, my friends, have

your comforting--and new speckled shells!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                  XXVIII. THE RBLE.

  Life  is  a  well  of  delight;  but  where  the  rabble  also  drink,  there  all

fountains are poisoned.

  To everything cleanly am I well disposed; but I hate to see the grinning

mouths and the thirst of the unclean.

  They cast their eye down into the fountain: and now glanceth up to me

their odious smile out of the fountain.

  The holy water have they poisoned with their lustfulness; and when they

called their filthy dreams delight, then poisoned they also the words.

  Indignant becometh the flame when they put their damp hearts to the fire;

the spirit itself bubbleth and smoketh when the rabble approach the fire.

    Mawkish and over-mellow becometh the fruit in their hands: unsteady,

and withered at the top, doth their look make the fruit-tree.

  And many a one who hath turned away from life, hath only turned away

from the rabble: he hated to share with them fountain, flame, and fruit.  And many a one who hath gone into the wilderness and suffered thirst

with  beasts  of  prey,  disliked  only  to  sit  at  the  cistern  with  filthy  camel-

drivers.

  And many a one who hath come along as a destroyer, and as a hailstorm

to all cornfields, wanted merely to put his foot into the jaws of the rabble, and

thus stop their throat.

  And it is not the mouthful which hath most choked me, to know that life

itself requireth enmity and death and torture-crosses:--

  But I asked once, and suffocated almost with my question: What? is the

rabble also NECESSARY for life?

  Are poisoned fountains necessary, and stinking fires, and filthy dreams,

and maggots in the bread of life?

  Not my hatred, but my loathing, gnawed hungrily at my life! Ah, ofttimes

became I weary of spirit, when I found even the rabble spiritual!

  And on the rulers turned I my back, when I saw what they now call

ruling: to traffic and bargain for power--with the rabble!

  Amongst peoples of a strange language did I dwell, with stopped ears: so

that the language of their trafficking might remain strange unto me, and their

bargaining for power.

  And holding my nose, I went morosely through all yesterdays and to-

days: verily, badly smell all yesterdays and to-days of the scribbling rabble!

  Like a cripple become deaf, and blind, and dumb--thus have I lived long;

that  I  might  not  live  with  the  power-rabble,  the  scribe-rabble,  and  the

pleasure-rabble.

    Toilsomely did my spirit mount stairs, and cautiously; alms of delight

were its refreshment; on the staff did life creep along with the blind one.

  What hath happened unto me? How have I freed myself from loathing?

Who hath rejuvenated mine eye? How have I flown to the height where no

rabble any longer sit at the wells?

  Did my loathing itself create for me wings and fountain-divining powers?

Verily, to the loftiest height had I to fly, to find again the well of delight!

  Oh, I have found it, my brethren! Here on the loftiest height bubbleth up

for me the well of delight! And there is a life at whose waters none of the

rabble drink with me!

    Almost too violently dost thou flow for me, thou fountain of delight! And

often emptiest thou the goblet again, in wanting to fill it!

  And yet must I learn to approach thee more modestly: far too violentlydoth my heart still flow towards thee:--

  My heart on which my summer burneth, my short, hot, melancholy, over-

happy summer: how my summer heart longeth for thy coolness!

  Past,  the  lingering  distress  of  my  spring!  Past,  the  wickedness  of  my

snowflakes in June! Summer have I become entirely, and summer-noontide!

  A summer on the loftiest height, with cold fountains and blissful stillness:

oh, come, my friends, that the stillness may become more blissful!

  For this is OUR height and our home: too high and steep do we here

dwell for all uncleanly ones and their thirst.

  Cast but your pure eyes into the well of my delight, my friends! How

could it become turbid thereby! It shall laugh back to you with ITS purity.

  On the tree of the future build we our nest; eagles shall bring us lone ones

food in their beaks!

  Verily,  no  food  of  which  the  impure  could  be  fellow-partakers!  Fire,

would they think they devoured, and burn their mouths!

  Verily, no abodes do we here keep ready for the impure! An ice-cave to

their bodies would our happiness be, and to their spirits!

  And as strong winds will we live above them, neighbours to the eagles,

neighbours to the snow, neighbours to the sun: thus live the strong winds.

  And like a wind will I one day blow amongst them, and with my spirit,

take the breath from their spirit: thus willeth my future.

  Verily, a strong wind is Zarathustra to all low places; and this counsel

counselleth he to his enemies, and to whatever spitteth and speweth: "Take

care not to spit AGAINST the wind!"--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                              XXIX. THE TARANTULAS.

  Lo, this is the tarantula's den! Wouldst thou see the tarantula itself? Here

hangeth its web: touch this, so that it may tremble.

  There cometh the tarantula willingly: Welcome, tarantula! Black on thy

back is thy triangle and symbol; and I know also what is in thy soul.

    Revenge is in thy soul: wherever thou bitest, there ariseth black scab;

with revenge, thy poison maketh the soul giddy!

  Thus do I speak unto you in parable, ye who make the soul giddy, ye

preachers of EQUALITY! Tarantulas are ye unto me, and secretly revengeful

ones!

  But I will soon bring your hiding-places to the light: therefore do I laugh

in your face my laughter of the height.  Therefore do I tear at your web, that your rage may lure you out of your

den of lies, and that your revenge may leap forth from behind your word

"justice."

    Because, FOR MAN TO BE REDEEMED FROM REVENGE--that is for

me the bridge to the highest hope, and a rainbow after long storms.

    Otherwise, however, would the tarantulas have it. "Let it be very justice

for the world to become full of the storms of our vengeance"--thus do they

talk to one another.

    "Vengeance will we use, and insult, against all who are not like us"--thus

do the tarantula-hearts pledge themselves.

  "And 'Will to Equality'--that itself shall henceforth be the name of virtue;

and against all that hath power will we raise an outcry!"

  Ye preachers of equality, the tyrant-frenzy of impotence crieth thus in

you for "equality": your most secret tyrant-longings disguise themselves thus

in virtue-words!

  Fretted conceit and suppressed envy--perhaps your fathers' conceit and

envy: in you break they forth as flame and frenzy of vengeance.

  What the father hath hid cometh out in the son; and oft have I found in

the son the father's revealed secret.

  Inspired ones they resemble: but it is not the heart that inspireth them--but

vengeance. And when they become subtle and cold, it is not spirit, but envy,

that maketh them so.

  Their jealousy leadeth them also into thinkers' paths; and this is the sign

of their jealousy--they always go too far: so that their fatigue hath at last to go

to sleep on the snow.

  In  all  their  lamentations  soundeth  vengeance,  in  all  their  eulogies  is

maleficence; and being judge seemeth to them bliss.

  But thus do I counsel you, my friends: distrust all in whom the impulse to

punish is powerful!

  They are people of bad race and lineage; out of their countenances peer

the hangman and the sleuth-hound.

  Distrust all those who talk much of their justice! Verily, in their souls not

only honey is lacking.

  And when they call themselves "the good and just," forget not, that for

them to be Pharisees, nothing is lacking but--power!

  My friends, I will not be mixed up and confounded with others.

  There are those who preach my doctrine of life, and are at the same timepreachers of equality, and tarantulas.

  That  they  speak  in  favour  of  life,  though  they  sit  in  their  den,  these

poison-spiders, and withdrawn from life--is because they would thereby do

injury.

  To those would they thereby do injury who have power at present: for

with those the preaching of death is still most at home.

  Were it otherwise, then would the tarantulas teach otherwise: and they

themselves were formerly the best world-maligners and heretic-burners.

  With these preachers of equality will I not be mixed up and confounded.

For thus speaketh justice UNTO ME: "Men are not equal."

  And  neither  shall  they  become  so!  What  would  be  my  love  to  the

Superman, if I spake otherwise?

  On  a  thousand  bridges  and  piers  shall  they  throng  to  the  future,  and

always shall there be more war and inequality among them: thus doth my

great love make me speak!

    Inventors of figures and phantoms shall they be in their hostilities; and

with  those  figures  and  phantoms  shall  they  yet  fight  with  each  other  the

supreme fight!

  Good and evil, and rich and poor, and high and low, and all names of

values: weapons shall they be, and sounding signs, that life must again and

again surpass itself!

  Aloft will it build itself with columns and stairs--life itself: into remote

distances would it gaze, and out towards blissful beauties-- THEREFORE

doth it require elevation!

  And because it requireth elevation, therefore doth it require steps, and

variance of steps and climbers! To rise striveth life, and in rising to surpass

itself.

  And just behold, my friends! Here where the tarantula's den is, riseth aloft

an ancient temple's ruins--just behold it with enlightened eyes!

  Verily, he who here towered aloft his thoughts in stone, knew as well as

the wisest ones about the secret of life!

  That there is struggle and inequality even in beauty, and war for power

and supremacy: that doth he here teach us in the plainest parable.

  How divinely do vault and arch here contrast in the struggle: how with

light and shade they strive against each other, the divinely striving ones.--

  Thus, steadfast and beautiful, let us also be enemies, my friends! Divinely

will we strive AGAINST one another!--  Alas! There hath the tarantula bit me myself, mine old enemy! Divinely

steadfast and beautiful, it hath bit me on the finger!

    "Punishment must there be, and justice"--so thinketh it: "not gratuitously

shall he here sing songs in honour of enmity!"

  Yea, it hath revenged itself! And alas! now will it make my soul also

dizzy with revenge!

  That I may NOT turn dizzy, however, bind me fast, my friends, to this

pillar! Rather will I be a pillar-saint than a whirl of vengeance!

  Verily, no cyclone or whirlwind is Zarathustra: and if he be a dancer, he

is not at all a tarantula-dancer!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                          XXX. THE FAMOUS WISE ONES.

  The people have ye served and the people's superstition--NOT the truth!--

all  ye  famous  wise  ones!  And  just  on  that  account  did  they  pay  you

reverence.

  And on that account also did they tolerate your unbelief, because it was a

pleasantry and a by-path for the people. Thus doth the master give free scope

to his slaves, and even enjoyeth their presumptuousness.

  But he who is hated by the people, as the wolf by the dogs--is the free

spirit, the enemy of fetters, the non-adorer, the dweller in the woods.

  To hunt him out of his lair--that was always called "sense of right" by the

people: on him do they still hound their sharpest-toothed dogs.

  "For there the truth is, where the people are! Woe, woe to the seeking

ones!"--thus hath it echoed through all time.

  Your people would ye justify in their reverence: that called ye "Will to

Truth," ye famous wise ones!

  And your heart hath always said to itself: "From the people have I come:

from thence came to me also the voice of God."

    Stiff-necked  and  artful,  like  the  ass,  have  ye  always  been,  as  the

advocates of the people.

  And many a powerful one who wanted to run well with the people, hath

harnessed in front of his horses--a donkey, a famous wise man.

  And  now,  ye  famous  wise  ones,  I  would  have  you  finally  throw  off

entirely the skin of the lion!

  The skin of the beast of prey, the speckled skin, and the dishevelled locks

of the investigator, the searcher, and the conqueror!

  Ah! for me to learn to believe in your "conscientiousness," ye would firsthave to break your venerating will.

    Conscientious--so call I him who goeth into God-forsaken wildernesses,

and hath broken his venerating heart.

  In the yellow sands and burnt by the sun, he doubtless peereth thirstily at

the isles rich in fountains, where life reposeth under shady trees.

  But his thirst doth not persuade him to become like those comfortable

ones: for where there are oases, there are also idols.

  Hungry, fierce, lonesome, God-forsaken: so doth the lion-will wish itself.

  Free from the happiness of slaves, redeemed from Deities and adorations,

fearless  and  fear-inspiring,  grand  and  lonesome:  so  is  the  will  of  the

conscientious.

  In the wilderness have ever dwelt the conscientious, the free spirits, as

lords of the wilderness; but in the cities dwell the well-foddered, famous wise

ones--the draught-beasts.

  For, always, do they draw, as asses--the PEOPLE'S carts!

  Not that I on that account upbraid them: but serving ones do they remain,

and harnessed ones, even though they glitter in golden harness.

  And often have they been good servants and worthy of their hire. For thus

saith virtue: "If thou must be a servant, seek him unto whom thy service is

most useful!

  The  spirit  and  virtue  of  thy  master  shall  advance  by  thou  being  his

servant: thus wilt thou thyself advance with his spirit and virtue!"

  And  verily,  ye  famous  wise  ones,  ye  servants  of  the  people!  Ye

yourselves have advanced with the people's spirit and virtue--and the people

by you! To your honour do I say it!

  But the people ye remain for me, even with your virtues, the people with

purblind eyes--the people who know not what SPIRIT is!

  Spirit  is  life  which  itself  cutteth  into  life:  by  its  own  torture  doth  it

increase its own knowledge,--did ye know that before?

  And the spirit's happiness is this: to be anointed and consecrated with

tears as a sacrificial victim,--did ye know that before?

  And the blindness of the blind one, and his seeking and groping, shall yet

testify to the power of the sun into which he hath gazed,--did ye know that

before?

  And with mountains shall the discerning one learn to BUILD! It is a small

thing for the spirit to remove mountains,--did ye know that before?

  Ye know only the sparks of the spirit: but ye do not see the anvil which itis, and the cruelty of its hammer!

  Verily, ye know not the spirit's pride! But still less could ye endure the

spirit's humility, should it ever want to speak!

  And never yet could ye cast your spirit into a pit of snow: ye are not hot

enough for that! Thus are ye unaware, also, of the delight of its coldness.

  In all respects, however, ye make too familiar with the spirit; and out of

wisdom have ye often made an almshouse and a hospital for bad poets.

  Ye are not eagles: thus have ye never experienced the happiness of the

alarm of the spirit. And he who is not a bird should not camp above abysses.

  Ye seem to me lukewarm ones: but coldly floweth all deep knowledge.

Ice-cold are the innermost wells of the spirit: a refreshment to hot hands and

handlers.

    Respectable  do  ye  there  stand,  and  stiff,  and  with  straight  backs,  ye

famous wise ones!--no strong wind or will impelleth you.

  Have  ye  ne'er  seen  a  sail  crossing  the  sea,  rounded  and  inflated,  and

trembling with the violence of the wind?

  Like the sail trembling with the violence of the spirit, doth my wisdom

cross the sea--my wild wisdom!

  But ye servants of the people, ye famous wise ones--how COULD ye go

with me!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                              XXXI. THE NIGHT-SONG.

  'Tis night: now do all gushing fountains speak louder. And my soul also is

a gushing fountain.

  'Tis night: now only do all songs of the loving ones awake. And my soul

also is the song of a loving one.

  Something  unappeased,  unappeasable,  is  within  me;  it  longeth  to  find

expression.  A  craving  for  love  is  within  me,  which  speaketh  itself  the

language of love.

  Light am I: ah, that I were night! But it is my lonesomeness to be begirt

with light!

  Ah, that I were dark and nightly! How would I suck at the breasts of

light!

  And you yourselves would I bless, ye twinkling starlets and glow-worms

aloft!--and would rejoice in the gifts of your light.

  But I live in mine own light, I drink again into myself the flames that

break forth from me.  I  know  not  the  happiness  of  the  receiver;  and  oft  have  I  dreamt  that

stealing must be more blessed than receiving.

  It is my poverty that my hand never ceaseth bestowing; it is mine envy

that I see waiting eyes and the brightened nights of longing.

  Oh, the misery of all bestowers! Oh, the darkening of my sun! Oh, the

craving to crave! Oh, the violent hunger in satiety!

  They take from me: but do I yet touch their soul? There is a gap 'twixt

giving and receiving; and the smallest gap hath finally to be bridged over.

  A hunger ariseth out of my beauty: I should like to injure those I illumine;

I should like to rob those I have gifted:--thus do I hunger for wickedness.

    Withdrawing my hand when another hand already stretcheth out to it;

hesitating  like  the  cascade,  which  hesitateth  even  in  its  leap:--thus  do  I

hunger for wickedness!

  Such revenge doth mine abundance think of: such mischief welleth out of

my lonesomeness.

  My happiness in bestowing died in bestowing; my virtue became weary

of itself by its abundance!

  He who ever bestoweth is in danger of losing his shame; to him who ever

dispenseth, the hand and heart become callous by very dispensing.

  Mine eye no longer overfloweth for the shame of suppliants; my hand

hath become too hard for the trembling of filled hands.

  Whence have gone the tears of mine eye, and the down of my heart? Oh,

the lonesomeness of all bestowers! Oh, the silence of all shining ones!

  Many suns circle in desert space: to all that is dark do they speak with

their light--but to me they are silent.

  Oh, this is the hostility of light to the shining one: unpityingly doth it

pursue its course.

  Unfair to the shining one in its innermost heart, cold to the suns:--thus

travelleth every sun.

  Like a storm do the suns pursue their courses: that is their travelling.

Their inexorable will do they follow: that is their coldness.

  Oh, ye only is it, ye dark, nightly ones, that extract warmth from the

shining ones! Oh, ye only drink milk and refreshment from the light's udders!

  Ah, there is ice around me; my hand burneth with the iciness! Ah, there is

thirst in me; it panteth after your thirst!

  'Tis night: alas, that I have to be light! And thirst for the nightly! And

lonesomeness!  'Tis night: now doth my longing break forth in me as a fountain,--for

speech do I long.

  'Tis night: now do all gushing fountains speak louder. And my soul also is

a gushing fountain.

  'Tis night: now do all songs of loving ones awake. And my soul also is

the song of a loving one.--

  Thus sang Zarathustra.

                              XXXII. THE DANCE-SONG.

  One evening went Zarathustra and his disciples through the forest; and

when he sought for a well, lo, he lighted upon a green meadow peacefully

surrounded with trees and bushes, where maidens were dancing together. As

soon  as  the  maidens  recognised  Zarathustra,  they  ceased  dancing;

Zarathustra, however, approached them with friendly mien and spake these

words:

  Cease not your dancing, ye lovely maidens! No game-spoiler hath come

to you with evil eye, no enemy of maidens.

  God's advocate am I with the devil: he, however, is the spirit of gravity.

How could I, ye light-footed ones, be hostile to divine dances? Or to maidens'

feet with fine ankles?

  To be sure, I am a forest, and a night of dark trees: but he who is not

afraid of my darkness, will find banks full of roses under my cypresses.

  And even the little God may he find, who is dearest to maidens: beside

the well lieth he quietly, with closed eyes.

  Verily, in broad daylight did he fall asleep, the sluggard! Had he perhaps

chased butterflies too much?

  Upbraid  me  not,  ye  beautiful  dancers,  when  I  chasten  the  little  God

somewhat! He will cry, certainly, and weep--but he is laughable even when

weeping!

  And with tears in his eyes shall he ask you for a dance; and I myself will

sing a song to his dance:

  A  dance-song  and  satire  on  the  spirit  of  gravity  my  supremest,

powerfulest devil, who is said to be "lord of the world."--

  And this is the song that Zarathustra sang when Cupid and the maidens

danced together:

  Of late did I gaze into thine eye, O Life! And into the unfathomable did I

there seem to sink.

  But thou pulledst me out with a golden angle; derisively didst thou laughwhen I called thee unfathomable.

  "Such is the language of all fish," saidst thou; "what THEY do not fathom

is unfathomable.

  But changeable am I only, and wild, and altogether a woman, and no

virtuous one:

  Though I be called by you men the 'profound one,' or the 'faithful one,'

'the eternal one,' 'the mysterious one.'

  But ye men endow us always with your own virtues--alas, ye virtuous

ones!"

  Thus did she laugh, the unbelievable one; but never do I believe her and

her laughter, when she speaketh evil of herself.

  And when I talked face to face with my wild Wisdom, she said to me

angrily: "Thou willest, thou cravest, thou lovest; on that account alone dost

thou PRAISE Life!"

  Then had I almost answered indignantly and told the truth to the angry

one;  and  one  cannot  answer  more  indignantly  than  when  one  "telleth  the

truth" to one's Wisdom.

  For thus do things stand with us three. In my heart do I love only Life--

and verily, most when I hate her!

  But  that  I  am  fond  of  Wisdom,  and  often  too  fond,  is  because  she

remindeth me very strongly of Life!

  She  hath  her  eye,  her  laugh,  and  even  her  golden  angle-rod:  am  I

responsible for it that both are so alike?

  And when once Life asked me: "Who is she then, this Wisdom?"--then

said I eagerly: "Ah, yes! Wisdom!

  One thirsteth for her and is not satisfied, one looketh through veils, one

graspeth through nets.

  Is she beautiful? What do I know! But the oldest carps are still lured by

her.

    Changeable is she, and wayward; often have I seen her bite her lip, and

pass the comb against the grain of her hair.

  Perhaps she is wicked and false, and altogether a woman; but when she

speaketh ill of herself, just then doth she seduce most."

  When I had said this unto Life, then laughed she maliciously, and shut her

eyes. "Of whom dost thou speak?" said she. "Perhaps of me?

  And if thou wert right--is it proper to say THAT in such wise to my face!

But now, pray, speak also of thy Wisdom!"  Ah, and now hast thou again opened thine eyes, O beloved Life! And into

the unfathomable have I again seemed to sink.--

  Thus sang Zarathustra. But when the dance was over and the maidens had

departed, he became sad.

  "The sun hath been long set," said he at last, "the meadow is damp, and

from the forest cometh coolness.

  An unknown presence is about me, and gazeth thoughtfully. What! Thou

livest still, Zarathustra?

  Why? Wherefore? Whereby? Whither? Where? How? Is it not folly still

to live?--

  Ah, my friends; the evening is it which thus interrogateth in me. Forgive

me my sadness!

  Evening hath come on: forgive me that evening hath come on!"

  Thus sang Zarathustra.

                            XXXIII. THE GRAVE-SONG.

  "Yonder is the grave-island, the silent isle; yonder also are the graves of

my youth. Thither will I carry an evergreen wreath of life."

    Resolving thus in my heart, did I sail o'er the sea.--

  Oh, ye sights and scenes of my youth! Oh, all ye gleams of love, ye

divine fleeting gleams! How could ye perish so soon for me! I think of you

to-day as my dead ones.

  From you, my dearest dead ones, cometh unto me a sweet savour, heart-

opening and melting. Verily, it convulseth and openeth the heart of the lone

seafarer.

  Still am I the richest and most to be envied--I, the lonesomest one! For I

HAVE POSSESSED you, and ye possess me still. Tell me: to whom hath

there ever fallen such rosy apples from the tree as have fallen unto me?

  Still am I your love's heir and heritage, blooming to your memory with

many-hued, wild-growing virtues, O ye dearest ones!

  Ah, we were made to remain nigh unto each other, ye kindly strange

marvels; and not like timid birds did ye come to me and my longing--nay, but

as trusting ones to a trusting one!

  Yea, made for faithfulness, like me, and for fond eternities, must I now

name you by your faithlessness, ye divine glances and fleeting gleams: no

other name have I yet learnt.

  Verily, too early did ye die for me, ye fugitives. Yet did ye not flee from

me,  nor  did  I  flee  from  you:  innocent  are  we  to  each  other  in  ourfaithlessness.

  To kill ME, did they strangle you, ye singing birds of my hopes! Yea, at

you, ye dearest ones, did malice ever shoot its arrows--to hit my heart!

  And they hit it! Because ye were always my dearest, my possession and

my possessedness: ON THAT ACCOUNT had ye to die young, and far too

early!

  At my most vulnerable point did they shoot the arrow--namely, at you,

whose skin is like down--or more like the smile that dieth at a glance!

  But this word will I say unto mine enemies: What is all manslaughter in

comparison with what ye have done unto me!

  Worse evil did ye do unto me than all manslaughter; the irretrievable did

ye take from me:--thus do I speak unto you, mine enemies!

  Slew ye not my youth's visions and dearest marvels! My playmates took

ye from me, the blessed spirits! To their memory do I deposit this wreath and

this curse.

  This  curse  upon  you,  mine  enemies!  Have  ye  not  made  mine  eternal

short, as a tone dieth away in a cold night! Scarcely, as the twinkle of divine

eyes, did it come to me--as a fleeting gleam!

  Thus spake once in a happy hour my purity: "Divine shall everything be

unto me."

  Then did ye haunt me with foul phantoms; ah, whither hath that happy

hour now fled!

  "All days shall be holy unto me"--so spake once the wisdom of my youth:

verily, the language of a joyous wisdom!

  But  then  did  ye  enemies  steal  my  nights,  and  sold  them  to  sleepless

torture: ah, whither hath that joyous wisdom now fled?

  Once did I long for happy auspices: then did ye lead an owl-monster

across my path, an adverse sign. Ah, whither did my tender longing then

flee?

  All loathing did I once vow to renounce: then did ye change my nigh ones

and nearest ones into ulcerations. Ah, whither did my noblest vow then flee?

  As a blind one did I once walk in blessed ways: then did ye cast filth on

the blind one's course: and now is he disgusted with the old footpath.

  And when I performed my hardest task, and celebrated the triumph of my

victories, then did ye make those who loved me call out that I then grieved

them most.

  Verily, it was always your doing: ye embittered to me my best honey, andthe diligence of my best bees.

  To my charity have ye ever sent the most impudent beggars; around my

sympathy  have  ye  ever  crowded  the  incurably  shameless.  Thus  have  ye

wounded the faith of my virtue.

  And  when  I  offered  my  holiest  as  a  sacrifice,  immediately  did  your

"piety" put its fatter gifts beside it: so that my holiest suffocated in the fumes

of your fat.

  And once did I want to dance as I had never yet danced: beyond all

heavens did I want to dance. Then did ye seduce my favourite minstrel.

  And now hath he struck up an awful, melancholy air; alas, he tooted as a

mournful horn to mine ear!

    Murderous  minstrel,  instrument  of  evil,  most  innocent  instrument!

Already did I stand prepared for the best dance: then didst thou slay my

rapture with thy tones!

  Only in the dance do I know how to speak the parable of the highest

things:--and now hath my grandest parable remained unspoken in my limbs!

    Unspoken and unrealised hath my highest hope remained! And there have

perished for me all the visions and consolations of my youth!

  How did I ever bear it? How did I survive and surmount such wounds?

How did my soul rise again out of those sepulchres?

  Yea,  something  invulnerable,  unburiable  is  with  me,  something  that

would rend rocks asunder: it is called MY WILL. Silently doth it proceed,

and unchanged throughout the years.

  Its course will it go upon my feet, mine old Will; hard of heart is its

nature and invulnerable.

    Invulnerable am I only in my heel. Ever livest thou there, and art like

thyself, thou most patient one! Ever hast thou burst all shackles of the tomb!

  In thee still liveth also the unrealisedness of my youth; and as life and

youth sittest thou here hopeful on the yellow ruins of graves.

  Yea, thou art still for me the demolisher of all graves: Hail to thee, my

Will! And only where there are graves are there resurrections.--

  Thus sang Zarathustra.

                            XXXIV. SELF-SURPASSING.

  "Will to Truth" do ye call it, ye wisest ones, that which impelleth you and

maketh you ardent?

  Will for the thinkableness of all being: thus do I call your will!

  All  being  would  ye  MAKE  thinkable:  for  ye  doubt  with  good  reasonwhether it be already thinkable.

  But it shall accommodate and bend itself to you! So willeth your will.

Smooth shall it become and subject to the spirit, as its mirror and reflection.

  That is your entire will, ye wisest ones, as a Will to Power; and even

when ye speak of good and evil, and of estimates of value.

  Ye would still create a world before which ye can bow the knee: such is

your ultimate hope and ecstasy.

  The ignorant, to be sure, the people--they are like a river on which a boat

floateth  along:  and  in  the  boat  sit  the  estimates  of  value,  solemn  and

disguised.

  Your will and your valuations have ye put on the river of becoming; it

betrayeth unto me an old Will to Power, what is believed by the people as

good and evil.

  It was ye, ye wisest ones, who put such guests in this boat, and gave them

pomp and proud names--ye and your ruling Will!

  Onward  the  river  now  carrieth  your  boat:  it  MUST  carry  it.  A  small

matter if the rough wave foameth and angrily resisteth its keel!

  It is not the river that is your danger and the end of your good and evil, ye

wisest  ones:  but  that  Will  itself,  the  Will  to  Power--the  unexhausted,

procreating life-will.

  But that ye may understand my gospel of good and evil, for that purpose

will I tell you my gospel of life, and of the nature of all living things.

  The living thing did I follow; I walked in the broadest and narrowest

paths to learn its nature.

  With a hundred-faced mirror did I catch its glance when its mouth was

shut, so that its eye might speak unto me. And its eye spake unto me.

  But wherever I found living things, there heard I also the language of

obedience. All living things are obeying things.

  And this heard I secondly: Whatever cannot obey itself, is commanded.

Such is the nature of living things.

  This, however, is the third thing which I heard--namely, that commanding

is more difficult than obeying. And not only because the commander beareth

the burden of all obeyers, and because this burden readily crusheth him:--

  An attempt and a risk seemed all commanding unto me; and whenever it

commandeth, the living thing risketh itself thereby.

  Yea,  even  when  it  commandeth  itself,  then  also  must  it  atone  for  its

commanding.  Of  its  own  law  must  it  become  the  judge  and  avenger  andvictim.

  How doth this happen! so did I ask myself. What persuadeth the living

thing to obey, and command, and even be obedient in commanding?

  Hearken now unto my word, ye wisest ones! Test it seriously, whether I

have crept into the heart of life itself, and into the roots of its heart!

  Wherever I found a living thing, there found I Will to Power; and even in

the will of the servant found I the will to be master.

  That to the stronger the weaker shall serve--thereto persuadeth he his will

who  would  be  master  over  a  still  weaker  one.  That  delight  alone  he  is

unwilling to forego.

  And as the lesser surrendereth himself to the greater that he may have

delight and power over the least of all, so doth even the greatest surrender

himself, and staketh--life, for the sake of power.

  It is the surrender of the greatest to run risk and danger, and play dice for

death.

  And where there is sacrifice and service and love-glances, there also is

the will to be master. By by-ways doth the weaker then slink into the fortress,

and into the heart of the mightier one--and there stealeth power.

  And this secret spake Life herself unto me. "Behold," said she, "I am that

WHICH MUST EVER SURPASS ITSELF.

  To  be  sure,  ye  call  it  will  to  procreation,  or  impulse  towards  a  goal,

towards the higher, remoter, more manifold: but all that is one and the same

secret.

  Rather would I succumb than disown this one thing; and verily, where

there is succumbing and leaf-falling, lo, there doth Life sacrifice itself--for

power!

  That  I  have  to  be  struggle,  and  becoming,  and  purpose,  and  cross-

purpose--ah, he who divineth my will, divineth well also on what CROOKED

paths it hath to tread!

    Whatever I create, and however much I love it,--soon must I be adverse to

it, and to my love: so willeth my will.

  And even thou, discerning one, art only a path and footstep of my will:

verily, my Will to Power walketh even on the feet of thy Will to Truth!

  He certainly did not hit the truth who shot at it the formula: 'Will to

existence': that will--doth not exist!

  For what is not, cannot will; that, however, which is in existence--how

could it still strive for existence!  Only where there is life, is there also will: not, however, Will to Life, but-

-so teach I thee--Will to Power!

  Much is reckoned higher than life itself by the living one; but out of the

very reckoning speaketh--the Will to Power!"--

  Thus did Life once teach me: and thereby, ye wisest ones, do I solve you

the riddle of your hearts.

  Verily, I say unto you: good and evil which would be everlasting--it doth

not exist! Of its own accord must it ever surpass itself anew.

  With your values and formulae of good and evil, ye exercise power, ye

valuing ones: and that is your secret love, and the sparkling, trembling, and

overflowing of your souls.

  But a stronger power groweth out of your values, and a new surpassing:

by it breaketh egg and egg-shell.

  And he who hath to be a creator in good and evil--verily, he hath first to

be a destroyer, and break values in pieces.

  Thus doth the greatest evil pertain to the greatest good: that, however, is

the creating good.--

  Let us SPEAK thereof, ye wisest ones, even though it be bad. To be silent

is worse; all suppressed truths become poisonous.

  And let everything break up which--can break up by our truths! Many a

house is still to be built!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                            XXXV. THE SUBLIME ONES.

  Calm  is  the  bottom  of  my  sea:  who  would  guess  that  it  hideth  droll

monsters!

  Unmoved  is  my  depth:  but  it  sparkleth  with  swimming  enigmas  and

laughters.

  A sublime one saw I to-day, a solemn one, a penitent of the spirit: Oh,

how my soul laughed at his ugliness!

  With upraised breast, and like those who draw in their breath: thus did he

stand, the sublime one, and in silence:

  O'erhung  with  ugly  truths,  the  spoil  of  his  hunting,  and  rich  in  torn

raiment; many thorns also hung on him--but I saw no rose.

  Not  yet  had  he  learned  laughing  and  beauty.  Gloomy  did  this  hunter

return from the forest of knowledge.

  From the fight with wild beasts returned he home: but even yet a wild

beast gazeth out of his seriousness--an unconquered wild beast!  As a tiger doth he ever stand, on the point of springing; but I do not like

those strained souls; ungracious is my taste towards all those self-engrossed

ones.

  And ye tell me, friends, that there is to be no dispute about taste and

tasting? But all life is a dispute about taste and tasting!

  Taste: that is weight at the same time, and scales and weigher; and alas

for every living thing that would live without dispute about weight and scales

and weigher!

  Should he become weary of his sublimeness, this sublime one, then only

will his beauty begin--and then only will I taste him and find him savoury.

  And only when he turneth away from himself will he o'erleap his own

shadow--and verily! into HIS sun.

  Far too long did he sit in the shade; the cheeks of the penitent of the spirit

became pale; he almost starved on his expectations.

  Contempt is still in his eye, and loathing hideth in his mouth. To be sure,

he now resteth, but he hath not yet taken rest in the sunshine.

  As the ox ought he to do; and his happiness should smell of the earth, and

not of contempt for the earth.

  As  a  white  ox  would  I  like  to  see  him,  which,  snorting  and  lowing,

walketh before the plough-share: and his lowing should also laud all that is

earthly!

  Dark is still his countenance; the shadow of his hand danceth upon it.

O'ershadowed is still the sense of his eye.

  His deed itself is still the shadow upon him: his doing obscureth the doer.

Not yet hath he overcome his deed.

  To be sure, I love in him the shoulders of the ox: but now do I want to see

also the eye of the angel.

  Also his hero-will hath he still to unlearn: an exalted one shall he be, and

not only a sublime one:--the ether itself should raise him, the will-less one!

  He hath subdued monsters, he hath solved enigmas. But he should also

redeem  his  monsters  and  enigmas;  into  heavenly  children  should  he

transform them.

  As  yet  hath  his  knowledge  not  learned  to  smile,  and  to  be  without

jealousy; as yet hath his gushing passion not become calm in beauty.

  Verily, not in satiety shall his longing cease and disappear, but in beauty!

Gracefulness belongeth to the munificence of the magnanimous.

  His arm across his head: thus should the hero repose; thus should he alsosurmount his repose.

  But  precisely  to  the  hero  is  BEAUTY  the  hardest  thing  of  all.

Unattainable is beauty by all ardent wills.

  A little more, a little less: precisely this is much here, it is the most here.

  To  stand  with  relaxed  muscles  and  with  unharnessed  will:  that  is  the

hardest for all of you, ye sublime ones!

  When power becometh gracious and descendeth into the visible--I call

such condescension, beauty.

  And from no one do I want beauty so much as from thee, thou powerful

one: let thy goodness be thy last self-conquest.

  All evil do I accredit to thee: therefore do I desire of thee the good.

  Verily, I have often laughed at the weaklings, who think themselves good

because they have crippled paws!

  The virtue of the pillar shalt thou strive after: more beautiful doth it ever

become, and more graceful--but internally harder and more sustaining--the

higher it riseth.

  Yea, thou sublime one, one day shalt thou also be beautiful, and hold up

the mirror to thine own beauty.

  Then will thy soul thrill with divine desires; and there will be adoration

even in thy vanity!

  For this is the secret of the soul: when the hero hath abandoned it, then

only approacheth it in dreams--the superhero.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                        XXXVI. THE LAND OF CULTURE.

  Too far did I fly into the future: a horror seized upon me.

  And when I looked around me, lo! there time was my sole contemporary.

  Then  did  I  fly  backwards,  homewards--and  always  faster.  Thus  did  I

come unto you, ye present-day men, and into the land of culture.

  For the first time brought I an eye to see you, and good desire: verily,

with longing in my heart did I come.

  But  how  did  it  turn  out  with  me?  Although  so  alarmed--I  had  yet  to

laugh! Never did mine eye see anything so motley-coloured!

  I laughed and laughed, while my foot still trembled, and my heart as well.

"Here forsooth, is the home of all the paintpots,"--said I.

  With fifty patches painted on faces and limbs--so sat ye there to mine

astonishment, ye present-day men!

  And with fifty mirrors around you, which flattered your play of colours,and repeated it!

  Verily, ye could wear no better masks, ye present-day men, than your

own faces! Who could--RECOGNISE you!

  Written all over with the characters of the past, and these characters also

pencilled over with new characters--thus have ye concealed yourselves well

from all decipherers!

  And though one be a trier of the reins, who still believeth that ye have

reins! Out of colours ye seem to be baked, and out of glued scraps.

  All times and peoples gaze divers-coloured out of your veils; all customs

and beliefs speak divers-coloured out of your gestures.

  He who would strip you of veils and wrappers, and paints and gestures,

would just have enough left to scare the crows.

  Verily, I myself am the scared crow that once saw you naked, and without

paint; and I flew away when the skeleton ogled at me.

  Rather would I be a day-labourer in the nether-world, and among the

shades of the by-gone!--Fatter and fuller than ye, are forsooth the nether-

worldlings!

  This, yea this, is bitterness to my bowels, that I can neither endure you

naked nor clothed, ye present-day men!

  All that is unhomelike in the future, and whatever maketh strayed birds

shiver, is verily more homelike and familiar than your "reality."

  For  thus  speak  ye:  "Real  are  we  wholly,  and  without  faith  and

superstition": thus do ye plume yourselves--alas! even without plumes!

  Indeed, how would yeLE to believe, ye divers-coloured ones!--ye who

are pictures of all that hath ever been believed!

    Perambulating refutations are ye, of belief itself, and a dislocation of all

thought. UNTRUSTWORTHY ONES: thus do I call you, ye real ones!

  All periods prate against one another in your spirits; and the dreams and

pratings of all periods were even realer than your awakeness!

    Unfruitful are ye: THEREFORE do ye lack belief. But he who had to

create,  had  always  his  presaging  dreams  and  astral  premonitions--and

believed in believing!--

    Half-open doors are ye, at which grave-diggers wait. And this is YOUR

reality: "Everything deserveth to perish."

  Alas, how ye stand there before me, ye unfruitful ones; how lean your

ribs! And many of you surely have had knowledge thereof.

  Many a one hath said: "There hath surely a God filched something fromme  secretly  whilst  I  slept?  Verily,  enough  to  make  a  girl  for  himself

therefrom!

    "Amazing is the poverty of my ribs!" thus hath spoken many a present-

day man.

  Yea, ye are laughable unto me, ye present-day men! And especially when

ye marvel at yourselves!

  And woe unto me if I could not laugh at your marvelling, and had to

swallow all that is repugnant in your platters!

  As it is, however, I will make lighter of you, since I have to carry what is

heavy; and what matter if beetles and May-bugs also alight on my load!

  Verily, it shall not on that account become heavier to me! And not from

you, ye present-day men, shall my great weariness arise.--

  Ah, whither shall I now ascend with my longing! From all mountains do I

look out for fatherlands and motherlands.

  But  a  home  have  I  found  nowhere:  unsettled  am  I  in  all  cities,  and

decamping at all gates.

  Alien to me, and a mockery, are the present-day men, to whom of late my

heart impelled me; and exiled am I from fatherlands and motherlands.

  Thus do I love only my CHILDREN'S LAND, the undiscovered in the

remotest sea: for it do I bid my sails search and search.

  Unto my children will I make amends for being the child of my fathers:

and unto all the future--for THIS present-day!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                      XXXVII. IMMACULATE PERCEPTION.

  When yester-eve the moon arose, then did I fancy it about to bear a sun:

so broad and teeming did it lie on the horizon.

  But it was a liar with its pregnancy; and sooner will I believe in the man

in the moon than in the woman.

  To be sure, little of a man is he also, that timid night-reveller. Verily, with

a bad conscience doth he stalk over the roofs.

  For he is covetous and jealous, the monk in the moon; covetous of the

earth, and all the joys of lovers.

  Nay, I like him not, that tom-cat on the roofs! Hateful unto me are all that

slink around half-closed windows!

  Piously and silently doth he stalk along on the star-carpets:--but I like no

light-treading human feet, on which not even a spur jingleth.

  Every honest one's step speaketh; the cat however, stealeth along over theground. Lo! cat-like doth the moon come along, and dishonestly.--

  This  parable  speak  I  unto  you  sentimental  dissemblers,  unto  you,  the

"pure discerners!" You do I call--covetous ones!

  Also ye love the earth, and the earthly: I have divined you well!--but

shame is in your love, and a bad conscience--ye are like the moon!

  To  despise  the  earthly  hath  your  spirit  been  persuaded,  but  not  your

bowels: these, however, are the strongest in you!

  And now is your spirit ashamed to be at the service of your bowels, and

goeth by-ways and lying ways to escape its own shame.

  "That would be the highest thing for me"--so saith your lying spirit unto

itself--"to gaze upon life without desire, and not like the dog, with hanging-

out tongue:

  To be happy in gazing: with dead will, free from the grip and greed of

selfishness--cold and ashy-grey all over, but with intoxicated moon-eyes!

  That would be the dearest thing to me"--thus doth the seduced one seduce

himself,--"to love the earth as the moon loveth it, and with the eye only to

feel its beauty.

  And  this  do  I  call  IMMACULATE  perception  of  all  things:  to  want

nothing else from them, but to be allowed to lie before them as a mirror with

a hundred facets."--

  Oh, ye sentimental dissemblers, ye covetous ones! Ye lack innocence in

your desire: and now do ye defame desiring on that account!

  Verily,  not  as  creators,  as  procreators,  or  as  jubilators  do  ye  love  the

earth!

  Where  is  innocence?  Where  there  is  will  to  procreation.  And  he  who

seeketh to create beyond himself, hath for me the purest will.

  Where is beauty? Where I MUST WILL with my whole Will; where I

will love and perish, that an image may not remain merely an image.

  Loving and perishing: these have rhymed from eternity. Will to love: that

is to be ready also for death. Thus do I speak unto you cowards!

  But now doth your emasculated ogling profess to be "contemplation!"

And  that  which  can  be  examined  with  cowardly  eyes  is  to  be  christened

"beautiful!" Oh, ye violators of noble names!

  But it shall be your curse, ye immaculate ones, ye pure discerners, that ye

shall never bring forth, even though ye lie broad and teeming on the horizon!

  Verily, ye fill your mouth with noble words: and we are to believe that

your heart overfloweth, ye cozeners?  But MY words are poor, contemptible, stammering words: gladly do I

pick up what falleth from the table at your repasts.

  Yet still can I say therewith the truth--to dissemblers! Yea, my fish-bones,

shells, and prickly leaves shall--tickle the noses of dissemblers!

  Bad air is always about you and your repasts: your lascivious thoughts,

your lies, and secrets are indeed in the air!

  Dare  only  to  believe  in  yourselves--in  yourselves  and  in  your  inward

parts! He who doth not believe in himself always lieth.

  A God's mask have ye hung in front of you, ye "pure ones": into a God's

mask hath your execrable coiling snake crawled.

  Verily ye deceive, ye "contemplative ones!" Even Zarathustra was once

the dupe of your godlike exterior; he did not divine the serpent's coil with

which it was stuffed.

  A  God's  soul,  I  once  thought  I  saw  playing  in  your  games,  ye  pure

discerners! No better arts did I once dream of than your arts!

    Serpents' filth and evil odour, the distance concealed from me: and that a

lizard's craft prowled thereabouts lasciviously.

  But I came NIGH unto you: then came to me the day,--and now cometh it

to you,--at an end is the moon's love affair!

  See there! Surprised and pale doth it stand--before the rosy dawn!

  For already she cometh, the glowing one,--HER love to the earth cometh!

Innocence and creative desire, is all solar love!

  See there, how she cometh impatiently over the sea! Do ye not feel the

thirst and the hot breath of her love?

  At the sea would she suck, and drink its depths to her height: now riseth

the desire of the sea with its thousand breasts.

  Kissed  and  sucked  WOULD  it  be  by  the  thirst  of  the  sun;  vapour

WOULD it become, and height, and path of light, and light itself!

  Verily, like the sun do I love life, and all deep seas.

  And this meaneth TO ME knowledge: all that is deep shall ascend--to my

height!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                XXXVIII. SCHOLARS.

  When I lay asleep, then did a sheep eat at the ivy-wreath on my head,--it

ate, and said thereby: "Zarathustra is no longer a scholar."

  It said this, and went away clumsily and proudly. A child told it to me.

  I like to lie here where the children play, beside the ruined wall, amongthistles and red poppies.

  A  scholar  am  I  still  to  the  children,  and  also  to  the  thistles  and  red

poppies. Innocent are they, even in their wickedness.

  But to the sheep I am no longer a scholar: so willeth my lot--blessings

upon it!

  For this is the truth: I have departed from the house of the scholars, and

the door have I also slammed behind me.

  Too long did my soul sit hungry at their table: not like them have I got the

knack of investigating, as the knack of nut-cracking.

  Freedom do I love, and the air over fresh soil; rather would I sleep on ox-

skins than on their honours and dignities.

  I am too hot and scorched with mine own thought: often is it ready to take

away my breath. Then have I to go into the open air, and away from all dusty

rooms.

  But they sit cool in the cool shade: they want in everything to be merely

spectators, and they avoid sitting where the sun burneth on the steps.

  Like those who stand in the street and gape at the passers-by: thus do they

also wait, and gape at the thoughts which others have thought.

  Should one lay hold of them, then do they raise a dust like flour-sacks,

and involuntarily: but who would divine that their dust came from corn, and

from the yellow delight of the summer fields?

  When they give themselves out as wise, then do their petty sayings and

truths chill me: in their wisdom there is often an odour as if it came from the

swamp; and verily, I have even heard the frog croak in it!

  Clever are they--they have dexterous fingers: what doth MY simplicity

pretend to beside their multiplicity! All threading and knitting and weaving

do their fingers understand: thus do they make the hose of the spirit!

  Good clockworks are they: only be careful to wind them up properly!

Then do they indicate the hour without mistake, and make a modest noise

thereby.

  Like millstones do they work, and like pestles: throw only seed-corn unto

them!--they know well how to grind corn small, and make white dust out of

it.

  They keep a sharp eye on one another, and do not trust each other the

best.  Ingenious  in  little  artifices,  they  wait  for  those  whose  knowledge

walketh on lame feet,--like spiders do they wait.

  I saw them always prepare their poison with precaution; and always didthey put glass gloves on their fingers in doing so.

  They also know how to play with false dice; and so eagerly did I find

them playing, that they perspired thereby.

  We are alien to each other, and their virtues are even more repugnant to

my taste than their falsehoods and false dice.

  And when I lived with them, then did I live above them. Therefore did

they take a dislike to me.

  They want to hear nothing of any one walking above their heads; and so

they put wood and earth and rubbish betwixt me and their heads.

  Thus did they deafen the sound of my tread: and least have I hitherto been

heard by the most learned.

  All mankind's faults and weaknesses did they put betwixt themselves and

me:--they call it "false ceiling" in their houses.

  But nevertheless I walk with my thOVE their heads; and even should I

walk on mine own errors, still would I be above them and their heads.

  For men are NOT equal: so speaketh justice. And what I will, THEY may

not will!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                      XXXIX. POETS.

  "Since  I  have  known  the  body  better"--said  Zarathustra  to  one  of  his

disciples--"the spirit hath only been to me symbolically spirit; and all the

'imperishable'--that is also but a simile."

  "So have I heard thee say once before," answered the disciple, "and then

thou addedst: 'But the poets lie too much.' Why didst thou say that the poets

lie too much?"

  "Why?" said Zarathustra. "Thou askest why? I do not belong to those who

may be asked after their Why.

  Is my experience but of yesterday? It is long ago that I experienced the

reasons for mine opinions.

  Should I not have to be a cask of memory, if I also wanted to have my

reasons with me?

  It is already too much for me even to retain mine opinions; and many a

bird flieth away.

  And sometimes, also, do I find a fugitive creature in my dovecote, which

is alien to me, and trembleth when I lay my hand upon it.

  But what did Zarathustra once say unto thee? That the poets lie too much?

--But Zarathustra also is a poet.    Believest thou that he there spake the truth? Why dost thou believe it?"

  The disciple answered: "I believe in Zarathustra." But Zarathustra shook

his head and smiled.--

  Belief doth not sanctify me, said he, least of all the belief in myself.

  But granting that some one did say in all seriousness that the poets lie too

much: he was right--WE do lie too much.

  We also know too little, and are bad learners: so we are obliged to lie.

  And which of us poets hath not adulterated his wine? Many a poisonous

hotchpotch  hath  evolved  in  our  cellars:  many  an  indescribable  thing  hath

there been done.

  And because we know little, therefore are we pleased from the heart with

the poor in spirit, especially when they are young women!

  And even of those things are we desirous, which old women tell one

another in the evening. This do we call the eternally feminine in us.

  And  as  if  there  were  a  special  secret  access  to  knowledge,  which

CHOKETH UP for those who learn anything, so do we believe in the people

and in their "wisdom."

  This, however, do all poets believe: that whoever pricketh up his ears

when lying in the grass or on lonely slopes, learneth something of the things

that are betwixt heaven and earth.

  And if there come unto them tender emotions, then do the poets always

think that nature herself is in love with them:

  And that she stealeth to their ear to whisper secrets into it, and amorous

flatteries: of this do they plume and pride themselves, before all mortals!

  Ah, there are so many things betwixt heaven and earth of which only the

poets have dreamed!

  And especOVE the heavens: for all Gods are poet-symbolisations, poet-

sophistications!

  Verily, ever are we drawn aloft--that is, to the realm of the clouds: on

these do we set our gaudy puppets, and then call them Gods and Supermen:--

  Are  not  they  light  enough  for  those  chairs!--all  these  Gods  and

Supermen?--

  Ah, how I am weary of all the inadequate that is insisted on as actual! Ah,

how I am weary of the poets!

  When Zarathustra so spake, his disciple resented it, but was silent. And

Zarathustra also was silent; and his eye directed itself inwardly, as if it gazed

into the far distance. At last he sighed and drew breath.--  I am of to-day and heretofore, said he thereupon; but something is in me

that is of the morrow, and the day following, and the hereafter.

  I became weary of the poets, of the old and of the new: superficial are

they all unto me, and shallow seas.

  They did not think sufficiently into the depth; therefore their feeling did

not reach to the bottom.

  Some sensation of voluptuousness and some sensation of tedium: these

have as yet been their best contemplation.

    Ghost-breathing  and  ghost-whisking,  seemeth  to  me  all  the  jingle-

jangling  of  their  harps;  what  have  they  known  hitherto  of  the  fervour  of

tones!--

  They are also not pure enough for me: they all muddle their water that it

may seem deep.

  And fain would they thereby prove themselves reconcilers: but mediaries

and mixers are they unto me, and half-and-half, and impure!--

  Ah, I cast indeed my net into their sea, and meant to catch good fish; but

always did I draw up the head of some ancient God.

  Thus did the sea give a stone to the hungry one. And they themselves may

well originate from the sea.

  Certainly, one findeth pearls in them: thereby they are the more like hard

molluscs. And instead of a soul, I have often found in them salt slime.

  They have learned from the sea also its vanity: is not the sea the peacock

of peacocks?

  Even before the ugliest of all buffaloes doth it spread out its tail; never

doth it tire of its lace-fan of silver and silk.

    Disdainfully doth the buffalo glance thereat, nigh to the sand with its

soul, nigher still to the thicket, nighest, however, to the swamp.

  What is beauty and sea and peacock-splendour to it! This parable I speak

unto the poets.

  Verily, their spirit itself is the peacock of peacocks, and a sea of vanity!

    Spectators, seeketh the spirit of the poet--should they even be buffaloes!--

  But of this spirit became I weary; and I see the time coming when it will

become weary of itself.

  Yea,  changed  have  I  seen  the  poets,  and  their  glance  turned  towards

themselves.

  Penitents of the spirit have I seen appearing; they grew out of the poets.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.                                XL. GREAT EVENTS.

  There is an isle in the sea--not far from the Happy Isles of Zarathustra--on

which a volcano ever smoketh; of which isle the people, and especially the

old women amongst them, say that it is placed as a rock before the gate of the

nether-world;  but  that  through  the  volcano  itself  the  narrow  way  leadeth

downwards which conducteth to this gate.

  Now  about  the  time  that  Zarathustra  sojourned  on  the  Happy  Isles,  it

happened that a ship anchored at the isle on which standeth the smoking

mountain, and the crew went ashore to shoot rabbits. About the noontide

hour, however, when the captain and his men were together again, they saw

suddenly  a  man  coming  towards  them  through  the  air,  and  a  voice  said

distinctly: "It is time! It is the highest time!" But when the figure was nearest

to them (it flew past quickly, however, like a shadow, in the direction of the

volcano),  then  did  they  recognise  with  the  greatest  surprise  that  it  was

Zarathustra; for they had all seen him before except the captain himself, and

they loved him as the people love: in such wise that love and awe were

combined in equal degree.

    "Behold!" said the old helmsman, "there goeth Zarathustra to hell!"

  About the same time that these sailors landed on the fire-isle, there was a

rumour that Zarathustra had disappeared; and when his friends were asked

about it, they said that he had gone on board a ship by night, without saying

whither he was going.

  Thus there arose some uneasiness. After three days, however, there came

the story of the ship's crew in addition to this uneasiness--and then did all the

people say that the devil had taken Zarathustra. His disciples laughed, sure

enough, at this talk; and one of them said even: "Sooner would I believe that

Zarathustra hath taken the devil." But at the bottom of their hearts they were

all full of anxiety and longing: so their joy was great when on the fifth day

Zarathustra appeared amongst them.

  And this is the account of Zarathustra's interview with the fire-dog:

  The earth, said he, hath a skin; and this skin hath diseases. One of these

diseases, for example, is called "man."

  And another of these diseases is called "the fire-dog": concerning HIM

men have greatly deceived themselves, and let themselves be deceived.

  To fathom this mystery did I go o'er the sea; and I have seen the truth

naked, verily! barefooted up to the neck.

  Now  do  I  know  how  it  is  concerning  the  fire-dog;  and  likewiseconcerning  all  the  spouting  and  subversive  devils,  of  which  not  only  old

women are afraid.

  "Up with thee, fire-dog, out of thy depth!" cried I, "and confess how deep

that depth is! Whence cometh that which thou snortest up?

  Thou drinkest copiously at the sea: that doth thine embittered eloquence

betray! In sooth, for a dog of the depth, thou takest thy nourishment too much

from the surface!

  At the most, I regard thee as the ventriloquist of the earth: and ever, when

I have heard subversive and spouting devils speak, I have found them like

thee: embittered, mendacious, and shallow.

  Ye  understand  how  to  roar  and  obscure  with  ashes!  Ye  are  the  best

braggarts, and have sufficiently learned the art of making dregs boil.

  Where  ye  are,  there  must  always  be  dregs  at  hand,  and  much  that  is

spongy, hollow, and compressed: it wanteth to have freedom.

    'Freedom' ye all roar most eagerly: but I have unlearned the belief in

'great events,' when there is much roaring and smoke about them.

  And  believe  me,  friend  Hullabaloo!  The  greatest  events--are  not  our

noisiest, but our stillest hours.

  Not around the inventors of new noise, but around the inventors of new

values, doth the world revolve; INAUDIBLY it revolveth.

  And just own to it! Little had ever taken place when thy noise and smoke

passed away. What, if a city did become a mummy, and a statue lay in the

mud!

  And this do I say also to the o'erthrowers of statues: It is certainly the

greatest folly to throw salt into the sea, and statues into the mud.

  In the mud of your contempt lay the statue: but it is just its law, that out

of contempt, its life and living beauty grow again!

  With diviner features doth it now arise, seducing by its suffering; and

verily! it will yet thank you for o'erthrowing it, ye subverters!

  This counsel, however, do I counsel to kings and churches, and to all that

is weak with age or virtue--let yourselves be o'erthrown! That ye may again

come to life, and that virtue--may come to you!--"

  Thus spake I before the fire-dog: then did he interrupt me sullenly, and

asked: "Church? What is that?"

    "Church?"  answered  I,  "that  is  a  kind  of  state,  and  indeed  the  most

mendacious. But remain quiet, thou dissembling dog! Thou surely knowest

thine own species best!  Like thyself the state is a dissembling dog; like thee doth it like to speak

with smoke and roaring--to make believe, like thee, that it speaketh out of the

heart of things.

  For it seeketh by all means to be the most important creature on earth, the

state; and people think it so."

  When I had said this, the fire-dog acted as if mad with envy. "What!"

cried he, "the most important creature on earth? And people think it so?" And

so much vapour and terrible voices came out of his throat, that I thought he

would choke with vexation and envy.

  At last he became calmer and his panting subsided; as soon, however, as

he was quiet, I said laughingly:

  "Thou art angry, fire-dog: so I am in the right about thee!

  And that I may also maintain the right, hear the story of another fire-dog;

he speaketh actually out of the heart of the earth.

  Gold doth his breath exhale, and golden rain: so doth his heart desire.

What are ashes and smoke and hot dregs to him!

    Laughter flitteth from him like a variegated cloud; adverse is he to thy

gargling and spewing and grips in the bowels!

  The gold, however, and the laughter--these doth he take out of the heart

of the earth: for, that thou mayst know it,--THE HEART OF THE EARTH IS

OF GOLD."

  When the fire-dog heard this, he could no longer endure to listen to me.

Abashed did he draw in his tail, said "bow-wow!" in a cowed voice, and crept

down into his cave.--

  Thus told Zarathustra. His disciples, however, hardly listened to him: so

great was their eagerness to tell him about the sailors, the rabbits, and the

flying man.

  "What am I to think of it!" said Zarathustra. "Am I indeed a ghost?

  But it may have been my shadow. Ye have surely heard something of the

Wanderer and his Shadow?

  One thing, however, is certain: I must keep a tighter hold of it; otherwise

it will spoil my reputation."

  And once more Zarathustra shook his head and wondered. "What am I to

think of it!" said he once more.

  "Why did the ghost cry: 'It is time! It is the highest time!'

  For WHAT is it then--the highest time?"--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.                              XLI. THE SOOTHSAYER.

  "-And I saw a great sadness come over mankind. The best turned weary

of their works.

  A doctrine appeared, a faith ran beside it: 'All is empty, all is alike, all

hath been!'

  And from all hills there re-echoed: 'All is empty, all is alike, all hath

been!'

  To be sure we have harvested: but why have all our fruits become rotten

and brown? What was it fell last night from the evil moon?

  In vain was all our labour, poison hath our wine become, the evil eye hath

singed yellow our fields and hearts.

  Arid have we all become; and fire falling upon us, then do we turn dust

like ashes:--yea, the fire itself have we made aweary.

  All our fountains have dried up, even the sea hath receded. All the ground

trieth to gape, but the depth will not swallow!

  'Alas!  where  is  there  still  a  sea  in  which  one  could  be  drowned?'  so

soundeth our plaint--across shallow swamps.

  Verily,  even  for  dying  have  we  become  too  weary;  now  do  we  keep

awake and live on--in sepulchres."

  Thus did Zarathustra hear a soothsayer speak; and the foreboding touched

his heart and transformed him. Sorrowfully did he go about and wearily; and

he became like unto those of whom the soothsayer had spoken.--

  Verily, said he unto his disciples, a little while, and there cometh the long

twilight. Alas, how shall I preserve my light through it!

  That it may not smother in this sorrowfulness! To remoter worlds shall it

be a light, and also to remotest nights!

  Thus did Zarathustra go about grieved in his heart, and for three days he

did not take any meat or drink: he had no rest, and lost his speech. At last it

came to pass that he fell into a deep sleep. His disciples, however, sat around

him in long night-watches, and waited anxiously to see if he would awake,

and speak again, and recover from his affliction.

  And  this  is  the  discourse  that  Zarathustra  spake  when  he  awoke;  his

voice, however, came unto his disciples as from afar:

  Hear, I pray you, the dream that I dreamed, my friends, and help me to

divine its meaning!

  A riddle is it still unto me, this dream; the meaning is hidden in it and

encaged, and doth not yet fly above it on free pinions.  All  life  had  I  renounced,  so  I  dreamed.  Night-watchman  and  grave-

guardian had I become, aloft, in the lone mountain-fortress of Death.

  There did I guard his coffins: full stood the musty vaults of those trophies

of victory. Out of glass coffins did vanquished life gaze upon me.

  The  odour  of  dust-covered  eternities  did  I  breathe:  sultry  and  dust-

covered lay my soul. And who could have aired his soul there!

    Brightness  of  midnight  was  ever  around  me;  lonesomeness  cowered

beside  her;  and  as  a  third,  death-rattle  stillness,  the  worst  of  my  female

friends.

  Keys did I carry, the rustiest of all keys; and I knew how to open with

them the most creaking of all gates.

  Like a bitterly angry croaking ran the sound through the long corridors

when  the  leaves  of  the  gate  opened:  ungraciously  did  this  bird  cry,

unwillingly was it awakened.

  But more frightful even, and more heart-strangling was it, when it again

became silent and still all around, and I alone sat in that malignant silence.

  Thus did time pass with me, and slip by, if time there still was: what do I

know thereof! But at last there happened that which awoke me.

  Thrice did there peal peals at the gate like thunders, thrice did the vaults

resound and howl again: then did I go to the gate.

  Alpa! cried I, who carrieth his ashes unto the mountain? Alpa! Alpa! who

carrieth his ashes unto the mountain?

  And I pressed the key, and pulled at the gate, and exerted myself. But not

a finger's-breadth was it yet open:

  Then did a roaring wind tear the folds apart: whistling, whizzing, and

piercing, it threw unto me a black coffin.

  And in the roaring, and whistling, and whizzing the coffin burst up, and

spouted out a thousand peals of laughter.

  And a thousand caricatures of children, angels, owls, fools, and child-

sized butterflies laughed and mocked, and roared at me.

  Fearfully was I terrified thereby: it prostrated me. And I cried with horror

as I ne'er cried before.

  But mine own crying awoke me:--and I came to myself.--

  Thus did Zarathustra relate his dream, and then was silent: for as yet he

knew not the interpretation thereof. But the disciple whom he loved most

arose quickly, seized Zarathustra's hand, and said:

  "Thy life itself interpreteth unto us this dream, O Zarathustra!  Art thou not thyself the wind with shrill whistling, which bursteth open

the gates of the fortress of Death?

  Art  thou  not  thyself  the  coffin  full  of  many-hued  malices  and  angel-

caricatures of life?

  Verily, like a thousand peals of children's laughter cometh Zarathustra

into all sepulchres, laughing at those night-watchmen and grave-guardians,

and whoever else rattleth with sinister keys.

  With  thy  laughter  wilt  thou  frighten  and  prostrate  them:  fainting  and

recovering will demonstrate thy power over them.

  And when the long twilight cometh and the mortal weariness, even then

wilt thou not disappear from our firmament, thou advocate of life!

  New  stars  hast  thou  made  us  see,  and  new  nocturnal  glories:  verily,

laughter itself hast thou spread out over us like a many-hued canopy.

  Now will children's laughter ever from coffins flow; now will a strong

wind ever come victoriously unto all mortal weariness: of this thou art thyself

the pledge and the prophet!

  Verily, THEY THEMSELVES DIDST THOU DREAM, thine enemies:

that was thy sorest dream.

  But  as  thou  awokest  from  them  and  camest  to  thyself,  so  shall  they

awaken from themselves--and come unto thee!"

  Thus  spake  the  disciple;  and  all  the  others  then  thronged  around

Zarathustra, grasped him by the hands, and tried to persuade him to leave his

bed and his sadness, and return unto them. Zarathustra, however, sat upright

on  his  couch,  with  an  absent  look.  Like  one  returning  from  long  foreign

sojourn did he look on his disciples, and examined their features; but still he

knew them not. When, however, they raised him, and set him upon his feet,

behold, all on a sudden his eye changed; he understood everything that had

happened, stroked his beard, and said with a strong voice:

  "Well! this hath just its time; but see to it, my disciples, that we have a

good repast; and without delay! Thus do I mean to make amends for bad

dreams!

  The soothsayer, however, shall eat and drink at my side: and verily, I will

yet show him a sea in which he can drown himself!"--

  Thus  spake  Zarathustra.  Then  did  he  gaze  long  into  the  face  of  the

disciple who had been the dream-interpreter, and shook his head.--

                                  XLII. REDEMPTION.

  When  Zarathustra  went  one  day  over  the  great  bridge,  then  did  thecripples and beggars surround him, and a hunchback spake thus unto him:

  "Behold, Zarathustra! Even the people learn from thee, and acquire faith

in thy teaching: but for them to believe fully in thee, one thing is still needful-

-thou  must  first  of  all  convince  us  cripples!  Here  hast  thou  now  a  fine

selection, and verily, an opportunity with more than one forelock! The blind

canst thou heal, and make the lame run; and from him who hath too much

behind, couldst thou well, also, take away a little;--that, I think, would be the

right method to make the cripples believe in Zarathustra!"

    Zarathustra, however, answered thus unto him who so spake: When one

taketh his hump from the hunchback, then doth one take from him his spirit--

so do the people teach. And when one giveth the blind man eyes, then doth he

see too many bad things on the earth: so that he curseth him who healed him.

He, however, who maketh the lame man run, inflicteth upon him the greatest

injury; for hardly can he run, when his vices run away with him--so do the

people teach concerning cripples. And why should not Zarathustra also learn

from the people, when the people learn from Zarathustra?

  It is, however, the smallest thing unto me since I have been amongst men,

to see one person lacking an eye, another an ear, and a third a leg, and that

others have lost the tongue, or the nose, or the head.

  I see and have seen worse things, and divers things so hideous, that I

should neither like to speak of all matters, nor even keep silent about some of

them: namely, men who lack everything, except that they have too much of

one thing--men who are nothing more than a big eye, or a big mouth, or a big

belly, or something else big,--reversed cripples, I call such men.

  And when I came out of my solitude, and for the first time passed over

this bridge, then I could not trust mine eyes, but looked again and again, and

said at last: "That is an ear! An ear as big as a man!" I looked still more

attentively--and actually there did move under the ear something that was

pitiably small and poor and slim. And in truth this immense ear was perched

on a small thin stalk--the stalk, however, was a man! A person putting a glass

to his eyes, could even recognise further a small envious countenance, and

also that a bloated soullet dangled at the stalk. The people told me, however,

that the big ear was not only a man, but a great man, a genius. But I never

believed in the people when they spake of great men--and I hold to my belief

that it was a reversed cripple, who had too little of everything, and too much

of one thing.

  When Zarathustra had spoken thus unto the hunchback, and unto those ofwhom the hunchback was the mouthpiece and advocate, then did he turn to

his disciples in profound dejection, and said:

  Verily, my friends, I walk amongst men as amongst the fragments and

limbs of human beings!

  This is the terrible thing to mine eye, that I find man broken up, and

scattered about, as on a battle- and butcher-ground.

  And when mine eye fleeth from the present to the bygone, it findeth ever

the same: fragments and limbs and fearful chances--but no men!

  The present and the bygone upon earth--ah! my friends--that is MY most

unbearable trouble; and I should not know how to live, if I were not a seer of

what is to come.

  A seer, a purposer, a creator, a future itself, and a bridge to the future--

and alas! also as it were a cripple on this bridge: all that is Zarathustra.

  And ye also asked yourselves often: "Who is Zarathustra to us? What

shall he be called by us?" And like me, did ye give yourselves questions for

answers.

  Is he a promiser? Or a fulfiller? A conqueror? Or an inheritor? A harvest?

Or a ploughshare? A physician? Or a healed one?

  Is he a poet? Or a genuine one? An emancipator? Or a subjugator? A

good one? Or an evil one?

  I walk amongst men as the fragments of the future: that future which I

contemplate.

  And it is all my poetisation and aspiration to compose and collect into

unity what is fragment and riddle and fearful chance.

  And how could I endure to be a man, if man were not also the composer,

and riddle-reader, and redeemer of chance!

  To redeem what is past, and to transform every "It was" into "Thus would

I have it!"--that only do I call redemption!

  Will--so is the emancipator and joy-bringer called: thus have I taught you,

my friends! But now learn this likewise: the Will itself is still a prisoner.

  Willing  emancipateth:  but  what  is  that  called  which  still  putteth  the

emancipator in chains?

  "It  was":  thus  is  the  Will's  teeth-gnashing  and  lonesomest  tribulation

called. Impotent towards what hath been done--it is a malicious spectator of

all that is past.

  Not  backward  can  the  Will  will;  that  it  cannot  break  time  and  time's

desire--that is the Will's lonesomest tribulation.  Willing emancipateth: what doth Willing itself devise in order to get free

from its tribulation and mock at its prison?

  Ah, a fool becometh every prisoner! Foolishly delivereth itself also the

imprisoned Will.

  That time doth not run backward--that is its animosity: "That which was":

so is the stone which it cannot roll called.

  And thus doth it roll stones out of animosity and ill-humour, and taketh

revenge on whatever doth not, like it, feel rage and ill-humour.

  Thus did the Will, the emancipator, become a torturer; and on all that is

capable of suffering it taketh revenge, because it cannot go backward.

  This, yea, this alone is REVENGE itself: the Will's antipathy to time, and

its "It was."

  Verily, a great folly dwelleth in our Will; and it became a curse unto all

humanity, that this folly acquired spirit!

  THE SPIRIT OF REVENGE: my friends, that hath hitherto been man's

best contemplation; and where there was suffering, it was claimed there was

always penalty.

    "Penalty," so calleth itself revenge. With a lying word it feigneth a good

conscience.

  And because in the willer himself there is suffering, because he cannot

will backwards--thus was Willing itself, and all life, claimed--to be penalty!

  And then did cloud after cloud roll over the spirit, until at last madness

preached: "Everything perisheth, therefore everything deserveth to perish!"

  "And  this  itself  is  justice,  the  law  of  time--that  he  must  devour  his

children:" thus did madness preach.

    "Morally are things ordered according to justice and penalty. Oh, where is

there deliverance from the flux of things and from the 'existence' of penalty?"

Thus did madness preach.

  "Can there be deliverance when there is eternal justice? Alas, unrollable

is the stone, 'It was': eternal must also be all penalties!" Thus did madness

preach.

  "No deed can be annihilated: how could it be undone by the penalty!

This, this is what is eternal in the 'existence' of penalty, that existence also

must be eternally recurring deed and guilt!

  Unless the Will should at last deliver itself, and Willing become non-

Willing--:" but ye know, my brethren, this fabulous song of madness!

  Away from those fabulous songs did I lead you when I taught you: "TheWill is a creator."

  All "It was" is a fragment, a riddle, a fearful chance--until the creating

Will saith thereto: "But thus would I have it."--

  Until the creating Will saith thereto: "But thus do I will it! Thus shall I

will it!"

  But did it ever speak thus? And when doth this take place? Hath the Will

been unharnessed from its own folly?

  Hath  the  Will  become  its  own  deliverer  and  joy-bringer?  Hath  it

unlearned the spirit of revenge and all teeth-gnashing?

  And who hath taught it reconciliation with time, and something higher

than all reconciliation?

  Something higher than all reconciliation must the Will will which is the

Will to Power--: but how doth that take place? Who hath taught it also to will

backwards?

  --But at this point in his discourse it chanced that Zarathustra suddenly

paused, and looked like a person in the greatest alarm. With terror in his eyes

did he gaze on his disciples; his glances pierced as with arrows their thoughts

and  arrear-thoughts.  But  after  a  brief  space  he  again  laughed,  and  said

soothedly:

  "It  is  difficult  to  live  amongst  men,  because  silence  is  so  difficult--

especially for a babbler."--

  Thus  spake  Zarathustra.  The  hunchback,  however,  had  listened  to  the

conversation and had covered his face during the time; but when he heard

Zarathustra laugh, he looked up with curiosity, and said slowly:

  "But  why  doth  Zarathustra  speak  otherwise  unto  us  than  unto  his

disciples?"

    Zarathustra  answered:  "What  is  there  to  be  wondered  at!  With

hunchbacks one may well speak in a hunchbacked way!"

  "Very good," said the hunchback; "and with pupils one may well tell tales

out of school.

  But  why  doth  Zarathustra  speak  otherwise  unto  his  pupils--than  unto

himself?"--

                            XLIII. MANLY PRUDENCE.

  Not the height, it is the declivity that is terrible!

  The declivity, where the gaze shooteth DOWNWARDS, and the hand

graspeth UPWARDS. There doth the heart become giddy through its double

will.  Ah, friends, do ye divine also my heart's double will?

  This, this is MY declivity and my danger, that my gaze shooteth towards

the summit, and my hand would fain clutch and lean--on the depth!

  To man clingeth my will; with chains do I bind myself to man, because I

am pulled upwards to the Superman: for thither doth mine other will tend.

  And THEREFORE do I live blindly among men, as if I knew them not:

that my hand may not entirely lose belief in firmness.

  I know not you men: this gloom and consolation is often spread around

me.

  I sit at the gateway for every rogue, and ask: Who wisheth to deceive me?

  This is my first manly prudence, that I allow myself to be deceived, so as

not to be on my guard against deceivers.

  Ah, if I were on my guard against man, how could man be an anchor to

my ball! Too easily would I be pulled upwards and away!

  This providence is over my fate, that I have to be without foresight.

  And he who would not languish amongst men, must learn to drink out of

all glasses; and he who would keep clean amongst men, must know how to

wash himself even with dirty water.

  And thus spake I often to myself for consolation: "Courage! Cheer up!

old  heart!  An  unhappiness  hath  failed  to  befall  thee:  enjoy  that  as  thy--

happiness!"

  This, however, is mine other manly prudence: I am more forbearing to the

VAIN than to the proud.

  Is not wounded vanity the mother of all tragedies? Where, however, pride

is wounded, there there groweth up something better than pride.

  That life may be fair to behold, its game must be well played; for that

purpose, however, it needeth good actors.

  Good actors have I found all the vain ones: they play, and wish people to

be fond of beholding them--all their spirit is in this wish.

  They  represent  themselves,  they  invent  themselves;  in  their

neighbourhood I like to look upon life--it cureth of melancholy.

  Therefore am I forbearing to the vain, because they are the physicians of

my melancholy, and keep me attached to man as to a drama.

  And further, who conceiveth the full depth of the modesty of the vain

man! I am favourable to him, and sympathetic on account of his modesty.

  From you would he learn his belief in himself; he feedeth upon your

glances, he eateth praise out of your hands.  Your lies doth he even believe when you lie favourably about him: for in

its depths sigheth his heart: "What am I?"

  And if that be the true virtue which is unconscious of itself--well, the vain

man is unconscious of his modesty!--

  This is, however, my third manly prudence: I am not put out of conceit

with the WICKED by your timorousness.

  I am happy to see the marvels the warm sun hatcheth: tigers and palms

and rattle-snakes.

  Also amongst men there is a beautiful brood of the warm sun, and much

that is marvellous in the wicked.

  In truth, as your wisest did not seem to me so very wise, so found I also

human wickedness below the fame of it.

  And oft did I ask with a shake of the head: Why still rattle, ye rattle-

snakes?

  Verily, there is still a future even for evil! And the warmest south is still

undiscovered by man.

  How many things are now called the worst wickedness, which are only

twelve feet broad and three months long! Some day, however, will greater

dragons come into the world.

  For that the Superman may not lack his dragon, the superdragon that is

worthy of him, there must still much warm sun glow on moist virgin forests!

  Out of your wild cats must tigers have evolved, and out of your poison-

toads, crocodiles: for the good hunter shall have a good hunt!

  And verily, ye good and just! In you there is much to be laughed at, and

especially your fear of what hath hitherto been called "the devil!"

  So alien are ye in your souls to what is great, that to you the Superman

would be FRIGHTFUL in his goodness!

  And ye wise and knowing ones, ye would flee from the solar-glow of the

wisdom in which the Superman joyfully batheth his nakedness!

  Ye highest men who have come within my ken! this is my doubt of you,

and my secret laughter: I suspect ye would call my Superman--a devil!

  Ah, I became tired of those highest and best ones: from their "height" did

I long to be up, out, and away to the Superman!

  A horror came over me when I saw those best ones naked: then there

grew for me the pinions to soar away into distant futures.

  Into  more  distant  futures,  into  more  southern  souths  than  ever  artist

dreamed of: thither, where Gods are ashamed of all clothes!  But disguised do I want to see YOU, ye neighbours and fellowmen, and

well-attired and vain and estimable, as "the good and just;"--

  And disguised will I myself sit amongst you--that I may MISTAKE you

and myself: for that is my last manly prudence.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                            XLIV. THE STILLEST HOUR.

  What hath happened unto me, my friends? Ye see me troubled, driven

forth, unwillingly obedient, ready to go--alas, to go away from YOU!

  Yea, once more must Zarathustra retire to his solitude: but unjoyously

this time doth the bear go back to his cave!

  What  hath  happened  unto  me?  Who  ordereth  this?--Ah,  mine  angry

mistress wisheth it so; she spake unto me. Have I ever named her name to

you?

    Yesterday towards evening there spake unto me MY STILLEST HOUR:

that is the name of my terrible mistress.

  And thus did it happen--for everything must I tell you, that your heart

may not harden against the suddenly departing one!

  Do ye know the terror of him who falleth asleep?--

  To the very toes he is terrified, because the ground giveth way under him,

and the dream beginneth.

  This do I speak unto you in parable. Yesterday at the stillest hour did the

ground give way under me: the dream began.

  The hour-hand moved on, the timepiece of my life drew breath--never did

I hear such stillness around me, so that my heart was terrified.

  Then was there spoken unto me without voice: "THOU KNOWEST IT,

ZARATHUSTRA?"--

  And I cried in terror at this whispering, and the blood left my face: but I

was silent.

  Then was there once more spoken unto me without voice: "Thou knowest

it, Zarathustra, but thou dost not speak it!"--

  And at last I answered, like one defiant: "Yea, I know it, but I will not

speak it!"

  Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: "Thou WILT not,

Zarathustra? Is this true? Conceal thyself not behind thy defiance!"--

  And I wept and trembled like a child, and said: "Ah, I would indeed, but

how can I do it! Exempt me only from this! It is beyond my power!"

  Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: "What matter aboutthyself, Zarathustra! Speak thy word, and succumb!"

  And I answered: "Ah, is it MY word? Who am I? I await the worthier

one; I am not worthy even to succumb by it."

  Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: "What matter about

thyself? Thou art not yet humble enough for me. Humility hath the hardest

skin."--

  And I answered: "What hath not the skin of my humility endured! At the

foot of my height do I dwell: how high are my summits, no one hath yet told

me. But well do I know my valleys."

  Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: "O Zarathustra, he

who hath to remove mountains removeth also valleys and plains."--

  And I answered: "As yet hath my word not removed mountains, and what

I have spoken hath not reached man. I went, indeed, unto men, but not yet

have I attained unto them."

  Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: "What knowest thou

THEREOF! The dew falleth on the grass when the night is most silent."--

  And I answered: "They mocked me when I found and walked in mine

own path; and certainly did my feet then tremble.

  And thus did they speak unto me: Thou forgottest the path before, now

dost thou also forget how to walk!"

  Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: "What matter about

their mockery! Thou art one who hast unlearned to obey: now shalt thou

command!

  Knowest thou not who is most needed by all? He who commandeth great

things.

  To  execute  great  things  is  difficult:  but  the  more  difficult  task  is  to

command great things.

  This is thy most unpardonable obstinacy: thou hast the power, and thou

wilt not rule."--

  And I answered: "I lack the lion's voice for all commanding."

  Then was there again spoken unto me as a whispering: "It is the stillest

words which bring the storm. Thoughts that come with doves' footsteps guide

the world.

  O Zarathustra, thou shalt go as a shadow of that which is to come: thus

wilt thou command, and in commanding go foremost."--

  And I answered: "I am ashamed."

  Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: "Thou must yetbecome a child, and be without shame.

  The pride of youth is still upon thee; late hast thou become young: but he

who would become a child must surmount even his youth."--

  And I considered a long while, and trembled. At last, however, did I say

what I had said at first. "I will not."

  Then did a laughing take place all around me. Alas, how that laughing

lacerated my bowels and cut into my heart!

  And there was spoken unto me for the last time: "O Zarathustra, thy fruits

are ripe, but thou art not ripe for thy fruits!

  So must thou go again into solitude: for thou shalt yet become mellow."--

  And  again  was  there  a  laughing,  and  it  fled:  then  did  it  become  still

around me, as with a double stillness. I lay, however, on the ground, and the

sweat flowed from my limbs.

  --Now  have  ye  heard  all,  and  why  I  have  to  return  into  my  solitude.

Nothing have I kept hidden from you, my friends.

  But even this have ye heard from me, WHO is still the most reserved of

men--and will be so!

  Ah, my friends! I should have something more to say unto you! I should

have something more to give unto you! Why do I not give it? Am I then a

niggard?--

  When, however, Zarathustra had spoken these words, the violence of his

pain, and a sense of the nearness of his departure from his friends came over

him, so that he wept aloud; and no one knew how to console him. In the

night, however, he went away alone and left his friends.

                                      THIRD PART.

  "Ye look aloft when ye long for exaltation, and I look downward because

I am exalted.

  "Who among you can at the same time laugh and be exalted?

  "He who climbeth on the highest mountains, laugheth at all tragic plays

and tragic realities."--ZARATHUSTRA, I., "Reading and Writing."

                              XLV. THE WANDERER.

  Then, when it was about midnight, Zarathustra went his way over the

ridge of the isle, that he might arrive early in the morning at the other coast;

because there he meant to embark. For there was a good roadstead there, in

which foreign ships also liked to anchor: those ships took many people with

them, who wished to cross over from the Happy Isles. So when Zarathustra

thus  ascended  the  mountain,  he  thought  on  the  way  of  his  many  solitarywanderings from youth onwards, and how many mountains and ridges and

summits he had already climbed.

  I am a wanderer and mountain-climber, said he to his heart, I love not the

plains, and it seemeth I cannot long sit still.

  And whatever may still overtake me as fate and experience--a wandering

will be therein, and a mountain-climbing: in the end one experienceth only

oneself.

  The time is now past when accidents could befall me; and what COULD

now fall to my lot which would not already be mine own!

  It returneth only, it cometh home to me at last--mine own Self, and such

of it as hath been long abroad, and scattered among things and accidents.

  And one thing more do I know: I stand now before my last summit, and

before that which hath been longest reserved for me. Ah, my hardest path

must I ascend! Ah, I have begun my lonesomest wandering!

  He, however, who is of my nature doth not avoid such an hour: the hour

that saith unto him: Now only dost thou go the way to thy greatness! Summit

and abyss--these are now comprised together!

  Thou goest the way to thy greatness: now hath it become thy last refuge,

what was hitherto thy last danger!

  Thou goest the way to thy greatness: it must now be thy best courage that

there is no longer any path behind thee!

  Thou goest the way to thy greatness: here shall no one steal after thee!

Thy foot itself hath effaced the path behind thee, and over it standeth written:

Impossibility.

  And if all ladders henceforth fail thee, then must thou learn to mount

upon thine own head: how couldst thou mount upward otherwise?

  Upon  thine  own  head,  and  beyond  thine  own  heart!  Now  must  the

gentlest in thee become the hardest.

  He  who  hath  always  much-indulged  himself,  sickeneth  at  last  by  his

much-indulgence. Praises on what maketh hardy! I do not praise the land

where butter and honey--flow!

  To learn TO LOOK AWAY FROM oneself, is necessary in order to see

MANY THINGS:--this hardiness is needed by every mountain-climber.

  He, however, who is obtrusive with his eyes as a discerner, how can he

ever see more of anything than its foreground!

  But thou, O Zarathustra, wouldst view the ground of everything, and its

background: thus must thou mount even above thyself--up, upwards, untilthou hast even thy stars UNDER thee!

  Yea!  To  look  down  upon  myself,  and  even  upon  my  stars:  that  only

would I call my SUMMIT, that hath remained for me as my LAST summit!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra to himself while ascending, comforting his heart

with harsh maxims: for he was sore at heart as he had never been before. And

when he had reached the top of the mountain-ridge, behold, there lay the

other sea spread out before him: and he stood still and was long silent. The

night, however, was cold at this height, and clear and starry.

  I recognise my destiny, said he at last, sadly. Well! I am ready. Now hath

my last lonesomeness begun.

  Ah, this sombre, sad sea, below me! Ah, this sombre nocturnal vexation!

Ah, fate and sea! To you must I now GO DOWN!

  Before  my  highest  mountain  do  I  stand,  and  before  my  longest

wandering: therefore must I first go deeper down than I ever ascended:

  --Deeper down into pain than I ever ascended, even into its darkest flood!

So willeth my fate. Well! I am ready.

  Whence come the highest mountains? so did I once ask. Then did I learn

that they come out of the sea.

  That  testimony  is  inscribed  on  their  stones,  and  on  the  walls  of  their

summits. Out of the deepest must the highest come to its height.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra on the ridge of the mountain where it was cold:

when, however, he came into the vicinity of the sea, and at last stood alone

amongst the cliffs, then had he become weary on his way, and eagerer than

ever before.

    Everything as yet sleepeth, said he; even the sea sleepeth. Drowsily and

strangely doth its eye gaze upon me.

  But it breatheth warmly--I feel it. And I feel also that it dreameth. It

tosseth about dreamily on hard pillows.

  Hark!  Hark!  How  it  groaneth  with  evil  recollections!  Or  evil

expectations?

  Ah, I am sad along with thee, thou dusky monster, and angry with myself

even for thy sake.

  Ah, that my hand hath not strength enough! Gladly, indeed, would I free

thee from evil dreams!--

  And while Zarathustra thus spake, he laughed at himself with melancholy

and bitterness. What! Zarathustra, said he, wilt thou even sing consolation to

the sea?  Ah, thou amiable fool, Zarathustra, thou too-blindly confiding one! But

thus hast thou ever been: ever hast thou approached confidently all that is

terrible.

  Every monster wouldst thou caress. A whiff of warm breath, a little soft

tuft on its paw--: and immediately wert thou ready to love and lure it.

  LOVE is the danger of the lonesomest one, love to anything, IF IT ONLY

LIVE! Laughable, verily, is my folly and my modesty in love!--

  Thus  spake  Zarathustra,  and  laughed  thereby  a  second  time.  Then,

however, he thought of his abandoned friends--and as if he had done them a

wrong with his thoughts, he upbraided himself because of his thoughts. And

forthwith it came to pass that the laugher wept--with anger and longing wept

Zarathustra bitterly.

                    XLVI. THE VISION AND THE ENIGMA.

  1.

  When it got abroad among the sailors that Zarathustra was on board the

ship--for a man who came from the Happy Isles had gone on board along

with him,--there was great curiosity and expectation. But Zarathustra kept

silent for two days, and was cold and deaf with sadness; so that he neither

answered looks nor questions. On the evening of the second day, however, he

again opened his ears, though he still kept silent: for there were many curious

and dangerous things to be heard on board the ship, which came from afar,

and was to go still further. Zarathustra, however, was fond of all those who

make distant voyages, and dislike to live without danger. And behold! when

listening, his own tongue was at last loosened, and the ice of his heart broke.

Then did he begin to speak thus:

  To  you,  the  daring  venturers  and  adventurers,  and  whoever  hath

embarked with cunning sails upon frightful seas,--

  To  you  the  enigma-intoxicated,  the  twilight-enjoyers,  whose  souls  are

allured by flutes to every treacherous gulf:

  --For ye dislike to grope at a thread with cowardly hand; and where ye

can DIVINE, there do ye hate to CALCULATE--

  To you only do I tell the enigma that I SAW--the vision of the lonesomest

one.--

  Gloomily  walked  I  lately  in  corpse-coloured  twilight--gloomily  and

sternly, with compressed lips. Not only one sun had set for me.

  A path which ascended daringly among boulders, an evil, lonesome path,

which neither herb nor shrub any longer cheered, a mountain-path, crunchedunder the daring of my foot.

  Mutely  marching  over  the  scornful  clinking  of  pebbles,  trampling  the

stone that let it slip: thus did my foot force its way upwards.

    Upwards:--in  spite  of  the  spirit  that  drew  it  downwards,  towards  the

abyss, the spirit of gravity, my devil and arch-enemy.

    Upwards:--although  it  sat  upon  me,  half-dwarf,  half-mole;  paralysed,

paralysing; dripping lead in mine ear, and thoughts like drops of lead into my

brain.

  "O Zarathustra," it whispered scornfully, syllable by syllable, "thou stone

of wisdom! Thou threwest thyself high, but every thrown stone must--fall!

  O  Zarathustra,  thou  stone  of  wisdom,  thou  sling-stone,  thou  star-

destroyer! Thyself threwest thou so high,--but every thrown stone--must fall!

    Condemned  of  thyself,  and  to  thine  own  stoning:  O  Zarathustra,  far

indeed threwest thou thy stone--but upon THYSELF will it recoil!"

  Then  was  the  dwarf  silent;  and  it  lasted  long.  The  silence,  however,

oppressed me; and to be thus in pairs, one is verily lonesomer than when

alone!

  I ascended, I ascended, I dreamt, I thought,--but everything oppressed me.

A sick one did I resemble, whom bad torture wearieth, and a worse dream

reawakeneth out of his first sleep.--

  But there is something in me which I call courage: it hath hitherto slain

for me every dejection. This courage at last bade me stand still and say:

"Dwarf! Thou! Or I!"--

  For  courage  is  the  best  slayer,--courage  which  ATTACKETH:  for  in

every attack there is sound of triumph.

  Man, however, is the most courageous animal: thereby hath he overcome

every animal. With sound of triumph hath he overcome every pain; human

pain, however, is the sorest pain.

  Courage slayeth also giddiness at abysses: and where doth man not stand

at abysses! Is not seeing itself--seeing abysses?

  Courage is the best slayer: courage slayeth also fellow-suffering. Fellow-

suffering, however, is the deepest abyss: as deeply as man looketh into life,

so deeply also doth he look into suffering.

  Courage, however, is the best slayer, courage which attacketh: it slayeth

even death itself; for it saith: "WAS THAT life? Well! Once more!"

  In such speech, however, there is much sound of triumph. He who hath

ears to hear, let him hear.--  2.

  "Halt, dwarf!" said I. "Either I--or thou! I, however, am the stronger of

the  two:--thou  knowest  not  mine  abysmal  thought!  IT--couldst  thou  not

endure!"

  Then happened that which made me lighter: for the dwarf sprang from

my shoulder, the prying sprite! And it squatted on a stone in front of me.

There was however a gateway just where we halted.

  "Look at this gateway! Dwarf!" I continued, "it hath two faces. Two roads

come together here: these hath no one yet gone to the end of.

  This long lane backwards: it continueth for an eternity. And that long lane

forward--that is another eternity.

  They are antithetical to one another, these roads; they directly abut on one

another:--and it is here, at this gateway, that they come together. The name of

the gateway is inscribed above: 'This Moment.'

  But  should  one  follow  them  further--and  ever  further  and  further  on,

thinkest thou, dwarf, that these roads would be eternally antithetical?"--

    "Everything straight lieth," murmured the dwarf, contemptuously. "All

truth is crooked; time itself is a circle."

  "Thou spirit of gravity!" said I wrathfully, "do not take it too lightly! Or I

shall let thee squat where thou squattest, Haltfoot,--and I carried thee HIGH!"

    "Observe," continued I, "This Moment! From the gateway, This Moment,

there runneth a long eternal lane BACKWARDS: behind us lieth an eternity.

  Must not whatever CAN run its course of all things, have already run

along that lane? Must not whatever CAN happen of all things have already

happened, resulted, and gone by?

  And if everything have already existed, what thinkest thou, dwarf, of This

Moment? Must not this gateway also--have already existed?

  And  are  not  all  things  closely  bound  together  in  such  wise  that  This

Moment draweth all coming things after it? CONSEQUENTLY--itself also?

  For whatever CAN run its course of all things, also in this long lane

OUTWARD--MUST it once more run!--

  And this slow spider which creepeth in the moonlight, and this moonlight

itself,  and  thou  and  I  in  this  gateway  whispering  together,  whispering  of

eternal things--must we not all have already existed?

  --And must we not return and run in that other lane out before us, that

long weird lane--must we not eternally return?"--

  Thus did I speak, and always more softly: for I was afraid of mine ownthoughts, and arrear-thoughts. Then, suddenly did I hear a dog HOWL near

me.

  Had I ever heard a dog howl thus? My thoughts ran back. Yes! When I

was a child, in my most distant childhood:

  --Then did I hear a dog howl thus. And saw it also, with hair bristling, its

head upwards, trembling in the stillest midnight, when even dogs believe in

ghosts:

  --So that it excited my commiseration. For just then went the full moon,

silent as death, over the house; just then did it stand still, a glowing globe--at

rest on the flat roof, as if on some one's property:--

  Thereby had the dog been terrified: for dogs believe in thieves and ghosts.

And when I again heard such howling, then did it excite my commiseration

once more.

  Where was now the dwarf? And the gateway? And the spider? And all the

whispering?  Had  I  dreamt?  Had  I  awakened?  'Twixt  rugged  rocks  did  I

suddenly stand alone, dreary in the dreariest moonlight.

  BUT  THERE  LAY  A  MAN!  And  there!  The  dog  leaping,  bristling,

whining--now did it see me coming--then did it howl again, then did it CRY:-

-had I ever heard a dog cry so for help?

  And verily, what I saw, the like had I never seen. A young shepherd did I

see,  writhing,  choking,  quivering,  with  distorted  countenance,  and  with  a

heavy black serpent hanging out of his mouth.

  Had I ever seen so much loathing and pale horror on one countenance?

He had perhaps gone to sleep? Then had the serpent crawled into his throat--

there had it bitten itself fast.

  My hand pulled at the serpent, and pulled:--in vain! I failed to pull the

serpent out of his throat. Then there cried out of me: "Bite! Bite!

  Its head off! Bite!"--so cried it out of me; my horror, my hatred, my

loathing, my pity, all my good and my bad cried with one voice out of me.--

  Ye daring ones around me! Ye venturers and adventurers, and whoever of

you  have  embarked  with  cunning  sails  on  unexplored  seas!  Ye  enigma-

enjoyers!

  Solve unto me the enigma that I then beheld, interpret unto me the vision

of the lonesomest one!

  For it was a vision and a foresight:--WHAT did I then behold in parable?

And WHO is it that must come some day?

  WHO is the shepherd into whose throat the serpent thus crawled? WHOis the man into whose throat all the heaviest and blackest will thus crawl?

  --The shepherd however bit as my cry had admonished him; he bit with a

strong bite! Far away did he spit the head of the serpent--: and sprang up.--

  No  longer  shepherd,  no  longer  man--a  transfigured  being,  a  light-

surrounded being, that LAUGHED! Never on earth laughed a man as HE

laughed!

  O my brethren, I heard a laughter which was no human laughter,--and

now gnaweth a thirst at me, a longing that is never allayed.

  My longing for that laughter gnaweth at me: oh, how can I still endure to

live! And how could I endure to die at present!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                          XLVII. INVOLUNTARY BLISS.

  With such enigmas and bitterness in his heart did Zarathustra sail o'er the

sea. When, however, he was four day-journeys from the Happy Isles and

from his friends, then had he surmounted all his pain--: triumphantly and with

firm foot did he again accept his fate. And then talked Zarathustra in this wise

to his exulting conscience:

  Alone am I again, and like to be so, alone with the pure heaven, and the

open sea; and again is the afternoon around me.

  On an afternoon did I find my friends for the first time; on an afternoon,

also, did I find them a second time:--at the hour when all light becometh

stiller.

  For whatever happiness is still on its way 'twixt heaven and earth, now

seeketh for lodging a luminous soul: WITH HAPPINESS hath all light now

become stiller.

  O afternoon of my life! Once did my happiness also descend to the valley

that it might seek a lodging: then did it find those open hospitable souls.

  O afternoon of my life! What did I not surrender that I might have one

thing: this living plantation of my thoughts, and this dawn of my highest

hope!

    Companions did the creating one once seek, and children of HIS hope:

and lo, it turned out that he could not find them, except he himself should

first create them.

  Thus am I in the midst of my work, to my children going, and from them

returning: for the sake of his children must Zarathustra perfect himself.

  For in one's heart one loveth only one's child and one's work; and where

there is great love to oneself, then is it the sign of pregnancy: so have I foundit.

  Still  are  my  children  verdant  in  their  first  spring,  standing  nigh  one

another, and shaken in common by the winds, the trees of my garden and of

my best soil.

  And verily, where such trees stand beside one another, there ARE Happy

Isles!

  But one day will I take them up, and put each by itself alone: that it may

learn lonesomeness and defiance and prudence.

  Gnarled and crooked and with flexible hardness shall it then stand by the

sea, a living lighthouse of unconquerable life.

  Yonder where the storms rush down into the sea, and the snout of the

mountain  drinketh  water,  shall  each  on  a  time  have  his  day  and  night

watches, for HIS testing and recognition.

    Recognised  and  tested  shall  each  be,  to  see  if  he  be  of  my  type  and

lineage:--if he be master of a long will, silent even when he speaketh, and

giving in such wise that he TAKETH in giving:--

  --So that he may one day become my companion, a fellow-creator and

fellow-enjoyer with Zarathustra:--such a one as writeth my will on my tables,

for the fuller perfection of all things.

  And  for  his  sake  and  for  those  like  him,  must  I  perfect  MYSELF:

therefore  do  I  now  avoid  my  happiness,  and  present  myself  to  every

misfortune--for MY final testing and recognition.

  And verily, it were time that I went away; and the wanderer's shadow and

the longest tedium and the stillest hour--have all said unto me: "It is the

highest time!"

  The word blew to me through the keyhole and said "Come!" The door

sprang subtlely open unto me, and said "Go!"

  But I lay enchained to my love for my children: desire spread this snare

for me--the desire for love--that I should become the prey of my children, and

lose myself in them.

    Desiring--that is now for me to have lost myself. I POSSESS YOU, MY

CHILDREN! In this possessing shall everything be assurance and nothing

desire.

  But brooding lay the sun of my love upon me, in his own juice stewed

Zarathustra,--then did shadows and doubts fly past me.

  For frost and winter I now longed: "Oh, that frost and winter would again

make me crack and crunch!" sighed I:--then arose icy mist out of me.  My past burst its tomb, many pains buried alive woke up--: fully slept had

they merely, concealed in corpse-clothes.

  So called everything unto me in signs: "It is time!" But I--heard not, until

at last mine abyss moved, and my thought bit me.

  Ah, abysmal thought, which art MY thought! When shall I find strength

to hear thee burrowing, and no longer tremble?

  To my very throat throbbeth my heart when I hear thee burrowing! Thy

muteness even is like to strangle me, thou abysmal mute one!

  As yet have I never ventured to call thee UP; it hath been enough that I--

have carried thee about with me! As yet have I not been strong enough for

my final lion-wantonness and playfulness.

    Sufficiently formidable unto me hath thy weight ever been: but one day

shall I yet find the strength and the lion's voice which will call thee up!

  When  I  shall  have  surmounted  myself  therein,  then  will  I  surmount

myself also in that which is greater; and a VICTORY shall be the seal of my

perfection!--

    Meanwhile  do  I  sail  along  on  uncertain  seas;  chance  flattereth  me,

smooth-tongued chance; forward and backward do I gaze--, still see I no end.

  As yet hath the hour of my final struggle not come to me--or doth it come

to me perhaps just now? Verily, with insidious beauty do sea and life gaze

upon me round about:

  O afternoon of my life! O happiness before eventide! O haven upon high

seas! O peace in uncertainty! How I distrust all of you!

  Verily, distrustful am I of your insidious beauty! Like the lover am I, who

distrusteth too sleek smiling.

  As he pusheth the best-beloved before him--tender even in severity, the

jealous one--, so do I push this blissful hour before me.

  Away with thee, thou blissful hour! With thee hath there come to me an

involuntary bliss! Ready for my severest pain do I here stand:--at the wrong

time hast thou come!

  Away  with  thee,  thou  blissful  hour!  Rather  harbour  there--with  my

children! Hasten! and bless them before eventide with MY happiness!

  There,  already  approacheth  eventide:  the  sun  sinketh.  Away--my

happiness!--

  Thus  spake  Zarathustra.  And  he  waited  for  his  misfortune  the  whole

night;  but  he  waited  in  vain.  The  night  remained  clear  and  calm,  and

happiness  itself  came  nigher  and  nigher  unto  him.  Towards  morning,however, Zarathustra laughed to his heart, and said mockingly: "Happiness

runneth  after  me.  That  is  because  I  do  not  run  after  women.  Happiness,

however, is a woman."

                              XLVIII. BEFORE SUNRISE.

  O heaven above me, thou pure, thou deep heaven! Thou abyss of light!

Gazing on thee, I tremble with divine desires.

  Up to thy height to toss myself--that is MY depth! In thy purity to hide

myself--that is MINE innocence!

  The God veileth his beauty: thus hidest thou thy stars. Thou speakest not:

THUS proclaimest thou thy wisdom unto me.

  Mute o'er the raging sea hast thou risen for me to-day; thy love and thy

modesty make a revelation unto my raging soul.

  In that thou camest unto me beautiful, veiled in thy beauty, in that thou

spakest unto me mutely, obvious in thy wisdom:

  Oh, how could I fail to divine all the modesty of thy soul! BEFORE the

sun didst thou come unto me--the lonesomest one.

  We have been friends from the beginning: to us are grief, gruesomeness,

and ground common; even the sun is common to us.

  We do not speak to each other, because we know too much--: we keep

silent to each other, we smile our knowledge to each other.

  Art thou not the light of my fire? Hast thou not the sister-soul of mine

insight?

    Together did we learn everything; together did we learn to ascend beyond

ourselves to ourselves, and to smile uncloudedly:--

    --Uncloudedly to smile down out of luminous eyes and out of miles of

distance, when under us constraint and purpose and guilt steam like rain.

  And wandered I alone, for WHAT did my soul hunger by night and in

labyrinthine paths? And climbed I mountains, WHOM did I ever seek, if not

thee, upon mountains?

  And all my wandering and mountain-climbing: a necessity was it merely,

and a makeshift of the unhandy one:--to FLY only, wanteth mine entire will,

to fly into THEE!

  And what have I hated more than passing clouds, and whatever tainteth

thee? And mine own hatred have I even hated, because it tainted thee!

  The passing clouds I detest--those stealthy cats of prey: they take from

thee and me what is common to us--the vast unbounded Yea- and Amen-

saying.  These mediators and mixers we detest--the passing clouds: those half-

and-half ones, that have neither learned to bless nor to curse from the heart.

  Rather will I sit in a tub under a closed heaven, rather will I sit in the

abyss  without  heaven,  than  see  thee,  thou  luminous  heaven,  tainted  with

passing clouds!

  And oft have I longed to pin them fast with the jagged gold-wires of

lightning,  that  I  might,  like  the  thunder,  beat  the  drum  upon  their  kettle-

bellies:--

  --An angry drummer, because they rob me of thy Yea and Amen!--thou

heaven above me, thou pure, thou luminous heaven! Thou abyss of light!--

because they rob thee of MY Yea and Amen.

  For rather will I have noise and thunders and tempest-blasts, than this

discreet, doubting cat-repose; and also amongst men do I hate most of all the

soft-treaders, and half-and-half ones, and the doubting, hesitating, passing

clouds.

  And "he who cannot bless shall LEARN to curse!"--this clear teaching

dropt unto me from the clear heaven; this star standeth in my heaven even in

dark nights.

  I, however, am a blesser and a Yea-sayer, if thou be but around me, thou

pure, thou luminous heaven! Thou abyss of light!--into all abysses do I then

carry my beneficent Yea-saying.

  A blesser have I become and a Yea-sayer: and therefore strove I long and

was a striver, that I might one day get my hands free for blessing.

  This,  however,  is  my  blessing:  to  stand  above  everything  as  its  own

heaven, its round roof, its azure bell and eternal security: and blessed is he

who thus blesseth!

  For all things are baptized at the font of eternity, and beyond good and

evil; good and evil themselves, however, are but fugitive shadows and damp

afflictions and passing clouds.

  Verily, it is a blessing and not a blasphemy when I teach that "above all

things  there  standeth  the  heaven  of  chance,  the  heaven  of  innocence,  the

heaven of hazard, the heaven of wantonness."

  "Of Hazard"--that is the oldest nobility in the world; that gave I back to

all things; I emancipated them from bondage under purpose.

  This freedom and celestial serenity did I put like an azure bell above all

things, when I taught that over them and through them, no "eternal Will"--

willeth.  This wantonness and folly did I put in place of that Will, when I taught

that "In everything there is one thing impossible--rationality!"

  A LITTLE reason, to be sure, a germ of wisdom scattered from star to

star--this leaven is mixed in all things: for the sake of folly, wisdom is mixed

in all things!

  A little wisdom is indeed possible; but this blessed security have I found

in all things, that they prefer--to DANCE on the feet of chance.

  O heaven above me! thou pure, thou lofty heaven! This is now thy purity

unto me, that there is no eternal reason-spider and reason-cobweb:--

  --That thou art to me a dancing-floor for divine chances, that thou art to

me a table of the Gods, for divine dice and dice-players!--

  But thou blushest? Have I spoken unspeakable things? Have I abused,

when I meant to bless thee?

  Or is it the shame of being two of us that maketh thee blush!--Dost thou

bid me go and be silent, because now--DAY cometh?

  The  world  is  deep:--and  deeper  than  e'er  the  day  could  read.  Not

everything may be uttered in presence of day. But day cometh: so let us part!

  O heaven above me, thou modest one! thou glowing one! O thou, my

happiness before sunrise! The day cometh: so let us part!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                        XLIX. THE BEDWARFING VIRTUE.

  1.

  When Zarathustra was again on the continent, he did not go straightway

to his mountains and his cave, but made many wanderings and questionings,

and ascertained this and that; so that he said of himself jestingly: "Lo, a river

that floweth back unto its source in many windings!" For he wanted to learn

what had taken place AMONG MEN during the interval: whether they had

become greater or smaller. And once, when he saw a row of new houses, he

marvelled, and said:

  "What do these houses mean? Verily, no great soul put them up as its

simile!

  Did perhaps a silly child take them out of its toy-box? Would that another

child put them again into the box!

  And these rooms and chambers--can MEN go out and in there? They

seem to be made for silk dolls; or for dainty-eaters, who perhaps let others eat

with them."

  And Zarathustra stood still and meditated. At last he said sorrowfully:"There hath EVERYTHING become smaller!

    Everywhere do I see lower doorways: he who is of MY type can still go

therethrough, but--he must stoop!

  Oh, when shall I arrive again at my home, where I shall no longer have to

stoop--shall no longer have to stoop BEFORE THE SMALL ONES!"--And

Zarathustra sighed, and gazed into the distance.--

  The same day, however, he gave his discourse on the bedwarfing virtue.

  2.

  I pass through this people and keep mine eyes open: they do not forgive

me for not envying their virtues.

  They bite at me, because I say unto them that for small people, small

virtues are necessary--and because it is hard for me to understand that small

people are NECESSARY!

  Here am I still like a cock in a strange farm-yard, at which even the hens

peck: but on that account I am not unfriendly to the hens.

  I  am  courteous  towards  them,  as  towards  all  small  annoyances;  to  be

prickly towards what is small, seemeth to me wisdom for hedgehogs.

  They all speak of me when they sit around their fire in the evening--they

speak of me, but no one thinketh--of me!

  This is the new stillness which I have experienced: their noise around me

spreadeth a mantle over my thoughts.

  They shout to one another: "What is this gloomy cloud about to do to us?

Let us see that it doth not bring a plague upon us!"

  And recently did a woman seize upon her child that was coming unto me:

"Take the children away," cried she, "such eyes scorch children's souls."

  They cough when I speak: they think coughing an objection to strong

winds--they divine nothing of the boisterousness of my happiness!

  "We have not yet time for Zarathustra"--so they object; but what matter

about a time that "hath no time" for Zarathustra?

  And  if  they  should  altogether  praise  me,  how  could  I  go  to  sleep  on

THEIR praise? A girdle of spines is their praise unto me: it scratcheth me

even when I take it off.

  And this also did I learn among them: the praiser doeth as if he gave

back; in truth, however, he wanteth more to be given him!

  Ask my foot if their lauding and luring strains please it! Verily, to such

measure and ticktack, it liketh neither to dance nor to stand still.

  To small virtues would they fain lure and laud me; to the ticktack of smallhappiness would they fain persuade my foot.

  I pass through this people and keep mine eyes open; they have become

SMALLER,  and  ever  become  smaller:--THE  REASON  THEREOF  IS

THEIR DOCTRINE OF HAPPINESS AND VIRTUE.

  For they are moderate also in virtue,--because they want comfort. With

comfort, however, moderate virtue only is compatible.

  To be sure, they also learn in their way to stride on and stride forward:

that, I call their HOBBLING.--Thereby they become a hindrance to all who

are in haste.

  And  many  of  them  go  forward,  and  look  backwards  thereby,  with

stiffened necks: those do I like to run up against.

  Foot and eye shall not lie, nor give the lie to each other. But there is much

lying among small people.

  Some of them WILL, but most of them are WILLED. Some of them are

genuine, but most of them are bad actors.

  There are actors without knowing it amongst them, and actors without

intending it--, the genuine ones are always rare, especially the genuine actors.

  Of  man  there  is  little  here:  therefore  do  their  women  masculinise

themselves. For only he who is man enough, will--SAVE THE WOMAN in

woman.

  And this hypocrisy found I worst amongst them, that even those who

command feign the virtues of those who serve.

  "I serve, thou servest, we serve"--so chanteth here even the hypocrisy of

the rulers--and alas! if the first lord be ONLY the first servant!

  Ah, even upon their hypocrisy did mine eyes' curiosity alight; and well

did I divine all their fly-happiness, and their buzzing around sunny window-

panes.

  So much kindness, so much weakness do I see. So much justice and pity,

so much weakness.

  Round, fair, and considerate are they to one another, as grains of sand are

round, fair, and considerate to grains of sand.

    Modestly to embrace a small happiness--that do they call "submission"!

and at the same time they peer modestly after a new small happiness.

  In their hearts they want simply one thing most of all: that no one hurt

them. Thus do they anticipate every one's wishes and do well unto every one.

  That, however, is COWARDICE, though it be called "virtue."--

  And when they chance to speak harshly, those small people, then do Ihear therein only their hoarseness--every draught of air maketh them hoarse.

  Shrewd indeed are they, their virtues have shrewd fingers. But they lack

fists: their fingers do not know how to creep behind fists.

  Virtue for them is what maketh modest and tame: therewith have they

made the wolf a dog, and man himself man's best domestic animal.

  "We set our chair in the MIDST"--so saith their smirking unto me--"and

as far from dying gladiators as from satisfied swine."

  That, however, is--MEDIOCRITY, though it be called moderation.--

  3.

  I pass through this people and let fall many words: but they know neither

how to take nor how to retain them.

  They wonder why I came not to revile venery and vice; and verily, I came

not to warn against pickpockets either!

  They wonder why I am not ready to abet and whet their wisdom: as if

they had not yet enough of wiseacres, whose voices grate on mine ear like

slate-pencils!

  And when I call out: "Curse all the cowardly devils in you, that would

fain whimper and fold the hands and adore"--then do they shout: "Zarathustra

is godless."

  And especially do their teachers of submission shout this;--but precisely

in their ears do I love to cry: "Yea! I AM Zarathustra, the godless!"

  Those teachers of submission! Wherever there is aught puny, or sickly, or

scabby, there do they creep like lice; and only my disgust preventeth me from

cracking them.

  Well! This is my sermon for THEIR ears: I am Zarathustra the godless,

who saith: "Who is more godless than I, that I may enjoy his teaching?"

  I am Zarathustra the godless: where do I find mine equal? And all those

are mine equals who give unto themselves their Will, and divest themselves

of all submission.

  I am Zarathustra the godless! I cook every chance in MY pot. And only

when it hath been quite cooked do I welcome it as MY food.

  And verily, many a chance came imperiously unto me: but still more

imperiously did my WILL speak unto it,--then did it lie imploringly upon its

knees--

    --Imploring  that  it  might  find  home  and  heart  with  me,  and  saying

flatteringly: "See, O Zarathustra, how friend only cometh unto friend!"--

  But why talk I, when no one hath MINE ears! And so will I shout it outunto all the winds:

  Ye  ever  become  smaller,  ye  small  people!  Ye  crumble  away,  ye

comfortable ones! Ye will yet perish--

  --By your many small virtues, by your many small omissions, and by

your many small submissions!

  Too  tender,  too  yielding:  so  is  your  soil!  But  for  a  tree  to  become

GREAT, it seeketh to twine hard roots around hard rocks!

  Also what ye omit weaveth at the web of all the human future; even your

naught is a cobweb, and a spider that liveth on the blood of the future.

  And when ye take, then is it like stealing, ye small virtuous ones; but

even  among  knaves  HONOUR  saith  that  "one  shall  only  steal  when  one

cannot rob."

  "It giveth itself"--that is also a doctrine of submission. But I say unto you,

ye comfortable ones, that IT TAKETH TO ITSELF, and will ever take more

and more from you!

  Ah,  that  ye  would  renounce  all  HALF-willing,  and  would  decide  for

idleness as ye decide for action!

  Ah, that ye understood my word: "Do ever what ye will--but first be such

as CAN WILL.

  Love  ever  your  neighbour  as  yourselves--but  first  be  such  as  LOVE

THEMSELVES--

  --Such as love with great love, such as love with great contempt!" Thus

speaketh Zarathustra the godless.--

  But why talk I, when no one hath MINE ears! It is still an hour too early

for me here.

  Mine own forerunner am I among this people, mine own cockcrow in

dark lanes.

  But THEIR hour cometh! And there cometh also mine! Hourly do they

become smaller, poorer, unfruitfuller,--poor herbs! poor earth!

  And SOON shall they stand before me like dry grass and prairie, and

verily, weary of themselves--and panting for FIRE, more than for water!

  O blessed hour of the lightning! O mystery before noontide!--Running

fires will I one day make of them, and heralds with flaming tongues:--

  --Herald shall they one day with flaming tongues: It cometh, it is nigh,

THE GREAT NOONTIDE!

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                            L. ON THE OLIVE-MOUNT.  Winter, a bad guest, sitteth with me at home; blue are my hands with his

friendly hand-shaking.

  I honour him, that bad guest, but gladly leave him alone. Gladly do I run

away from him; and when one runneth WELL, then one escapeth him!

  With warm feet and warm thoughts do I run where the wind is calm--to

the sunny corner of mine olive-mount.

  There do I laugh at my stern guest, and am still fond of him; because he

cleareth my house of flies, and quieteth many little noises.

  For he suffereth it not if a gnat wanteth to buzz, or even two of them; also

the lanes maketh he lonesome, so that the moonlight is afraid there at night.

  A  hard  guest  is  he,--but  I  honour  him,  and  do  not  worship,  like  the

tenderlings, the pot-bellied fire-idol.

  Better even a little teeth-chattering than idol-adoration!--so willeth my

nature. And especially have I a grudge against all ardent, steaming, steamy

fire-idols.

  Him whom I love, I love better in winter than in summer; better do I now

mock at mine enemies, and more heartily, when winter sitteth in my house.

  Heartily, verily, even when I CREEP into bed--: there, still laugheth and

wantoneth my hidden happiness; even my deceptive dream laugheth.

  I, a--creeper? Never in my life did I creep before the powerful; and if ever

I lied, then did I lie out of love. Therefore am I glad even in my winter-bed.

  A poor bed warmeth me more than a rich one, for I am jealous of my

poverty. And in winter she is most faithful unto me.

  With a wickedness do I begin every day: I mock at the winter with a cold

bath: on that account grumbleth my stern house-mate.

  Also do I like to tickle him with a wax-taper, that he may finally let the

heavens emerge from ashy-grey twilight.

  For especially wicked am I in the morning: at the early hour when the pail

rattleth at the well, and horses neigh warmly in grey lanes:--

    Impatiently do I then wait, that the clear sky may finally dawn for me, the

snow-bearded winter-sky, the hoary one, the white-head,--

  --The winter-sky, the silent winter-sky, which often stifleth even its sun!

  Did I perhaps learn from it the long clear silence? Or did it learn it from

me? Or hath each of us devised it himself?

  Of all good things the origin is a thousandfold,--all good roguish things

spring into existence for joy: how could they always do so--for once only!

  A good roguish thing is also the long silence, and to look, like the winter-sky, out of a clear, round-eyed countenance:--

  --Like it to stifle one's sun, and one's inflexible solar will: verily, this art

and this winter-roguishness have I learnt WELL!

  My best-loved wickedness and art is it, that my silence hath learned not to

betray itself by silence.

    Clattering with diction and dice, I outwit the solemn assistants: all those

stern watchers, shall my will and purpose elude.

  That no one might see down into my depth and into mine ultimate will--

for that purpose did I devise the long clear silence.

  Many a shrewd one did I find: he veiled his countenance and made his

water muddy, that no one might see therethrough and thereunder.

  But precisely unto him came the shrewder distrusters and nut-crackers:

precisely from him did they fish his best-concealed fish!

  But  the  clear,  the  honest,  the  transparent--these  are  for  me  the  wisest

silent ones: in them, so PROFOUND is the depth that even the clearest water

doth not--betray it.--

  Thou snow-bearded, silent, winter-sky, thou round-eyed whitehead above

me! Oh, thou heavenly simile of my soul and its wantonness!

  And MUST I not conceal myself like one who hath swallowed gold--lest

my soul should be ripped up?

    MUST I not wear stilts, that they may OVERLOOK my long legs--all

those enviers and injurers around me?

  Those dingy, fire-warmed, used-up, green-tinted, ill-natured souls--how

COULD their envy endure my happiness!

  Thus do I show them only the ice and winter of my peaks--and NOT that

my mountain windeth all the solar girdles around it!

  They hear only the whistling of my winter-storms: and know NOT that I

also travel over warm seas, like longing, heavy, hot south-winds.

  They commiserate also my accidents and chances:--but MY word saith:

"Suffer the chance to come unto me: innocent is it as a little child!"

  How  COULD  they  endure  my  happiness,  if  I  did  not  put  around  it

accidents,  and  winter-privations,  and  bear-skin  caps,  and  enmantling

snowflakes!

  --If I did not myself commiserate their PITY, the pity of those enviers and

injurers!

  --If I did not myself sigh before them, and chatter with cold, and patiently

LET myself be swathed in their pity!  This  is  the  wise  waggish-will  and  good-will  of  my  soul,  that  it

CONCEALETH NOT its winters and glacial storms; it concealeth not its

chilblains either.

  To one man, lonesomeness is the flight of the sick one; to another, it is

the flight FROM the sick ones.

  Let them HEAR me chattering and sighing with winter-cold, all those

poor squinting knaves around me! With such sighing and chattering do I flee

from their heated rooms.

  Let  them  sympathise  with  me  and  sigh  with  me  on  account  of  my

chilblains: "At the ice of knowledge will he yet FREEZE TO DEATH!"--so

they mourn.

    Meanwhile do I run with warm feet hither and thither on mine olive-

mount: in the sunny corner of mine olive-mount do I sing, and mock at all

pity.--

  Thus sang Zarathustra.

                                LI. ON PASSING-BY.

  Thus  slowly  wandering  through  many  peoples  and  divers  cities,  did

Zarathustra return by round-about roads to his mountains and his cave. And

behold, thereby came he unawares also to the gate of the GREAT CITY.

Here, however, a foaming fool, with extended hands, sprang forward to him

and stood in his way. It was the same fool whom the people called "the ape of

Zarathustra:" for he had learned from him something of the expression and

modulation of language, and perhaps liked also to borrow from the store of

his wisdom. And the fool talked thus to Zarathustra:

  O Zarathustra, here is the great city: here hast thou nothing to seek and

everything to lose.

  Why wouldst thou wade through this mire? Have pity upon thy foot! Spit

rather on the gate of the city, and--turn back!

  Here is the hell for anchorites' thoughts: here are great thoughts seethed

alive and boiled small.

  Here do all great sentiments decay: here may only rattle-boned sensations

rattle!

  Smellest  thou  not  already  the  shambles  and  cookshops  of  the  spirit?

Steameth not this city with the fumes of slaughtered spirit?

  Seest thou not the souls hanging like limp dirty rags?--And they make

newspapers also out of these rags!

  Hearest thou not how spirit hath here become a verbal game? Loathsomeverbal swill doth it vomit forth!--And they make newspapers also out of this

verbal swill.

  They  hound  one  another,  and  know  not  whither!  They  inflame  one

another, and know not why! They tinkle with their pinchbeck, they jingle

with their gold.

  They are cold, and seek warmth from distilled waters: they are inflamed,

and  seek  coolness  from  frozen  spirits;  they  are  all  sick  and  sore  through

public opinion.

  All lusts and vices are here at home; but here there are also the virtuous;

there is much appointable appointed virtue:--

  Much appointable virtue with scribe-fingers, and hardy sitting-flesh and

waiting-flesh,  blessed  with  small  breast-stars,  and  padded,  haunchless

daughters.

  There  is  here  also  much  piety,  and  much  faithful  spittle-licking  and

spittle-backing, before the God of Hosts.

  "From on high," drippeth the star, and the gracious spittle; for the high,

longeth every starless bosom.

  The moon hath its court, and the court hath its moon-calves: unto all,

however, that cometh from the court do the mendicant people pray, and all

appointable mendicant virtues.

  "I serve, thou servest, we serve"--so prayeth all appointable virtue to the

prince: that the merited star may at last stick on the slender breast!

  But the moon still revolveth around all that is earthly: so revolveth also

the prince around what is earthliest of all--that, however, is the gold of the

shopman.

  The God of the Hosts of war is not the God of the golden bar; the prince

proposeth, but the shopman--disposeth!

  By all that is luminous and strong and good in thee, O Zarathustra! Spit

on this city of shopmen and return back!

  Here floweth all blood putridly and tepidly and frothily through all veins:

spit on the great city, which is the great slum where all the scum frotheth

together!

  Spit on the city of compressed souls and slender breasts, of pointed eyes

and sticky fingers--

  --On the city of the obtrusive, the brazen-faced, the pen-demagogues and

tongue-demagogues, the overheated ambitious:--

  Where  everything  maimed,  ill-famed,  lustful,  untrustful,  over-mellow,sickly-yellow and seditious, festereth pernicious:--

  --Spit on the great city and turn back!--

  Here, however, did Zarathustra interrupt the foaming fool, and shut his

mouth.--

  Stop this at once! called out Zarathustra, long have thy speech and thy

species disgusted me!

  Why didst thou live so long by the swamp, that thou thyself hadst to

become a frog and a toad?

  Floweth  there  not  a  tainted,  frothy,  swamp-blood  in  thine  own  veins,

when thou hast thus learned to croak and revile?

  Why  wentest  thou  not  into  the  forest?  Or  why  didst  thou  not  till  the

ground? Is the sea not full of green islands?

  I despise thy contempt; and when thou warnedst me--why didst thou not

warn thyself?

  Out of love alone shall my contempt and my warning bird take wing; but

not out of the swamp!--

  They call thee mine ape, thou foaming fool: but I call thee my grunting-

pig,--by thy grunting, thou spoilest even my praise of folly.

  What  was  it  that  first  made  thee  grunt?  Because  no  one  sufficiently

FLATTERED thee:--therefore didst thou seat thyself beside this filth, that

thou mightest have cause for much grunting,--

  --That  thou  mightest  have  cause  for  much  VENGEANCE!  For

vengeance, thou vain fool, is all thy foaming; I have divined thee well!

  But thy fools'-word injureth ME, even when thou art right! And even if

Zarathustra's word WERE a hundred times justified, thou wouldst ever--DO

wrong with my word!

  Thus spake Zarathustra. Then did he look on the great city and sighed,

and was long silent. At last he spake thus:

  I loathe also this great city, and not only this fool. Here and there-- there

is nothing to better, nothing to worsen.

  Woe to this great city!--And I would that I already saw the pillar of fire in

which it will be consumed!

  For such pillars of fire must precede the great noontide. But this hath its

time and its own fate.--

  This precept, however, give I unto thee, in parting, thou fool: Where one

can no longer love, there should one--PASS BY!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra, and passed by the fool and the great city.  LII. THE APOSTATES.

  1.

  Ah, lieth everything already withered and grey which but lately stood

green and many-hued on this meadow! And how much honey of hope did I

carry hence into my beehives!

  Those young hearts have already all become old--and not old even! only

weary,  ordinary,  comfortable:--they  declare  it:  "We  have  again  become

pious."

  Of late did I see them run forth at early morn with valorous steps: but the

feet of their knowledge became weary, and now do they malign even their

morning valour!

  Verily,  many  of  them  once  lifted  their  legs  like  the  dancer;  to  them

winked the laughter of my wisdom:--then did they bethink themselves. Just

now have I seen them bent down--to creep to the cross.

  Around light and liberty did they once flutter like gnats and young poets.

A little older, a little colder: and already are they mystifiers, and mumblers

and mollycoddles.

  Did perhaps their hearts despond, because lonesomeness had swallowed

me like a whale? Did their ear perhaps hearken yearningly-long for me IN

VAIN, and for my trumpet-notes and herald-calls?

  --Ah!  Ever  are  there  but  few  of  those  whose  hearts  have  persistent

courage and exuberance; and in such remaineth also the spirit patient. The

rest, however, are COWARDLY.

  The  rest:  these  are  always  the  great  majority,  the  common-place,  the

superfluous, the far-too many--those all are cowardly!--

  Him who is of my type, will also the experiences of my type meet on the

way: so that his first companions must be corpses and buffoons.

  His  second  companions,  however--they  will  call  themselves  his

BELIEVERS,--will  be  a  living  host,  with  much  love,  much  folly,  much

unbearded veneration.

  To those believers shall he who is of my type among men not bind his

heart; in those spring-times and many-hued meadows shall he not believe,

who knoweth the fickly faint-hearted human species!

  COULD they do otherwise, then would they also WILL otherwise. The

half-and-half spoil every whole. That leaves become withered,--what is there

to lament about that!

  Let them go and fall away, O Zarathustra, and do not lament! Better evento blow amongst them with rustling winds,--

  --Blow amongst those leaves, O Zarathustra, that everything WITHERED

may run away from thee the faster!--

  2.

  "We have again become pious"--so do those apostates confess; and some

of them are still too pusillanimous thus to confess.

  Unto them I look into the eye,--before them I say it unto their face and

unto the blush on their cheeks: Ye are those who again PRAY!

  It is however a shame to pray! Not for all, but for thee, and me, and

whoever hath his conscience in his head. For THEE it is a shame to pray!

  Thou knowest it well: the faint-hearted devil in thee, which would fain

fold its arms, and place its hands in its bosom, and take it easier:--this faint-

hearted devil persuadeth thee that "there IS a God!"

    THEREBY,  however,  dost  thou  belong  to  the  light-dreading  type,  to

whom light never permitteth repose: now must thou daily thrust thy head

deeper into obscurity and vapour!

  And verily, thou choosest the hour well: for just now do the nocturnal

birds again fly abroad. The hour hath come for all light-dreading people, the

vesper hour and leisure hour, when they do not--"take leisure."

  I hear it and smell it: it hath come--their hour for hunt and procession, not

indeed for a wild hunt, but for a tame, lame, snuffling, soft-treaders', soft-

prayers' hunt,--

  --For a hunt after susceptible simpletons: all mouse-traps for the heart

have again been set! And whenever I lift a curtain, a night-moth rusheth out

of it.

  Did  it  perhaps  squat  there  along  with  another  night-moth?  For

everywhere do I smell small concealed communities; and wherever there are

closets there are new devotees therein, and the atmosphere of devotees.

  They sit for long evenings beside one another, and say: "Let us again

become  like  little  children  and  say,  'good  God!'"--ruined  in  mouths  and

stomachs by the pious confectioners.

  Or  they  look  for  long  evenings  at  a  crafty,  lurking  cross-spider,  that

preacheth  prudence  to  the  spiders  themselves,  and  teacheth  that  "under

crosses it is good for cobweb-spinning!"

  Or they sit all day at swamps with angle-rods, and on that account think

themselves PROFOUND; but whoever fisheth where there are no fish, I do

not even call him superficial!  Or they learn in godly-gay style to play the harp with a hymn-poet, who

would fain harp himself into the heart of young girls:--for he hath tired of old

girls and their praises.

  Or they learn to shudder with a learned semi-madcap, who waiteth in

darkened  rooms  for  spirits  to  come  to  him--and  the  spirit  runneth  away

entirely!

  Or they listen to an old roving howl-and growl-piper, who hath learnt

from the sad winds the sadness of sounds; now pipeth he as the wind, and

preacheth sadness in sad strains.

  And some of them have even become night-watchmen: they know now

how to blow horns, and go about at night and awaken old things which have

long fallen asleep.

  Five words about old things did I hear yester-night at the garden-wall:

they came from such old, sorrowful, arid night-watchmen.

  "For a father he careth not sufficiently for his children: human fathers do

this better!"--

  "He is too old! He now careth no more for his children,"--answered the

other night-watchman.

  "HATH he then children? No one can prove it unless he himself prove it!

I have long wished that he would for once prove it thoroughly."

  "Prove? As if HE had ever proved anything! Proving is difficult to him;

he layeth great stress on one's BELIEVING him."

  "Ay!  Ay!  Belief  saveth  him;  belief  in  him.  That  is  the  way  with  old

people! So it is with us also!"--

  --Thus spake to each other the two old night-watchmen and light-scarers,

and tooted thereupon sorrowfully on their horns: so did it happen yester-night

at the garden-wall.

  To me, however, did the heart writhe with laughter, and was like to break;

it knew not where to go, and sunk into the midriff.

  Verily, it will be my death yet--to choke with laughter when I see asses

drunken, and hear night-watchmen thus doubt about God.

  Hath the time not LONG since passed for all such doubts? Who may

nowadays awaken such old slumbering, light-shunning things!

  With the old Deities hath it long since come to an end:--and verily, a good

joyful Deity-end had they!

  They did not "begloom" themselves to death--that do people fabricate! On

the contrary, they--LAUGHED themselves to death once on a time!  That took place when the unGodliest utterance came from a God himself-

-the utterance: "There is but one God! Thou shalt have no other Gods before

me!"--

  --An old grim-beard of a God, a jealous one, forgot himself in such wise:-

-

  And  all  the  Gods  then  laughed,  and  shook  upon  their  thrones,  and

exclaimed: "Is it not just divinity that there are Gods, but no God?"

  He that hath an ear let him hear.--

  Thus talked Zarathustra in the city he loved, which is surnamed "The Pied

Cow." For from here he had but two days to travel to reach once more his

cave and his animals; his soul, however, rejoiced unceasingly on account of

the nighness of his return home.

                              LIII. THE RETURN HOME.

  O  lonesomeness!  My  HOME,  lonesomeness!  Too  long  have  I  lived

wildly in wild remoteness, to return to thee without tears!

  Now threaten me with the finger as mothers threaten; now smile upon me

as  mothers  smile;  now  say  just:  "Who  was  it  that  like  a  whirlwind  once

rushed away from me?--

  --Who  when  departing  called  out:  'Too  long  have  I  sat  with

lonesomeness; there have I unlearned silence!' THAT hast thou learned now--

surely?

  O  Zarathustra,  everything  do  I  know;  and  that  thou  wert  MORE

FORSAKEN amongst the many, thou unique one, than thou ever wert with

me!

  One thing is forsakenness, another matter is lonesomeness: THAT hast

thou now learned! And that amongst men thou wilt ever be wild and strange:

  --Wild and strange even when they love thee: for above all they want to

be TREATED INDULGENTLY!

  Here, however, art thou at home and house with thyself; here canst thou

utter  everything,  and  unbosom  all  motives;  nothing  is  here  ashamed  of

concealed, congealed feelings.

  Here do all things come caressingly to thy talk and flatter thee: for they

want to ride upon thy back. On every simile dost thou here ride to every truth.

    Uprightly and openly mayest thou here talk to all things: and verily, it

soundeth as praise in their ears, for one to talk to all things--directly!

  Another matter, however, is forsakenness. For, dost thou remember, O

Zarathustra? When thy bird screamed overhead, when thou stoodest in theforest, irresolute, ignorant where to go, beside a corpse:--

  --When thou spakest: 'Let mine animals lead me! More dangerous have I

found it among men than among animals:'--THAT was forsakenness!

  And dost thou remember, O Zarathustra? When thou sattest in thine isle,

a well of wine giving and granting amongst empty buckets, bestowing and

distributing amongst the thirsty:

  --Until at last thou alone sattest thirsty amongst the drunken ones, and

wailedst nightly: 'Is taking not more blessed than giving? And stealing yet

more blessed than taking?'--THAT was forsakenness!

  And dost thou remember, O Zarathustra? When thy stillest hour came and

drove thee forth from thyself, when with wicked whispering it said: 'Speak

and succumb!'--

  --When it disgusted thee with all thy waiting and silence, and discouraged

thy humble courage: THAT was forsakenness!"--

  O lonesomeness! My home, lonesomeness! How blessedly and tenderly

speaketh thy voice unto me!

  We do not question each other, we do not complain to each other; we go

together openly through open doors.

  For all is open with thee and clear; and even the hours run here on lighter

feet. For in the dark, time weigheth heavier upon one than in the light.

  Here fly open unto me all being's words and word-cabinets: here all being

wanteth to become words, here all becoming wanteth to learn of me how to

talk.

  Down  there,  however--all  talking  is  in  vain!  There,  forgetting  and

passing-by are the best wisdom: THAT have I learned now!

  He who would understand everything in man must handle everything. But

for that I have too clean hands.

  I do not like even to inhale their breath; alas! that I have lived so long

among their noise and bad breaths!

  O blessed stillness around me! O pure odours around me! How from a

deep breast this stillness fetcheth pure breath! How it hearkeneth, this blessed

stillness!

  But down there--there speaketh everything, there is everything misheard.

If one announce one's wisdom with bells, the shopmen in the market-place

will out-jingle it with pennies!

    Everything  among  them  talketh;  no  one  knoweth  any  longer  how  to

understand. Everything falleth into the water; nothing falleth any longer intodeep wells.

    Everything  among  them  talketh,  nothing  succeedeth  any  longer  and

accomplisheth itself. Everything cackleth, but who will still sit quietly on the

nest and hatch eggs?

    Everything among them talketh, everything is out-talked. And that which

yesterday  was  still  too  hard  for  time  itself  and  its  tooth,  hangeth  to-day,

outchamped and outchewed, from the mouths of the men of to-day.

    Everything among them talketh, everything is betrayed. And what was

once called the secret and secrecy of profound souls, belongeth to-day to the

street-trumpeters and other butterflies.

  O human hubbub, thou wonderful thing! Thou noise in dark streets! Now

art thou again behind me:--my greatest danger lieth behind me!

  In  indulging  and  pitying  lay  ever  my  greatest  danger;  and  all  human

hubbub wisheth to be indulged and tolerated.

  With suppressed truths, with fool's hand and befooled heart, and rich in

petty lies of pity:--thus have I ever lived among men.

    Disguised  did  I  sit  amongst  them,  ready  to  misjudge  MYSELF  that  I

might endure THEM, and willingly saying to myself: "Thou fool, thou dost

not know men!"

  One unlearneth men when one liveth amongst them: there is too much

foreground in all men--what can far-seeing, far-longing eyes do THERE!

  And, fool that I was, when they misjudged me, I indulged them on that

account more than myself, being habitually hard on myself, and often even

taking revenge on myself for the indulgence.

  Stung all over by poisonous flies, and hollowed like the stone by many

drops of wickedness: thus did I sit among them, and still said to myself:

"Innocent is everything petty of its pettiness!"

  Especially  did  I  find  those  who  call  themselves  "the  good,"  the  most

poisonous flies; they sting in all innocence, they lie in all innocence; how

COULD they--be just towards me!

  He who liveth amongst the good--pity teacheth him to lie. Pity maketh

stifling air for all free souls. For the stupidity of the good is unfathomable.

  To  conceal  myself  and  my  riches--THAT  did  I  learn  down  there:  for

every one did I still find poor in spirit. It was the lie of my pity, that I knew in

every one,

  --That I saw and scented in every one, what was ENOUGH of spirit for

him, and what was TOO MUCH!  Their stiff wise men: I call them wise, not stiff--thus did I learn to slur

over words.

  The grave-diggers dig for themselves diseases. Under old rubbish rest bad

vapours. One should not stir up the marsh. One should live on mountains.

  With blessed nostrils do I again breathe mountain-freedom. Freed at last

is my nose from the smell of all human hubbub!

  With sharp breezes tickled, as with sparkling wine, SNEEZETH my soul-

- sneezeth, and shouteth self-congratulatingly: "Health to thee!"

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                          LIV. THE THREE EVIL THINGS.

  1.

  In my dream, in my last morning-dream, I stood to-day on a promontory--

beyond the world; I held a pair of scales, and WEIGHED the world.

  Alas, that the rosy dawn came too early to me: she glowed me awake, the

jealous one! Jealous is she always of the glows of my morning-dream.

    Measurable  by  him  who  hath  time,  weighable  by  a  good  weigher,

attainable by strong pinions, divinable by divine nut-crackers: thus did my

dream find the world:--

  My dream, a bold sailor, half-ship, half-hurricane, silent as the butterfly,

impatient as the falcon: how had it the patience and leisure to-day for world-

weighing!

  Did my wisdom perhaps speak secretly to it, my laughing, wide-awake

day-wisdom, which mocketh at all "infinite worlds"? For it saith: "Where

force is, there becometh NUMBER the master: it hath more force."

  How confidently did my dream contemplate this finite world, not new-

fangledly, not old-fangledly, not timidly, not entreatingly:--

  --As if a big round apple presented itself to my hand, a ripe golden apple,

with a coolly-soft, velvety skin:--thus did the world present itself unto me:--

  --As  if  a  tree  nodded  unto  me,  a  broad-branched,  strong-willed  tree,

curved as a recline and a foot-stool for weary travellers: thus did the world

stand on my promontory:--

  --As if delicate hands carried a casket towards me--a casket open for the

delectation of modest adoring eyes: thus did the world present itself before

me to-day:--

  --Not riddle enough to scare human love from it, not solution enough to

put to sleep human wisdom:--a humanly good thing was the world to me to-

day, of which such bad things are said!  How I thank my morning-dream that I thus at to-day's dawn, weighed the

world! As a humanly good thing did it come unto me, this dream and heart-

comforter!

  And that I may do the like by day, and imitate and copy its best, now will

I put the three worst things on the scales, and weigh them humanly well.--

  He who taught to bless taught also to curse: what are the three best cursed

things in the world? These will I put on the scales.

      VOLUPTUOUSNESS,  PASSION  FOR  POWER,  and  SELFISHNESS:

these three things have hitherto been best cursed, and have been in worst and

falsest repute--these three things will I weigh humanly well.

  Well! Here is my promontory, and there is the sea--IT rolleth hither unto

me, shaggily and fawningly, the old, faithful, hundred-headed dog-monster

that I love!--

  Well!  Here  will  I  hold  the  scales  over  the  weltering  sea:  and  also  a

witness do I choose to look on--thee, the anchorite-tree, thee, the strong-

odoured, broad-arched tree that I love!--

  On what bridge goeth the now to the hereafter? By what constraint doth

the high stoop to the low? And what enjoineth even the highest still--to grow

upwards?--

  Now stand the scales poised and at rest: three heavy questions have I

thrown in; three heavy answers carrieth the other scale.

  2.

    Voluptuousness: unto all hair-shirted despisers of the body, a sting and

stake; and, cursed as "the world," by all backworldsmen: for it mocketh and

befooleth all erring, misinferring teachers.

    Voluptuousness: to the rabble, the slow fire at which it is burnt; to all

wormy wood, to all stinking rags, the prepared heat and stew furnace.

    Voluptuousness:  to  free  hearts,  a  thing  innocent  and  free,  the  garden-

happiness of the earth, all the future's thanks-overflow to the present.

    Voluptuousness: only to the withered a sweet poison; to the lion-willed,

however, the great cordial, and the reverently saved wine of wines.

    Voluptuousness: the great symbolic happiness of a higher happiness and

highest hope. For to many is marriage promised, and more than marriage,--

  --To many that are more unknown to each other than man and woman:--

and who hath fully understood HOW UNKNOWN to each other are man and

woman!

    Voluptuousness:--but I will have hedges around my thoughts, and evenaround my words, lest swine and libertine should break into my gardens!--

  Passion for power: the glowing scourge of the hardest of the heart-hard;

the cruel torture reserved for the cruellest themselves; the gloomy flame of

living pyres.

  Passion for power: the wicked gadfly which is mounted on the vainest

peoples; the scorner of all uncertain virtue; which rideth on every horse and

on every pride.

  Passion for power: the earthquake which breaketh and upbreaketh all that

is rotten and hollow; the rolling, rumbling, punitive demolisher of whited

sepulchres; the flashing interrogative-sign beside premature answers.

  Passion for power: before whose glance man creepeth and croucheth and

drudgeth, and becometh lower than the serpent and the swine:--until at last

great contempt crieth out of him--,

  Passion for power: the terrible teacher of great contempt, which preacheth

to their face to cities and empires: "Away with thee!"--until a voice crieth out

of themselves: "Away with ME!"

  Passion for power: which, however, mounteth alluringly even to the pure

and lonesome, and up to self-satisfied elevations, glowing like a love that

painteth purple felicities alluringly on earthly heavens.

  Passion for power: but who would call it PASSION, when the height

longeth to stoop for power! Verily, nothing sick or diseased is there in such

longing and descending!

  That the lonesome height may not for ever remain lonesome and self-

sufficing; that the mountains may come to the valleys and the winds of the

heights to the plains:--

  Oh, who could find the right prenomen and honouring name for such

longing! "Bestowing virtue"--thus did Zarathustra once name the unnamable.

  And then it happened also,--and verily, it happened for the first time!--

that his word blessed SELFISHNESS, the wholesome, healthy selfishness,

that springeth from the powerful soul:--

  --From  the  powerful  soul,  to  which  the  high  body  appertaineth,  the

handsome, triumphing, refreshing body, around which everything becometh a

mirror:

  --The pliant, persuasive body, the dancer, whose symbol and epitome is

the self-enjoying soul. Of such bodies and souls the self-enjoyment calleth

itself "virtue."

  With its words of good and bad doth such self-enjoyment shelter itself aswith sacred groves; with the names of its happiness doth it banish from itself

everything contemptible.

  Away  from  itself  doth  it  banish  everything  cowardly;  it  saith:  "Bad--

THAT IS cowardly!" Contemptible seem to it the ever-solicitous, the sighing,

the complaining, and whoever pick up the most trifling advantage.

  It despiseth also all bitter-sweet wisdom: for verily, there is also wisdom

that bloometh in the dark, a night-shade wisdom, which ever sigheth: "All is

vain!"

  Shy distrust is regarded by it as base, and every one who wanteth oaths

instead of looks and hands: also all over-distrustful wisdom,--for such is the

mode of cowardly souls.

  Baser still it regardeth the obsequious, doggish one, who immediately

lieth  on  his  back,  the  submissive  one;  and  there  is  also  wisdom  that  is

submissive, and doggish, and pious, and obsequious.

  Hateful  to  it  altogether,  and  a  loathing,  is  he  who  will  never  defend

himself, he who swalloweth down poisonous spittle and bad looks, the all-

too-patient one, the all-endurer, the all-satisfied one: for that is the mode of

slaves.

  Whether they be servile before Gods and divine spurnings, or before men

and stupid human opinions: at ALL kinds of slaves doth it spit, this blessed

selfishness!

  Bad:  thus  doth  it  call  all  that  is  spirit-broken,  and  sordidly-servile--

constrained, blinking eyes, depressed hearts, and the false submissive style,

which kisseth with broad cowardly lips.

  And spurious wisdom: so doth it call all the wit that slaves, and hoary-

headed  and  weary  ones  affect;  and  especially  all  the  cunning,  spurious-

witted, curious-witted foolishness of priests!

  The spurious wise, however, all the priests, the world-weary, and those

whose souls are of feminine and servile nature--oh, how hath their game all

along abused selfishness!

  And precisely THAT was to be virtue and was to be called virtue--to

abuse  selfishness!  And  "selfless"--so  did  they  wish  themselves  with  good

reason, all those world-weary cowards and cross-spiders!

  But to all those cometh now the day, the change, the sword of judgment,

THE GREAT NOONTIDE: then shall many things be revealed!

  And he who proclaimeth the EGO wholesome and holy, and selfishness

blessed,  verily,  he,  the  prognosticator,  speaketh  also  what  he  knoweth: