belief  that  through  him  and  with  him  Wagner  might  make  still  further

changes ? This, however, would have been possible only in the Tribschen

days, during which Wagner had the time to meditate. In Bayreuth it was out

of the question.

  My brother and Wagner saw nothing of each other from August, 1874, to

July,  1876.  True,  invitations  came  often  enough  from  Wagner,  and  my

brother,  delighted  at  his  kindness,  certainly  answered  in  the  most  hearty

fashion, and even suggested all kinds of plans whereby they might meet ; but

it cannot be denied that my brother was only too glad to avail himself of any

excuse to delay or completely to prevent such a meeting, and of this Wagner

was fully conscious. I have already mentioned the fact that in the summer of

1875 my brother was compelled for reasons of health to visit a watering-

place instead of going to Bayreuth for the rehearsals. All Wagner's and my

brother's friends had assembled in Bayreuth at the time, and my brother's

letters were once more full of the old expressions of longing. And yet anyone

who reads these communications from Steinabad carefully will find much

between the lines.

  When, however, faithful friends wrote such loving, admiring and reverent

letters from Bayreuth, all the happiness that Wagner's works had given him

for so many long years surged in his heart once more. Thoughts of all the

blessed hours of friendship and intimate association filled his memory, and

he asked himself, almost with terror, what his life would have been without

Wagner and his Art ! Over-flowing with the deepest gratitude, he summoned

up all the feelings he had had in this connection for the last sixteen years, or

thereabouts ; and thus the sorrowing disciple, who was a disciple no longer,

wrote his second letter of farewell, " Richard Wagner in Bayreuth."

  He worked at the essay from August to October ; but he was dissatisfied

with it, and laid it aside. The element of conflict in his own feelings on the

question, which was usually absent from his creative moments, is betrayed in

one or two of his admissions at the time. In the autumn of 1875, for instance,

he regards the essay as " unpublishable," and at the beginning of October he

writes: "My essay, ' Richard Wagner in Bayreuth,' will not be printed. It is

almost ready, but in it I am far behind the standard I demand of myself ; thus

its only value to me is that it is a new inquiry into the most difficult question

relating to the experiences we have had hitherto. I do not stand above the

thing,  and  I  realise  full  well  that  I  have  not  been  quite  successful  in  the

inquiry how could I then be helpful to others ? "  As I have already said, the state of my brother's health at the beginning of

1876  was  very  serious  and  alarming,  and  throughout  this  period,  all

correspondence between Bale and Bayreuth was carried on only by myself

and Wagner. With the spring, however, came also recovery and a glad love of

life, and on Wagner's birthday my brother wrote his first letter to Bayreuth

since his return to health. Wagner answered in the most friendly manner on

the following day : " Friend, now at last you are up and well ! " In this letter

he once more made protestations of friendship, and expressed his regret at

having seen so little of my brother in recent years, with such warmth and

emphasis, even going to the extent of saying that it was the greatest calamity

that had befallen him during the last seven years, that my brother was most

deeply moved. Wagner's words recalled all the happy years of their deepest

friendship to my brother's mind, and he decided that he could not remain

dumb at the moment of Wagner's greatest triumph his gratitude would not

allow it. He must summon others to yield to these forces which had made him

so happy for years, and which had brought so many thoughts and feelings to

maturity in him. He therefore sent part of the Wagner essay to be printed, and

in June, 1876, went to Badenweiler for a few days to write the conclusion.

  But during the whole time that the work was in the press my brother was

tormented by the question whether it would not be possible to read many

things between the lines of this most loving and reverent essay, which would

betray Wagner. It is a very difficult thing to return successfully to feelings

which one has long ago overcome, however strenuously one may try, with all

the love and melancholy of a seceding disciple, to revive one's former faith

and to recall all its beauty. This effort on my brother's part sometimes gives a

stilted and exaggerated quality to " Richard Wagner in Bayreuth." His qualms

are plainly expressed in the letters that he sent with the two copies of the

essay which he presented to Wagner and Frau Cosima respectively. As these

letters were drafted in one of his note-books, they are still preserved.

  "Here, dearest Master," he wrote to Wagner, "is a kind of Bayreuth festal

address ! I could not hold my peace, and was constrained to speak out on

many  points.  Those  who  are  now  rejoicing,  will,  I  trust,  find  themselves

doing so all the more after reading my essay this to-day is my pride and my

hope. I cannot even venture to guess how you yourself will receive these

confessions  this  time.  My  writing  has  this  unfortunate  consequence,  that

every time I publish a work something in my personal relations comes into

question, which can afterwards be restored to its proper place only with thehelp of a little humour. I cannot say more distinctly than I have done, the

extent to which I feel this particularly now. When I think of what I have

dared to accomplish this time, I grow giddy and embarrassed, and I feel like

The Eider on Lake Constance. But once, in your very first letter to me, you

said something about faith in German Freedom. It is to this faith that I turn

to-day ; for it was only in it that I found the necessary courage to do what I

have done.

  " Yours heart and soul " F. N."

  To Frau Cosima he wrote : " You must surely know what all friends of

Bayreuth now think of you ; and which of us this summer does not desire to

give you some token of his great gratitude ? Be so kind therefore as to help

me in this small attempt at giving you a little pleasure, by accepting one of

the two special copies of my latest work which I am sending to you and to the

Master. (Busy as you are with all that you have charge of and all that you

care for, you will, however, have neither the time nor the inclination to read it

until after the summer). You will learn from my essay that I could not endure

to prepare myself for the great and wonderful event of this summer all alone

and at such a distance from you I had to communicate my joy to others. If

only I might hope that here and there I have divined a note of your joy and

that I have expressed it with you ! I can think of no more beautiful desire."

  Frau Wagner spent half the night reading the essay, and on the 11th of

July, 1876, sent the following telegram : " Dear Friend I thank you for the

only refreshment and joy I have had recently besides that given to me by

husband's art. May this suffice for my thanks to you. Cosima."

  On  the  12th  of  July,  1876,  Wagner  wrote  :  "  Friend  !  Your  book  is

prodigious ! " How did you learn to know me so well ? Come quickly, and

get accustomed to the new impressions by attending the rehearsals. Yours, E.

W."

  This is the last letter Wagner ever wrote to my brother.

  Once when the conversation turned upon modern literature, my brother,

who was somewhat of a stranger to everything erotic, asked one of his pupils,

who by-the-bye died young, why the same theme the love between man and

woman which was becoming extremely boring, always formed the principal

subject of all novels. " Yes," replied the pupil thoughtfully, " but what other

feelings would be able to give rise to such conflicts ? " " Well, friendship,"

my brother replied warmly, " it gives rise to absolutely similar conflicts, but

on a much higher plane. In the first place there is mutual attraction on theground of convictions and opinions in common, then there follows the joy of

perfect unity, mutual admiration and glorification. Later on there arose on

one side suspicion, and on the other doubt as to the excellence of the friend

and his views. The necessity of separation, and the difficulty of being able to

do  without  each  other  quickly  follow.  All  these  and  other  unspeakable

sufferings sometimes affect two friends." The pupil looked up incredulously,

he had never experienced such a passionate kind of friendship.

  This chapter is thus the story of a friendship, with all its sorrows and its

delights ; the romance of two geniuses who were able for a while to walk side

by side along cheerful and sunny highways. One of them, however, is now

already  turning,  ready  to  say  farewell.  Hesitatingly  he  stands  at  the

crossways. Full of love and melancholy he looks back upon the road along

which they have come together will the other be able to keep him at his side ?

              CHAPTER XXVI " DEE RING DES NIBELUNGEN."

  IF a merciful Providence had watched over my brother's friendship with

Wagner, it would have prevented him from going to Bayreuth. Very much in

the same way as Luther went to Rome, my brother went to Bayreuth, simply

to find his waning faith in Wagnerian Art still further shaken, but we know

how Luther's visit to Rome turned out. Still with the name of Bayreuth my

brother associated the hope that there "Wagner's Art would reveal itself to

him in a new and overwhelming manner. The vision of a festival in which the

actors in the spectacle and the spectators would be equally remarkable and

admirable, and in which both, united by the depth of their feelings, must

produce a positively prodigious effect all this moved him deeply, and filled

him with great and undefined hopes. In the middle of July, therefore, with a

feeling of real joy, he went to Bayreuth for the rehearsals, although he had

not yet recovered from the fatigue brought about by his completion of the

fourth essay for the Thoughts out of Season. But the first news from Bayreuth

was very depressing : "I almost regret having come ! For, up to the present,

everything has been pitiable. On Monday I attended the rehearsal ; it did not

please me at all ; and I had to leave." He concluded his letter with the words :

" Everybody is anxiously expecting you ; make haste, make haste, dear Lama

! "

  For, meanwhile, I was still busy in Bale, packing up all the furniture and

putting it away, as we intended giving up the flat during my brother's tour in

Italy.

  The  second  letter  from  Bayreuth  seemed  much  more  hopeful  :  "  MYDEAR GOOD SISTEK, I feel better now. For the last three days my health

has been excellent ; but you must remember that I am staying with Fraulein

von Meysenbug. I am in the garden from the first thing in the morning ; I

drink  milk,  bathe  in  the  river,  and  eat  only  food  that  agrees  with  me.

Meanwhile I have seen and heard the Twilight of the Gods ; it is a good thing

to grow used to it. I am now in my element.

  " Incidentally (but this is between ourselves !) only half of the seats have

been sold for the second cycle, and scarcely a third have been sold for the

third cycle. To-night the King is coming. He has wired that he is delighted

with my essay. The Schur6s are also coming to-day. The Wagners and their

children have often asked after you.

  " As to my Italian tour, everything seems to be turning out better than I

could have desired. Sea, woods and the neighbourhood of Naples maybe in

the end it will only come to this. One can only hope. My health has made

such  good  progress  that  I  am  much  more  cheerful.  I  must,  however,  be

careful, and I decline all invitations, even Wagner's. Wagner thinks that I

make myself scarce."

  Later on he explained this spirited letter by saying that in order to write it

he had forcibly summoned up all his spiritual strength, and had tried to place

himself in his former attitude of mind. This had given him a certain wanton

feeling of struggle and triumph, and the only thing he had not been able to

endure  was  conversation  of  a  very  intimate  nature.  This  more  lively

communication also terminated with the words : " Make haste, good Lama ! "

I now pressed on my domestic duties as quickly as possible ; albeit, on the

morning of my departure I received the news that Fritz no longer wished to

remain in Bayreuth. His violent effort to be his old self in regard to Wagner's

work had thus only lasted a few days. He wrote : "I long to leave, it is absurd

for me to stay here. I shudder at the thought of every one of these long

musical evenings, and yet I do not stay away. ... I am quite sick of it. I refuse

to be here even for the first performance. I prefer to go anywhere rather than

remain here where everything is a torment to me."

  These  tidings  frightened  me  very  much,  indeed  ;  for  all  the  practical

arrangements had been made for us to make a stay of four weeks ; we were

both patrons, and had had the intention of hearing the three cycles as well as

the full rehearsals. Then, we had hired a large apartment for the whole of the

time, which, in addition to two bedrooms, contained a drawing-room and a

study for my brother. As a matter of fact, it was exceedingly rash on our partto have let my brother decide upon this sojourn in Bayreuth, seeing that it

entailed at least twelve evenings at the theatre. Even now I cannot imagine

how it was that the oculist did not most strictly forbid the whole thing. But, as

I have already said, my brother's ailments were wrongly diagnosed at this

time, and cause and effect were confounded. In those days we assumed that

the  eye-trouble  was  the  outcome  of  indeterminable  trouble  elsewhere,

whereas, now, we know that the former was the chief agent in bringing about

the general decline of his health. Still it should not be forgotten that, with a

nature as sensitive as my brother's, spiritual suffering, and such shocks as

those which his changed relations to his best friend and the alteration in his

convictions and ideals involved, proved much more painful and difficult to

endure than bodily indisposition.

  When I reached Bayreuth on the day before the first full rehearsal, Fritz

had already left. I was very much upset, for I felt certain that something great

and grievous had made him leave ; and I can well remember having spent a

whole morning at Fraulein von Meysenbug's, where I cried bitterly all the

time ; but she did not understand why I was so unhappy. On the following

day  I  received  a  letter  from  my  brother,  who  was  at  Klingenbrunn,  near

Regen,  in  the  Bavarian  Forest  :  "  DEAREST  SISTER,  I  trust  you  are  in

Bayreuth, and have found nice people there to look after you, now that I have

gone.

  I know perfectly well that I could not endure to stay there ; as a matter of

fact, we ought to have known this before ! Just think how carefully I have

had to live during the last few years. I feel so tired and exhausted after my

short  stay  there,  that  I  cannot  recover  my  old  spirits.  This  place  is  very

delightful ; there are large woods here, and the air of the heights is like that in

the Jura. I shall stay here about ten days, but I shall not return via Bayreuth.

So we may not see each other again this year ! How things change ! I have to

summon all my self-control to endure the unutterable disappointment I have

had this summer. I cannot even see my friends ; for the time being everything

is poison and injury to me."

  Fritz spent about ten days wandering about the woods of Klingenbrunn,

busily writing all the while. And it was during this time that the first notes for

the " Ploughshare " were written, many thoughts of which ultimately found

their way into Human, All too Human. The " Ploughshare " contained the

fundamental ideas of my brother's new line of thought. Here for the first time,

he expresses in clear, plain words what had long been taking shape withinhim, namely, a complete revolution in the opinions he had held hitherto.

  What, then, induced him as a new and changed personality to return to

Bayreuth on the day before the beginning of the first cycle, is now simply

impossible  to  discover.  If  I  remember  rightly,  it  seemed  as  if  even  in

Klingenbrunn he had been unable to convince himself that everything was at

an end for him in Bayreuth. It was longing that drove him back, his longing

for  the  Dionysian  music  which,  in  the  past,  he  had  heard  in  Wagner's

creations. He would so willingly have yielded to the influence of the old

charms ! Our likes and dislikes do not develop at the same speed as our

knowledge,  very  often  they  hasten  in  advance  of  the  latter,  but  more

frequently they are unable to keep pace with its rapid stride. My brother once

said of himself metaphorically that " the silkworm, drags its old prison for

some time along with it after first emerging from the chrysalis," and in the

same  way  he  was  able  to  rid  himself  of  his  old  love  and  preference  for

Wagner's music, only by degrees. Whatever the reasons of his return may

have been, however, he at all events suddenly came back to Bayreuth, and

listened with the greatest interest and some surprise to my account of all I had

experienced.

  During the time that I had been alone in Bayreuth, in the care of friends

of  course,  I  had  indeed  had  many  wonderful  experiences,  and  they  were

wonderful because everything happened so differently from what one might

have expected. King Ludwig of Bavaria had declared his intention of being

present at the full rehearsals ; in fact, they were to be performed for him

alone, as he was staying quite incognito at the Hermitage Castle, and would

see nobody but Wagner. Finally a very small number of people were allowed

to take their places in the first two rows of the amphitheatre, which could

scarcely be seen from the royal box, in order to witness the performance of

the Rheingold ; and I was one of this very small number. We waited for two

hours in pitch darkness for the arrival of the exalted visitor. King Ludwig,

who turned night into day, and day into night, had slept so well that no one

dared to wake him. He had reached Bayreuth early that morning (at A.M.) ;

had left the train at a railway watchman's hut, where Wagner, who had been

commanded to meet him there, received him, and the two had then gone to

the Hermitage together. On reaching the Castle, the King had detained the

Master for another two hours in friendly conversation in the Castle grounds,

an experience which we thought very unsuited to Wagner's sixty-three years.

  The full rehearsals went off splendidly ; if I remember rightly, those whocould speak with authority on the subject declared that they were among the

best performances of the Ring that were ever given. I have a particularly

vivid recollection of the beauty of Siegfried.

  It was such a relief that the poor deformed dragon never appeared in

person on the stage, and that its fight with Siegfried took place in the cave.

The  whole  scene  thus  made  an  extraordinarily  beautiful  and  mysterious

impression.

  King  Ludwig  also  expressed  himself  very  well  pleased  with  the

performance of the Rheingold on the first evening, and the only criticism he

made was that the music had sounded rather hollow in the empty theatre. He

therefore expressed the wish that a company of soldiers should he sent to fill

up the theatre. But this was really too hard on the people of Bayreuth, and the

executive  council  of  the  festival  performances  sallied  forth  to  have  an

audience of the King. In the most moving language these gentlemen showed

how deserving the people of Bayreuth had been not only in receiving and

sheltering artists but in other ways ; they also pointed out that the town was

full of enthusiastic visitors, and they begged the King graciously to allow the

inhabitants of Bayreuth, together with their guests, to fill the theatre during

the  full  rehearsals,  instead  of  the  soldiers.  It  was  said  that  the  King  was

extremely kind at the audience, and graciously granted the request of the

executive council ; but these worthy gentlemen were duly informed that they

must not on any account forget that the King was incognito on this visit to

Bayreuth, and that anything in the way of an ovation, and all staring at the

Royal Box, should be avoided. Thus the Walkure was performed before the

most motley audience I have ever seen in my life. People of all classes sat

shoulder to shoulder, who as a rule were distributed according to fashion,

wealth, and, above all, culture. There must undoubtedly have been many an

enthusiastic spectator in the crowded assembly ; but, on the whole, when one

contemplated  the  masses  of  Philistines  and  housewives,  and  heard  them

speak, one could not suppress a feeling of anxiety. One consoled one's self by

thinking  that  these  were  not  the  proper  spectators.  From  time  to  time  a

member of the executive committee would stand up, and in forcible language

would exhort the noisy throng not to look in the direction of the Royal Box,

but to keep their eyes on the stage. When, however, the theatre darkened and

the music began, the words " The King is coming" ran like a sort of electric

current all through the auditorium, and almost every head was turned towards

the forbidden spot. It was said that the sensitive King drew back as thoughpainfully conscious of being the centre of attention, but in any case the whole

theatre  suddenly  grew  so  absolutely  dark,  that  even  the  most  inquisitive

spectator present could have seen nothing in the forbidden spot, and then only

were  all  eyes  turned  upon  the  stage.  As  regards  external  decorum  the

following  evening  showed  an  improvement.  Gradually,  the  type  of  the

enthusiastic  visitor  began  to  preponderate  among  the  audience,  and  we

respected the King's incognito, despite the fact that we were all filled with the

most ardent wish to show Wagner's greatest benefactor our homage and our

gratitude. We were consoled by the fact that King Ludwig promised to return

for the third cycle of the Ring not as a private individual, but as a monarch,

and that we should therefore be able to rejoice at the sight of him.

  Our dear old Kaiser Wilhelm attended the first cycle. Dressed in civilian

clothes, he drove into Bayreuth, bowing graciously in all directions ; his kind

and  dignified  appearance  won  the  hearts  of  all  the  Bavarians,  and  we

Prussians were really proud. Even my brother was inspired with the most

hearty patriotic feeling. The Kaiser was given an extraordinarily enthusiastic

and spirited reception, even by the Bavarians. The letter W was displayed

everywhere ; but uninitiated, fanatical Wagnerites believed that this was in

Wagner's honour, and thought it in every way quite natural. Owing to the

Kaiser's presence, famine soon broke out in Bayreuth ; for the whole of the

population  even  from  the  remoter  districts  came  to  the  town  to  see  the

venerable hero. On one occasion, it was literally impossible for us and our

friends to get anything to eat for lunch; and later on Baroness E. v. W. told

me that when she had visited Countess Schleinitz during the Kaiser's visit to

Bayreuth, all she had been offered was some black bread and black-pudding

which were the only edibles the servants had been able to scrape together.

During the long intervals of the Ring, scenes took place in the Restaurant

"Albert," which showed only too plainly how closely related man is to the

beast for the crowd positively surged to the buffet, their eyes startling out of

their heads with eagerness.

  In the theatre, too, Kaiser Wilhelm was the object of the most enthusiastic

demonstrations. He arrived punctually, and manifested his appreciation by

good-natured applause ; but there were universal doubts as to whether he

really enjoyed the performances. No, Wagner's operas were not to his liking ;

Carmen pleased him much more, and this was perhaps not such bad taste

after all. Moreover, he had only consented to come in response to the most

pressing persuasion on the part of Countess Schleinitz. This excellent ladyhad succeeded in convincing him that the Bayreuth Festival was a national

festival ; thus he thought it his duty to attend it. He came on the 12th August

and  left  in  the  evening  of  the  14th  in  order  to  join  the  mano3uvres.

Unfortunately the performances he witnessed were the least successful of all.

They were full of hitches and a number of transformations entirely failed. For

instance,  once,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  Walhalla  was  supposed  to  rise

miraculously in the background ; but instead of that, all one could see was a

dark space in the middle of which was standing a foreman scene-shifter in his

shirt-sleeves (the heat was appalling). This was not a beautiful spectacle.

  It was generally rumoured at the time that, in response to a command to

go to the Imperial Box, Wagner had replied : " I beg His Imperial Majesty to

excuse me ; but I am tired." The Chamberlain had then bowed and retired ;

but  had  soon  returned.  "  His  Imperial  Majesty  requests  Herr  Wagner  to

come," he said. "Is it a command?" "Wagner demanded. The Chamberlain

said that it was. " I obey the command," said Wagner.

  It has been asserted that this scene was an example of Richard Wagner's

extravagant pride and arrogance but this is absolutely false! On that evening

Wagner really was very unhappy and extremely annoyed at the failure of the

performance (at least that is what my brother said), and while in this mood it

was  certainly  hard  to  be  called  before  His  Imperial  Majesty  in  order  to

receive praise. Wagner knew perfectly well that in his Festival speech of the

28th May, 1872, he had promised that : " so far as the artistic means at our

disposal at present are able to do so, you will be given the best that is to be

had in acting, singing and scenic effect." And this promise was not fulfilled in

those  first  evenings  of  the  Festival  performances,  at  least  as  far  as  the

transformations  and  many  other  things  were  concerned.  The  fact  that,

generally speaking, this was not painfully apparent was due to the wonderful

and really ideal orchestra, and to the peculiar spirit of the greater part of the

spectators, who seemed to be more impressed by the flattering presence of

the Kaiser, than by the perfection of the performances.

  And now let me describe the spectator at Bayreuth of whom my brother

had formed such an ideal image beforehand. He writes in the fourth essay of

the Thoughts out of Season : " It is certain that in Bayreuth even the spectator

is  a  spectacle  worth  seeing.  If  the  spirit  of  some  observant  sage  were  to

return,  after  the  absence  of  a  century,  and  were  to  compare  the  most

remarkable movements in the present world of culture, he would find much

to interest him there. Like one swimming in a lake, who encounters a currentof warm water issuing from a hot spring, in Bayreuth he would certainly feel

as if he had suddenly plunged into a more temperate element, and would say

to  himself  that  this  must  rise  out  of  a  distant  and  deeper  source  :  the

surrounding mass of water, which at all events is more common in origin,

does not account for it. In this way, all those who assist at the Bayreuth

Festival will seem like men out of season; their raison d'etre and the forces

which would seem to account for them are elsewhere, and their home is not

in the present age."

  But oh ! Where were these spectators ? It is possible that the exceptional

men in the herd become one with the herd, and are thus invisible ! It was

precisely  at  the  first  cycle  that  the  most  enthusiastic  Wagnerites  were

supposed to be present ; but one felt with horror that those who had come

together on that occasion were principally people who were able to pay 900

marks for twelve seats at the theatre. Of course there were some idealists like

ourselves  in  the  number,  but  these  few  were  certainly  utterly  lost  in  the

crowd. One could see men and women of high birth among the audience ; for

the presence of the Kaiser had attracted quite a large court to Bayreuth. One

could also admire the most beautiful dresses ; and Marienbad seemed to have

sent over quite a number of corpulent persons, bankers and people of means,

together with their wives ; the most luxurious jewels blazed on the opulent

bosoms of the women, and heavy gold chains hung in half hoops on the

rotund  waists  of  the  men  alas  !  and  these  were  the  spectators  who  were

supposed to be strangers to their age ! It was the same crowd that one can see

at any first night at the theatre. Of course here and there one was glad to see

one or two exceptional individuals, such, for instance, as the distinguished

painters, Menzel, Lenbach, Meyerheim, Makart, Angely ; or the interesting

musicians, Wilhelmi, Richter, Levy and others ; while an absolutely special

circle with an atmosphere of its own was formed by Franz Liszt, surrounded

by  a  bevy  of  admiring  and  languishing  females.  But  even  these  did  not

present a spectacle which might be said to have been in keeping with the

vigorous type of Wagner's genius, or which might in any way have been

called  "inopportune."  Moreover  it  was  whispered  that,  owing  to  Wagner,

Liszt had quarrelled with his friend Princess Wittgenstein ; for she was ill-

disposed to Wagner, and was consequently not present. She had not wished

Liszt to be present at the Festival performances, because he only played the "

part of a supernumerary there." But Liszt was not to be led astray ; he came

notwithstanding, and everybody thought all the more of him for it.  Only once did I have the impression that a kind of people different from

the rest of the ordinary public was assembled at Bayreuth. One morning I

paid a call at Wahnfried, but had to wait awhile in the small ante-chamber

before  I  could  be  received,  as  the  great  hall  was  packed  with  visitors.  I

peeped into the room and saw that at least forty orchestra-conductors, young

artists and authors, were waiting there for an audience of Wagner. (Wagner

was compelled to receive people in groups, as the throng of visitors was so

great.  On  the  first  day  of  the  Festival  performance  five  hundred  people

presented  their  cards  at  Wahnfried.)  In  that  rapid  glance  I  saw  only

interesting, artistic heads and fine intellectual faces ; the more elderly men in

the crowd spoke in gentle undertones, and the younger men listened with

becoming reverence. Indeed, a serious, reverent and devout spirit seemed to

prevail among the small throng of men waiting to see the Master. It was only

before such really artistic men as these that der Ring des Nibelungen, should

have been performed, and afterwards the spectators should have been given

the  right  of  freely  expressing  their  opinions  !  Of  course,  these  special

spectators should not have consisted merely of infatuated Wagnerites, for

there would have been little to learn from such severely disciplined partisans,

despite the fact that this type was at one time regarded as the "ideal spectator

" by Wagner and my brother. Now it happened that fate brought us into close

relationship  with  an  example  of  a  spectator  such  as  this  a  man  who  was

absolutely devoted to Wagner and his works ; and we learnt to know this type

in its strangest form. In the extravagance of his manner he was quite comical.

If my brother spoke at table, this man would forget meat and drink, and

would sink into abysmal reflection ; he understood little of what Fritz said,

and even that badly. If I gently reminded him of the present, lost in thought,

and in a voice that was not of this world, he would reply : " Your brother has

uttered words of the most profound wisdom, and I have lost all notion of

Time and Space." Meanwhile, however, the hasty waiters had removed the

plate which he had not yet touched, and I felt constrained to entreat him to

ask for another helping, for fear lest he should go out to face intellectual

enjoyment on an empty stomach. Then he would say : " You are right, one

must summon all one's individuality here, in order that one may not perish in

the cosmos." He always spoke in this strain ! " And he was a Wagnerite par

excellence," Fritz said with a look of sorrow.

  My brother also went to Angermann's one evening, but he returned with a

very sad smile. It was here that the chief assembly rooms of the members ofthe Wagner Societies were situated, and at that time these people were of that

particular type who thumped the tables uproariously with their fists, raised

their  pint  jars  of  beer  threateningly  and  seemed  ready  for  any  kind  of  "

knockdown " argument if another ventured to deviate in the slightest from the

strictest Wagner code. In a description of the Festival plays of 1896, Houston

Chamberlain  writes  :  "  I  have  often  read  of  the  out-and-out  votary  of

Bayreuth ; but I have never yet been able to find this kind of man ; no one

speaks so much, so pettily, and with so little understanding concerning all

that is done in Bayreuth, as these so called out-and-out votaries of Bayreuth.

The stranger and the enemy almost always feel more or less clearly how great

the project is, even if they do nothing else ; he, however, who by paying the

annual  subscription  of  four  marks,  has  become  a  member  of  the  General

Wagner Society, seems to feel as much at home at Bayreuth as a fish in a

pond. For the small sum of money he pays, he seems to have acquired not

only the right of membership, but also an absolutely infallible understanding

of one of the most prodigious artistic undertakings ever known in history and

it is well known that the first proof of genuine connoisseurship is to find fault

with anything and everything."

  In. 1876 things were very different ! When the member of the Wagner

Societies of those days paid his subscription he seemed to acquire the right to

storm like a savage at everyone who did not consider every note and every

word of the Master's to be as sacred as the gospel. These people seemed to

my brother like a parody of himself.

  But even we ourselves, members of "Wagner's circle of intimate friends,

had very different sensations from those we had expected. It is true that, at

times, we received the most stirring impressions, we were charmed by the

orchestra, and many a scene in Siegfried and in the Gotterdammerung, as for

instance that of the Rhine Daughters and others, will in their unparalleled

beauty continue to live to all eternity in our souls. But, in spite of all this,

owing  perhaps  to  our  great  and  over-sanguine  expectations,  we  were

disappointed. With some misgivings we felt that this was not the dawn of a

new art, but, to put it briefly, Grand Opera and nothing else. Gradually our

feelings  dropped  to  the  level  of  an  ordinary  music  festival  :  but  an

uncomfortable sensation was left behind which was vented by the friends in

all kinds of jokes and jests. And there were opportunities enough for the

exercise of malicious humour ! It would have been better if we had heard less

of what was going on behind the scenes and of what was going on higher up,in the clouds of great aspirations. Unfortunately, however, our flat was in the

very centre of the town, and we were lucky enough to possess a drawing-

room,  whereas  other  people  were  able  to  obtain  only  sleeping

accommodation. Thus, a throng of talkative visitors was almost constantly

assembled under our roof. In this way we heard far too much of the intrigues

and dissensions, and of the quarrels of the artists between themselves. Our

attention was also called to far too many more or less admirable love affairs

which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  must  have  met  with  exceptionally  favourable

conditions during that summer at Bayreuth, for they sprung up as luxuriantly

as mushrooms after rain. But even more luxuriant in their abundance were the

excesses which were prompted on all sides by vanity, and one was compelled

continually to recall the expression " Vanity Fair ! Vanity Fair ! " For hosts of

people had come to Bayreuth on this occasion with the object of receiving

some special mark of honour from Wagner, in return for something they had

done for Wagnerian Art. And even if the Master and Cosima had been the

embodiment of justice (a virtue to which they did not in the least aspire) they

would have found it quite impossible to do special honour to such a Tast

concourse of people that is to say, to honour each one more conspicuously

than the last. Thus all Bayreuth was seething with injured vanity, and the air

was heavy and oppressive in consequence a very amusing state of affairs for

the  detached  spectator  !  Frequently  Frau  Cosima  had  to  spend  whole

mornings in driving round and soothing people's mortified feelings by means

of kind and comforting little speeches.

  But here I should like to emphasise the fact that my brother had not the

smallest  reasons  whatever  for  feeling  hurt.  In  fact,  Wagner  never  lost  an

opportunity  of  honouring  and  distinguishing  him;  but  Fritz  escaped  these

flattering attentions whenever he could, for he disliked Wagner's blatant and

boisterous  praise.  Moreover,  both  of  them  felt  that  much  that  was

unexpressed lay between them, they had had none of those great moments

together which might have bound my brother afresh to his friend. "Was such,

a moment after all within an ace of them all the time ? I remember one

morning my brother and I went to pay a call at Wahnfried, and we found the

Master in the garden on the point of going out. I cannot recall precisely what

Wagner said, but suddenly my brother's countenance lighted up, and with an

expression of tense expectation he seemed to await what was to follow. Did

he believe that the Master was going to say : " Ah, dear Friend, the whole

Festival  is  nothing  more  or  less  than  a  farce,  it  is  not  what  we  two  haddreamed it would be ; even my music ought to have been quite different. I

will return to simplicity and melody ! " Did my brother cherish the hope that

Wagner was going to say something of the sort ? Whatever his first words

may  have  led  my  brother  to  expect,  however,  that  which  followed  soon

showed  him  his  mistake,  and  the  gleam  of  gladness  vanished  from  my

brother's eyes. No ! Wagner was no longer young enough to oppose himself.

  I shall never be able to satisfy myself, however, that Wagner, in his heart

of  hearts,  was  really  pleased  with  this  Festival  at  Bayreuth.  He  simply

pretended to be, just as we all did ! We behaved as if we were delighted, and

yet what a host of disappointments we had to overcome in our souls. I fancy

that by far the greater number of us Wagnerites must have felt then pretty

much  as  many  a  German  peasant  did  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth

century, when he was obliged to serve as a soldier under the Great Corsican.

We  were  under  the  yoke  of  a  mighty  genius  we  were  intoxicated  by  the

power of an exceedingly strong will which conquered even the most hostile

of its opponents, and finally compelled them to admire but at bottom we all

felt that there was something artificial about this intoxication. Nevertheless

we  had  sworn  allegiance  to  the  great  leader,  and  we  therefore  allowed

ourselves neither to criticise nor to be honest towards ourselves. Fritz was the

only honest person present. He felt profoundly disappointed, and he did not

conceal his feelings. To Wagner my brother seemed like the embodiment of

conscience, or like one of those genii who point solemnly and admonishingly

to Heaven. Wagner felt only too clearly that my brother had formed an ideal

image of him and the Festival which neither had attained, and which soared

high up above both a bitter reproach against the Festival itself. Wagner, too,

was embarrassed in my brother's presence, but his embarrassment manifested

itself differently. He was boisterous and high-spirited, whilst Fritz was silent.

  What then did my brother really feel at that time ? In his heart he felt the

profoundest  disappointment  this  a  perfect  stranger  could  have  noticed.  It

seems surprising that his disappointment should have been so marked, seeing

that, as I have shown in the preceding chapter, he had felt for some time in

the position of a disciple who was prepared to part from his master. But,

owing to his great love for Wagner, the actual parting from him was hard,

and he would have given much to be able to wait a little longer, if only he

could have felt a little hope remained (as he trusted it would have done before

the Bayreuth Festival) that Wagnerian Art contained a great life-enhancing

force. Now, however, he began to feel, with unspeakable pain, not only thesuspicion, but also the certainty, that in this Art there was not the quality

which his gift of transfiguration had led him to suppose.

  It has been said that my brother's great disappointment was caused partly

by the imperfect working of the stage machinery, and the failure of one or

two scenes and tableaux. It| is true that a good many of these faults led to

comical effects, as for instance the scene between Alberich and the Rhine

Daughters, in which the latter turned round and round like wooden horses at a

fair. And the dragon, the centrepiece of whose neck was missing, and whose

head seemed, therefore, to spring direct from his trunk, was still funnier. If I

remember rightly this disagreeable beast was made in London. Now, as ill-

luck would have it, the missing piece, which left the London makers late, was

sent to Beirut instead of Bayreuth, and the consequence was that it never

reached its proper destination in time for the Festival plays. But all this either

did not affect my brother, or else it simply increased his suspicion. On this

very point he writes : " I utterly disagree with those who were dissatisfied

with  the  decorations,  the  scenery  and  the  mechanical  contrivances  at

Bayreuth. Far too much industry and ingenuity were applied to the task of

chaining the imagination to matters which did not belie their epic origin. But

as  to  the  naturalism  of  the  attitudes,  of  the  singing,  compared  with  the

orchestra ! What affected, artificial and depraved tones, what a distortion of

nature,  were  we  made  to  hear  !  "  As  to  some  tones  which  were  of  an

incredibly natural quality I would fain never hear them again aye, I would

fain forget them for ever (Materna) ! "

  No,  this  Bayreuth  Festival  resembled  in  no  respect  whatever  the

stupendous vision which had hovered before my brother's eyes, just as little

as the Ring des Nibelungen resembled those bewitching Dionysian strains

which  he  had  hoped  to  hear.  In  explanation  of  the  fact  that  this

disappointment was to some extent sudden, it should be remembered that my

brother had not been with Wagner for two years, and had actually not heard

any of the Master's works performed for four years. He had zealously studied

the King des Nibelungen on the piano, but by this means he obtained only a

false and far too subtilised idea of the real thing. In addition to this, since

January, 1874, he had not ceased from pondering in private over Wagner's "

terrible tendencies " ; now, however, these appeared before him in all their

brutal reality. He felt that this was no music of the future ; it was not a sign of

ascent but of decline ! It was simply exalted intoxication, enervating hashish,

and possessed not the smallest suggestion of exuberant Dionysian vitality.But Fritz's pain over all this was too deep for him to be able to speak about it,

and thus he obeyed the serious admonition which he himself had pronounced

to his readers at the beginning of the fourth essay of the Thoughts out of

Season, he wrapped himself in profound "Pythagorean Silence." The only

thing he did mention at times, and in terms of the highest admiration, was the

orchestra. "You will never hear its like again, Lizzie," he would often repeat.

  He was obviously pained when the Master's admirers desired to speak to

him  about  the  last  of  the  Thoughts  out  of  Season,  "  Richard  Wagner  in

Bayreuth." A very astute lady in Bayreuth once asked me : " Why does your

brother so dislike to hear his last essay spoken about ? " When I told him I

had been asked this question he exclaimed : " Ah, Lizzie, people should let

bygones be bygones ! " "But," I said, somewhat annoyed, "it only appeared

five weeks ago ! " "It seems to me like five years ! " he replied. He did not

say  any  more  about  it,  but  a  few  notes  written  in  1878  reveal  what  his

feelings were at the time.

  "  The  Schopenhauerian  man  drove  me  to  scepticism  concerning

everything  that  had  been  respected,  held  in  high  esteem,  and  preached

hitherto  (also  concerning  the  Greeks,  Schopenhauer  and  Wagner),  i.e.,

genius, holiness and the pessimism of knowledge. Along this circuitous path I

reached the height with the freshest of breezes. The essay on Bayreuth was

simply a pause, a recapitulation, a rest. In it the uselessness of Bayreuth was

revealed to me.

  " My picture of Wagner completely surpassed him ; I had depicted an

ideal monster one, however, which was perhaps quite capable of kindling the

enthusiasm of artists. The real Wagner, Bayreuth as it actually is, was only

like a bad, final proof, pulled on inferior paper from the engraving which was

my  creation.  My  longing  to  see  real  men  and  their  motives  received  an

extraordinary impetus from this humiliating experience."

  We  had  given  up  our  seats  for  the  second  cycle  of  Festival  plays  to

relatives, as the performances were extraordinarily fatiguing, and I can well

remember on the evening when Das Rheingold was performed, after all our

guests had left us, and the crowds had surged noisily to the Festival Play

House to the accompanying sounds of carriages coming and going, how a

profound silence gradually fell over the whole of Bayreuth. We talked of my

brother's stay in Italy, we said that on his return we should not take up our

abode in Bale itself, but in Arlesheim, and we spoke of many things ; but we

did not mention a word about "Wagner and the Festival plays. Over tea, whenthe silence outside became strangely noticeable, I could not help exclaiming :

" How odd it seems, that we should remain at home all alone on a Festival

evening at Bayreuth ! "

  " This is the first pleasant hour I have spent here," Fritz replied with an

extraordinary expression on his face. " Fritz," I said, hesitatingly, " it was

much more beautiful when you played these things on the piano, and we used

to imagine all the accompanying scenes in such glowing colours." "Of course

it was more beautiful," Fritz replied sadly, and then was silent a long, long

time.

  I cannot say that Fritz suffered from any bodily indisposition during these

weeks in Bayreuth, and he even had very few headaches ; but, in order to

excuse the fact that he so seldom went to the Wagners, we often made use of

the plea of illness. It is true that he suffered profoundly and acutely, but in an

utterly  different  way,  and  one  about  which  we  could  not  speak.  All  this

untruthfulness and obscurity upset him. He absolutely refused to remain any

longer in the place, and this despite the fact that he had fallen in love with an

exceptionally  fascinating  and  charming  Parisienne,  who,  unfortunately,

however, was already married. But by this time, even this could not retain

him any longer in Bayreuth, and so one day, with his wistful and melancholy

smile, he bade a last farewell to that Upper Franconian town in which he had

had such painful experiences. " Oh, Lizzie ! So that was Bayreuth ! " he

exclaimed sorrowfully as he said good-bye, and his eyes were full of tears.

  One can well imagine his feelings when one reads the following note : "

My blunder was this, I went to Bayreuth with an ideal in my breast, and was

thus doomed to experience the bitterest disappointment. The preponderance

of ugliness, grotesqueness and strong pepper thoroughly repelled me. I had

imagined tragedy with music in a way which far surpassed Wagner, and I had

heard music in the tragedy of existence in a manner which was far beyond

Schopenhauer."

  Now, to conclude this volume, let us once more look back upon the great

span of years, from 1844 to 1876, which we have depicted in its pages. If one

wished to describe it generally by a single adjective, no better one than the

word "happy" could be found. In 1878 my brother spoke about himself to

Malvida von Meysenbug and others as a " Happy Prince," and in 1874 he

wrote to Rohde as follows : "I resemble a happy man as far as it is possible

for me to know what happiness is."

  In  a  letter  written  in  August,  1875,  to  Dr.  Karl  Fuchs,  who  hadcomplained to him about a series of misfortunes, he gives a very excellent

account of his own experiences, and shows how happy accidents had come to

him quite unexpectedly always at the right time : " It seems to me as if a

certain  fiery  haste,  a  kind  of  refusal  to  wait,  has  robbed  you  of  many  a

success. One should not let Fate know what one desires ; and five minutes

later  it  is  quite  willing  of  its  own  accord  to  make  an  offer.  I  think  it  is

Shakespeare who says : ' To be ready is everything.' It may be, however, that

what I am saying with so much apparent worldly wisdom, is nothing but a

theory deduced from a life which has been sown somewhat plentifully with

happy accidents. But you can believe me when I say that it is absolutely in

keeping  with  my  most  profound  convictions,  to  cherish  a  thing  for  years

without even allowing myself to notice that I am doing so, and then to hold it

tight when it comes within my grasp, because I was ' ready.' In this process of

' cherishing,' I never reached the point of desiring, and in this respect I lack

your fire. All I feel is a kind of conditional idea. 'It would be a nice thing for

thee if, ... You have no notion what great and magnificent ideas of this kind I

carry about with me, for which I shall suddenly be ready."

  All the events of this book confirm his words concerning " a life which

has  been  sown  somewhat  plentifully  with  happy  accidents."  From  his

childhood  onwards  we  have  seen  him  surrounded  by  solicitous  love,  by

admiring  friends  and  by  benevolent  teachers  and  masters.  We  found  that

quite early in life his gifts were acknowledged by the most distinguished

people, and that many a rare windfall came his way. And in all the incidents

of his life, even in his periods of illness, there is no element of bitterness, but

always some kind of beneficent compensation. Thus his attitude towards Life

was one of almost trustful love ; for she had always fulfilled his silent wishes

at the right time.

  But of all the events of his life, the greatest and most valuable was his

deep friendship for Richard Wagner. In his love and reverence for this man

he spent the most beautiful years of his existence, and all his loftiest hopes

for  the  future  were  associated  with  the  Master's  name.  We  can  therefore

understand with what bitter feelings he left Bayreuth ; he had lost his faith in

Wagner's  Art,  and  all  the  glorious  dreams  and  hopes  of  his  youth  faded

through this heartrending experience. He thus bids farewell to the years of his

youth, in which he had followed his two ideals, Schopenhauer and Wagner,

so reverently as to draw even his friends along with him ; and now he must

walk unaccompanied along the hard solitary road of his manhood, which hewas  condemned  to  pursue  for  his  own  perfection  alone,  without  any

followers, and even without any hearty sympathy from his friends. Thus there

fell upon this life, so happy and sunny hitherto, a mist which grew ever more

dense a mist in which it was hard for him to find his own way, and harder

still  to  remain  firm  against  all  the  demands  of  a  heart  which  yearned  so

passionately for friendship. It is the hard and stony road to greatness which

lies before him.