between us! and whenever, here, we get news of a hurricane, your brother

grows angry and agitated, and cudgels his brains to discover how on earth it

ever occurred to the Lama to embark upon such an adventure. I do the best I

can to bear up, but every day, and more particularly at night, I am overcome

by incomparable sadness-always, simply owing to the fact that the Lama has

run away and has completely broken with her brother's tradition.

  I have just heard from the Court Orchestra Conductor of Carlsruhe (to

whom I had written a line to please poor G.) that my recommendation ("the

recommendation of a man whom I admire enthusiastically") had prepossessed

him most favourably towards the work, and while I am rejoicing over this

news, it occurs to me that you will say, "He is of course a Jew!"[88] This, in

my  opinion,  proves  how  the  Lama  has  leaped  aside  from  her  brother's

tradition: we no longer rejoice about the same things. Meanwhile it cannot be

helped. Life is an experiment; one can do what one likes, and one has to pay

too dearly for everything. Onward, my dear old Lama! And may you face

what you have resolved to face, with courage!

  YOUR F.

  Nietzsche To His Sister - July, 1886

    Sils-Maria, July 8, 1886.

  MY DARLING LAMA:

  I have ceased to be in favour of the idea of living for good in Leipzig or

Munich; life in such circles demands too heavy a toll on my pride; and after

all, however much I "belittle" myself, I still do not attain to that cheerful and

comforting courage and self-reliance which are necessary for the continued

pursuit of my path in life-attributes which at all events spring into existence

more readily in Sils and in Nice than in the places above mentioned. How

many humiliations and acts of foolishness did I not have to swallow down

during my last stay in Germany, and without my friends ever dreaming of

anything of the sort! No-they one and all "mean well" by me. I endured hours

of  spiritual  depression  that  I  can  remember  only  with  a  shudder.  The

humiliating  experiences  of  the  autumn  of  1882,  which  I  had  almost  for

gotten, came back to my mind, and I recollected with shame the type of

humanity  I  had  already  treated  as  my  equal!  Wherever  I  turned  I  was

confronted by opinions utterly opposed to my own-to my great astonishment,

however, not about Wagner. Even Kohde has refused to have anything to do

with Parsifal.

  Where are those old friends with whom in years gone by I felt so closelyunited? Now it seems as if we belonged to different worlds, and no longer

spoke the same language! Like a stranger and an outcast, I move among them

not one of their words or looks reaches me any longer. I am dumb for no one

understands my speech ah, but they never did understand me! or does the

same fate bear the same burden on its soul? It is terrible to be condemned to

silence when one has so much to say [ . . . ] Was I made for solitude or for a

life  in  which  there  was  no  one  to  whom  I  could  speak?  The  inability  to

communicate one's thoughts is in very truth the most terrible of all kinds of

loneliness. Difference is a mask-which is more ironbound than any iron mask

and  perfect  friendship  is  possible  only  inter  pares!  Inter  pares![89]-an

intoxicating  word;  it  contains  so  much  comfort,  hope,  savour,  and

blessedness  for  him  who  is  necessarily  always  alone;  for  him  who  is

"different";  who  has  never  met  anyone  who  precisely  belonged  to  him,

although he has sought well on all sorts of roads; who in his relationship to

his  fellows  always  had  to  practise  a  sort  of  considerate  and  cheerful

dissimulation in the hope of assimilating himself to them, often with success,

who from all too long experience knows how to show that bright face to

adversity  which  is  called  sociability-and  some  times,  too,  to  give  vent  to

those dangerous, heart rending outbursts of all his concealed misery, of all

the longings he has not yet stifled, of all his surging and tumultuous streams

of love-the sudden madness of those moments when the lonely man embraces

one  that  seems  to  his  taste  and  treats  him  as  a  friend,  as  a  Heaven-sent

blessing and precious gift, only to thrust him from him with loathing an hour

later, and with loathing too for himself, as if he had been contaminated and

abased, as if he had grown strange even to himself, as if he had fallen from

his own company. A deep man needs friends. All else failing, he has at least

his god. But I have neither god nor friends! Ah, my dear sister, those you call

by that name were certainly friends once but now? For instance [ . . . ].

  . . . Now I ought once more to give myself a little rest, for the spiritual

and intellectual tension of the last few years has been too severe, and my

temper  has  grown  sharper  and  more  gloomy.  My  health  is  really  quite

normal-but my poor soul is so sensitive to injury and so full of longing for

good friends, for people "who are my life." Get me a small circle of men who

will listen to me and understand me-and I shall be cured!

  Your FRITZ.

  Nietzsche To Peter Gast - July, 1886

    Sils-Maria, Tuesday, July 20, 1886.  DEAR FRIEND:

  . . . Assuming that you prefer a solitary visit to the places in question,

allow me to send a few addresses where you can find cheap quarters. In

Rapallo, for instance (whence you will be able to explore Santa Margherita

and Portofino) I would recommend the cheap little Albergo della Posta, right

on the sea-front, in which the first part of Zarathustra was written. Oh what a

joy it would be for me to be allowed to act as cicerone to you there and in

Genoa-and you would have to try all my modest trattorias! And we would

climb about the gloomy bastions together and drink a glass of Monteferrato

on my Belvedere in Sampierdorena! Honestly, I can think of nothing that

would give me so much pleasure. This bit of Genoa is a piece of my past

towards which I feel respect- . . . it was terribly solitary and severe. . . .

  I have not quite settled down yet here in Sils; these sudden transitions do

not suit my health. The printing of my book is oppressing me to the extent of

becoming  irksome.  I  shall  have  complete  freedom  (and  leave  to  think  of

something new) only when I see the first finished copy-that is to say, in three

weeks per haps. I had to make fresh plans for the fourth page of the wrapper

(-I  trust  the  agreement  between  Schmeitzner  and  Fritzsch  will  soon  be

concluded,  provided  that  Schmeitzner  never  hears  to  what  extent  I  am

informed as to Fritzsch's intentions.)

  How funny! However well one tries to beware of the emancipation of

women-it is of no use! I have encountered another classical specimen of the

literary  female,  Miss  Helen  Zimmern  (the  woman  who  introduced

Schopenhauer  to  the  English.)  I  believe  she  has  even  translated

"Schopenhauer as an Educator." Of course she is a Jewess; it is amazing to

see the extent to which this race now has the spirituality of Europe in its

hands (to-day she talked to me for a long time about her race). . . .

  Your friend,

  N.

  Nietzsche To Peter Gast - October, 1886

  About 400 metres above the sea, overlooking the street leading across the

arch of Portofino.

  Ruta Ligure, October 10, 1886,

  DEAR FRIEND:

  Just a line from this wonderful corner of the globe, where I should prefer

to see you rather than in your present quarters in Munich. Imagine an island

of the Greek Archipelago, arbitrarily covered with woods and hills, whichowing to some accident one day swam close up to the mainland and was

unable  to  swim  back  again.  There  is  certainly  something  Greek  about  it;

while  it  is  also  somewhat  piratical,  unexpected,  covert,  and  dangerous  in

character. Finally when at a bend in the road one comes upon a little tropical

forest of palms, which makes one feel very far from Europe, it is a little

reminiscent of Brazil-at least, that is what my table-companion says, and he

has been round the world several times. I have never lived so long in genuine

Robinson Crusoe insularity and oblivion. Frequently too I have set great fires

burning in front of me. To watch the pure restless flame, with its white-grey

belly, rear itself against the cloudless sky with heather growing all round, and

the whole steeped in that October blissfulness which is such a master in the

matter of yellows. Oh, dear friend, such early autumn happiness would be

just the thing for you, as much if not more than it is for me! . . .

  Your devoted friend,

    NIETZSCHE.

  Nietzsche To Peter Gast - January, 1887

  Nice (France), January 21, 1887,

  Rue des Poncbettes 29. Au premier.

  DEAR FRIEND:

  .  .  .  Ever  since  the  spring  of  last  year,  Levi[90]  has  made  the  best

impression  upon  me.  What  I  have  since  heard  from  another  quarter,  in

Munich, has confirmed the fact that he has neither lost nor wishes to lose a

kind of relationship with me (he calls it gratitude); and this holds good of all

Wagnerians (although I cannot quite explain it). Seydlitz (now President of

the  Wagner  Society)  informs  me  that  they  waited  for  me  in  Munich  last

autumn with "feverish tension." Incidentally, in the Engadine, my neighbour

at  table  was  the  sister  of  the  Barber  of  Bagdad;  do  you  understand  this

abbreviated expression?

  To conclude-I have just heard the Overture to Parsifal for the first time

(and in Monte Carlo!). When I see you again I will tell you exactly what it

conveyed to me. Moreover, apart from all irrelevant questions (as to what the

use of this music can or ought to be) and on purely aesthetic grounds; has

Wagner  ever  done  anything  better?  This  music  reveals  the  very  highest

psychological consciousness and certainty with regard to what it intended to

say, express, convey; it selects the shortest and most direct means to this end,

every nuance of feeling being carried to the point of epigram. As descriptive

music it is so lucid, that to listen to it is to be forcibly reminded of a shieldwrought all over with noble devices, and finally it is full of such a sublimity

and rarity of feeling, of experience and of spiritual events at the very basis of

music, that it does Wagner the greatest credit; it contains a synthesis of states

which to many men, even "higher men," it would seem impossible to unite,

and is of a commanding severity, of a "loftiness" in the most terrifying sense

of the word, and of an omniscience and penetration that seem to transpierce

one's soul with knives-and withal it is full of pity for that which it sees and

orders there. This sort of thing is to be found in Dante, but nowhere else. I

wonder whether any painter has ever depicted such a sad look of love as

Wagner has given us in the last accents of his overture?

  Your devoted friend,

    NIETZSCHE.

  To Seydlitz - February, 1887

  Nice, Thursday, February 24, 1887.

  Rue des Ponchettes 29. 1st floor.

  DEAR FRIEND:

    Fortunately your letter, as far as your own case is concerned, did not by

any means prove quod erat demonstrandum; otherwise, however, I admit all

you say, the disastrous effects of a grey sky, the prolonged damp cold, the

proximity of Bavarians and of Bavarian beer-I admire every artist who turns

to face these foes-not to speak of German politics, which are only another

form of permanent winter and bad weather. It seems to me that Germany for

the  last  fifteen  years  has  become  a  regular  school  of  besotment.  Water,

rubbish and filth, far and wide-that is what it looks like from a distance. I beg

a thousand pardons if I have hurt your more noble feelings in speaking in this

way,  but  for  present-day  Germany,  however  much  it  may  bristle,

hedgehoglike,  with  arms,  I  no  longer  have  any  respect.  It  represents  the

stupidest, most depraved and most mendacious form of the German spirit that

has ever existed and what absurdities has not this spirit dared to perpetrate! I

forgive no one for compromising with it in any way, even if his name be

Richard  Wagner,  particularly  when  this  compromise  is  effected  in  the

shamefully  equivocal  and  cautious  manner  in  which  this  shrewd,  all-too-

shrewd glorifier of "reine Thorheit"[91] has effected it in the latter years of

his life.

  Here in our land of sunshine what different things we have in mind! Only

a  moment  ago  Nice  was  in  the  middle  of  her  long  international  carnival

(incidentally with a preponderance of Spanish women) and immediately afterit was over, six hours after the last Girandola, there followed some more new

and rarely tasted charms of existence. For we are all living in the interesting

expectation  of  being  swallowed  up-thanks  to  a  well-meaning  earthquake,

which caused howling far and wide not only among dogs. You can imagine

what fun it is to hear the houses rattling over one's head like coffee-mills, to

watch the inkstands beginning to show signs of free will, while the streets fill

with  horrified  half-dressed  figures  and  unhinged  nervous  systems.  This

morning, from about two to three o clock, like the gaillard I am, I made a

round of inspection in the various quarters of the town, in order to ascertain

where the fear was greatest. For the inhabitants camp out in the open night

and day, and it looks delightfully martial. In the hotels where there is much

damage, panic of course reigns supreme. I found all my friends, male and

female, lying pitifully beneath the green trees, well swathed in flannels, for it

was very cold, and, at the slightest sign of a vibration, thinking gloomily of

the end. I should not be surprised if this brought the season to a sudden

conclusion. Everyone is thinking of leaving (provided of course they can get

away and the railways are not all torn up). Already yesterday evening the

visitors at the hotel where I board could not be induced to partake of their

table-d'hote inside the house, but ate and drank in the open, and but for an

exceedingly  pious  old  woman  who  is  convinced  that  the  Almighty  has

absolutely no right to injure her, I was "the only cheerful being among a host

of masks."[92]

  I have just got hold of a newspaper containing a description of this awful

night, which is far more picturesque than the one your humble friend has

been able to give you. I am enclosing it in this letter. Please read it to your

dear wife, and bear me in mind.

  Your devoted

    NIETZSCHE.

  Nietzsche To Peter Gast - March, 1887

  Nice, Monday, March 7, 1887.

  DEAR FRIEND:

  I have just had a visit from a philologist whose previous history has not

been unlike my own-a Dr. A., brought up in the school of Rohde and von

Gutschmidt  and  very  much  esteemed  by  his  teachers-but  passionately

disgusted with and opposed to all philology. He fled to me "his master"-for

he is determined to devote himself absolutely to philosophy, and now I am

urging him to go slowly, quite slowly, to make no blunders, and not to allowhimself to be carried away by any false examples. I believe I am succeeding

in  "disappointing"  him.  I  heard  incidentally  from  him,  how  even  in  the

University of Tubingen, where I pass for the most negative of spirits, my

works are eagerly devoured in secret. Dr. A. is half American, half Swabian.

  The same thing happened to me with Dostoyevsky as with Stendhal; the

most haphazard encounter, a book that one opens casually on a book stall,

and the very title of which is unknown to one-and then suddenly one's instinct

speaks and one knows one has met a kinsman.[93]

  Up  to  the  present  I  have  learnt  little  concerning  his  position,  his

reputation and his history; he died in 1881. In his youth things were pretty

bad with him; he was delicate and poor, although he came of distinguished

stock.  At  the  age  of  twenty-seven  he  was  sentenced  to  death,  but  was

reprieved on the very steps of the scaffold, whereupon he spent four years in

chains in Siberia amid criminals of the worst type. This formed the decisive

period  in  his  life.  It  was  then  that  he  discovered  the  power  of  his

psychological intuition; nay more, his heart was mellowed and deepened by

the experience. His reminiscences of this period "La maison des Morts," is

one of the most human books in existence. The first of his works that I read

was  a  French  translation  entitled  "L'esprit  souterrain,"  consisting  of  two

stories: the first a kind of unknown music, and the second a real stroke of

genius in psychology-a terrible and cruel piece of mockery levelled at ?????

sa?t??,[94] but done with such a light and daring hand, and with so much of

the  rapture  of  superior  strength,  that  I  was  almost  intoxicated  with  joy.

Meanwhile, on the recommendation of Overbeck, whom I asked about the

matter, I have read "Humilies et offenses" (the only one that O. knew) with

the  greatest  respect  for  the  artist  Dostoyevsky.  I  have  also  observed  how

completely the youngest generation of Parisian novelists are tyrannized over

by the influence of Dostoyevsky, and by their jealousy of him (Paul Bourget,

for instance).

  I shall stay here until April 3, without, I trust, seeing any more of the

earthquake. For Dr. Falb is warning people to beware of March 9, when he

expects a renewal of the phenomena in our district; he also mentions March

22 and 23. Up till now I have remained fairly cool, and have lived with a

feeling of irony and cold curiosity among thousands of people grown crazy

with fear. But one cannot stand security for oneself and perhaps in a few days

I shall be less rational than anyone. The element of suddenness, l'imprevu,

has its charm. . . .  How are you? You cannot think what a lot of good your last letter did me!

You are so brave!

  Your devoted friend,

  N.

  Nietzsche To His Sister - March, 1887

  Nice, Wednesday, March 23, 1887.

  MY DEAR LAMA:

  It is now difficult to help me. When one has been at great pains for half

one's life to secure independence for one's self, as I found it necessary to do,

one has to accept the disadvantages of the situation as well. One cannot have

the one without the other. Among these disadvantages is the fact that no one

can tell from appearances what are the things I lack. I should like to have a

little more money in order, for instance, that in the interests of my declining

health, alone, and with the view of avoiding innumerable mistakes in dieting

that I am exposed to in restaurants and hotels, I might have my own kitchen.

It is also a question of pride; I should like to lead a life that really is suitable

to me, and does not look so conventional as that of "a scholar on his travels."

But even the five conditions that might make life endurable, and are really

not  pretentious,  seem  to  me  impracticable.  I  require  (1)  Some  one  to

superintend my digestion, (2) Somebody who can laugh with me and who has

cheerful  spirits,  (3)  Some  one  who  is  proud  of  my  company  and  who

constrains others to treat me with becoming respect, (4) Some one who can

read aloud to me without making a book sound idiotic. There is yet a fifth

condition; but I will say nothing about it.

  To marry now would perhaps be simply an act of folly, which would

immediately  deprive  me  of  the  independence  that  I  have  won  with  such

bloody strife. And then I should also have to choose some European State, to

belong to and become a citizen of it. I should have to consider my wife, my

child, my wife's family, the place I lived in, and the people we associated

with, but to forbid myself the free expression of my ideas would kill me. I

should prefer to be miserable, ill, and feared, and live in some out of the way

corner, than to be "settled" and given my place in modern mediocrity! I lack

neither courage nor good spirits. Both have remained with me because I have

no acts of cowardice or false compromise on my conscience. Incidentally I

may say that I have not yet found a woman who would be suited to associate

with me, and whose presence would not bore me and make me nervous. (The

Lama was a good housemate for whom I can find no substitute, but it wantedto vent its energy and to sacrifice itself. For whom? For a miserable foreign

race of men, who will not even thank her-and not for me. And I would be

such a grateful animal, and always ready for merry laughter. Are you still

able to laugh at all? I am afraid that you will quite forget how to do it among

these embittered people.) Moreover I know the women folk of half Europe,

and wherever I have observed the influence of women on men, I have noticed

a sort of gradual decline as the result; for instance in the case of poor . Not

very encouraging is it? I shall leave Nice at the beginning of next month in

order to seek peaceful retirement on Lake Maggiore, where there are woods

and shaded groves, and not this blindingly white incessant sunshine of Nice

in the spring! The address is: Villa Badia, Cannobio (Lago Maggiore), but

before this letter reaches you who knows where I shall be?

  With love,

  Your F.

  Nietzsche To His Sister - April, 1887

  Cannobio, Lago Maggiore, Villa Badia,

  April 20, 1887.

  MY DEAR LAMA:

  Here I am in a magnificent spot, and every morning I marvel at the glory

of  the  colouring.  The  noble  cloisterly  nature  of  the  situation  and  the

arrangements also pleases me-and yet I am so out of sorts that I feel as if I

could no longer be heartily glad about anything. Nothing comes to me from

the outside world to give me courage or strength. My fellow-boarders are

incomparably tedious! In that respect I was better off in Nice this winter.

There were a few people there who interested me. Our dear mother will have

written to you all about it.

  And now about yourself, my dear Lama! I was very much impressed by

the  purchase  of  this  huge  piece  of  land,  "larger  than  many  a  German

principality." But I must confess that I am absolutely at sea about the whole

affair. If I understand anything at all, it is that the real owner of that vast

complex of territory is that rich Paraguayan who is so friendly with F�rster.

This would not prevent him from wishing to serve his own interests by means

of this "German colony." He is certainly bent on turning it to his own profit.

Now the principal thing to me seems to be, not that the colony should be

inhabited, but that it should do some business, sell wood, etc. For without that

I absolutely cannot see how such a great outlay of capital can get its proper

return.  F�rster promised to invest a portion of your money securely either in

Germany or in Paraguay; but, if know my sister well, this last portion will

certainly find its way before long into the pockets of those numerous paupers.

[95] I confess that they are my one bugbear; remember that if anything goes

wrong they constitute a most unpleasant element with which to deal. Then

they  always  believe  that  one  has  unjustly  led  them  into  trouble;  whereas

success and failure often depend on accidents. To tell you the truth, my dear

Lama, your letters do not comfort me in the least. If we were situated as you

are we should all write such contented and hopeful letters home-particularly

to relatives. I have not written to you about it yet; but I am not edified by the

whole affair. In my mind's eye, I can see these paupers, dependent upon your

pity, pressing themselves covetously upon you in order to exploit your all too

ready liberality. No colony can prosper with such elements; do not deceive

yourself on that point. If they were peasants it would be quite a different

thing.

  Also  please  allow  me  to  question  whether  you  are  so  well  fitted  for

colonizing as my brother-in-law so often affirms. Not long ago I was talking

to one of your former friends and he declared that we did not even know what

colonizing meant. It was an incessant struggle with the elements . . . and you

were as well fitted for it as "lily and rose-branches would be for sweeping a

chimney." A fine simile! but very sad for the Lama. Forgive this sad letter,

but mother's anxiety on your account has infected me also. I believe she is

feeling  ill  as  the  result  of  bad  German  weather;  but  the  Lama  in  the

atmosphere and the sun of the South holds her head up.

  With love and solicitude,

  YOUR BROTHER.

  Nietzsche To Malvida Von Meysenbug - May, 1887

  [May 12, 1887]

  Address: Chur (Schweiz) Rosenhtigel

  Until June 10

    afterwards : Celerina, Oberengadine.

    DEAREST FRA�LEIN:

  How strange it is! With regard to what you so kindly said to me at the last

moment, I wonder whether it might not prove both refreshing and fruitful for

us both once more to join our two solitudes in closest and heartiest proximity!

I  have  frequently  thought  about  this  of  late,  and  asked  myself  searching

questions about it. To spend one more winter with you and to be looked afterand waited upon perhaps by Trina[96] herself that is indeed an extremely

alluring prospect for which I cannot thank you sufficiently! I should prefer

above all to return to Sorrento once more (d?? ?a? t??? t? ?a??? say the

Greeks: "all good things twice or thrice!") Or to Capri-where I shall play the

piano to you again but better than I did before Or to Amalfl or Castellamare.

Finally even to Rome (although my suspicion of the Roman climate and of

large towns in general is based on good reasons and is not to be over thrown

so easily). Solitude in the midst of solitary nature has hitherto been my chief

refreshment, my means of recovery; such cities of modern traffic as Nice or

even Zurich (which I have just left) in the end always make me feel irritable,

sad,  uncertain,  desperate,  unproductive,  and  ill.  I  have  retained  a  sort  of

longing and superstition with regard to that peaceful sojourn down there, as if

there I had breathed more deeply, if only for a few moments, than anywhere

else in my life. For instance, on the occasion of that very first drive we took

together in Naples when we went to Posilippo.

  Taking everything into consideration, you are the only person on earth

about whom I could cherish such a wish; besides, I feel that I am condemned

to my solitude and my citadel. There is no longer any alternative. That which

bids me live, my exceptional and weighty task, bids me also keep out of the

way of men and no longer attach myself to anyone. Perhaps it is the pure

element in which this task has placed me that explains why it is that I have

gradually grown unable even to bear the smell of men and least of all "young

men,"  with  whom  I  am  not  infrequently  afflicted  (-oh,  how  obtrusively

clumsy  they  are,  just  like  puppies!)  In  the  old  days,  in  our  solitude  in

Sorrento, B. and R. were too much for me; I fancy that at that time I was very

reticent with you-even about things of which there is no one I should have

spoken to more readily than yourself.

  On my table there lies the new edition (in two volumes) of "Human-all-

too-Human," the first part of which I worked out then-how strange! Strange

that  it  should  have  been  in  your  respected  neighbourhood.  In  the  long

"address"  which  I  found  a  necessary  preface  for  the  new  edition  of  my

complete works there are a number of curious things about myself which are

quite uncompromising in their honesty. By this means I shall hold "the many"

once and for all at arm's length; for nothing annoys men more than to show

them some of the severity and hardness with which, under the discipline of

one's own ideal, one deals and has dealt out to oneself. That is why I have

cast my line out for "the few," and this after all I did without impatience, forit is in the nature of the indescribable strangeness and dangerousness of my

thoughts that ears should not be opened for them until very late-certainly not

before 1901.

  You  ask  me  to  come  to  Versailles-oh,  if  only  it  were  possible!  For  I

esteem  the  circle  of  men  that  you  meet  there  (a  curious  admission  for  a

German, but in present-day Europe I feel related only to the most intellectual

among the French and Russians, and in no way whatever to my countrymen

who judge all things on the principle of "Germany, Germany above all"). But

I  must  return  to  the  cold  air  of  the  Engadine;  spring  attacks  me

unconsciously; I dare not tell you into what abysses of despair I sink under its

influence. My body (and my philosophy, too, for that matter), feels the cold

to  be  its  appointed  preservative  element-that  sounds  paradoxical  and

negative, but it is the most thoroughly demonstrated fact of my life.

  This  is  by  no  means  a  sign  of  a  "cold  nature":  but  you,  of  course,

understand that, my most dear and faithful friend!

  Always your affectionate and grateful friend,

    NIETZSCHE.

    P.S.-Fr�ulein Salome has also informed me of her engagement, but I did

not  answer  her  either,  however  much  happiness  and  prosperity  I  may

honestly wish her. One must keep out of the way of the kind of creature who

does not understand awe and respect.

  To Rohde - May, 1887

  Chur, May 21, 1887.

  No, my old friend Rohde, I allow no one to speak so disrespectfully of

Monsieur Taine as you do in your letter and you least of all, because it is

contrary to all decency to treat any man in the way you do, when you know I

think  highly  of  him.  If  you  choose  to  do  so  you  may,  if  you  like,  talk

nonsense about me to your heart's content-that lies in the natura verum[97]; I

have never complained about it or ever expected anything else. But in regard

to a scholar like Taine who is more akin to your own species, you ought to

have eyes in your head. To call him "jejune" is, to return to our student's

jargon, simply frantically stupid-for he happens to be the most substantial

thinker  in  present-day  France;  and  in  this  connection  it  would  not  be

inopportune to remark that where a man can detect no substance it does not

necessarily follow there is none, but simply that there is none for him. In the

harrowing history of the modern soul, which is in many respects a tragic

history,  Taine  takes  his  place  as  a  well-constituted  and  venerable  typepossessing many of the noblest qualities of this soul-its reckless courage, its

absolutely  sincere  intellectual  conscience,  its  stirring  and  modest  stoicism

amid acute privations and isolation. With such qualities a thinker deserves

respect; he belongs to the few who immortalize their age. I enjoy the sight of

such a brave pessimist who does his duty patiently and resolutely without any

need of noise or stage effect-aye, and who can honestly say of himself: satis

sunt mihi pauci, satis est unus, satis est nullus.[98] In this way, whether he

wishes it or no, his life becomes a mission, his attitude to all his problems is

an inevitable one (and not the optional or accidental one that your own and

most philologists are to philology).

  No offence, I hope. But if I knew you only by this one remark of yours

about Taine I believe that, owing to the lack of instinct and tact it reveals, I

should  thoroughly  despise  you.  Fortunately,  however,  as  far  as  I  am

concerned, you have proved your self a man in other ways.

  But you really ought to hear Burckhardt speak about Taine.

  Your friend,

  N.

  To Rohde - May, 1887

  Chur, May 23, 1887.

  DEAR FRIEND:

  It was not nice of me to have yielded suddenly as I did yesterday to a fit

of anger against you, but it is at least a good thing that it has all come out, for

it has brought me something valuable in the form of your letter. This has

relieved me immensely and given a different direction to my feelings against

you.

  Your remark about Taine seemed to me extravagantly contemptuous and

ironical, and the part of me that revolted against it was the anchorite. For this

part  in  me  knows  from  an  all  too  rich  experience  with  what  unrelenting

coldness  all  those  who  live  off  the  beaten  track  are  dismissed  and  even

dispatched. In addition to this, with the exception of Burckhardt, Taine is the

only man who for many a long year has sent me a word of encouragement

and sympathy about my writings. For the moment I even think of him and

Burckhardt as my only readers. As three fundamental nihilists we are indeed

irrevocably bound one to another, although, as you may perhaps suspect, I

have not yet abandoned all hope of finding a way out of the abyss by means

of which we can arrive at "something."

  When a man keeps digging deep down in his own mine, he becomes"subterranean" or perhaps suspicious. It spoils his character-hence my last

letter. Take me as I am.

  Yours,

  N.

  Nietzsche To Peter Gast - November 3, 1887

  Nice, Thursday.

    [November 3, 1887.]

  DEAR FRIEND:

  Huge rejoicing over the newly published, revised, and amplified dressing

gown! Oh, but how ashamed you make me feel! For every day I felt the need

of this article of clothing, especially in view of the wintry weather we have

been having this autumn, which is intensified by the northerly situation of my

room  which  looks  out  on  to  the  garden  and  is  on  the  ground  floor.

Nevertheless, I did not dare to have my dressing-gown sent here, because I

remembered its dilapidated condition much more out of keeping with Nice

perhaps than with your more philosophical Venice. And I am not yet modest

enough  to  show  my  pride  by  exhibiting  my  rags!  Ecco!  .  .  .  .  And  now

suddenly to sit so much embellished and so eminently respectable, in one's

own room-what a surprise!

    Everything seems to conspire to make this winter more acceptable to me

than previous winters have been. For during previous winters I have been

driven off my head not only from time to time, but constantly, habitually (and

into Heaven knows what-possibly into the damnable writing of books and

literature). I have just been to inspect the room that I shall occupy for the next

six months; it is just over the one I have had up till now, and yesterday it was

freshly papered in accordance with my bad taste-a reddish brown with stripes

and speckles. Opposite to it at a sufficient distance away stands a building

painted dark yellow, and above that, to exhilarate me even more, half the sky

(which is blue, blue, blue!) Below me lies a beautiful garden which is always

green and which I can survey as I sit at my table. The floor of the room is

covered  with  straw;  upon  the  straw  lies  an  old  carpet,  and  over  that  a

beautiful new one. There are besides, a large round table, a well-upholstered

settee, a book-case, the bed, covered with a dark blue counterpane, heavy

brown curtains over the door, and one or two other things covered with bright

red  cloth  (the  wash-hand-stand  and  the  coat-rack)-in  short  a  nice  multi-

coloured mixture, but on the whole warm and subdued. A stove is coming

from Naumburg, of the kind I have described to you. . . .  Even my brother-in-law has been good enough to write to me; we both do

our utmost to mitigate the somewhat strained relationship (-he writes about

"Beyond Good and Evil", which he had had sent out to him; I did not send it

to him-for very special reasons). . . .

  Your devoted and grateful friend,

    NIETZSCHE.

  To Rohde - November, 1887

  Nice, November 11, 1887.

  DEAR FRIEND:

  I seem to feel as if I still had to make amends to you for something that

happened last Spring. And to show you how perfectly willing I am to do all I

can, I send you herewith a copy of a work I have just published (but, perhaps,

I owe you this book anyhow, because it belongs inseparably to the one I sent

last-). No, do not let yourself be estranged from me too easily! At my age,

and lonely as I am, I do not feel any too eager to lose the few men who had

my confidence in the past.

  Yours,

  N.

  N. B.-About Monsieur Taine, let me beg you to recover your senses. The

coarse things you say and think about him annoy me extremely. I would

forgive such behavior on the part of Prince Napoleon[99] but not on the part

of my friend Rohde. It would be difficult for me to believe that the man who

misunderstands such severe and magnanimous spirits as Taine (who is the

educator  of  all  the  serious  scientific  character  in  France  today)  could

understand  anything  about  my  own  mission.  Honestly,  you  have  never

breathed a word to me that might lead me to suppose that you knew anything

of the destiny that hangs over me. But have I ever reproached you for this?

Not once, even in my own heart, if only for the simple reason that I am not

accustomed  to  any  different  treatment  from  anyone.  Who  has  ever

approached me with even a thousandth part of my passion and my suffering!

Has anyone even an inkling of the real cause of my prolonged ill health over

which I may even yet prevail? I am now forty-three and am just as much

alone now as I was as a child.

  Nietzsche To Peter Gast - November, 1887

  Nice, November 24, 1887.

  DEAR FRIEND:

  I am enjoying a great blessing this morning: for the first time a "fire-idol"stands in my room: a small stove-and I confess that I have already pranced

round it once or twice like a good heathen. Until today my life has been a

blue-fingered frosty affair, on the basis of which not even my philosophy

stood firmly on its legs. Things are pretty insufferable when in one's own

room one can feel the frigid breath of death when one withdraws to one's

room not as to a fastness, so to speak, but as if one were drawn back to

prison. For the last ten days it has been simply pouring: the rainfall per square

metre has been reckoned at 208 litres. This October was the coldest I have

ever had here, and this November the rainiest. Nice is still rather empty and

yet twenty-five of us sit down to dinner every evening-all of them kindly and

wellmeaning people, to whom no objection can be made. . . .

  . . . The fact that Rousseau was one of the first followers of Gluck gives

me cause for reflection; for, as far as I at least am concerned, everything the

former prized is a little suspicious, as are also all those who prized him (there

is a whole family of Rousseau-Schiller belongs to it, and so in part does Kant;

in France, George Sand, and also Sainte-Beuve; in England, George Eliot,

etc., etc.). All those who have been in need of "moral dignity" fautede mieux

have  been  among  the  admirers  of  Rousseau,  even  down  to  our  darling

D�hring, who had the good taste to represent himself in his autobiography

as the Rousseau of the 19th century. (Just observe how a man stands towards

Voltaire and Rousseau: it makes all the difference in the world whether he

says yea to the former or to the latter: Voltaire's enemies-as, for instance,

Victor Hugo, all romanticists, even the subtler latter-day sort such as the

brothers  Goncourt-are  all  favourably  disposed  to  that  masked  plebeian

Rousseau. And I suspect that there is something of the resentment of the mob

to  be  found  at  the  bottom  of  all  Romanticism.)  Voltaire  is  magnificently

intellectual canaille; but I agree with Galiani that

  Un monstre gai vaut mieux

  qu un sentimental ennuyeux.

  Voltaire was only possible and tolerable on the soil of a noble culture that

can allow itself the luxury of intellectual canaillerie.

  Observe with what warm feelings, what tolerance, my stove has already

begun to permeate me!

  I beseech you, dear friend, to be constantly mindful of this one duty; you

cannot  avoid  it:  you  must  once  more  by  word  and  deed  elevate  severer

principles to a place of honour in rebus muxicis et musicantibus, and seduce

the Germans to the paradox, which is a paradox only at the present day: thatthe severer principles and more cheerful music are inseparable.

  Your devoted and grateful friend,

  N.

  Nietzsche To Peter Gast - December, 1887

  Nice. Pension de Geneve.

  December 20, 1887.

  DEAR FRIEND:

  . . . On all sides the chasm has become too great, and I have to have

recourse  to  every  possible  kind  of  chastening  influence  in  order  not  to

descend among the men of resentment myself. The sort of defensive attitude

towards  me  taken  up  by  all  those  people  who  were  once  my  friends  has

something annoying about it which is much more mortifying than an attack.

"Not to hear and not to see" that seems to be the motto. No one made any

response to the Hymn, except Brahms, and he wrote: "J. B. begs to present

his sincerest thanks to you for what you have sent him, as also for the honour

which he esteems it to be, and the great stimulus he derived from it. With his

most respectful compliments, etc."

  Only two letters came about the book; but they at least were very fine.

One was from Dr. Fuchs, and the other from Dr. George Brandes (the most

intellectual Dane of the day-that is to say, a Jew). The latter seems inclined to

take  me  up  pretty  thoroughly;  he  marvels  at  the  "original  spirit"  that  is

exhaled by my works, and sums up their teaching in the term "aristocratic

radicalism." That is well said and well conceived. Oh these Jews! A few

criticisms of my "Beyond Good and Evil," sent me by Nauman, show only

ill-will:  the  words  "ripe  for  the  psychiater  and  pathologist"  are  meant  to

explain  and  censure  my  work  at  the  same  time.  (Between  ourselves,  the

undertaking I have in hand is so huge and so monstrous that I cannot take it

amiss if people on reading my books should at times feel some doubt as to

whether I am quite "sane.") . . .

  . . . I am industrious but melancholy, and I have not yet recovered from

the state of vehement irritation into which the last few years have thrown me.

I am not yet "sufficiently impersonalized." Nevertheless, I know what has

been done, and done away with: all my previous life has been ruled off at this

point-that has been the meaning of the last few years. True, my existence

hitherto has thus shown itself to be what it actually is-a mere promise. The

passion of my last work has something terrible about it. Yesterday I read it

with the most profound astonishment as though it were something new. Writeto me, dear friend, and let me hear nothing but good news.

  Your devoted,

  N.

  To Karl Fuchs - December, 1887

  Nice (France), December 14, 1887.

  Pension de Geneve.

  MY DEAR FRIEND:

  It was a happy thought on your part to write me such a letter. For almost

involuntarily and in pursuance of an inexorable necessity, I am just in the

midst of calculating how I stand with men and things, and laying the whole of

my  past  ad  acta.  Almost  everything  I  am  now  doing  amounts  to  an

underlining  of  what  has  gone  before.  During  the  last  few  years  the

vehemence of my inner vibrations has been terrific; and now that I must

ascend  to  a  new  and  higher  form,  what  I  most  of  all  need  is  a  new

estrangement, a still higher form of impersonalization. At the same time it is

essential for me to know what and whom I can still regard as mine.

  How old am I already? I do not know, any more than I know how young I

shall yet be.

  I look at your portrait with pleasure. It seems full of youth and courage,

mingled, as is only becoming, with incipient wisdom (and white hair?).

  In Germany they are crying out aloud against my eccentricities. But, as

they do not know where my centrum is, it is not easy for them to hit the nail

on  the  head  in  their  efforts  to  determine  where  and  when  I  have  been

"eccentric" in the past. For instance in being a philologist I was out of my

centrum (fortunately this does not by any means signify that I was a bad

philologist). On the same principle, it now seems to me an eccentricity that I

should  ever  have  been  a  Wagnerite.  It  was  an  extremely  dangerous

experiment, and now that I know I have not been ruined by it I also realize

what it has meant for me-it was the severest test of character I could have

had. It is certain that one's inmost nature gradually disciplines one's whole

being into unity; that passion for which for ages one can find no name saves

us  from  all  digressions  and  dispersions,  that  mission  whose  involuntary

custodian we are.

  It is very difficult to understand such things from afar. And that is why

the last ten years of my life have been extremely painful and violent. In the

event of your being inclined to hear anything more about this ungodly and

problematic history, let me recommend to your friendly sympathy the neweditions of my earlier works, particularly their introductions. (Incidentally, let

me tell you that my publisher, the excellent E. W. Fritzsch of Leipzig, who

has good reason for feeling desperate, is prepared to send copies of these new

editions to anyone who promises to write a long article about "Nietzsche en

bloc." The more important literary journals, such as Lindau's North and South

are ripe for such an article, as a genuine feeling of anxiety and excitement is

beginning to prevail concerning the importance of my literature. Up to the

present no one has had the courage and inintelligence to reveal me to the dear

Germans. My problems are new, the range of my psychological horizon is

terrific, my language is bold and German. Possibly there are no books in the

German language richer in ideas or more independent than mine.)

  The hymn also belongs to this "underlining process." Could you not get

someone to sing it to you? I have already been promised its production in

many quarters (for instance, Mottl in Karlsruhe). It is really intended to be

sung "to my memory" one day. It will survive as a souvenir of me, provided,

of course, that I survive.

  Do not forget me, dear doctor. I thank you from the bottom of my heart

for wishing to remain my friend even in the second half of your century.

  Yours,

    NIETZSCHE.

  Nietzsche To His Sister - January, 1888

  Nice, January 25, 1888.

  MY DEAR OLD LAMA:

  It was with great pleasure that I read my brother-in-law's p�an on his

"incomparable wife." I am proud of having brought you up-only very few

women  would  have  overcome  those  extraordinary  difficulties  with  such

bravery  and  unassuming  cheerfulness.  But  please  let  us  have  a  little  less

modesty! Do not forget that the herd insists on having picturesque people-that

is to say, people who draw pictures of their gifts, aspirations, and successes in

such bold and obtrusive strokes that they can be grasped even by the dullest

eyes.  The  herd  honours  everything  in  the  nature  of  a  pose,  any  solemn

attitude,-things from which we two are averse. Only subtle spirits understand

the shame of the noble mind, that conceals its highest and its best beneath a

plain surface. I feel certain that among all those people over there, only a few

have any idea with what little regard for yourself and with what passionate

resolution you try to realize your ideals. The only question I ask myself is-are

these ideals worthy of so much self-sacrifice? I very much fear you will yethave to overcome many bitter disappointments in your life. Ultimately you

will be come a sceptical old woman-without having lost your bravery; and

you will be well suited to your sceptical brother. How we shall laugh then

over the idealism of our youth-possibly with tears.

  Now let me tell you a little experience I have had. As I was taking my

usual  walk  yesterday,  I  suddenly  heard  some  one  talking  and  laughing

heartily along a side path (it sounded almost as if it might have been you);

and when this some one appeared before me, it turned out to be a charming

brown-eyed girl, whose soft gaze, as she surveyed me, reminded me of a roe.

Then, lonely philosopher though I am, my heart grew quite warm-I thought

of your marriage schemes, and for the whole of the rest of the walk I could

not help thinking of the charming young girl. Certainly it would do me good

to have something so graceful about me-but would it do her good? Would my

views not make her unhappy, and would it not break my heart (provided that

I loved her) to make such a delightful creature suffer? No, let us not speak of

marrying!

  But what you were thinking of was rather a good comrade [ . . . ]. Do you

really think that an emancipated woman of this sort, with all her femininity

vanished, could be a good comrade, or could be tolerable as a wife at all?

You forget that, in spite of my bad eyesight, I have a very highly developed

sense  of  beauty;  and  this,  quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  such  embittered

women are repugnant to me and spoil my spirits and my whole atmosphere.

Much intellect in a woman amounts to very little as far as I am concerned, for

this so-called intellect, by which only the most superficial men are deceived,

is nothing more than the most absurd pretentiousness. There is nothing more

tiring than such an intellectual goose, who does not even know how tedious

she is. Think of Frau O.! But in this respect I must admit that Fraulein X. is

incomparably  more  pleasant-but,  nevertheless!  You  think  that  love  would

change her; but I do not believe in any such change through "love." Besides,

you  have  not  seen  her  for  many  years  it  is  obvious  that  she  must  have

changed in the direction of ugliness and loss of womanliness. Believe me, if

you were to see her now-at her very appearance the thought of love and

marriage would strike you, as it does me, as absurd. You can take my word

for it, that for men like me, a marriage after the type of Goethe's would be the

best of all-that is to say, a marriage with a good housekeeper! But even this

idea is repellent to me. A young and cheerful daughter to whom I would be

an object of reverence would be much more to the point. The best of all,however, would be to have my good old Lama again. For a philosopher, a

sister is an excellent philanthropic institution, particularly when she is bright,

brave, and loving (no old vinegar flask like G. Keller's[100] sister), but as a

rule one only recognizes such truths when it is too late.

  Well, this has been a nice chat on marriage with the Lama. With many

hearty wishes and greetings to you and your Bernhard,

  Your devoted F.

  Nietzsche To Peter Gast - February, 1888

  Nice, February 1, 1888.

  DEAR FRIEND:

  How close you have been to me all this time! What a tremendous deal I

have thought out-both trash and wisdom-with you always as the principal

figure in my mind! There has been a fine opportunity: the last drawing in the

Nice Lottery. For at least half an hour I allowed myself the small and foolish

luxury of taking it for granted that I should win the first prize. With half a

million it would be possible to reinstate a number of reasonable things on

earth. At least you and I would regard the irrational character of our existence

with more irony, with more detachment-for, in order to do the things you and

I do, and to do them quite well and divinely, one thing is fundamentally

necessary,  Irony  (well,  then,  for  this  is  the  way  the  world  reasons-half  a

million is the first premise of irony. . . . ) .

  To  lack  not  only  health,  but  also  money,  recognition,  love,  and

protection-and  not  to  become  a  tragic  grumbler:  this  constitutes  the

paradoxical character of our present condition, its problem. As for myself, I

have  got  into  a  state  of  chronic  vulnerability,  against  which,  when  my

condition is slightly improved, I take a sort of revenge which is not of the

nicest description that is to say, I adopt an attitude of excessive hardness. For

a proof of this, look at my last work! Still, I put up with all this with the

sagacity of an old psychologist and without the smallest moral indignation.

Oh, how instructive it is to live in such an extreme state as mine! Only now

do I understand history; never has my vision been more profound than during

the last few months.

  Dear  friend,  your  physiological  computation  about  the  influence  of

Venice is perfectly right. In this place, where one is constantly hearing so

many  visitors  and  invalids  discuss  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  effects  of

particular climates, I have gradually learned to grasp the cardinal truth of this

question.  In  regard  to  the  optimum,  the  realization  of  our  most  intimatewishes (our "works"), one must hearken to this voice of Nature; certain kinds

of music can flourish no better under a wet sky than can certain plants. The

lady who is my neighbour at table has just told me that until two weeks ago

she had been lying ill in Berlin, that she had caused the doctors there a great

deal of anxiety, and that she was unable to walk from one corner of the street

to the other. Now-and she cannot account for the change in her she runs,-she

eats, she is cheerful and can no longer believe-that she has been ill. As the

same thing has happened to her three times in her life, she now swears by a

"dry climate" as a recipe for all spiritual ailments (-for she had suffered from

a sort of desperate melancholia). The fact that for years you should have

found the effect of the climate of Venice (as a contrast to the climate in which

you were brought up) very good for you and a sort of balm oil that calmed

you down, is quite correct: I have discussed this vital question with doctors in

the  Engadine:  namely,  that  a  climate  when  tried  as  a  contrast  for  its

stimulating effect-that is to say when it is ordered only for a given period of

time-has exactly the opposite effect when it is lived in for good; and that the

inhabitant of the Engadine, under the constant influence of this particular

climate, becomes serious, phlegmatic, and a little anaemic, while the visitor

to this part of the world leaves it feeling braced and strengthened in all his

bodily functions. Moral: You ought, therefore, to be (or have been) only a

visitor to Venice. I am really sorry to have to say this and even to see it in the

way I do; for so much there is arranged and ordered in such a splendid and

suitable way for you that you could not find the same anywhere else. You

might try Corsica? I have been told that one can find board and lodging in the

small hotels at Bastia for three to four francs a day. So many fugitives from

all lands have lived in Corsica (particularly Italian scholars, etc.). The railway

line from Bastia to Corte has just been opened (February 1, 1888). The great

frugality of the Corsican mode of life and the simplicity of their customs

would make people like ourselves feel quite at home there. And how far

away  from  modernity  one  would  feel  there!  Maybe  the  soul  would  grow

stronger, purer, and prouder there . . . (-I can see quite clearly now that one

would suffer less if one were prouder: you and I are not proud enough. . . .).

  Your affectionate and devoted friend,

  N.

  To Seydlitz - February, 1888

  Nice, Pension de Geneve.

    February 12, 1888.  DEAR FRIEND:

  It has not been a "proud silence" that has sealed my lips to everyone all

this time, but rather the humble silence of a sufferer who was ashamed of

betraying the extent of his pain. When an animal is ill it crawls into its cave-

so does la bete philosophe. So seldom does a friendly voice come my way. I

am  now  alone,  absurdly  alone,  and  in  my  unrelenting  subterranean  war

against all that mankind has hitherto honoured and loved (-my formula for

this is "the Transvaluation of all Values") I myself seem unwittingly to have

become  something  of  a  cave,  something  concealed  that  can  no  longer  be

found even when it is a definite object of search. But no one goes in search of

it. Between us three, it is not beyond the limits of possibility that I am the

leading philosopher of the age-aye, maybe a little more than that, something

decisive and fateful that stands between two epochs. But a man is constantly

paying for holding such an isolated position by an isolation which becomes

every day more complete, more icy, and more cutting. And look at our dear

Germans! . . . Although I am in my forty-fifth year and have published about

fifteen  books  (  among  them  that  non  plus  ultra  "Zarathustra")  no  one  in

Germany has yet succeeded in producing even a moderately good review of a

single one of my works. They are now getting out of the difficulty with such

words as "eccentric," "pathological," "psychiatric." There have been evil and

slanderous  hints  enough  about  me,  and  in  the  papers  both  scholarly  and

unscholarly, the prevailing attitude is one of ungoverned animosity;-but how

is it that no one protests against this? How is it that no one feels insulted

when  I  am  abused?  And  all  these  years  no  comfort,  no  drop  of  human

sympathy, not a breath of love.

  In these circumstances one has to live at Nice. This season it is again full

of idlers, grecs and other philosophers-it is full of my like. And, with his own

peculiar cynicism, God allows his sun to shine more brightly on us than on

the more respectable Europe of Herr von Bismarck (-which with feverish

virtue is working at its armaments, and looks for all the world like a heroic

hedgehog). The days seem to dawn here with unblushing beauty; never have

we had a more beautiful winter. How I should like to send you some of the

colouring  of  Nice!  It  is  all  besprinkled  with  a  glittering  silver  grey;

intellectual,  highly  intellectual  colouring;  free  from  every  vestige  of  the

brutal  ground  tone.  The  advantage  of  this  small  stretch  of  coast  between

Alassio and Nice is the suggestion of Africa in the colouring, the vegetation,

and the dryness of the air. This is not to be found in other parts of Europe.  Oh, how gladly would I not sit with you and your dear wife beneath some

Homeric Ph�acien sky! But I must not go further south (-my eyes will soon

drive me to more northern and more stupid landscapes). Please let me know

when you will be in Munich again and forgive this gloomy letter.

  Your devoted friend,

    NlETZSCHE.

  Nietzsche To Peter Gast - February, 1888

  Nice, Pension de Geneve,

    February 26, 1888.

  DEAR FRIEND:

  The weather is sultry, it is Sunday afternoon, and I am very lonely. I can

think of nothing more pleasant to do than to sit down and have a chat with

you. I have just noticed that my fingers are blue, so my writing will be legible

only to him who can guess my thoughts. . . .

  What  you  say  in  your  letter  about  Wagner's  style  reminds  me  of  an

effusion of my own on the subject that I wrote somewhere, in which I say

that his "dramatic style" is nothing more than a species of bad style, or rather,

no style in music. But our musicians call this progress. . . . As a matter of

fact, in this domain of truth, everything still remains to be said-aye! I very

much suspect that everything still remains to be thought. Wagner himself, as

a  man,  an  animal,  a  god,  and  an  artist  rises  a  thousand  miles  above  the

understanding and the lack of understanding of our Germans. Whether it is

the same with the French I do not know.

  Today I had the pleasure of being proved in the right over a question,

which, in itself, might seem extraordinarily daring: to wit-what man up to the

present  has  been  the  best  prepared  for  Wagner?  Which  of  us  was  most

adapted to Wagner and most Wagnerian inwardly in spite of and without

Wagner?  To  this  question  I  had  for  some  considerable  time  replied  by

pointing to that odd three-quarter imbecile of a Baudelaire, the poet of Les

Fleurs du Mal. I had deplored the fact that, during his lifetime, this man was

so fundamentally related to Wagner in spirit; I had marked the lines in his

poems that were in any way redolent of Wagner's sensibility, to which no

form has been given in the poetry of any other man (Baudelaire is a libertine,

mystic, and satanic to boot; but above all Wagnerian). And what do I find

today?  On  turning  over  the  leaves  of  the  recently  published  (�uvres

Posthumes of this author so highly esteemed and even beloved in France, lo

and  behold,  in  the  midst  of  invaluable  Psychologicis  of  decadence  (moncoeur  mis  a  nu,  after  the  manner  of  those  introspective  writings  of

Schopenhauer  and  Byron[101]  that  were  burnt)  what  should  I  find  but  a

hitherto unpublished letter of Wagner's relating to one of Baudelaire's essays

in the Revue Europeenne, April, 1861. Here is a copy of it:

  "My  dear  Monsieur  Baudelaire,  I  have  called  upon  you  several  times

without finding you in. You will readily understand how anxious I am to tell

you what a tremendous pleasure you gave me by your article that does me so

much honour and gives me more encouragement than anything anyone else

has said as yet about my poor talent. Would it not be possible for me before

long to tell you in person how elated I felt at reading those beautiful pages

that described to me-after the manner of the finest poem-the impression I may

boast  of  having  made  upon  a  mind  so  superior  as  yours?  Thank  you  a

thousand times for the kindness you have shown me, and, believe me, I am

proud to be able to think of you as a friend. May we soon meet!

  Yours,

  Richard Wagner."

    [Wagner was then forty-eight years old and Baudelaire was forty. The

letter is touching, although it is in such wretchedly bad French.]

  In the same book there are a few sketches by Baudelaire in which in a

most passionate manner he defends Heinrich Heine against French criticism

(Jules Janin). During the latter part of his life, when he was half mad and

slowly declining, Wagner's music used to be played to him as a form of

medicine: and even when Wagner's name was mentioned to him, "he smiled

with joy".

  (If I am not mistaken, Wagner only wrote one other letter expressive of

such gratitude and enthusiasm, and that was after the receipt of The Birth of

Tragedy.)

  (Extract from one of Baudelaire's letters: "I dare not write any more about

Wagner: people have made too much fun of me. This music has been one of

the greatest joys of my life: for full fifteen years I have not experienced such

feelings of elation, or rather ecstasy").

  How are you now, dear friend? I have vowed to take nothing seriously for

a  while.  Even  you  are  not  to  believe  that  I  have  once  again  written

"literature": this essay was for myself. Every winter now I intend to write just

such an essay for myself,-the thought of getting it published is practically out

of  the  question.  .  .  .  The  Fritzsch  has  been  settled  by  wire.  Spitteler  has

written. It is not a bad letter. and in it he apologises for his "impudence" (hisown word).[102]



                              THE YOUNG NIETZSCHE

  BY ELISABETH FORSTER-NIETZSCHE

    TRANSLATED BY ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI

    FRIENDS at home and abroad have often asked me whether I could not

relate the story of my brother Friedrich Nietzsche's life in an abridged form.

They  pointed  out  that  the  large  biography  in  three  volumes  was  chiefly

intended for the student who could find the time necessary to read it, and

calling my attention to the number of falsehoods which, within recent years,

have been circulated both in Germany and France concerning Nietzsche's life,

declared  that  it  was  high  time  that  the  authentic  facts  should  be  made

accessible to wider circles in the form of a small and handy volume that

would likewise be suitable for translation into a foreign language. As I was

not able to undertake a fresh narrative of my brother's life immediately, I

appealed to Professor Ernst Holzer of Ulm, and asked him whether he would

do it. He assured me that there was nothing he was more desirous of doing

than  to  relate  afresh  at  least  a  portion  of  my  brother's  life.  The  young

Nietzsche and his works seemed to have been buried and forgotten. All the

fuss  had  been  made  in  connection  with  the  older  solitary  Nietzsche.  The

latter,  however,  could  be  properly  understood  only  on  condition  that  the

image of the young Nietzsche was already impressed in sharp outline on the

mind of the reader. I therefore laid at Professor Holzer's disposal all the fresh

material that had been deciphered and collected from letters and note-books

since the publication of my first biography. Professor Holzer's aim was more

particularly to describe the young scholar who had done such surprisingly

good and learned work, even at Pforta and later in Leipzig, and to reveal him

as a University Professor, in the light of his philological essays and lectures.

According to Professor Holzer, the first volume of the Philologica scarcely

gives an adequate idea of the importance of these performances, although the

second and third, which are not yet published, certainly will.

  In the autumn of 1909 Holzer spoke to me of his projected work with the

utmost enthusiasm, and said that although it was his intention to lay particular

stress on Nietzsche the University Professor, of whom everybody knew so

little, he also wished more particularly to show the importance of the Young

Nietzsche,  the  author  of  those  essays  which  had  appeared  in  the  early'seventies, to whom he felt particularly sympathetic. " The man who speaks

here  is  the  '  first  Nietzsche,'  the  friend  of  Richard  Wagner  the  Nietzsche

whom Erwin Rohde loved so enthusiastically, the young, hopeful and trustful

Nietzsche,  who,  with  a  colossal  faith  in  his  ideals  and  friends,  marched

courageously towards the future the gladiator who, in the early 'seventies, felt

himself to be in possession of his greatest power, and who seemed to a friend

who once visited him in Bale, ' full of fire and buoyancy, and as selfreliant as

a young lion ! ' But only a very few months after our meeting, death suddenly

put  an  end  to  Professor  Holzer's  career,  and  this  intellectual  and  devoted

friend, from whom we expected such great things, was taken from us.

  Thus I was obliged to reconcile myself to the thought of telling the tale of

my brother's life afresh and of repeating much that I had already published.

And I resolved to carry out the work in the first place for the benefit of the

foreigner,  from  whom  the  first  suggestion  of  the  scheme  had  come,  and

secondly  for  Germany.  It  is  only  natural  that  my  little  book  should  have

developed into something very different from that which Professor Holzer

had contemplated. Truth to tell, the only point of resemblance between the

two lies in the fact that in the following pages I have endeavoured to depict

the young and happy Nietzsche, not only during a given well-defined period,

but throughout the whole of the thirty-two happy years of his youth, from

1844 to 1876. I, alone, can speak with any real knowledge of these years, for,

as Baron von Gersdorff and Rohde once said to me : " We are acquainted

only with small portions of his life ; but you know everything that links those

isolated portions together."

  Thus I have tried to gather together everything that has been said and

written about my brother during the period above described, and it has been

my constant endeavour to lay bare even those facts which might shed a less

favourable light upon him. But I had already done this with very little success

before the composition of the large biography. When Baron von Gersdorff

came to Weimar in August, 1898, in order to celebrate the 150th anniversary

of  Goethe's  birthday,  I  asked  him  whether  he  could  not  tell  me  anything

unfavourable concerning my brother, whose bosom friend he had been and in

whom my brother had certainly confided more than in all his other friends.

For I told him that there was too little shadow in the bright picture I had

drawn of my brother's life. Gersdorff replied to me a little wistfully : " I can

remember nothing ; he was all light. It was we, his friends, who did not

understand him, who contributed the shade to his life."  Maybe this life-history is important chiefly in this respect, that it presents

us with one great problem. For it is a problem that Friedrich Nietzsche, who

denied our present moral values, or at least traced them to sources absolutely

unsuspected  hitherto  this  Transvaluer  of  all  Values  should  himself  have

fulfilled all the loftiest and most subtle demands made by the morality now

preached among us. And he did not do this because of any moral imperative,

but from a perfectly cheerful inability to act otherwise. I leave it to others to

solve this problem.

  I have not the slightest intention of advancing any of my own views, or of

attempting in any way to prove my brother's doctrines. Quite a number of

distinguished scholars and literary men have written excellent works with the

latter object in view, and many more will probably do so in the future. In the

pages  before  us,  all  I  wish  to  do  is  to  describe  the  Young  and  Happy

Nietzsche, while in a volume which is to follow this one, under the title of

The  Lonely  Nietzsche,  I  shall  speak  of  the  later  tragic  years  of  solitude,

during which no word either of love or friendship any longer reached him,

but in which he climbed the steep path to his highest and most exalted aims.

                                  PART I CHILDHOOD

                            CHAPTER I OUR ANCESTORS

  MY brother attached great importance to good descent and even declared

that all bodily and spiritual virtue and excellence are acquired only with great

pains and the exercise of peculiar diligence, self-mastery and frugality, and

through  the  indefatigable  and  faithful  repetition  of  the  same  tasks.  The

gratitude and reverence with which he looked back upon our ancestors and

their treasures of virtue, and the modesty with which he was able to regard

himself,  with  all  his  superior  qualities,  only  as  their  heir,  will  therefore

readily be understood. As late as the year 1883 he wrote in Zarathustra : "

Ever am I your love's heir and heritage, blooming to your memory of many

gorgeous native virtues, ye dearest ones ! "

  Our father, Karl Ludwig Nietzsche, was born at Eilenburg, at a time of

considerable unrest and danger, on the 10th October, 1813, only a few days

before the great Battle of the Nations at Leipzig, and was the son of the

Doctor of Divinity and Superintendent, Friedrich August Ludwig Nietzsche.

Eilenburg, which is situated not far from Leipzig, was, owing to the passage

of the troops, and later on account of the crowds of military refugees and

fugitives, much involved in the course of events. Our grandmother Nietzsche

was  never  able  to  speak  without  emotion  of  the  terrors  of  that  appallingautumn : numberless troops had swarmed over the whole district ; throughout

every one of those gloomy nights the hurried monotonous tramping of the

regiments had been heard, and friend and foe alike had knocked at the door of

the Superintendent's house, with a thousand and one entreaties and requests.

How much advice and help was not expected of the worthy shepherd of souls

! To how many dying creatures was he not called in order to give them the

last solace of religion ! Our grandmother used to say that for years in her

dreams she was frightened by hearing the gruesome tapping on the shutters

which was reminiscent of those days. It must, however, be remembered that

Eilenburg at this time belonged to Saxony and that Saxony was Napoleon's

ally After the battle, the tumultuous rejoicings over the victory, which were

borne from town to town by the pealing of bells, were therefore received with

somewhat mixed feelings at Eilenburg.

  We never knew our grandfather Nietzsche personally ; according to all

accounts, however, he must have been a very worthy, kindly and scholarly

man. The degree of Doctor of Divinity was conferred upon him in honour of

a number of excellent treatises he had written, the most important of which,

on account of the posthumous fame they enjoyed, being : " Gamaliel, or the

Everlasting Duration of Christianity, Calculated to Instruct and Tranquillize

the Public Mind in Face of the Present Ferment in the Theological World "

(Published  by  Supperian,  Leipzig,  1796),  and  "Contributions  Towards  the

Promotion of a Seasonable Attitude regarding Religion, Education, the Duty

of the Subject, and Human Life " (Published by Gadike, Weimar, 1804).

  Our  grandfather  Nietzsche  married  twice  and  had  twelve  children,  of

whom  two  died  in  early  infancy.  (Our  dear  grandmother  was  his  second

wife.) In his seventieth year he caught a severe cold, and, after four days'

illness, on the 16th March, 1806, he died. In a short essay, which a friend of

his youth wrote in honour of his memory, the writer with the profoundest

reverence for his character says : " All who had the good fortune to look into

his mind and to witness his mode of life, could not but praise the delightful

qualities  of  his  heart  and  soul.  They  admired  above  all  the  pious  feeling

which transfigured the whole of life for him, and rendered every duty holy in

his eyes, inspired him in every moment of joy, and hallowed every affliction

as  a  dispensation  from  God  and  Heaven.  The  hearty  benevolence  and

friendliness  with  which  he  met  all  men  and  offered  his  love  to  every

burdened soul whom he could help, and which made him pray to the God of

Love even for those who had done him harm; the uprightness, loyalty andhonesty with which he always clung to the good and defended the cause of

righteousness, and which made his outward acts the faithful reflection of his

inner spirit ; the noble dignity, coupled with friendliness and modesty with

which he won both our love and our esteem, were felt by everyone who came

into contact with him."

  Our dear grandmother Nietzsche was born on the 11th December, 1778.

She came of a family of pastors of the name of Krause, but I know little about

these  ancestors,  save  that  they  were  cheerful,  active  people,  and  that  our

great-grandmother was famous for the excellence of her cooking. To this day

recipes which she favoured are used in my household. She was no longer

living  when  our  grandmother  at  the  age  of  thirty-one  took  as  her  second

husband our grandfather ; and that is the reason why the ceremony took place

at Naumburg, where our grandmother's favourite brother was a preacher at

the Cathedral. Our grandmother had three brothers and one sister, a very

beautiful girl, whose portrait is still a source of pleasure to every visitor to the

Nietzsche archives. All the brothers and sisters, however, must have been

good-looking men and women, for our great-grandmother writes: " God has

given me five good-looking and well-behaved children." Both claims were

true, for every one of her children lived to do her credit and give her joy. One

of the sons was " the founder of the needlework and embroidery industry in

the Saxon Voigtland "a benefactor to the Voigt land," as a local inscription to

his  honour  gratefully  attests  ;  the  second  was  Dr.  Krause,  General

Superintendent, Professor and Doctor of Divinity, first in Konigsberg and

afterwards in "Weimar, as successor to Herder, and was held in high esteem,

thanks to his intellect and scholarship. The third son was a worthy country

clergyman, who even in those days endeavoured to be not only a parson and

shepherd  of  souls,  but  also  an  adviser  in  all  worldly  matters  to  his

parishioners.

  Our  dear  grandmother  Nietzsche  was  remarkable  for  her  great  mental

vivacity,  cleverness  and  really  delightful  kindliness  of  heart.  Her  first

husband,  a  relative  of  August  von  Kozebue,  was  a  man  called  Kriiger,  a

lawyer to the Court at Weimar, but he lived for only a few years after their

marriage. Even in these early days she passed through troubled and warlike

times, for owing to the battle of Jena and its consequences, "Weimar was

called upon to suffer many vicissitudes. Her only little boy died, and her

husband, who was already infirm, fell so seriously ill as a result of the events

of October, 1806, that he was never able to rally, and died in 1807. After hisdeath  she  went  to  live  with  her  favourite  brother,  Dr.  Krause,  who

subsequently became General Superintendent, and in 1809 she married again,

to become, as I have already stated, the wife of our grandfather Nietzsche. In

addition to her seven stepchildren, she also had three children of her own. All

the brothers and sisters, whether by the first or second marriage, in spite of

the  great  difference  of  age  which  separated  them,  lived  on  unusually

affectionate terms. When our father was born the eldest step -brother was

twenty-nine. The modest comfort which reigned in the Nietzsche family was

founded  on  a  legacy  from  another  half-brother  of  our  father's,  who  had

amassed a handsome fortune in England ; he had died a bachelor, and had left

all his money to his relatives. The whole of our father's family, whom I learnt

to know only when they were far advanced in years, were remarkable for

their great powers of self-control, their lively interest in intellectual matters,

and their strong sense of family unity, which manifested itself alike in their

splendid readiness to help one another, and in the cordial relations which

subsisted between them.

  My  brother  often  refers  to  his  Polish  descent,  and  in  later  years  he

instituted researches with a view to establishing it, which met with some

success. I know nothing definite concerning these investigations, as a large

number of my brother's documents were lost after his breakdown in health in

Turin. The family tradition was that a certain minor Polish nobleman named

Nicki (pronounced Nietzky) had obtained the special favour of Augustus the

Strong, King of Poland, and had received the title of Count from him. When,

however,  Stanislaus  Leszcynski,  the  Pole,  was  made  King,  our  supposed

ancestor  became  involved  in  a  conspiracy  in  favour  of  Saxony  and  the

Protestants. He was sentenced to death; but taking flight with his wife, who

had just given birth to a son, he wandered about with her for two or three

years as a fugitive through the small States of Germany, during which time

our  great-grandmother  nursed  and  suckled  her  little  boy  herself.  So  the

legend runs, and our great-grandfather Nietzsche, who at the age of ninety

could still ride a horse at a gallop, is said to have ascribed his hardiness to

these  circumstances.  Unfortunately  the  dates  do  not  seem  to  tally  quite

accurately ; in any case, nothing definite can be said, as the first certain date

which is known about our great-great -grandfather Nietzsche and his family

belongs to the year 1709.

  From  his  childhood  onwards  my  brother  always  attached  a  certain

importance to this somewhat mythical Polish descent. He writes in the year1883 : " I have been taught to trace my descent and name to a noble Polish

family  called  Nietzky,  who,  yielding  to  insufferable  religious  oppression,

gave up their homes and their title over a hundred years ago ; for they were

Protestants. I will not deny that as a boy I was rather proud of my Polish

descent. Whatever German blood I have in my veins comes solely from my

mother's family, the Oehlers, and from my paternal grandmother's family, the

Krauses, but it seems to me that in all essentials I have remained a Pole,

notwithstanding. The fact that my appearance has always been characteristic

of the Polish type, has often enough been brought home to me. Outside my

own  country,  in  Switzerland  and  in  Italy,  for  instance,  I  have  often  been

accosted as a Pole. In Sorrento, where I spent my winters, the people used to

call me il Polacco, whilst during a summer holiday, in Marienbad especially,

I was often reminded of my Polish nature in a striking manner. Poles would

come up to me and, mistaking me for one of their acquaintances, would greet

me  in  Polish  ;  and  one,  to  whom  I  said  I  was  no  Pole,  and  to  whom  I

introduced myself as a Swiss, looked at me sadly for some time, and then

said : ' It is still the old race, but the heart has vanished, God knows whither.'

A small album of mazurkas which I composed as a boy bore the inscription, '

In  memory  of  our  ancient  forebears  !  '  and  I  reflected  them  in  many  a

judgment and in many a prejudice."

    Occasionally our aged aunts would speak of the enthusiasm of our great-

grandfather  Nietzsche  whom  they  had  known,  and  whose  handsome

appearance and noble dignity in his hoary old age they could not praise too

highly. Our ancestors both on the Nietzsche and the Oehler side were very

long  lived.  Of  the  four  pairs  of  great-grandparents,  the  great-grandfather

above  mentioned  reached  the  age  of  ninety,  five  great-grandmothers  and

great-grandfathers died between seventy-five and eighty-six, and two only

failed to reach old age. The two grandfathers attained their seventieth year,

the maternal grandmother died at eighty-two, and grandmother Nietzsche at

seventy-seven.

  Our father was the youngest child, and as such the favourite of his parents

and of his nine elder brothers and sisters. From his earliest youth he must

have been an unusually lovable and gifted boy. He was educated first at the

seminary  at  Rossleben,  and  afterwards  became  a  student  at  Halle.  The

teachers at Rossleben and the professors at Halle all unite in praising his

gifts, his industry, his exemplary love of order, and his indefatigable devotion

to duty. He had an extraordinary talent for music, and small tickets belongingto the Rossleben days are still in existence, which he used for inviting his

friends on Sundays, between the hours of church and the midday meal, to a

concert at which he was the sole performer. Later his excellent impromptu

playing on the piano created a great impression, while compositions from his

pen are also said to have existed, albeit I was unable to find any trace of these

among our mother's papers after her death. He was sound to the core, and a

great votary of physical exercise, such as skating and long walks. A relative

who was with him at Rossleben recalled, even in his eighty -third year, the

great walking tours they used to take together.

  After  passing  his  examinations  with  distinction  he  was  engaged  for  a

short time as a tutor at Captain Baumbach's in Altenburg, and subsequently

held a similar post at the Ducal Court there. His three pupils were Princess

Theresa  (who  died  unmarried),  Princess  Elizabeth  (Grand  Duchess  of

Oldenburg), and Princess Alexandra (Grand Duchess Constantine of Russia).

Between  the  tutor  and  his  august  pupils  there  subsisted  for  many  years

afterwards  an  extremely  friendly  relationship  which  does  honour  to  both

parties.

  In 1841, at the special instance of Friedrich Wilhelm IV., he received the

living of Rocken. Our father had had a personal interview with this pious and

kindly monarch, and this meeting seems to have aroused the warmest feelings

on both sides, for surprisingly soon after this event he received his living "by

Royal Command," and great things were hoped for him that is to say, people

expected him to be summoned to Berlin to fill the post of Court Chaplain. A

friend of his youth describes his appearance at that time as follows : " He was

tall and slender, with a noble and poetic personality and a peculiar talent for

music ; he was endowed with delicate feeling, was full of reverence for his

family,  and  possessed  the  most  distinguished  manners."  He  had  beautiful

large dark-brown eyes, but was unfortunately very short-sighted.

  In the spring of 1843 our father made the acquaintance of our mother,

who  had  then  only  just  reached  her  seventeenth  year,  and  who  but  a

twelvemonth before had still been playing in secret with her dolls. As she had

three sisters older than herself and came between five brothers, in whose

games she still occasionally joined, it was only quite recently that she had

been regarded as grown up. In later years her brothers always chaffed her

about the wonderful way in which she used to toboggan. Not very far from

the parsonage there must have been an ideal toboggan run, and near the end

of it there was a dip over which our mother must have steered her tobogganwith particular daring and sureness, for none of the younger members of the

family would mount the toboggan unless she steered. During this spring our

father visited our grandparents in the company of an elderly colleague, the

godfather  of  the  girl  who  was  to  be  our  mother  and  who  was  called

Fransziska. It chanced that on this occasion Fransziska, now grown into a

charming young woman, came in with a pot of pinks to ask her godfather

what she should do to make them bloom as nicely as his plants. The sight of

this dark young beauty so greatly delighted our father, that, with the help of

the old godfather, he afterwards managed to see her frequently, and finally

became engaged to her in July, 1843 to the intense dismay of many a pretty

girl among the various estates and parsonages of the district, who believed

they had found their "ideal" in the noble young parson of Eocken.

  Our mother Fransziska, who was called Franzchen, was both beautiful

and healthy and full of a charming roguishness. The daughter of a parson, she

was one of a very large family. Her parents, our dear grandparents, Pastor

Oehler and his wife, were typically healthy people, and strength, robustness,

lively dispositions, and a cheerful outlook on life were among the qualities

which were the delight of all who knew them. Our grandfather was a parson

at Pohles, a small village two hours' journey from Weissenfels. He was a

bright,  clever  man,  a  typical  example  of  the  old  school  of  comfortable

country parson, who thought it no sin to go hunting (with a groom carrying

his guns behind him), or to play a friendly little game of skat. He loved music

and  poetry  but  was  no  adept  in  them  himself,  and  many  a  musical

performance  of  such  compositions  as  Haydn's  Creation  was  given  in  the

parsonage of Pobles by friends and members of the family to the joy of all

concerned.  One  evening  a  week  was  devoted  to  the  children,  when  they

recited poems ; and theatricals were often arranged chiefly by the children

themselves, who were so numerous that there was never any dearth of actors.

Moreover, our grandfather's house was nearly always full of guests, for he

was very fond of company. He was scarcely ever ill, and would not have died

even when he did, in his seventieth year, from a severe cold, had he not been

so  incredibly  imprudent  in  regard  to  his  health.  As  to  our  grandmother

Oehler, who died in her eighty-second year, all that can be said is, that if all

German women were possessed of the health she enjoyed, our nation would

excel all others in vitality. She bore our grandfather eleven children, and not

only gave each of them the breast for nearly the whole of the first year, but

also lost not a single one of them, and reared them all to maturity. It is saidthat the sight of these eleven children of very different ages (the eldest was

nineteen  when  the  youngest  was  born),  with  their  powerful  build,  rosy

cheeks, beaming eyes and wealth of curly locks excited the admiration of

every visitor. In spite of their magnificent health, the life of this family, of

course,  was  not  all  sunshine.  Every  one  of  the  eleven  children  was

exceedingly spirited, wilful and headstrong, and it was therefore no simple

matter to manage them. Moreover, though they always showed the utmost

respect and most implicit obedience to their parents even as middle-aged men

and women misunderstandings between them were of constant occurrence.

Our Oehler grandparents were fairly well to do, for our grandmother hailed

from a very old family who had been large landowners in the neighbourhood

of Zeitz for centuries, and her father, Counsellor Hahn, owned the baronial

estate of Wehlits and was the tenant of magnificent crown land near Zeitz.

When she married, her father gave her a carriage and horses, a coachman, a

cook, and kitchen-maid as part of her dowry, which for the wife of a German

parson  was  then,  and  is  still,  something  quite  exceptional.  The  eldest

grandchildren also received a charming pony-chaise, with a pony to draw it,

and this vehicle was often used by the great-great-grandchildren, my brother

and myself, though we harnessed it to a goat. Unfortunately, as a result of the

Avars of 1806 15, and of his exceptional good nature and readiness to help

others, our great-grandfather lost most of his property.

  The  families  of  Nietzsche  and  Oehler,  though  so  different  from  each

other,  proved,  as  we  now  see,  most  felicitous  complements.  Meanwhile,

however, our grandfather Oehler was not free from care. It is true that much

was done for the education of the children, and there was always a good

scholar in the house to act as tutor. Music was studied, and at table it was the

rule that French should be spoken. But the education was planned principally

with a view to the requirements of the sons, rather than the daughters, and the

latter learnt only as much as it was possible for them to pick up in addition to

those feminine accomplishments, such as sewing, embroidery, etc., which

were their special domain. Our mother, it is true, had learnt Latin with the

boys, but in other departments of knowledge her education was certainly very

deficient, and thanks to her continual association with her brothers she must

have assimilated much of their habits and manners. It was now her lot to

enter  a  very  cultured  and,  as  far  as  formalities  were  concerned,  an

exceedingly  punctilious  family.  When  on  one  occasion  her  mother-in-law

Nietzsche unexpectedly paid her a visit, she burst violently into the room andembraced the caller so vigorously that she almost knocked her down. Her

father  Oehler  watched  the  scene  thoughtfully  and  then  said  to  my

grandmother Nietzsche : " Our Franzchen is still a bit of a tomboy, and allow

me to tell you as a grower of trees that you are taking a wild shoot into your

family, from which you must rear a noble tree." Our grandmother Oehler

listened to this remark with some disapproval, to which she gave expression,

but  grandmother  Nietzsche  exclaimed  cheerfully  and  affectionately,  "

Franzchen is a gorgeous savage, and her vigour and roughness are perfectly

delightful."

  On the 10th October, 1843, on my father's thirtieth birthday, our parents

were married. When the young couple had passed through all the triumphal

arches, amid the greetings of the chief members of the parish, the teachers

and the school children, and had at last reached the steps of the parsonage,

our father's eldest step-sister a very stately and noble figure stood above them

in  the  decorated  doorway,  and  stretching  out  her  arms,  called  to  the

seventeen-year-old bride in solemn tones, " Welcome to the loyal hearts of

your sisters ! "

                        CHAPTER II EARLIEST CHILDHOOD

  OUR  parents'  eldest  son,  Friedrich  Wilhelm  Nietzsche,  was  born  at

Rocken on the 15th October, 1844, at ten o'clock in the morning, to the sound

of the peals of bells rung by the parish in honour of the birthday of our

reigning monarch King Friedrich Wilhelm IV. of Prussia. Our father's intense

joy that his first son should be born precisely on his beloved sovereign's

birthday will readily be understood. At the christening ceremony after the

baptism he said : " Thou blessed month of October, for many years the most

decisive events of my life have occurred within thy thirty-one days, but my

experience this day is the greatest and the most glorious of them all, the

christening  of  my  little  child  !  blissful  moment  !  exquisite  festival  !

unspeakably holy duty ! In the name of the Lord I bless thee ! From the

bottom of my heart do I utter these words : Bring me, then, this my beloved

child,  that  I  may  consecrate  him  unto  the  Lord  !  My  BOH,  Friedrich

Wilhelm, thus shalt thou be named on earth, in honour of my royal benefactor

on whose birthday thou wast born."

  From his earliest days my brother was always a very healthy child. He

gave little trouble either to his mother or his nurse, and though he did not

learn to speak until he was two and a half, he did so then comparatively

correctly. He was exceedingly strong, and, as a child, very hot tempered acharacteristic which he did not like to hear mentioned in later years, because,

in accordance with the family tradition of the Nietzsches, he soon learnt to

control himself. When he was older, if ever he did anything awkward, or

broke something, for which he had to he scolded, he would grow very red,

say  nothing,  and  withdraw  silently  into  solitude.  After  a  while  he  would

reappear with modest dignity, and would either beg for forgiveness, if he had

convinced himself of his fault, or else say nothing. My brother declared that

his appearance throughout his childhood was that of a typical peasant boy,

plump, brown and rosy. The thick fair hair which fell picturesquely over his

shoulders had the effect of somewhat modifying his robust appearance. But

for his wonderfully beautiful, large and expressive eyes, however, and his

extraordinarily decorous manner, neither his teachers nor his relatives would

have recognised in him the highly gifted and remarkable child he really was,

for he was both modest and reserved.

  He describes his first youthful impressions in a small book written in the

year 1858, when he was not yet fourteen years of age, entitled "Leaves from

my Life," and in which he relates his experiences up to that time : " The

village of Rocken lies half an hour's journey from Liitzen, close on the main

road. Every traveller who passes along this road must cast a kindly glance at

it, for it is so prettily tucked away amidst the trees and ponds that surround it.

The first object to catch the eye is the moss-clad church steeple. I have a

distinct recollection of how on one occasion, when I was walking with my

dear father from Liitzen to Rocken, when we were about halfway home the

bells began to ring out merrily in celebration of Eastertide. The sound of

these bells often recurs to my mind, and then sad thoughts carry me back to

the  dear  old  parsonage.  How  vividly  can  I  still  see  the  neighbouring

churchyard ! How often, when the old mortuary chapel was opened, did I not

ask what the biers and the black crape and the inscriptions on the tombstones

and monuments meant ! But when every other image has vanished from my

soul I shall never forget the old parsonage itself, for it is engraved on my

memory in mighty letters. The actual house was built in the year 1820, and

was  therefore  very  comfortably  arranged.  A  flight  of  steps  led  up  to  the

ground floor. I can still remember the study on the first storey and the rows of

books, where many an illustrated volume made this place a favourite resort of

mine. Behind the house there stretched the orchard and the lawn, a part of

which was generally under water in the spring, which meant that the cellar

was also flooded. In front of the house there was a courtyard with a barn anda stable, and this led to the flower garden, in the bowers or on the seats of

which  I  was  almost  always  to  be  found.  Behind  the  green  hedge  lay  the

ponds, surrounded by willow trees. To saunter between these ponds, to gaze

at the rays of the sun playing upon their surface, and to watch the sportive

little fishes darting hither and thither was my greatest joy. There is one other

thing which I must mention, which always filled me with a secret shudder.

On one side of the gloomy vestry there stood a colossal stone figure of St.

George carved by a skilful hand. The mighty form, the terrible weapons, and

the dim, mysterious light all combined to make me regard the saint with a

certain awe. Once, so the legend went, his eyes gleamed in such a terrible

manner that all who saw him were filled with horror."

  The parsonage of Kocken, with all its inmates, still remains in the minds

of those who knew it one of the happiest of memories ; it was called the "

ideal parsonage." As a matter of fact, it was not only ideal, it was a really

happy home, which, thanks to our father's magnificent piano-playing, his rich

intellectual gifts, and his delightful cheerfulness, was always radiant with joy.

Our grandmother Nietzsche formed one of the household during the greater

part of the year, and was held in universal respect in the place, while one of

my father's sisters undertook the housekeeping, and with the help of excellent

servants fulfilled the task in a really exemplary way. Our mother, who, by-

the-bye, soon adapted herself to the ways of the Nietzsche family, had plenty

of spare time, and our father was accordingly often able to take her away and

show her the world. The dear soul remembered with joy until the end of her

life a certain tour they took in Saxon Switzerland, ending up with a sojourn of

several  weeks  in  Dresden,  with  all  its  art  collections  and  incomparable

operatic and theatrical performances. In later life her brothers still referred to

the interesting account their sister had given of this visit, although in other

respects they were very much distressed at the change which had taken place

in their Franzchen, as she showed little interest in their harmless though,

perhaps, somewhat coarse jokes, and had grown so "intolerably refined and

cultured." The fact that our mother found it an easy matter to adapt herself to

her new surroundings she herself afterwards stoutly contested. Her rebellious

spirit was more particularly aroused by the admonitions of her sister-in-law,

our aunt Rosalie, of whom we, as children, were all very fond. In our father's

presence, however, little of all this was allowed to appear, for he was an

extraordinarily sensitive man, or, as was said of him at the time, he took

everything so much to heart. Any sign of discord either in the parish or in hisown family was so painful to him that he would withdraw to his study and

refuse to eat or drink, or speak with anybody. If any trifling dispute chanced

to occur in his presence between the sister-in-law in question and our fiery

young mother, he would lean back in his chair, close his eyes, and become

absorbed in very different thoughts, so that he might hear and see nothing of

the quarrel. The revolution of 1848 was an unspeakable sorrow to him; when

he read in the paper that his beloved King, Friedrich Wilhelm, had driven

round Berlin with a cockade in his hat l he burst into passionate tears, left the

room, and could only return to his family after having spent several hours

alone ; and no one was allowed to mention the event to him again. His three

little children were a source of great joy to him. I was born in July, 1846, and

our little brother Joseph in February, 1848. Our father used to spend much of

his time with us, but more especially with his eldest son, Fritz, whom he

called his "little friend," and whom he allowed to be with him even when he

was busy, as he knew how to sit still and would thoughtfully watch his father

at work. Even when Fritz was only a year old he was so delighted by his

father's music that whenever he cried for no apparent reason our father was

begged to play the piano to him. Then the child would sit upright in his little

carriage, as still as a mouse, and would not take his eyes off the musician.

  At the end of August, 1848, a terrible misfortune overtook us. Our father

was  accompanying  a  friend  home  one  evening,  and  on  his  return  to  the

parsonage our little clog, which he did not see owing to his short-sightedness,

ran  between  his  legs  just  as  he  reached  the  door.  He  stumbled  and  fell

backwards down a flight of seven stone steps on to the paving stones of the

courtyard, and as a result of his fall was laid up with concussion of the brain.

At  first  it  was  taken  for  granted  that  after  a  week's  rest  in  bed  no  evil

consequences would remain j after a few weeks, however, he began to get ill.

In the meantime a fire had occurred in Eocken, in the extinguishing of which

he played such an extremely prominent part that his subsequent illness was

always falsely ascribed by his parishioners to the fact that he had injured his

health at that time by standing for a night and a day knee-deep in the water of

a pond in order to conduct the operations. The trouble began with a loss of

appetite and severe headaches, which he had never had in his life before.

Neither  his  sisters  nor  his  parents  had  ever  suffered  in  this  way,  for  the

delicate organ in the Nietzsche family was the stomach. When in spite of the

doctors and the homoeopathic treatment in which the Nietzsche family firmly

believed, the headaches continued to return, the famous physician ProfessorOppolzer, of Leipzig, was summoned. He realised at once that the trouble

was  cerebral  and  not  gastric,  as  the  family  maintained.  At  first  Professor

Oppolzer gave us good ground for hope, as neither the patient's intellect nor

his consciousness were affected, and the doctor believed that the injured spot

in the brain would heal, " and leave a cicatrice there,"

  as he told us. And as a matter of fact there were periods of improvement

that is to say, days on which my father suffered no pain, and was able to write

his sermons and take the confirmation classes. In the spring of 1849 he began

to give Fritz a few lessons, as the boy showed exceptional interest in books,

reading  and  writing.  In  June,  1849,  however,  my  father's  trouble  became

steadily worse, and, in his heart of hearts, he was convinced that his end was

at hand. He certainly did not fear death, but the thought of leaving behind

him  without  protection  the  young  wife  he  loved  so  dearly  and  her  three

children,  filled  him  with  anguish.  He  made  his  will,  appointed  a  certain

relative, named Dachsel, who was afterwards a Counsellor of Justice, the

guardian of his children, and begged his mother, our beloved grandmother

Nietzsche, in the most touching terms, to take his dear Franzchen and his

children  under  her  care.  His  last  words  were,  "  Mother,  remember

Franzchen." He died on the 30th July, 1849, eleven months after his terrible

fall, and was deeply mourned, not only by his family and his nearest friends,

but, above all, by his parishioners, who during his illness had not been able to

do  enough  to  show  the  love  and  reverence  they  felt  for  him.  One  of  the

favourite friends of his youth wrote to me in 1895 : " In Rocken, by his warm

sympathy and his inspiring sermons, he won the hearts of his parishioners,

and set them a shining example in his personal and family life. His early

death after a long period of suffering was the cause of profound and universal

grief. The sight of the whole parish in mourning on the occasion of his burial

still remains vividly imprinted on my memory."

  But the most reverent words that have ever been said in memory of our

dear father were uttered by his son Friedrich in Ecce Homo, nearly forty

years after his death : " I regard it as a great privilege to have had such a

father  ;  it  even  seems  to  me  that  this  is  all  I  can  claim  in  the  matter  of

privileges, life, the great yea to life, excepted. What I owe to him above all is

this, that I do not need any special intention but merely a little patience in

order involuntarily to enter a world of higher and more delicate things. There

I am at home, there alone does my inmost passion become free."

  We remained in the dear old parsonage eight months after our father'sdeath. Meanwhile another fatal calamity befell our poor mother. Her lovely

youngest child, our little brother Joseph, fell ill a few days after his second

birthday owing to his cutting several teeth all at once. He died suddenly, as

the doctor explained, from teething convulsions. A dream which my brother

Fritz had and which he relates in the little biography above mentioned, was

very remarkable : " On this occasion I dreamt I heard the sound of the church

organ playing a requiem. When I looked to see what the cause of it was, a

grave suddenly opened and my father in his shroud arose out of it. He hurried

into the church and in a moment or two reappeared with a small child in his

arms. The grave opened, he stepped into it and the gravestone fell once more

over the opening. The sound of the organ immediately ceased and I awoke. In

the morning I related the dream to my dear mother ; very shortly afterwards

little Joseph became unwell, fell into convulsions, and died in a few hours.

Our sorrow was indescribable. My dream had been completely fulfilled."

  Our little brother's tiny coffin was laid beside my father's in the family

vault. The death of this small brother so soon after the great misfortune that

had robbed us of our father, filled us with such overwhelming sorrow that the

parsonage,  once  so  happy,  seemed  to  be  enveloped  ever  more  deeply  in

sorrow and gloom.

    Towards the beginning of April we left Kocken ; the day of our departure

and our journey made an ineffaceable impression upon Fritz. He got up in the

night, dressed himself, and went into the courtyard where the heavily laden

carriage  stood  waiting  with  its  shining  red  lamps.  The  wind  set  up  a

sorrowful dirge, the faithful dog howled in heartrending and gruesome tones,

and  the  moon,  pallid  and  cold,  shot  her  rays  over  the  low  roofs  of  the

neighbouring buildings into the great courtyard with its ghostly lights and all

its mournful echoes. In Zarathustra these early impressions and the memory

of this melancholy night recur : " Thus did I speak and ever more softly, for I

was  afraid  of  mine  own  thoughts,  and  the  thoughts  behind  them.  Then

suddenly did I hear a dog howl near me.

  " Had I ever heard a dog howl thus ? My thoughts ran back. Yea ! When I

was a child, in my most distant childhood.

  " Then did I hear a dog howl thus. And I saw it also with hair bristling,

and head uplifted, trembling in the silent midnight when even dogs believe in

ghosts.

  " Thus did it excite my pity. For just then did the full moon sail silent as

death over the house, and stand, as it were, a glowing globe at rest on the flatroof, as if on someone's property "

  In the grey hours of the morning, our eyes full of burning tears, we left

our native home of Eocken, which remained all our lives "the dear abode of

our loved ones." For us the peaceful graveyard with the graves of our father

and our little brother was the " grave-island, the silent isle," whither we bore

our evergreen wreath of happy and sorrowful memories. Our family vault in

Eocken lies sheer against the ancient church, which is one of the oldest in the

province of Saxony. The wall, overgrown with roses and wild vine, forms the

end wall of the burial ground. A few paces away stands the old school-house

where little Fritz, when he was only five years old, used to be taught after his

father's death. On one occasion, when my brother and myself as man and

woman were in Eocken, the little village children, their wooden shoes ringing

on the hard road, happened to be going to afternoon school, and it was with

deep  emotion  that  my  brother  contemplated  the  small  fair  heads,  for  he

himself  had  once  sat  among  them.  True,  they  were  now  the  children  of

another generation, who were hurrying so eagerly to school, but they were to

sit on the same uncomfortable old benches which had been in existence in my

brother's earliest childhood.

  My brother touchingly expresses his feelings about the repeated visits he

made to the old home as follows : " The sight of the surroundings of our

childhood deeply stirs us ; the summer house, the church with the graves, the

pond  and  the  wood  these  things  we  can  never  see  save  with  the  eyes  of

sufferers. Pity for ourselves overcomes us ; for, since then, what have we not

endured ? And here, everything still stands so calm and unchanged."

                    CHAPTER III TOWN AND SCHOOL LIFE

  IN the spring of 1850 we went to Naumburg, which was to be our new

home. Our grandmother Nietzsche, in her youth, had paid a long visit to her

favourite  brother,  Dr.  Krause  (afterwards  General  Superintendent)  in

Kaumburg, when he was a preacher at the Cathedral there. In those days she

had made friendships which had survived in spite of the long interval of

separation. It was for this reason that our grandmother chose Naumburg as

her home, and our mother, who was very fond of her, readily followed ; for

she said, in the words of Ruth to Naomi, " Whither thou goest I will go." Old

Frau  Lepsius,  a  friend  of  my  grandmother  Nietzsche's  youth,  used  often

afterwards to give me a most moving description of the affecting impression

we made upon everyone at that time. Our grandmother, our two aunts, our

dear mother, then a beautiful young widow of twenty-four, my brother and Iwere all in the deepest mourning and looked out upon the world with eyes so

unusually large and melancholy, that everyone felt a splendid man must have

departed from us for him to be so deeply and so genuinely mourned by his

family.  Some  time  elapsed  before  our  mother,  my  brother  and  I  grew

accustomed to the restricted town life. In those days Naumburg on the Saale

was not 'j the pleasant city encircled by streets of villas that it is now ; it was

surrounded by fortifications, and from ten o'clock at night to five o'clock in

the morning five heavy gates closed it in on all sides from the outer world. It

was  only  by  dint  of  loud  ringing,  and  the  gift  of  a  small  dole,  that  the

gatekeeper could be induced, often after a prolonged wait, to allow those

standing outside to enter, so that anyone who spent his evenings outside the

city in the vineyards on the hills, or in the country houses, would hasten his

footsteps when he heard the little bell ring from the tower of the Town Hall

giving warning a few minutes beforehand of the closing of the gates. All

round the town there was a deep moat, bounded on the other side by a fine

avenue of elms, which in its turn was surrounded by gardens, fields, and vine

clad hills.

    Naumburg  of  those  days  remains  in  my  memory  as  a  thoroughly

Christian, Conservative city, loyal to the King and a pillar of the Throne and

of the Church ; at least this is strictly true of those circles with which, thanks

to our grandmother's useful friendships, we came into touch. Just listen to the

enthusiastic  account  my  brother  gives  of  the  presence  of  King  Friedrich

Wilhelm IV. within the city walls : " Our dear King honoured Naumburg

(1854) with a visit. Great preparations were made for the occasion. All the

school children were decked with black-and-white favours and stood in the

market place from eleven o'clock in the morning awaiting the arrival of the

Father of his People. Gradually the sky became overcast, rain poured down

upon us all the King would not come ! Twelve o'clock; struck the King did

not come. Many of the children began to feel hungry. A fresh downpour

occurred,  all  the  streets  were  covered  with  mud  ;  one  o'clock  struck  the

impatience grew intense. Suddenly, about two o'clock, the bells began to ring

and the sky smiled through its tears upon the joyously swaying crowd. Then

we heard the rattle of the carriage; a boisterous cheer burst through the city ;

we waved our caps in exultation and roared at the tops of our voices. A fresh

breeze set flying the myriad flags which hung from the roofs, all the bells of

the town rang out, and the vast crowd shouted, raved, and literally pushed the

carriage in the direction of the cathedral. In the recesses of the sacred edificea bevy of little girls in white dresses with garlands of flowers on their heads

were arranged in the form of a pyramid. Here the King alighted and casting a

glance at the little girls declared that " he felt like Prokop." He praised the

preparations,  and  then  betook  himself  to  the  apartments  that  had  been

prepared  for  him  at  the  Deanery.  In  the  evening  the  whole  city  was

illuminated,  and  immense  crowds  thronged  the  streets.  The  pyramids  of

wreaths on the Town Hall and the Cathedral, were lighted from top to bottom

with tiny lamps; thousands of fairy lights decorated the houses, and in the

square before the Cathedral there was a display of fireworks which from time

to time lit up the dark pile with a lurid light."

  If my brother seems to speak of this royal visit with unusual enthusiasm it

must not be forgotten that he considered he had a special right to do so. As

already pointed out, King Friedrich Wilhelm IV. had been particularly kind to

our father, and Fritz had received that monarch's Christian names, chiefly

because  he  had  been  born  on  his  birthday.  This  was  always  a  source  of

pleasure to my brother ; for, on account of it, his birthday, during the whole

of his childhood, was a school holiday and was always set apart as a special

festival in our house in honour of our King and our beloved Fritz.

  The circle in which we moved in Naumburg was not ecclesiastical but

associated rather with the Justices of the High Court, who at that time reigned

over the social life of the city. The friends of our grandmother's youth were

connected  either  directly  or  indirectly  with  this  circle,  and  a  certain  Frau

Finder  was  one  of  the  leading  spirits  among  them.  She  was  a  highly

intelligent and lovable woman, who was closely attached to my grandmother,

and  they  were,  therefore,  very  anxious  that  their  respective  grandchildren

should be friends, a wish which was realised ever more and more fully as

time went on. Frau Finder had two grandchildren of the same age as our Fritz

Wilhelm  Pinder  and  Gustav  Krug.  The  deep  impression  their  new  friend

made upon them is described by the eldest of these two young people in the

biography which he wrote at the same time as my brother composed his, in

his fourteenth year: " Here I must first refer to one of the most important

events of my life. I chanced one day in my grandmother's garden to make the

acquaintance of a boy who thenceforth became the best and the most faithful

friend of my life, and will certainly remain so. This boy, whose name is

Friedrich  Nietzsche,  has  since  had  an  exceedingly  good  influence  on  my

whole life and upon every one of my occupations and opinions."

  Very shortly after our arrival at Naumburg, Fritz was sent to school there.Our grandmother had very peculiar convictions on this matter, which to my

surprise  only  seem  to  be  becoming  general  at  the  present  day,  and  are

regarded as quite modern. Her idea was that up to the age of eight or ten all

children, even of very different social positions, should be taught together ;

the children who came from the higher classes would thus acquire a better

understanding  of  the  attitude  of  mind  peculiar  to  the  lower  orders.  In

accordance  with  this  theory  with  which  oui'  guardian,  the  Counsellor  of

Justice Dachsel also agreed, my brother, when he was not quite six years of

age, was sent to the local Municipal Boys' School.

  But theories when carried into practice do not always yield the desired

result, more particularly when applied to original natures. Even in these early

days Fritz was very different from the average boy of his own age, with the

consequence  that  in  the  Municipal  School,  where  the  tone,  though  quite

tolerable,  was  somewhat  coarser  and  rowdier  than  elsewhere,  he  found

himself quite isolated. The serious, thoughtful child, with the dignified and

courtly manners, was such an unfamiliar figure to the other boys, that neither

side made any overtures of friendship, and the nearest approach that occurred

took the shape of an interchange of chaff. Be this as it may, even if the pupils

of the Municipal School did tease him a little, it was always in a very friendly

spirit, entirely free from malice. For they would take home amazing stories of

young Nietzsche; describing how "he could recite Bible texts and hymns with

such feeling that he almost made one cry." They always called him " the little

Minister," and there certainly was a dash of the parson in his manner of

expressing himself throughout the whole of his childhood, as is proved by the

biography which he wrote at that time.

  A little incident which occurred at this period and which was a standing

joke  among  us  for  long  afterwards  ought  to  be  mentioned  here.  The

Municipal School for Boys was situated at that time in the Topfmarkt, not

very far from our house. One day, just as school was over, there was a heavy

downpour of rain, and we looked out along the Priestergasse for our Fritz. All

the  boys  were  running  like  mad  to  their  homes  at  last  little  Fritz  also

appeared, walking slowly along, with his cap covering his slate and his little

handkerchief spread over the whole. Mamma waved and called out to him

when he was some way off : " Bun, child, run ! " The sheets of rain prevented

us  from  catching  his  reply.  When  our  mother  remonstrated  with  him  for

coming home soaked to the skin, he replied seriously : " But, Mamma, in the

rules of the school it is written : on leaving school, boys are forbidden tojump and run about in the street, but must walk quietly and decorously to

their  homes."  Fritz  had  obeyed  this  rule  under  the  most  adverse

circumstances.

  My brother stayed barely a year at the Municipal School, and was then

sent  to  a  private  educational  establishment  kept  by  a  young  schoolmaster

called Weber, whose institution was preparatory for the Cathedral Grammar

School. Fritz remained there with his two young friends Wilhelm Finder and

Gustav  Krug  till  the  year  1854,  when  he  entered  the  above-mentioned

Grammar  School  and  was  placed  in  the  Second  Form,  a  fact  which  he

describes with great pomp and circumstance in his childish biography.

  "  I  became  a  Grammar  School  Boy  !  !  We  were  taken  before  the

Headmaster,  Fortsch,  a  kind  and  good  man,  and  had  to  undergo  a  short

examination, after which we were placed in the Second Form. 0! how my

heart sank within me when I crossed the threshold of the school door for the

first time, for we had pictured everything to ourselves very much worse than

it actually was ; the pleasant surprise, however, had a good effect. Our form

master's one ambition seemed to be to add to our knowledge, and he was

certainly an exceedingly well-read man. He did not, however, possess the gift

of making things clear to his pupils ; though I ought to add that as soon as I

became a pupil in the Second Form, I developed the usual pride a boy in that

position always feels."

  I  remember  perfectly  well  the  high  opinion  my  brother  now  had  of

himself, for from that time forward he always laid stress upon his being much

older than I was and used to call me " a little girl," although there was only

two years' difference between us. I ought to point out that Fritz was a big and

strong child, while I was small and delicate a 'fact which would account for

his always having been taken for much the elder. From the time he became a

Second Form boy he would no longer allow the servant to fetch him from

friends' houses at night. If we were both invited, and our good Minna in the

natural course of events came to fetch me, Fritz would leave us womenfolk

and always walk five paces ahead, and pretend not to belong to us. On the

other hand he was always very kind to me when, during the summer, the days

being longer, I was allowed to go home alone under his protection, as it was

still light. He guarded me from every accident and all such "monsters" as

horses and dogs, of which I was very frightened in those days.

  When we were a little older, he, my mother and myself, and sometimes a

few friends, used to take long excursions into the beautiful country roundNaumburg, of which he was always particularly fond, especially during the

golden months of autumn. In after life, it is true, he did not speak very kindly

of Naumburg, as its narrowness and provinciality oppressed him. But as long

as he lived he never forgot one feature of the good old town, which had from

the first made a favourable impression upon him, and this was the deep tone

of  the  old  bells  in  the  parish  church,  which  had  been  consecrated  to  St.

Wenceslaus,  in  the  days  when  Naumburg  was  a  Catholic  city.  Long

afterwards he declared that he had never heard such beautiful bells anywhere

else. The ringing of the midnight bell in Zarathustra, the bell " which has seen

more than any man, which counted the painful heartbeats of our fathers," and

speaks  with  its  ceaseless  clang  of  the  happiness  of  the  old  days,  always

sounded  in  his  ears  with  the  deep  rumbling  boom  of  the  dear  old  parish

church bells of Naumburg.

                      CHAPTER IV HOME AND EDUCATION

  OUR  family  party  consisted  of  our  grandmother  Nietzsche,  her  two

daughters, Aunt Augusta and Aunt Rosalie, our mother and us two children.

At the head stood our beloved grandmother, Frau Erdmuthe Nietzsche, who

was really an ideal woman, or, as we children thought, an ideal grandmother.

She had a beautiful pale face out of which shone forth lovely dark eyes, full

of intelligence and kindliness. In the fashion of the day a little cap, trimmed

with thick frills of lace, fitted tightly round her face and only two solitary

locks of silky coal-black hair were allowed to slip out over her temples from

beneath the lace. Grandma, as we called her, did not have a single white hair

till the day of her death. Her sweet, kindly and dignified spirit, her tender and

profound sympathy for the pain and suffering of others, made her the object

of everyone's love and reverence. As she scarcely ever went out, she used to

have an extraordinary number of visitors to the house, whom she was always

glad to see.

  Our grandmother's greatest joy was to please others. She could never give

enough,  and  I  know  that  she  often  had  to  be  forcibly  restrained  from

delighting us with a share of the beautiful choice fruits which used to be sent

for her special consumption. Nevertheless, she frequently gave us some on

the sly. On these occasions, however, Fritz could never be induced to accept

the delicacies : "No, dear Grandma," he would say firmly, " we must not take

these things away from you." It was sometimes possible, however, to effect a

compromise : the fruit was divided and we all enjoyed it very much.

  Aunt  Augusta  was  the  image  of  our  grandmother  in  character  and  inkindness of heart. For years she suffered from exceedingly painful gastric

troubles, which she bore, however, with great sweetness and patience ; and in

spite of her affliction, she did not cease from conducting the affairs of the

household in a truly admirable manner. " Leave me this one solace," she

would say, when she was entreated to spare herself.

  Aunt Rosalie, on the other hand, devoted herself to " the affairs of the

spirit " as we used to call them in fun ; that is to say, she was most assiduous

in helping Christian benevolent institutions, and showed an active and lively

interest in everything connected with the Church. She was well versed in

Christian  dogma,  but  interested  herself  in  science  and  politics  into  the

bargain. She read a good deal and regularly perused the papers, a custom

which was not common among women in those days.

  My brother and I were the objects of the general interest of the household,

especially as regards our education, between the years 1850 and 1856. We

were, however, principally left to the care of our dear mother, who brought us

up  with  the  same  Spartan  severity  and  simplicity  which  was  not  only

customary at that time, but which had always obtained in the bosom of her

family.  In  the  background  of  it  all,  however,  stood  the  figure  of  our

grandfather Oehler, who, despite his good nature, was a very astute observer

of men and things, and also, as I realised later in life, an exceedingly sceptical

critic of la comedie humaine, more particularly when it assumed pathetic airs.

Every kind of cant " Getue," as he called it was odious to him. He saw things

as they really were, although his mind was tinged with a certain benevolence

a  quality  which  was  afterwards  displayed  by  our  mother.  My  brother,

therefore, might be said to have inherited his poetical vein from his father,

and his sense of reality and a certain scepticism regarding human affairs from

his maternal ancestors. He felt this himself, and if he did not express it in

words it was merely lest our dear mother should misunderstand him.

  Our grandfather Oehler was the first to recognise the extraordinary gifts

of  his  eldest  grandchild.  A  certain  conversation  which  was  obviously  not

meant  for  my  ears  has  remained  indelibly  stamped  on  my  memory.  Our

mother was complaining to her father that her Fritz was so very different

from other boys and had such difficulty in making friends. Otherwise, she

said, he was good and obedient ; but in everything he had his own opinions,

which did not always coincide with those of other people. Both of my elders

had forgotten that I was in a far corner of the room playing with my dolls,

and my grandfather replied somewhat hotly as follows: " My dear child, youdon't  know  what  you  possess  in  this  boy  of  yours  !  He  is  the  most

extraordinary and the most talented child that I have ever seen in my life. All

my six sons together have not the gifts of your Fritz. Leave him to his own

devices!" In accordance with her father's counsel our mother let the child

develop in his own way. At all events, my brother certainly acknowledged in

later years that nobody ever tried to coerce him by a peremptory "Thou shalt,''

and that a healthy development from within was accordingly made possible

for him.

  If, however, no " Thou shalt " ever influenced my brother, the nature of

the  environment  in  which  he  lived  must  have  done  so.  The  comfort,  the

kindly consideration which was shown to everybody, the love of inward and

outward cleanliness and order, the respect for old age all these qualities were

so much in evidence in our household that even those that were not innate in

my  brother  himself,  must  have  exercised  a  profound  influence  over  the

formation  of  his  character  and  tastes.  In  addition  to  this,  there  was  the

environment  provided  by  his  friends  Wilhelm  Pinder  and  Gustav  Krug,

whose  fathers  were  both  distinguished  men,  possessed  of  intellectual  and

artistic  aspirations,  which,  as  my  brother  himself  describes,  made  a  great

impression upon him. I refer here more particularly to Herr Finder, the judge,

under whose paternal eye his young son Wilhelm and Fritz used to do their

homework, and who would often enter in an affectionate and sympathetic

way into their wishes and aims. My brother writes of this man with much

reverence as follows : " He is very intellectual and does more through his

active love than many a parson. He is, moreover, always busy devising some

improvement  for  Naumburg  and  is  accordingly  recognised  and  respected

everywhere.  In  his  own  home  he  was  ever  a  faithful  father,  while  he

performed the duties of his official post in an exemplary and conscientious

way. In his leisure moments he always endeavoured to introduce his family

and himself to the creations of the most brilliant intellects in literature and art,

and the profound comments which his extraordinary insight suggested were

the means of drawing many a beauty from their works into a truer light."

  I well remember how Herr Finder in order to accustom the youthful ears

of  his  children  as  early  as  possible  to  the  melodious  sounds  of  the  best

language, would read selections from Goethe to his family even when the

boys and girls were still very young. And Fritz was often allowed to form one

of the audience. I have a vivid recollection of the Lowennovelle, which was a

particular  delight  to  us  children.  Thirty  years  later  my  brother  gratefullyacknowledged the fact that it was the father of his friend Wilhelm who had

first introduced him to Goethe. It is true that our grandmother Nietzsche was

a great admirer of Goethe, for she had spent her youth in Weimar ; yet in her

opinion his works were not fit for little boys.

    Although he himself was not aware of it, Herr Krug, the Privy Councillor,

the father of the other friend, also exercised a considerable influence over my

brother, more particularly in the domain of music. Fritz describes him in his

early biography as follows : " He is a great connoisseur of music, and a

virtuoso, and has even composed some excellent pieces, among others a few

sonatas and quartets which have won prizes. His tall imposing figure, his

serious  intellectual  features  and  his  conspicuous  ability  all  these  qualities

made  a  profound  impression  upon  me.  He  had  a  wonderful  grand-piano,

which had so great an attraction for me, that I would often stand still outside

his house to catch the stately melodies of some work by Beethoven. He was a

great friend of Mendelssohn-Bartholdy, and also of the brothers Muller, the

famous violinists, whom I once had the good fortune to hear. An exceedingly

select circle of music lovers used often to assemble at his house, and almost

every great musician who wished to appear before the Naumburg public tried

to be introduced by him."

  At all events my brother had the chance of hearing good music at his

house when he was very young, and thus from early youth his taste was

above the average.

  The environment in which we lived must have had a strong influence

over my brother, more particularly owing to the profoundly religious spirit

which pervaded it. Although my grandmother Nietzsche had grown up at a

period  of  dry  rationalism  full  of  simple  ideas  about  God,  virtue  and

immortality, and consequently felt ill at ease during the orthodox revival of

the fifties, when people were beginning to be " born again " and to denounce

themselves  in  public  as  desperate  sinners,  her  whole  life  and  spirit  was

permeated by a delicate and touching piety. She entirely agreed with our

grandfather  Oehler,  that  everyone  should  decide  his  own  attitude  towards

God, and that every interference with such delicate questions, as well as the

advocacy of any particular dogma, should be ruthlessly discountenanced. It

was for this reason that throughout our childhood Christianity and religion

never seemed to us to contain any element of constraint, but we had examples

of both constantly before us in the most sublime manifestations of natural

submission. And thus many years afterwards my brother was able to write :"At twelve years of age I saw God in His glory." And later still, some weeks

before his final breakdown, he wrote : " If I wage war against Christianity, I

feel justified in doing so, because in that quarter I have met with no fatal

experiences  or  difficulties  the  most  earnest  Christians  have  always  been

kindly disposed to me."

  As may be gathered from his own notes and the opinions of his friends,

my  brother  was  a  very  pious  child  ;  he  pondered  deeply  over  religious

questions and always endeavoured to convert his thoughts into deeds. Once

when we went to a missionary meeting, and the foreign missionary made a

special appeal to the children present, my brother and I at once wondered

what we could do. Naturally our first thought was to read as much as possible

about missionary work and get plenty of information on the subject, after

which  he  thought  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to  send  the  heathen  children

something for Christmas. A Sister belonging to the Community at Herrnhut

was ready to receive presents for the heathen, whether children or grown-ups,

and we accordingly chose out something suitable from among our toys. Fritz

thought a picture book and a box of soldiers would do, and I a doll, and the

first pair of stockings I had knitted myself (they were as stiff as cardboard, as

such  first  attempts  always  are).  The  Sister  lived  close  by  and  we  were

allowed to call upon her by ourselves. When we had presented her with our

parcel, I suddenly felt desire to see and kiss my doll once more before it went

to the black little heathens. This desire led Sister Jenny to suppose that we

had  brought  our  most  treasured  toys,  and,  moved  by  the  thought,  she

proceeded  to  make  us  a  touching  little  speech,  saying  how  gratified  and

pleased the Lord would be, that with a cheerful heart we had voluntarily

sacrificed the things we most prized and loved ; this was often difficult, but it

was precisely the sacrifice which cost a great effort that was most pleasing to

the Lord. He did not want half measures, etc.

  We both blushed, for, young as we were, we were well versed in our

religion, and all the accounts of sacrifices in the Old and New Testaments,

that  of  Isaac  and  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  were  familiar  to  us,  and  the

thought of them lay heavy on our hearts. Alas, we had not by any means

sacrificed our most treasured toys ! Full of the profoundest shame, we went

our way and in one of the dark corners of the staircase Fritz said to me in

dismay : " Lizzie, I wish I had given my box of cavalry." These were his

finest and favourite soldiers. But I had still enough of the serpent and of Eve

in me to answer with some hesitation : " Ought God really to demand thevery best of our toys from us, Fritz ? " (The idea of sending my best loved

dolls  to  black  and  probably  exceedingly  savage  cannibals  seemed  utterly

impossible to me.) But Fritz whispered in reply : " Yes, indeed, Lizzie."

  We clasped each other's hands tightly, drew closer together and walked

along the street, both of us in the bottom of our hearts expecting the lightning

to come from heaven to punish us sinners, and smite us down for the half

measures of which we had been guilty.

  The  relations  which  existed  between  our  grandfather  Oehler  and  his

grandson  Fritz  were  exceedingly  friendly,  and  it  is  possible  that  our

grandfather had not nearly as much in common with any one of his own sons

as with his eldest grandchild. I remember in particular some lovely walks we

had in the summer of 1858, when he had the most interesting conversations

with the boy. I was allowed to accompany them on these occasions. But as I

had a little lamb which was passionately devoted to me and would not stir

from  my  side,  it  was  obliged  to  come  also  and  the  two  of  us  followed

modestly behind. From time to time our grandfather would turn round and

smile at the little escort, and Fritz showed kind attentions not only to me but

also to the fourth member of the party. When a stretch of grass seemed to

offer a good mouthful of food Fritz would say : " Grandpa, may not Lizzie's

lamb graze a little here ? " Then all three of us would halt, for the lamb would

only feed when it was quite sure I was standing by. The country about Pobles

is very flat, and when the corn was young one could see across vast distances

to  the  horizon.  From  that  time  onwards  one  of  my  brother's  favourite

pastimes was to wander over the meadows between the cornfields.

  We were always delighted to pay a visit to our grandparents at Pobles.

The parsonage stood on a hill at some distance from the village and was

surrounded by large gardens and orchards in which grew the finest of fruit. It

seems to me as I look back upon it now that every kind of berry, cherry,

plum, apple, pear and medlar in short everything that children love must have

grown there in abundance.

  It was bliss to us to spend the Easter and Whitsuntide holidays there ; all

the meadows were full of flowers, the garden full of strawberries, the air

laden with the fragrance of spring a rare combination of the scent of freshly

tilled soil with that of honeysuckle, elder and lime-blossom. Flocks of sheep

followed by the sweetest of lambs browsed over stretches of meadow land.

The  shepherds  blew  real  shawms  made  of  soft  bark,  and  all  the  village

children  piped  on  little  flutes  cut  out  of  elder  wood.  The  bleating  of  thelambs, the sound of the shawms, the piping and laughter of the children, all

these things blended in one harmonious voice the joyous cry of the spring !

Then the summer holidays would come round, and profound silence would

lie like a cowl over the whole village for everybody and everything that could

work was busy in the harvest field. We two spent most of our time either in

the gardens or woods, and only passed rainy days indoors.

  To lie in the shade of a tree listening to the warbling of the birds and the

chirping of the grasshoppers, with a beautiful book to read, and by our side a

basket of fruit this was our dream of summer bliss, and we enjoyed it in all its

changing aspects when we stayed with our beloved grandparents.

  We also made many other journeys and holiday visits. We stayed some

time, for instance, in the Voigtland with our good old aunts, and also in a

parsonage on the Bohemian frontier. In later years Fritz always recalled an

incident that had happened there in his childhood. The hill upon which the

church stood had once been the site of an old sacrificial altar. We found some

stones and bones, built an altar, laid the bones and some wood upon it, and

set the whole alight. When the peculiar smell attracted the worthy parson to

the scene, he found us solemnly parading round the altar, bearing burning

torches of pinewood and muttering a sort of mysterious hymn : " ! Odin hear

us ! " in the most sepulchral tones. He was not altogether pleased, and put a

stop to the impromptu sacrificial ceremony. We also spent a summer with

relations on a large country estate, where Fritz learnt to ride and drive ; and

on another occasion we went to the country house of some Leipzig relatives

who spent the summer in the neighbourhood of that city. From here Fritz

made  several  expeditions  to  the  bookshops  of  the  city  of  Leipzig,  which

interested  him  immensely.  Thus  every  summer  provided  us  with  new

experiences and new joys.

  But we were happiest with our dear grandparents in Pobles, where it was

so delightful, for instance, to be able to wear old clothes which did not matter

and which we could make as dirty as we liked. We revelled in freedom and

independence  and  even  ran  a  little  wild,  although  this  was  not  really

characteristic of us, for we Nietzsches were bred to good manners and liked

them.

  Our grandmother Oehler at the head of her household was a model of

forethought, dignity and economy. As I have already said, she was one of

those women who, having sprung from a family that had spent two hundred

years upon their own land, had the country in her bones. She used curiousprimitive  German  expressions,  and  there  was  much  in  her  speech  which

recurs again in Zarathustra. How often have I not heard her say : " One thing

is more needful than another ! " In the presence of her own children she was

rather reserved, but she showed the greatest tenderness to us grandchildren

and tried in an unostentatious way to fulfil our every wish, and would even

conjure  our  beloved  mother  to  do  the  same.  Whereupon  the  latter  once

replied rather shortly : " Did you act like that with your eleven children ? " to

which our grandmother answered just as tartly : " Ah, but you were not half

so well-behaved ! " Our dear mother in later years was often highly amused

at  the  thought  of  the  lenience  our  grandparents  had  shown  to  their

grandchildren after having brought up their own offspring with such severity.

Truth  compels  me  to  admit  that  we  were  extraordinarily  good  children,

perfect little models. As our grandfather once said to our mother in terms of

the highest praise, we not only obeyed a word but even a look. I should be

glad if I were able to describe any mad pranks or misbehaviour of any sort.

But I can remember nothing. In fact, once when we were at Pobles, a brother

of  my  mother's  wanted  us  to  break  a  window  or  do  something  equally

naughty so that we might get a thorough good scolding for once. For we were

too good for him. However this may have been, nobody could have called us

little machines quite the contrary ! From morning to night our minds were

full of our own queer plans and ideas ; but in carrying them out we always

chose  ways  and  means  of  which  our  mother  and  relatives  could  not

disapprove. Our lively imaginations transfigured all that crossed our path,

even the quaint old songs and verses which must have been in vogue about

the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  when  grandmamma  Nietzsche  was  still

young and which were found good enough for us sixty years later. But an

even greater joy to us were the tales grandmamma would tell us of her own

life. We loved best to hear about Napoleon, for whom she, as a daughter of

Saxony, always retained a certain affection. So vivid were her descriptions of

him that we always thought she must have been present at the scenes she

depicted, such as Napoleon's meeting with the Duchess Louise of Weimar, or

of his being roused from his sleep by the camp fire, tired out after his defeat

at  Leipzig,  by  the  peals  of  bells  which  announced  the  triumph  of  his

adversaries. In one of my brother's poems, " Fifty Years Ago," we can find

again in a transfigured form these tales which our grandmother Nietzsche

used to tell us. All unwittingly our admiration for Napoleon's greatness was

instilled  into  us  from  our  earliest  childhood,  a  fact  which  fills  me  withsurprise to this day, for at that time the children in school were always taught

to regard him as the Beast of the Apocalypse. Our mother also had a share in

making the figure of Napoleon, even when he was a captive, sympathetic to

us.  She  knew  an  extraordinarily  pathetic  play  called  "  Napoleon  in  St.

Helena," which she had once acted with her brothers and sisters at Pobles,

and which she could repeat almost entirely by heart, particularly one moving

scene in which she had taken part and which opens with a long soliloquy by

Napoleon. I can still remember one passage from it : " All the thrones of

Europe tottered, had I cast them down mine own throne would be standing to

this day." Here a little daughter of one of Napoleon's marshals came in and

said : " Oh, mighty Emperor ! Give me a lamb to play with, I pray thee," and

Napoleon turning gloomily towards his scanty retinue replied : "I cannot even

grant  the  wish  of  a  child."  Our  dear  mother  knew  numberless  interesting

poems by heart, and she would often delight us in the twilight hours by her

recitations. But as she did not know who the authors of these poems were, it

was  impossible  for  me  to  trace  them  afterwards,  with  the  exception  of

Gellert's Fables.

  Thus the poetical instruction we received from our family when we were

children was of a somewhat old-fashioned kind, and in music we were not

much better off. We danced, for instance, with enthusiasm to slow waltzes or

gavottes, which must certainly have been in use as lullabies as early as the

Great Revolution. We delighted in singing a comic duet which may very well

have pleased the hearts of German provincials in the year 17 90. In this a

sage old Hodge and a foolish little Phoebe have a harmless discussion about a

broken  pitcher.  The  comical  point  of  the  whole  thing  was  that  when  the

questions and answers had been satisfactorily concluded, the final reply of all

was so worded as to start the whole controversy afresh, whereupon our old

friends, who were grand mamma's contemporaries, and for whose benefit we

used to perform this duet, always displayed a certain mild amusement. As

soon, however, as Fritz became a Second Form boy he declared that such

performances  were  beneath  his  dignity,  and  announced  his  intention  of

composing something himself, which he accordingly did.

  At Christmas he presented grandmamma with a little motet, which he

himself had composed. We two had rehearsed it secretly in the nursery, and

performed it as a surprise for our elders on Christmas Eve. The text on which

this composition was based, was the Bible verse: "Lift up your heads, ye

gates of the earth; and the King of Glory shall come in." The words, musicand execution of this work moved the whole family to tears.

  Strange to say, not one member of the Nietzsche family seemed in any

way surprised that our ten-year-old Fritz should be able to compose motets

and write verses and plays. Of course everyone knew that our grandfather in

his earliest youth had indulged in writing poetry and music. So it seemed

quite natural for Fritz to take after his father, and grandpapa Oehler was much

too shrewd a teacher of the young to make Fritz suspect that his unusual gifts

were  anything  remarkable.  Fritz  accordingly  remained  very  modest.

Moreover,  he  did  not  find  his  school  work  as  easy  as  might  have  been

expected,  and  Greek  especially  gave  him  a  great  deal  of  trouble  at  first,

although it was a source of great joy to him afterwards.

  The  only  female  relative  who,  from  her  earliest  days,  saw  something

unique about Fritz, and who gave expression to her convictions, was myself,

his little sister. Everything he asserted was right, whatever the grown-ups

might say to the contrary. On one occasion only, when I was barely seven

years old and received all my information from a governess, did I fail to

accept his opinion. " Lizzie," Fritz said to me one day, in a very superior tone

of voice, " don't talk such rubbish about the stork. Man is a mammal, and

brings his young into the world alive." " Fritz," I exclaimed in surprise, " did

you find that in the old ' Natural History ' ? Herr Bettner says that it is a very

old-fashioned book, and that many discoveries have been made since it was

written." As a matter of fact, Fritz's piece of wisdom had been gleaned from

this old-fashioned " Natural History," and as he had a great respect for the

utterances of his teacher the problem remained unsolved, and there was yet

hope that new discoveries might be made which would turn in favour of the

stork theory.

  It is to this old " Natural History," by-the-bye, that I am indebted for the

nickname " Llama," by which my brother used good-naturedly to call me all

his life. The old book gave the following account of this creature : " The

llama is a remarkable animal ; it willingly carries the heaviest burdens, but if

coerced or treated badly, it refuses to take any nourishment and lies down in

the dust to die." My brother thought that the description fitted me so exactly

that, especially in moments of difficulty when he required my help, he always

called me by this name. No one else ever used it.

  From the days of my earliest childhood I always regarded my brother as

the highest possible authority, and when, later on, his friends declared that,

like  the  famous  pupil  of  Heraclitus,  I  looked  upon  every  discussion  asconcluded and decided by the words (translated by me into " Fritz says so "),

they were perfectly right. But the reverence and admiration which I showed

for Fritz, and which throughout my childhood and youth brought me a lot of

teasing and chaffing for at heart I am not a believer in authority certainly had

one excellent practical result in the shape of the Nietzsche archives. This

extraordinarily rich collection was made by myself alone. From a very early

age I always kept a treasure drawer, where I preserved everything from my

brother's pen that I could lay hands on when it had been discarded by him ;

and if from the very first he had not been so fond of burning things and had

not occasionally taken away the treasures from my hoard on the sly, not one

of  his  compositions  from  the  time  he  was  eight  onwards  would  now  be

missing. For when I was only six, though I attached but slight importance to

my  own  things,  I  had  already  started  this  collection  of  my  brother's

productions. His friends, too, had the greatest admiration for his poetical and

musical compositions, a matter of some weight with him, for all through his

life friendship played an extraordinarily important part. He always saw his

friends in the best light, as passages in his childish biography dealing with his

companions are still with us to show. He used the most loving and laudatory

terms  about  them  ;  and  it  must  be  confessed  that  they  returned  the

compliment. I must quote the description which his friend Wilhelm gave of

him in the biography which, following my brother's example, he, too, wrote

as a child of fourteen. He gives a striking picture of Fritz in those days : "

Fritz Nietzsche had had many sad experiences in his life ; he had lost his

father very early, the father whom he loved, and of whom he always spoke

with the greatest reverence. He also lost his little brother Joseph, who died as

a tiny child shortly after his father's death. Consequently the fundamental trait

of  his  character  was  a  certain  melancholy,  which  manifested  itself  in  his

whole being. From his earliest childhood he loved solitude in which he could

give himself up to his own thoughts. To a certain extent he avoided company,

and would search out the spots where Nature displayed her sublimest beauty.

He had an exceedingly pious and deep soul, and even as a child thought of

many  things  about  which  other  boys  of  his  age  did  not  bother.  It  thus

happened that his mind developed early. As a little boy he used to amuse

himself with all kinds of toys which he had made himself, and all of which

bore witness to an extraordinarily inventive and self-reliant mind. He was

leader in our games, introduced new methods into them, and thus made them

attractive and full of novelty. He was, in fact, in every respect a highly giftedboy. In addition to this, he was capable of a persevering industry which was

very creditable to him and by which he once more served as an example to

me.  Many  of  my  tastes  were  initiated  and  encouraged  by  him,  more

particularly in the case of music and literature.

  " He always exercised the greatest influence over me and even became

indispensable to me. From his earliest youth he began preparing himself for

the calling which he then wished to adopt that of the Church. He always had

a very serious though kindly disposition, and has remained to this day an

exceedingly dear and loving friend to me, a fact for which I shall always

remember him and which I cannot rate too highly. He never acted without

reflection, and all his actions were founded on a definite and sound reason.

This was particularly noticeable in those tasks which we did together, and if

ever  he  wrote  anything  with  which  I  did  not  immediately  agree  he  was

always ready to give a lucid and concise explanation of his meaning. His

principal virtues were modesty and gratitude, which he displayed in the most

unmistakable manner on every occasion. As a result of this modesty he was

rather shy, especially among strangers, with whom he never felt at his ease a

quality which I, too, have in common with him."

  I ought to add to this description of my brother that his friend Wilhelm

was  also  exceptionally  modest  and  speaks  of  himself  in  a  perfectly

unassuming manner. But what is clearly to be gathered from his description is

the  influence  which  my  brother  exercised  over  him.  This  is  not  the  only

evidence of it, for a school friend of the time, who is now Professor Pitzker of

Nordhausen, tells us in his Memoirs, that the exalted opinion my brother's

school friends had of him amounted almost to worship, " for his gifts were

self-evident, his manner affectionate, and there was something peculiar in his

voice and tone, as also in his choice of language, which distinguished him

from the other boys of his own age."

  It would seem that my brother at this time was not only being educated

but was also an educator himself. I can well remember a story told me by a

cynical law student, who, when my brother was in the Second or Third Form,

was  already  in  the  Sixth  at  the  Naumburg  Grammar  School,  and  who  in

virtue of his position had to superintend the "preparation " of the smaller

boys. He declared that in those days he had often noticed my brother's large

wistful  eyes,  and  wondered  what  influence  he  exercised  over  his

schoolfellows. They never dared to utter any coarse word or indecent remark

in his presence. Once one of the small boys clapped his hand to his mouthand cried : " No, I cannot say that before Nietzsche ! " " What is it he does to

you ? " inquired the Sixth Form boy. " Oh ! He looks at one in a way that

makes the words stick in one's throat." The otherwise very rationalistic law

student  continued  thoughtfully  by  saying  that  Fritz  reminded  him  of  the

twelve-year-old Jesus in the temple, and that he felt perfectly certain that

sooner or later he would do something great.

  My brother has so often asserted that he was my educator that I feel it

incumbent upon me to refer to it here. He gave me books which he thought I

might  read,  supervised  my  school  work,  and  took  a  great  interest  in  the

formation  of  my  mind  and  character.  In  all  this  he  showed  considerable

native  tact  ;  and  I  often  laugh  when  I  think  of  how  accurately  he  found

precisely the right thing for a little girl. Once when I was ten years old I had

secretly made up my mind to recite Soliman's soliloquy for an examination.

The soliloquy begins: " Should I spare myself ? Should I look on dumbly

until the last spark of strength which lies hid in the old hero's bones dieth

little by little in a life of ease," etc., etc. My brother burst out laughing when I

told him of my intention. Naturally he did not allow me to carry it out, and in

later life he often used to say : " Even as a child my sister had a weakness for

the heroic, but often she made it quite ridiculous, as her appearance was not

at all in keeping with the part."

  I was often asked in later years upon what points my brother laid most

stress in the educational programme he mapped out for me as a boy, a task in

which instinct was his principal guide. If I remember rightly, his admonitions

were chiefly directed towards inculcating self-control upon me and teaching

me to endure pain, sorrow and injustice in silence, with a smiling face and

cheerful words. Oh ! how often afterwards, in the most difficult moments of

my  life,  did  I  remember  the  unchildlike  words  which  my  brother  had

probably culled from one of the old philosophers : " Lizzie, whoever can

master  himself  can  also  master  others."  He  also  laid  great  stress  upon

truthfulness, though the older I grew the more passionately did I love this

virtue ; indeed, so great was my partiality for it that my brother even found it

necessary in later years to put some check on my ardour in this respect. I had

many a lesson calculated to show me how absolutely truthful one could be

without necessarily hurting other people's feelings, an accomplishment which

I sometimes found very difficult.

    Moreover, truth and falsehood were the only matters in which both of us

(I  through  Fritz's  influence)  when  in  our  own  company  showed  a  certainconsciousness of a pride of caste : we did not lie, because for us, the noble

Nietzkys, it was infra dig. Others might lie as much as they chose ; for us two

truthfulness was the proper thing.

  Only now do I begin to wonder how my brother got hold of this peculiar

idea, for there was nothing in the whole of our environment to suggest it. I

must point out most emphatically that no member of the Nietzsche family

attached  the  slightest  importance  to  the  story  of  our  noble  ancestry.

Grandmamma Nietzsche, who at the time of the Revolution had learnt to

acquire a wide and lofty outlook on life in the intellectual circles of Weimar,

valued individual capacity only, and if she were possessed of any pride at all

it was undoubtedly civic pride, for at that period the middle classes were

regarded  as  the  chief  representatives  of  virtue,  capacity,  uprightness,  and

spotless lives.

  It  is  possible,  however,  that  a  family  characteristic  of  the  Nietzsches

manifested itself in us as a consciousness of caste ; for I remember that one of

our aunts once said with calm pride : "We Nietzsches scorn to lie."

                      CHAPTER V OUR GAMES AND TASTES

  WHEN my brother and I were still quite young we created an imaginary

world  of  our  own  in  which  tiny  china  figures  of  men  and  animals,  lead

soldiers, etc., all revolved round one central personality in the shape of a little

porcelain  squirrel  about  an  inch  and  a  half  high  whom  we  called  King

Squirrel  I.  I  cannot  remember  how  this  little  animal  obtained  his  kingly

dignity ; we may have been led into giving him this rank on account of the

red colour of his coat which we regarded as his royal robe. It never once

entered  our  minds  that  there  is  nothing  regal  about  a  squirrel  ;  on  the

contrary, we considered that it had a most majestic presence, and thought the

little golden crown I had made for it with gold beads suited it to perfection.

This small king gave rise to all sorts of joyous little ceremonies.

    Everything that my brother made was in honour of King Squirrel ; all his

musical  productions  were  to  glorify  His  Majesty  ;  on  his  birthday

performances took place ; poems were recited and plays acted, all of which

were written by my brother. King Squirrel was a patron of art ; he must have

a picture gallery. Fritz painted one hung round with Madonna's, landscapes,

etc.,  etc.  A  particularly  beautiful  picture  represented  a  room  in  an  old

monastery in which an old-fashioned lamp burnt in a niche and filled the

whole apartment with a quaint red glow. The effect was so splendid that a

friend of my brother's offered him a halfpenny for the picture. Grandmamma,however, outbid this young connoisseur and paid a penny for the work of art,

which thus remained in the family ; unfortunately, however, it got lost after

all.

  The inspiration for this painting came from an exhibition of pictures sent

from Berlin to the provinces, which was visited by crowds of people, as there

was little travelling done in those days. There were special reasons for us

children to be taken to the show. The artist Gustav Richter had painted a

picture called " The Daughter of Jairus," and some friend of ours thought that

the girl in this picture was like our mother. We were therefore taken to the

exhibition  to  act  as  impartial  judges,  but  I  cannot  say  now  whether  our

verdict corresponded with the wishes of our family. The pictures which my

brother painted in response to this stimulus were all proportionate to the one-

and-a-half inch stature of their exalted royal patron, and with the help of

some toy bricks Fritz built galleries in a beautiful classic style to hold them.

  It was from one of these galleries that King Squirrel would witness the

parade of the troops. The lead soldiers were quickly and carefully drawn in

front of His Majesty on long pieces of wood, and if any of them toppled over,

relentless criticism was passed, as the parade was then regarded as a failure.

These military games were soon, however, to take a very different turn. My

brother himself describes this in the little biography I have already quoted so

often : " about this time (1854) the eyes of all Europe were turned in terror

upon  the  complications  between  Turkey  and  Russia.  The  Russians  had

suddenly occupied Moldavia and Walachia, the Turkish Principalities on the.

Danube, and stood threateningly before the Porte. In order to maintain the

balance  of  power  in  Europe,  the  integrity  of  the  Turkish  Empire  seemed

absolutely necessary, and for this reason Austria and Prussia and the Western

Powers intervened in her favour. But all the mediation of these four first-class

states did not have the desired effect upon the Emperor Nicholas. The war

between  Russia  and  Turkey  continued  unabated,  and  at  last  France  and

England armed their fleets and their armies and sent them to the assistance of

the Porte. The seat of war was the Crimea, and the great armies surrounded

Sebastopol, where the Russian host under Menschikoff was quartered.

  " This afforded a pleasant diversion for us. We immediately sided with

the Russians, and hotly challenged every friend of Turkey to fight."

  (I ought to add here that the we and the us in these notes of my brother

refer to himself and his friends, Wilhelm and Gustav. In this al fresco fighting

I  was  not  allowed  to  take  part,  to  my  bitter  disappointment,  as  it  wasconsidered unsuitable for a little girl.) " As we possessed some lead soldiers

we never grew tired of reproducing the various sieges and battles. Earthworks

were thrown up and each of us discovered some new means of making them

lasting. We each wrote our own little book which was a sort of ' Guide to the

War.' We had lead shot cast and increased our armies by fresh purchases. We

often  used  to  dig  a  little  pool  copied  from  the  map  of  the  harbour  of

Sebastopol,  and  also  carried  out  the  fortifications  marked  in  it  quite

accurately, and then filled up the trenches with water. We made a number of

pellets out of wax and saltpetre, set them alight, and threw them on to paper

boats ; soon bright flames would rise into the air, and, if our game lasted into

the evening, it was really a beautiful sight to see the fiery balls whizz through

the darkness. At the end the whole fleet, together with the remaining bombs,

was set alight, and the flames from this conflagration often used to rise two

feet into the air. Thus did I spend many a happy moment, not alone but in the

company  of  my  friends  and  at  home  with  my  sister.  We  also  built

fortifications with our toy bricks, and with practice I learnt all sorts of tricks

of construction."

  As a matter of fact my brother took a passionate interest in this science of

war, and I naturally followed suit. The Crimean War absorbed our whole

attention, and in our play we invented all kinds of wonderful divinations by

which we hoped to discover the result of the hostilities, and every day we

used to look out with burning eagerness for the news the paper might bring.

In his little biography my brother describes the warm interest he took in the

events of the war and its ultimate result as follows : " Everything that we

could  discover  about  the  science  of  war  in  those  days  was  simply  taken

possession  of,  so  that  I  acquired  quite  a  respectable  knowledge  of  these

things. Not only lexicons, but perfectly new books on military science used to

enrich  our  collection,  and  my  friends  and  I  were  anxious  to  compile  a

dictionary  of  military  terms,  and  had  already  made  great  plans  to  do  so,

when, suddenly, one day, Gustav, with a very pale face came and told me in a

voice full of emotion, that Sebastopol had fallen. As soon as every doubt on

the subject had been removed, we gave vent to our rage in a momentary

outburst of passion against the Russians for not having defended the fort of

Malakoff more successfully ; we were, in fact, exceedingly angry."

  My brother took the fall of Sebastopol very much to heart ; when Gustav

brought him the news he was so much upset that he could not eat his lunch,

whereupon I felt it incumbent upon me to abstain likewise. We were bothgenuinely sorry. Fritz poured out his woes in a number of verses, of which

unfortunately only the first rough draft has been preserved.

  If  the  Russians  had  left  the  defence  of  Sebastopol  to  our  three  little

strategists, they would certainly have been spared this defeat, or they would

at least have made good their losses by a glorious victory. But the Russians

submitted to their fate, and we lost interest in the vanquished nation. The

oracle was no longer questioned ; the little books on fort construction and

other military matters, and the whole paraphernalia of the science of war

were either burnt or vanished into the far corners of cupboards, ultimately to

be relegated to my treasure drawer. The model of the harbour of Sebastopol

was deserted, the strong bastions crumbled away all this belonged to the past

! My brother now turned his attention to wars which were more remotely

buried in the past. Homer and all Troy ringing with the clash of arms now

acted as an inspiration for all kinds of surprising compositions, and at last he

decided to write a play with his friend Wilhelm in which we could all act.

This time even the feminine element of the family, including Wilhelm's two

sisters and myself, was graciously allowed to take part in the proceedings.

  The piece was called " The Gods on Olympus.'' Half of it took place on

earth, the other half in the abovementioned home of the gods. Of course, the

two dramatists had arranged things in such a way that they themselves and

Gustav had the principal parts and all the speeches to recite, while we little

goddesses, who ranged from the ages of six to eight, had but little to say. We

were,  however,  quite  overcome  by  the  importance  of  our  project  and  the

beauty of our costumes.

  At last the day arrived for the performance to take place, in the presence

of  a  few  intimate  friends,  at  the  house  of  Herr  Finder,  the  Judge.

Unfortunately everything did not go off as it should have done. In the first

place, just as we were all ready to begin the play, Gustav was missing, and it

turned  out  that  he  had  suddenly  imagined  he  had  been  slighted  and  had

completely vanished. But in him we lost our principal hero for the scene on

earth, and Jupiter for the scene on Olympus. The consternation was general.

Herr  Finder  himself  thereupon  offered  to  play  the  parts,  and,  as  he  had

rehearsed the play with us, he knew them all by heart. It is true that he was

twice as tall as any of us other little actors, but in the part of Jupiter this was

not incongruous. The missing Gustav, however, also had the part of a mortal

to play, in which he represented a vanquished warrior laid low under the

courageous  onslaught  of  my  brother,  the  triumphant  hero.  It  seemed,  ofcourse,  preposterously  absurd  for  the  tall  Herr  Finder  to  be  irrevocably

overthrown  by  such  a  small  hero.  Nevertheless,  he  adapted  himself

wonderfully to the part, and died in accordance with all the laws of stagecraft.

Lt cannot be said, however, that the audience were either very much moved

or even very attentive, especially when Hen Finder, while in the act of dying,

suddenly remembered his duties as stage manager, and began to push the

screen in front of our improvised stage with his foot, and cried in a weak

voice : " Ladies and gentlemen, the first act is over."

  The piece progressed fairly well until the last scene, in which there was a

grand assembly of the gods awaiting the arrival of the hero who had been

promoted to their ranks. The scene had been well rehearsed, and is said to

have looked very well. A friend of ours, who had witnessed the play on this

evening, told me afterwards how extremely pretty we miniature goddesses

looked in our Greek costumes, with our rosy children's faces, and our plump

little white arms and necks. Juno in a light blue silk dress with gold spangles ;

Diana  in  white,  trimmed  with  silver-embroidered  green  satin,  and  I  as

Minerva in white satin with a shining breastplate and helmet.

  We had all learnt our parts very well and did not falter once, except at the

juncture when nectar and ambrosia, represented by blancmange and raspberry

syrup, were brought upon the scene.

  The two dramatists had thought it absolutely necessary for something to

be eaten during the play, for the hero himself, who had been promoted to the

rank of a god, certainly needed something to sustain him. Unfortunately we

had forgotten to rehearse the eating scene beforehand none of us ever dreamt

it would be necessary ! Eating, we thought, would come naturally, especially

when it was something we all liked so much. And, indeed, the eating did go

off of its own accord, but to have to speak and act while we were eating

seemed impossible, for, like well-behaved children, we were not accustomed

to talk while we ate.

  And thus the whole assembly of the gods gave itself up quite naturally to

feasting, and the plates and spoons clattered as the small mouths were filled

and filled again. The audience burst into uncontrollable fits of laughter; even

Jupiter joined in the general merriment, and only the two dramatists, who felt

with some alarm that all was not right, laid down their plates, and with dark

frowns and covert signals bade us do likewise. We were so bewildered with,

fright  that  we  all  forgot  our  cues,  spoke  out  of  turn,  put  on  the  wrong

emphasis, and, in short, the piece limped lamely to its close.  Juno and I, Minerva, took the matter so much to heart, that we sat down

on  a  footstool  and  cried  ;  the  dramatists  stood  gloomily  in  a  corner  and

seemed to be thinking that this was the result of letting girls play with them.

Finally, however, we were all consoled by the assurance that in a fortnight

the piece would be acted again before our grandmother, who, though she

never went out, must certainly see it, so that we would have to act it again

from beginning to end without a hitch. The piece, however, was never played

a second time, for in the meanwhile we became such passionate little Greeks,

that whenever we met, or even when Fritz and I were alone at home, we

played Greek games together, we wrestled, threw lances and discs (wooden

plates), practised the high jump, and ran races. Now these pastimes were the

cause  of  a  dreadful  accident,  in  which  Fritz  wounded  little  Gretchen  by

hurling his lance at her. The point of the weapon went right through her shoe

and pierced her foot, and it was a long time before the wound healed. All

Greek games were forbidden after this, but I must confess that we children

regarded this wound in the heel, precisely in the spot where Achilles was

vulnerable,  as  a  most  remarkable  and  mysterious  phenomenon,  quite

classical, as it were ; in our eyes it was a warning from the gods, and we

thought it perfectly right and proper that we should suddenly give up our

games when it happened.

  For a long while we also introduced Greek names and allusions into our

conversations, even into such good old German games as hide-and-seek, and

robbers and policemen ; Graecomania was indeed peculiar to the age, and

everything was given a Greek name in those days. I remember once, when

my brother was at Weber's school, two little horses appeared in an extremely

primitive circus (which used to delight Naumburg with its presence at Easter

and Midsummer) ; they were called Orestes and Pylades, and made a strong

appeal to our childish hearts, and with very good reason, too. The circus,

which as a matter of fact was only a circle covered with sand, over which a

canvas tent was stretched, once gave a children's performance to which my

brother and myself were sent in the care of our maid. All the children, the

majority of whom were pupils at Weber's school, sat round in a circle. The

performing  horses  were  really  ponies,  and  the  manager  of  the  circus,  a

homely sort of man, remained in touch with his youthful audience by keeping

up  a  running  conversation.  Both  these  ponies  delighted  us  by  their

extraordinary cleverness ; we were allowed to give them sugar and to encore

any particularly favourite trick.  At the end the manager of the circus thought he would have a joke : he

said that Orestes and Pylades were such extremely clever little ponies that

they could see into everyone's heart, and would now point out the laziest and

most cunning as well as the cleverest and most industrious boy present. In an

instant Orestes went up to a small boy, whom we all knew to be a notorious

little  pickle,  and  pawed  the  ground  before  him  in  a  most  contemptuous

manner, while Pylades stood perfectly still in front of Fritz and bowed most

reverently  three  times.  A  yell  of  joy  filled  the  small  circus  tent;  all  my

brother's little schoolfellows shouted gleefully: "That is quite true!" and our

maid, the faithful Minna, moved by the greatness of the moment, cried out

again and again with sobs : " He is the best boy in the world." The close of

the performance took the shape of a little ovation in which Fritz and the two

small ponies had to play their part. It was extremely painful to my brother to

be the object of public attention ; but the tenderness and admiration with

which  I  was  filled  for  Pylades  defy  description.  It  naturally  never  even

entered my head that the manager of the circus had probably received his

inspiration from Herr Weber himself, and had made the necessary signs to the

ponies.

    Tight-rope  dancers,  such  as  Kolter  and  Weizmann,  also  paid  frequent

visits to Naumburg, and one of their performances made a great impression

on my brother. A rope was stretched from the tower of the parish church

across the market-place, and high up in the air old Weizmann walked with

perfect equanimity. Whether it was on this occasion that the famous feat was

performed in which the elder Weizmann, coming from the church tower, is

met by the other one coming in the opposite direction, and the former kneels

down on the rope to allow the latter to jump over him and continue his way ;

or whether this was merely described to my brother, I cannot now remember.

In any case the profound impression of the picture he saw, either in real life

or in his own mind's eye, must have remained very deeply imprinted on his

memory, as we can see from the Prologue to Zarathustra.

  Thus the year brought us a thousand and one joys in its train ; but as my

brother  writes  in  1856  :  "  The  Christmas  festival  was  certainly  the  most

beautiful evening of the year. I had been waiting for it for many a long day

with real exaltation, but as the time drew nearer and nearer I could scarcely

curb my impatience. Minute after minute crawled slowly by and never in the

whole year had the days seemed longer. Strange to say, when my yearning

surpassed all bounds, I would sit down and write a Christmas greeting, andby this means would succeed in transplanting myself for an instant to the

longed for moment, when the door would open and the lighted Christmas tree

would shine before our eyes."

  From  his  eleventh  year  music  and  books  formed  the  objects  of  my

brother's  most  ardent  desire,  but  practical  things  like  sweets  were  also

thankfully received. We always received a quantity of presents, as we were

the only children in the whole Nietzsche family ; for the children of our

father's eldest stepbrother had grown up long ago. Thus the sacred evening on

which we used to give each other presents not only satisfied all our wishes

but also brought many a surprise in its train. To sit on Christmas Day, with

our very best clothes on, before a table holding all these wonderful things and

to gloat over them this was an indescribably joyful and festive feeling, and

my brother in after years used to declare that life brought nothing to compare

with it later on. On Christmas Day there was always a beautiful party at Herr

Finder's house also, to which the Krug family were invited as well, and thus

the three young friends, Wilhelm, Fritz and Gustav came together.

  Any festival that occurred in my brother's early life had always in some

way to be connected with his two friends ; otherwise it lost its glamour. This

applied  to  his  artistic  tastes,  which  were  also  shared  by  his  friends.  The

particular bond of union between him and Wilhelm Finder was their love of

poetry. I have already described how he collaborated with this boy in writing

the piece called " The Gods on Olympus," but he also produced two other

pieces  in  the  same  way,  one  called  "  The  Orkadal,"  and  the  other  "  The

Taking of Troy." The intimate relationship with his friend, to which these

poetical productions led, he describes as follows : " Later on, as our interest

in poetry increased, we became quite indispensable to each other, and were

never at a loss for subjects of conversation. We used to exchange ideas about

poets  and  prose  writers,  books  we  had  read,  and  new  publications  in  the

domain of literature; we would think out our life-plans together, give each

other verses, and would not rest until we had emptied our hearts to each

other."

  On the other hand his chief link with his friend Gustav was his passionate

love for music and his desire to compose on his own account. When my

brother had reached a point at which he was capable not only of enjoying

music but of taking an active part in its production, that is to say, in the year

1858, he wrote as follows : " On Ascension Day (1854) I went to the parish

church and heard the stately Hallelujah Chorus from the Messiah ; I felt as ifI ought to sing with the music, for it occurred to me that it was the angels'

song of rejoicing to the sound of which Jesus ascends to Heaven. I thereupon

formed the earnest resolution to compose something similar. As soon as the

service was over, I set to work, and rejoiced in a childlike way over every

new chord that I struck. Inasmuch, however, as for years I never ceased from

composing, by the mere knowledge thus acquired of the construction of tone

I found myself at a great advantage when reading music at sight."

  Gustav's love of music and his discovery of a kindred spirit in Fritz is

revealed by the following words in the little biography. " From his earliest

childhood Gustav was attracted to the joys of music. He soon learnt to play

the violin, because he spared himself no pains to become proficient in the art.

Later on music became such a necessity to him that I believe if he had been

snatched away from it he would have been robbed of half his soul as well.

How often did we not look through pieces of music together, exchange ideas

on them, and try to play one thing or another."

  Fritz began to write poetry very early in life : I can recollect that even in

the years 1854 to 1855 he used to read me some of his productions in this line

which I, as an obedient little sister, was constrained to admire. They were not,

however, very beautiful. My brother himself, in the year 1858, criticises his

first three periods of poetical composition in the following words : " In the

year 1854 I composed fifty-five poems and among them were the first verses

I ever wrote. The subjects I attempted to portray in these early efforts were as

a  rule  scenes  from  Nature.  Every  young  heart  is  inspired  by  magnificent

pictures, and always wishes to give them shape if possible in poetical form.

Weird seascapes, storms and fires, were the first material from which I drew

my inspiration. I had no models before me, nor could I understand very well

how one could copy a poet, so I wrote these verses as my spirit moved me.

Of course the result was a series of very clumsy poems, and almost every

verse  contained  some  roughness  of  language.  But  this  first  period,

nevertheless, was much more to my taste than the second . . . for whereas my

first poems were clumsy and ponderous, in those of the second period I tried

to express myself in more ornate and striking language. Unfortunately this

attempt  at  gracefulness  degenerated  into  affectation,  and  the  iridescent

language into sententious obscurity, while every one of them lacked the chief

thing of all ideas. At all events the first period for this reason soars high

above the second. All this proves that when one does not stand firmly on

one's legs one wavers between two extremes and can only find rest in thegolden mean.

  " In the third period of my poetical productions I sought to combine the

two  first  periods  that  is  to  say,  to  unite  charm  with  power.  How  far  I

succeeded I cannot say even now. This third period began on the second of

February, 1858. My dear mother's birthday falls on this day, and it was my

custom to give her a little collection of my poems. From that time onwards I

resolved  to  devote  a  little  more  practice  to  the  writing  of  poetry,  and  if

possible to produce a poem every evening. I carried this project out for a

week or so, and was always overjoyed when I saw a new creation of my brain

lying before me. On one occasion, too, I sought to express myself as simply

as possible, but I soon gave this up. For any poem which would aspire to

being perfect must certainly be as simple as possible, but in that case every

word must be instinct with poetic feeling. A poem which is empty of ideas

and which is over laden with phrases and metaphors is like a rosy apple in the

core of which a maggot lies hid. Stock phrases must as far as possible be

eliminated from a poem, for the excessive use of such phrases denotes a mind

which is not capable of creating its own sentences. In the writing of any

work, one must pay the greatest attention to the ideas themselves. One can

forgive any faults of style, but not a fault of thought. The best example of this

is provided by Goethe's poems with all their beautiful, clear and profound

thoughts. Youth which lacks original ideas naturally seeks to conceal this

void beneath a brilliant and iridescent style ; but does not poetry resemble

modern music in this respect ? It is on these lines that the poetry of the future

will soon develop. Poets will express themselves in the strangest imagery,

confused thoughts will be propounded with obscure but exceedingly high-

falutin  and  euphonious  arguments.  In  short,  works  after  the  style  of  the

Second Part of Faust will be written, save that the ideas of this production

will be entirely lacking. Dixi."

  From this note we may see that he exercised a very severe censorship

upon his own work. This habit of holding himself under the microscope he

retained till the end of his life.

  Thus it is clear that even at this time he was not deeply enamoured of

modern music. "Another rather sad aspect of the age is the fact that a large

number of our more modern composers strain themselves to write obscurely.

But  it  is  precisely  the  artistic  productions  which  please  the  ears  of

connoisseurs  most  that  leave  the  healthy  listener  unmoved.  I  refer  more

particularly to such music of the future as Liszt and Berlioz write, in which itis sought to make certain passages as weird and as strange as possible."

  Fritz often tried to compose. He himself tells us that he never regretted

the quantity of scored paper over which he scribbled, as it taught him a good

deal.  In  his  little  biography  there  is  a  rather  pathetic  passage  about  his

musical tastes, studies and efforts : " In the course of my work I began to feel

an  indomitable  hatred  for  all  modern  music  and  everything  that  was  not

classical.  Mozart  and  Haydn,  Schubert  and  Mendelssohn,  Beethoven  and

Bach these are the pillars upon which I and German music stand. I also heard

several oratorios at this time ; the profoundly moving Requiem was the first

of these ; and oh ! how the words Dies irae, dies ilia reached the very marrow

of my bones, as also did the heavenly Benedictus ! I often used to attend the

rehearsals. As the Mass for the Dead was usually sung on All Souls' Day,

these performances always took place on misty autumn days, and in the dim,

religious  light  of  the  Cathedral  I  would  sit  and  listen  to  the  sublime

melodies."

  Thus the three principal delights of my brother's life, music, poetry and

friendship,  already  beautified  his  schooldays.  It  is  really  remarkable  how

much he learned at that time through these three tastes. And -when in later

years  people  could  not  find  words  to  express  their  astonishment  at  the

extraordinary  range  of  his  knowledge  and  inner  artistic  experiences,  my

invariable reply was that he had begun his training in these matters and had

made himself familiar with these most noble of all feelings, in his earliest

youth.

              CHAPTER VI DEPARTURE AND LEAVETAKING

  GREAT  changes  now  gradually  appeared  in  our  household.  In  the

summer of 1855 our dear Aunt Augusta, who had always taken such loving

care  of  us,  departed  this  life  a  loss  which  was  a  great  blow  to  our

grandmother Nietzsche. Until that day she had enjoyed very tolerable health,

and, even on her seventy-sixth birthday, had felt no evil results from the large

influx of visitors who came to congratulate her. But after the death of the

daughter she loved so well, she grew weaker and weaker and often spoke of

her own death, especially on her seventy-seventh birthday. She could not bear

to have us two grandchildren out of her sight, and when in 1856 we wished to

go to Pobles as usual for the Easter holidays, for the first time in her life she

raised an objection. In the end, however, she insisted on our going, as we had

no garden in the town, and she thought a stay in the country would be very

good  for  our  health.  She  awaited  our  return  very  anxiously,  and  wasexceedingly upset because our grandparents at Pobles were obliged to keep

me,  at  any  rate,  with  them  a  little  longer  to  recover  from  some  trifling

childish illness. Fritz was very deeply affected by the fact that two days after

dear grandmamma was taken ill, her last scarcely audible wish was : " Do try

and  bring  my  little  Lizzie  to  me  "  ;  and  that,  although  a  messenger  was

immediately sent for us, my grandfather and I arrived too late to see her alive.

Fritz and I felt this unfortunate delay very much indeed, and very often in

later life he would refer to our inability to fulfil the last wish of the dear

departed. The death of our beloved grandmother Nietzsche, who had been so

intimately  bound  up  with  our  whole  life,  and  from  whom  we  had  daily

received  so  many  marks  of  love,  made  an  indescribable  impression  upon

Fritz and myself, and we could not console ourselves. "We often used to sit

together  in  the  dark,  talking  of  our  beloved  grandmother,  recalling  her

wonderful stories and the innumerable tokens of affection she had given us,

and would then burst into violent fits of tears.

  All those who had known the splendid woman, all her relatives, friends

and acquaintances, mourned her loss most genuinely; for to everyone she had

been a "beautiful example" of all the womanly virtues, and they honoured her

from the bottom of their hearts.

  Her death brought about great changes in our household and our mode of

life. Aunt Rosalie found a home of her own, as our dear mother, now in her

thirtieth year, showed a determined wish to be left to her own resources at

last, and to dispense with the exceedingly kind and well-meant guardianship

of her eldest sister-in-law. To us children it was a great sorrow that Aunt

Rosalie should leave the home, as a great affection existed between us. Our

mother  found  a  small  but  charming  little  apartment  in  a  friend's  house,

surrounded by a large old-fashioned and really romantic garden, which forms

one of our most delightful memories. Fritz and I lived in it from morning to

night, swung in our swing, right up into the very tops of the trees, played the

finest games, ate, drank and learnt our lessons beneath the shady branches,

and told each other gruesome stories in the shadow of the ancient, old-world

box trees. The owner of the house was a certain Frau Harem, the widow of a

clergyman,  an  excellent  woman,  possessed  of  extraordinary  strength  of

character. In spite of being obliged to work hard, she had retained a warm

interest in science and philosophy ; she read a good deal and proved in all she

did that she had a superior mind and remarkable independence of judgment.

In the year 1886 my brother said that she was the only woman he had knownin his boyhood who would have been capable of an heroic deed.

  From the point of view of health the change was certainly beneficial, for

we were now able to spend a great deal of our time in the open air, and Fritz

had a bright workroom all to himself. Our old nursery in the house we had

left had really not been healthy and it was certainly the cause of my brother's

and  my  own  acute  short-sightedness,  although  this  was  perhaps  to  some

extent hereditary.

    Meanwhile Fritz had been moved into a higher class and was very busy

indeed ; with the winter, however, his work grew heavier still, and he writes :

" At this time I was promoted to the Third Form. Here our form master was a

certain Dr. Silber, a man who, as a teacher, I learnt to love very much. His

highly intelligent and eloquent discourses, the wealth of information with

which he illuminated everything he treated, and which was the outcome of a

very thorough mastery of every branch of human knowledge, made him a

pleasant  contrast  to  other  men  of  his  profession.  He  also  had  the  gift  of

chaining the attention of his pupils. It was with him that we had our first

lessons in Greek, which, in any case, we found very difficult. Verses also

gave me great trouble and difficulty, although I liked writing them very much

indeed. Certainly, during our first winter, we had a great deal to do, and I can

remember that I often used to work till 11 or 12 o'clock at night and had to

rise at five in the morning."

  Fritz was a model schoolboy and invariably had the best reports in his

class,  and  yet  he  was  free  from  all  conceit,  for  he  always  had  his  own

peculiar, humble explanation of these things.

  In the spring of 1857 two school inspectors came, one after the other, to

Naumburg one to examine the Girls' School and the other the Boys'. The

inspector who went to my brother's school showed a great interest in Fritz

after the examination ; he asked his name several times and finally wrote it

down ; Fritz must have given extraordinarily clever answers to his questions.

But, oddly, enough, the inspector of the Girls' School took a great interest in

me and also inquired my name. When our dear mother heard both our stories

she was very proud, while Fritz, on the other hand, merely grew thoughtful

and meditative. When he and I were alone that afternoon, however, he said to

me : " Isn't it funny that both of us learn so well and know so many things

that other children don't know ? " After we had discussed the matter for a

little while the secret motive for his question at last became apparent. " I

always wonder," he said in a low voice, " whether it is not possible that ourdear Papa in Heaven is the cause of it, and whether he does not give us our

good thoughts. Only a little while ago Aunt Rosalie gave me a letter to read

from  our  aunts  in  Plauen,  and  in  it  I  found  this  passage  :  '  Clearly  their

father's blessing lies on both the children's heads; it is possible that God in his

grace allows our noble Ludwig more influence over his fatherless children

than other dead parents usually have.' ' The idea that everything excellent and

unusual in his character, which distinguished him from others, was a heritage

from the father we had lost so young, remained his conviction throughout his

life. The great yea to life, however, he had inherited from our dear, high-

spirited mother.

    Unfortunately, as the result of the tiring winter of 1856 1857, my brother

for the first time showed signs of eye trouble, which at the start took the form

of headaches. The dark nursery which I have already mentioned had gone far

towards  emphasising  his  inherent  disposition  to  short-sightedness,  and  in

spite of the superiority of his present workroom, the excessive industry of this

winter resulted in an overstrain of his optic nerves. Our grandmother Oehler,

who as a child had lost the sight of one eye, paid particular attention to the

eyesight of her grandchild. She discovered that my brother saw less with one

eye than with the other, and that his pupils were not always the same size.

Professor Schillbach of Jena was consulted and declared that one eye really

was weaker than the other and left the other all the work to do. In order to

make Fritz understand, he explained it to him in simple words by saying that

one eye was industrious and the other lazy. As a result of all this my brother

was  obliged  to  prolong  his  summer  holiday  by  a  few  weeks  in  order  to

recover from the strain to his eyesight. As a matter of fact there was in those

days remarkably little general knowledge about the needs of the eye. Even

our mother was ignorant on this subject, despite the fact that like her parents

she had very sound ideas on hygiene. As a rule she favoured natural cures

and homoeopathy. "We were never given medicine, and when we were ill,

from whatever cause, compresses, cold douches and walks were the remedies

employed. Our food was also very sensibly arranged ; we ate a great deal of

vegetables, fruit, and farinaceous substances, very little meat, and drank no

wine  or  beer  a  system  which  was  directly  opposed  to  the  strengthening

methods then in vogue for children.

    Fortunately, our lessons were considerably lighter during the following

autumn and winter, and thus Fritz, with the help of all kinds of open-air

sports, was able to recover from the strain of his work. He was a passionatelover of skating : " There is something positively ethereal in gliding with

winged feet over the crystal surface of frozen water, and when, in addition,

the moon shoots down her silver rays, evenings on the ice are really like

moments in fairyland. Around you there is perfect stillness broken only by

the  scraping  of  the  ice  and  the  rumbling  sound  of  the  skaters.  There  is

something majestic about this which is not to be found on summer nights."

Following our mother's example, we also did a great deal of tobogganing,

more especially at our grandparents' during the Christmas holidays.

  But when the summer came round Fritz also found much to delight him :

" Oh how glorious it is to plunge into the tepid water on a summer's day ; and

how keenly I felt this when I learned to swim ! To give oneself up to the

stream  and  float  downwards  in  its  soft  embrace  without  any  trouble  is  it

possible  to  imagine  anything  more  delightful  ?  Moreover,  I  consider  that

swimming is not only a glorious pastime, strengthening and refreshing to the

body, but that it may also be very useful in moments of danger. It cannot be

too highly recommended for boys."

  A  letter  addressed  to  my  Aunt  Rosalie  still  exists  which  brought  him

much teasing, as he filled two whole pages of it in expressing his joy in

bathing and swimming.

  My memory seems to tell me that in the beautiful romantic garden, with

its peaceful trees, his poet's instinct and his eagerness to compose received a

special stimulus. It is to these years, 1856 to 1858, that my brother's first

really  interesting  compositions  belong  compositions  which  still  possess  a

good deal of charm. Among them, for instance, we find a fantasia for the

piano, " Moonlight on the Pussta," which he afterwards touched up and which

finally found its place in the large edition of my biography of him. I was

simply delighted with it, and my pride passed all bounds when one evening I

discovered that the night-watchman had halted beneath our windows in order

to catch the sweet tones that were proceeding from Fritz and his piano. As a

matter of fact, it appeared that this same watchman had told the neighbours

that " Up the street, in the little house, someone played so beautifully that you

could not help stopping to listen."

  My brother had inherited from his father his gift of impromptu playing,

and this talent enabled him all through his life to exercise an extraordinary

influence over the people about him. Malvida von Meysenbug mentions this

in her "Memoirs of Capri." The Emperor and Empress of Brazil, when they

were staying incognito in Rosenlaui-Bad in the year 1877, could not tearthemselves  away  from  my  brother's  impromptu  playing  ;  and  even  Frau

Cosima Wagner still speaks of the wonderful effect of his music.

  At Easter, 1858, when he was thirteen and a half, Fritz became a Fourth

Form boy, but nevertheless he certainly remained very childlike. Even he

himself felt this, and the other boys, who upon their promotion suddenly gave

themselves the airs of grown-ups, smoked cigars, and carried walking-sticks

about with them, seemed ludicrous to him. Yet upon being moved up into a

higher class he realised that another period of his life had come to a close, for

it was during this summer that, with a kind of premonition that still greater

changes were in preparation, he wrote the little biography from which I have

quoted  so  much.  During  the  summer  holidays  at  Pobles,  we  had  already

discussed very exhaustively the plan of writing the story of his life. When,

therefore, leaving me behind, he returned after the holidays with our mother

to Naumburg, he immediately set to work to write this little book. He closed

it with the following words : " Thus have I concluded my first work and I

look back upon it with joy. I wrote it with great pleasure and did not grow

tired in the process. After one has attained a certain age it is exceedingly

delightful to pass one's earlier years in procession before one's soul and to

study one's spiritual development in this way. I have told the whole truth

without either poetical invention or poetical adornment. The fact that I may

occasionally have had to make additions and may still require to do so, will

be forgiven me in a work of this size. Oh ! if only I could write many such

books ! " For our life here below is a mirror, And within it ourselves to

perceive As we are, without bias or error, Is the highest thing I can conceive t

"

  Written between 18th August and 11th September, 1858.

  A few days after the completion of this first biography our mother was

surprised by a letter from the Hector of the Public School at Pforta, in which

she was offered a vacancy in this excellent institution for my brother.

  Pforta is a place which from very early times has fostered and promoted

the study of science. It is said to have been founded about the middle of the

twelfth  century  by  some  Cistercian  monks  who  were  driven  out  of

Pleissnerland by heathen Slavs and hospitably received by Bishop Udo of

Naumburg. For many centuries they fulfilled their mission of culture, but old

methods  were  bound  to  make  way  before  new  thoughts  and  aspirations.

Thanks to Duke Moritz of Saxony, the monastery with all that belonged to it

was assigned to the purposes of secular education in 1543, a time when,owing to the changes and the general state of unrest throughout Germany, on

account of the Reformation and the Thirty Years War, the Saxon Princes

were particularly eager to re-establish solid centres of culture. " One must

begin with the young," was a precept of the excellent George Komerstadt, the

Duke's particular counsellor, and Duke Moritz himself laid down in the Act

of 16th January, 1840, that " The boys shall be educated to a godly life, in the

learning of languages, discipline, and virtue, and shall be instructed for six

years " ; and in the new Act of 21st May of the same year we find : " The

scholars  shall  be  provided  with  superintendents,  servants,  teachers,  board,

and other needs, free of charge. When they enter the school they shall be kept

for six years and taught free of charge, provided that they prove themselves

fit for study."

  As a matter of fact, the Rector who wrote to my mother seems to have

taken the last sentence of this script more particularly to heart in regard to my

brother, for my mother owed this offer of a vacancy simply to the fact that

relatives of the Rector had spoken to him about the extraordinarily gifted

child, Fritz Nietzsche. Moreover, the pressure of candidates for Pforta was

not  by  any  means  so  great  in  those  days  as  it  is  now,  for  much  greater

demands were then made upon the capacities of the pupils than is the case at

present.

  After some hesitation our dear mother decided to face the terrible parting.

The news struck the three friends like a thunderbolt, although my brother had

always  had  a  particular  admiration  for  Pforta,  to  which  he  often  gave

expression in poetry. Even as a boy of ten he had written verses about Pforta

which were more touching than original, and of which I still remember a few

lines: " There, where through her narrow door, Pforta's pupils evermore Pass

out into life so free, There in Pforta would I be ! "

  Now at last things had so turned out that he really was going there, and he

was  exceedingly  delighted,  as  Pforta  had  always  exercised  a  singularly

romantic charm over him. But the parting from his family and friends was a

hard blow. Only a short time before he had written : " There is something

great and noble in having true friends, and our lives have been exceptionally

blessed by God, inasmuch as He has given us companions on our road who

strive with us after the same goal. I must praise God in Heaven above for all

this, for without it I should never have grown used to Naumburg. But as I

have  been  able  to  make  friends  here,  my  stay  in  the  city  has  been  very

pleasant, and I should suffer a good deal had I to leave it. For we three have,as a matter of fact, never been separated except during the holidays which I

have usually spent with my mother and sister."

  From these words some idea can be formed of the gloom which prevailed

among the friends at the thought of the forthcoming separation. Only one

person was even more hardly hit by this change, and that was I, his little

sister. Our mother seems to have guessed what my feelings would be. In the

letter containing the great news, which she sent to our grandparents, with

whom I was spending the whole summer.', she begged them to break it gently

to me. One morning after the postman had come I noticed that all kinds of

whispers  and  covert  glances  passed  between  them,  and  gathered  that

something was wrong. At last grandpapa came to me armed with a beautiful

new book for me to read (for reading was known to be the one delight of my

heart, which made me forget every trouble) and asked me to take a turn in the

garden with him the lamb following behind.

  " Now Lizzie,'' my grandfather began with apparent good cheer, " think of

it, Fritz is going to Pforta, where he has always longed to go so much."

  " To Pforta," I repeated in a low voice and stopped short in my walk.

  "Yes," said grandpapa, "think of the pretty little poems he has written

about Pforta ! He will certainly be delighted to go there. And of course you

will not cry," he continued, " even though this may be a great sorrow for you

; for is not what Fritz said a little while ago perfectly true, that it is silly not to

be able to overcome one's grief ? Don't you remember what Fritz told us

about the ancient Spartan women, how they were able with a cheerful smile

on their faces to watch their brothers and sons march to deadly combat, and

did not even cry if the warriors died or were brought home covered with

glory on a shield, but only bewailed their fate if they had fled shamefully

before the enemy ? Now you must understand that it is a great honour for

Fritz to go to Pforta ; you must bear this in mind and then you won't want to

cry."

  " No, grandpa," I said in a low voice. " And here," continued the dear old

diplomatist, " is a beautiful book for you to read ; go and find one of your

favourite haunts and give yourself up to its pages." I thanked and kissed

grandpapa and retreated with the book and the lamb.

  I  believe  that  grandpapa  was  thoroughly  satisfied  with  his  diplomacy.

But, after an hour or two had elapsed and lunch time came round, and no one

had heard or seen the slightest sign of me, he grew rather anxious and set out

to find me. All my favourite spots, however, the crooked apple tree whosebranches formed such a delightful natural seat, the grassy bank under the

elder bush, all were empty and deserted. Suddenly he heard the bleating of

the  lamb  in  the  distance,  and  went  in  the  direction  of  the  sound.  In  the

remotest corner of the large garden where, beyond the hedge, the ground fell

away  in  a  sharp  declivity,  there  was  a  gloomy,  barren  spot  which  was

supposed to be haunted. Giant elms grew there and made a mournful moan in

the wind, and numberless crows built their nests in the branches, while their

hoarse  cawing  combined  with  the  solitude  of  the  gloomy  secluded  spot

produced a very uncanny impression. Here grandpapa found me lying on the

ground, with my face buried in the grass, and crying fit to break my heart.

Alas, I was no Spartan, at least not when I thought no one was looking. Fritz

was going to Pforta, we should no longer be able to play together, all our

games would cease, our happy hours of conversation were at an end, we

should no longer be able to exchange views on the books we had read, and

there would be no more fairy tales or music it was awful ! I, the poor Llama,

felt myself exceedingly badly used by fate ; I refused to take any food, and

laid myself down in the dust to die.

  " Come, Lizzie," said my grandpapa softly, " stand up ! " He dried my

tears,  took  me  by  the  hand  and  walked  silently  to  the  house  the  lamb

followed, bleating mournfully. " Grandpa, you won't tell anybody," I cried

imploringly. " No, of course not," he replied almost solemnly ; and I don't

believe  he  did.  But  he  was  certainly  rather  frightened  by  the  passionate

sorrow which sought to conceal itself. He took me into the sacred precincts of

his study and laid me on the sofa.

  Despite my misery, I felt that it was a great honour to be laid on grand

papa's sofa, although the room smelt so strongly of tobacco that it almost

took my breath away. Later on I was put to bed and declared to be ill. When

grandpapa came in the evening to say good-night to me he took both my

bands in his and said suddenly, " Just think of it, Lizzie, we shall have to kill

your  little  lamb."  "Oh  no,  grandpapa  !  "  I  cried,  so  horrified  that  I  was

awakened from my apathy. " Yes, indeed," he replied, "the little lamb has not

eaten  anything  since  the  morning,  and  if  you  are  going  to  be  ill  it  will

certainly die; surely it would be better to kill it." "But I won't be ill, grandpa,"

I said eagerly. When it was morning I got up very early and opened the door

of my lamb's little stable ; it romped out so joyfully to me, almost knocking

me down with its tender attention, that grandpapa and the others were obliged

to shriek with laughter at the queer capers we both cut ; for it seemed to methat life still possessed a few charms even though Fritz was going to Pforta.

  But perhaps it was not quite true to say that I, the little sister, suffered

most under the blow of my brother's departure. My mother often used to

relate how she frequently found our Fritz's pillow wet in the morning, from

tears shed secretly in the night. But during the day he controlled himself, as

became  a  man,  and  tried  to  paint  his  future  life  in  Pforta  in  as  glowing

colours as possible.

  Now  let  us  pause  a  moment  and  glance  back  at  his  childhood,  that

childhood which with his departure from the maternal roof had reached its

end,  and  from  which  the  boy,  bred  and  strengthened  in  character  by  the

influences of the home, now ventured out in a new environment with such

self-reliance. This thoroughly healthy boy, who, with the exception of one or

two childish ailments, had suffered only from trouble with his eyes, we can

see in our mind's eye, with his red cheeks, his tanned skin, his large brown

eyes and long chestnut hair. He was not a beautiful boy in the ordinary sense

of the word, but he was attractive on account of his thoughtful glance and

expression of intelligence, purity and innocence. He was deeply religious,

and a certain earnestness and profound reserve completely isolated him from

all that was alien to, or unworthy of, his nature. But for this reason alone his

heart was opened all the more freely to such friends as Wilhelm and Gustav,

who resembled him, and with whom he revelled in poetry and music and the

interchange of philosophic thoughts, In addition to this he pursued his studies

at school in the most conscientious way and interested himself in all branches

of knowledge. He was a tender, obedient son, reverent toward all his elders,

and the best of friends to his little sister. Now he set out, well protected in

body and soul, towards the new future, though his heart was heavy, for he

was indescribably sad at having to leave us all. But in accordance with his

natural reserve he showed no one his deep sorrow, nor did he reveal the hot

tears which the parting cost him. Is not this affectionate and good-natured

boy, who knew so well how to master himself, with all his varied gifts, his

taste for art, science and philosophy, who prized friendship above everything

and was the leader of his friends is not this boy the prototype of the future

Nietzsche, even though it be but in childish form ?

                    PART II SCHOOLDAYS AND BOYHOOD

                                CHAPTER VII PFORTA

  AFTER  passing  an  examination,  my  brother  entered  Pforta  at  the

beginning of October, 1858, and was placed in the second division of theLower Fourth Form, thus losing six months seniority in his school career.

Owing to the high standard of proficiency which this institution demanded of

the boys, it was in the habit of putting pupils from other public schools, even

when they were well up in their subjects, a class or division lower than their

proper one. As a general rule, it was found more satisfactory for boys to enter

young enough to allow them to go right through the school from bottom to

top, as by this means they could be certain that the instruction and knowledge

acquired were completely in accord with the general plan of study.

  Fritz writes to our mother on the first day of his life at Pforta " Up to the

present  have  been  perfectly  comfortable  ;  but  what  is  the  use  of  being

perfectly comfortable in a strange place?" To this " strange place," however,

he soon became accustomed, in spite of severe attacks of homesickness; for

the romantic situation and the monastic isolation of Pforta exercised a great

charm over him.

  The  present  Royal  School  of  Pforta,  which  was  formerly  a  Cistercian

abbey, lies in a completely isolated position, in a very charming and fertile

valley ; for the old monks always built their monasteries in spots where they

found the three "W's Wiese, Wolder, Wasser (meadows, woods, and water).

The old monastery walls, twelve feet high and two and a half feet thick,

surrounded a total area of seventy-three acres. In addition to the farm-houses,

the  beautiful  old  church,  the  school-house  with  its  cloisters,  and  general

accommodation for the instruction, board, lodging, bathing, gymnastics and

games,  etc.,  of  the  pupils,  these  walls  enclosed  a  beautiful  garden  of

extraordinarily  large  dimensions,  houses  for  twelve  masters  and  twenty

additional pupils, who were called out-boys. These twenty youths were under

the  special  supervision  of  their  respective  house-masters,  and  had  the

advantages of family life, board, and lodging. The public school of Pforta had

no day-boys, and owing to its isolated position it was from the first destined

to accommodate only the limited number of 200 pupils.

  In an essay by the Rector Kirschner, written in celebration of one of the

school anniversaries in 1843, the author describes the aims and objects of the

institution  as  follows  :  "  It  is  an  establishment  for  the  instruction  and

education of boys, in which a definite number of pupils, within a prescribed

and fixed period of six years, are prepared for a career to be devoted to the

higher branches of science or for the calling of scholars. The characteristic

which distinguishes Pforta from other schools is that it is a self-contained

scholastic State, in which the life of the individual boy is developed on everyside. Under the care of guardians, to whom all parental rights are handed

over,  the  boys'  parents  entrust  them  to  the  Alma  Mater,  not  only  for

instruction, as in a Municipal School, but also for education ; not only for the

development of their minds, but also for the formation of their morals and

character ; and thus they here find for the development of every side of their

nature even more opportunity than they would get in a second paternal home.

The time they spend in the institution covers the most important years of their

educational life, from adolescence to the period when they must enter the

University. For this reason every Pforta boy, as a rule, leaves the institution

with  the  definite  stamp  of  a  certain  sound  efficiency  which  lasts  him

throughout  his  life.  This  is  not  the  result  of  any  deliberate  aim  in  the

educational programme, but springs necessarily from the virile, severe, and

powerful spirit of discipline, from the inspiring community of purpose among

the various forms all striving towards one object, from the serious study of

classics and other kindred subjects divorced from all association with the

distractions  of  town  life,  and  from  the  method  applied  to  those  studies

themselves. This stamp, of which they are rightly proud, is acquired only as

the result of an inner struggle and great individual effort. It is a mistake,

therefore,  to  ascribe  the  great  value  of  Pforta,  as  many  do,  mainly  to  its

scientific training. Its pupils become complete men ; they are taught to obey

the command and the will of their superiors, and are used to the severe and

punctual  fulfilment  of  duty,  to  self-control,  to  earnest  work,  to  original

personal initiative, as a result of individual choice in their work and their love

of it. They are accustomed to thoroughness and method in their studies, to

rules  in  the  division  of  the  time  at  their  disposal,  and  to  a  certain  self-

confident  tact  and  fairness  in  intercourse  with  their  equals.  And  all  these

things are the fruits of the discipline and education peculiar to the school"

  My brother describes the daily life at Pforta in the summer of 1859 in his

diary as follows : " I will now attempt to give a picture of the ordinary life in

Pforta.  As  early  as  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  the  dormitory  doors  are

thrown open, and from that time onwards any one is free to rise who wishes

to do so. But at five o'clock (in winter at six) everybody must be out of the

room ; the usual school bell rings, the dormitory prefects shout peremptorily,

' Get up, get up ; make haste and turn out ! ' and punish all those who do not

find it so easy to drag themselves from their beds. Then all the boys scramble

into a few light garments as quickly as possible, and hurry to the lavatories to

secure  a  place  before  they  get  too  crowded.  The  process  of  rising  andwashing occupies the short space of ten minutes, after which they all return to

their rooms, where they dress properly. Five minutes to the half-hour the first

prayer bell goes, and at the second bell they all have to be in the hall for

prayers. Here the prefects keep order until the master comes, stop all talking,

and urge the Sixth Form boys, who are generally late, to take their places. In

due course the master appears, accompanied by his assistant, and the prefects

then report whether their forms have their full numbers complete. The organ

begins to play, and after a short overture the morning hymn is sung. The

master reads a passage from the New Testament, sometimes a psalm, and

recites the Lord's Prayer ; a final text concludes the ceremony. After this all

the boys go to their rooms, where cups of milk with small wheaten rolls await

them. Punctually at six o'clock (hi the winter at seven) the bell rings for all

the boys to go to their form rooms. Each boy takes his books, goes to his

form room, and remains there till seven o'clock. Then comes one hour of

preparation, as it is called. Lessons follow until ten, when there is another

hour for preparation, and, finally, class until twelve. At the close of each

lesson and hour of preparation a bell rings. Punctually at twelve every boy

carries his books to his room and hurries back to the cloisters. Here we all fall

in, in the order of our tables, so as to form groups of twelve in double files of

six, and the prefects call for silence. As soon as the master is in the Refectory

the fifteenth table marches first into the room and is followed by the rest. All

absentees  are  noted  down.  Then  one  of  the  prefects  recites  the  following

Grace : ' Almighty God and Heavenly Father, we pray Thee bless these Thy

bounteous gifts, which through Thy grace we now take unto us, in the name

of Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.' "Here the whole assembly sings the old

Latin hymn which the monks used to chant when Pforta was a monastery.

  " Then everybody sits down and the meal begins. " The menu for the

week is as follows : Monday : Soup, meat, vegetables, fruit. Tuesday : Soup,

meat,  vegetables,  bread-and-butter.  Wednesday  :  Soup,  meat,  vegetables,

fruit. Thursday : Soup, boiled beef, vegetables, grilled kidneys and salad.

Friday : Soup, roast pork, vegetables, bread-and-butter ; or soup, dumplings

and roast pork, fruit ; or soup, lentils, sausage and bread-and-butter. Saturday

: Soup, meat, vegetables, fruit.

  "Every boy gets about six ounces of bread at each meal. The meal is

closed by Grace.

  " Directly after meals the boys hurry into the garden. No boy must be

found indoors before half-past one, otherwise he is severely punished by theweekly prefect. First of all we go and see whether a parcel or a letter has not

been brought by the messenger who comes every day to Pforta ; or with our

pocket-money we buy fruit from a fruit-woman. Then ninepins are played in

the garden or walks are taken. In summer we play a great deal at ball. At 1.45

the bell rings for class, and in five minutes every boy must be seated. The

lessons now last until ten minutes to four, immediately upon which follow

vespers, when small rolls with butter, fruit or plum jam are distributed all

round.  After  this  the  Head  gives  a  lesson  in  which  Greek,  Latin  or

mathematical tests are written. At five o'clock there is a short recess ; after

which  preparation  lasts  till  seven  o'clock.  Supper  follows,  which  usually

resembles the midday meal.

  " The menu for the week is as follows : Monday and Friday : Soup,

bread-and-butter and cheese. Tuesday and Saturday: Soup, potatoes, herring

and  butter.  Wednesday  :  Soup,  sausage,  mashed  potatoes  or  pickled

cucumber.

    Thursday: Soup, pancakes, plum sauce, bread-and butter.

  Sunday : Soup, rice boiled in milk, bread-and-butter ; or, herring, salad,

sausage, bread-and-butter ; or, eggs, salad and bread-and-butter.

  " After this we all go into the school garden until half -past eight. Then

evening prayer is said, and at nine o'clock we go to bed. All the monitors,

who owing to the hour of preparation are an hour behind time, remain up

until ten o'clock. Such is the daily routine at Pforta as a rule.

  " In summer Sunday is spent as follows : We all get up at six, at quarter to

seven we have prayers, after which we are all free to go into the school

garden until eight o'clock. Then we have an hour's preparation, which comes

to an end at the sound of the church bell. We all get into line in the cloisters

and march to church, where the weekly prefect holds an inspection. After this

we are free until twelve o'clock to wander about the garden, and we are also

at liberty after the midday meal (consisting of soup, fricassee, roast meat,

stewed fruit and salad), until prayer time, which begins at half-past one. We

then have to work until three o'clock, whereupon we have another hour of

freedom in the school garden ; but directly after vespers the walk, to which

we have looked forward with such great longing, is taken until six o'clock.

Preparation occupies the hour from six to seven, and then the day closes as

usual with the evening meal, recreation in the garden and prayers."

  On Sundays and general holidays the pupils were also given a certain

quantity of wine, which was produced by the school in its own vineyardslying in the Saale Valley. I believe this wine was very sour ; at any rate, it is

owing to this Pforta wine, which as a rule is called " Naumburger," that my

brother  had  his  peculiar  aversion  from  this  drink.  As  a  matter  of  fact

Naumburger wine is much better than its reputation.

  As we see, the pupils at Pforta were excellently cared for both in body

and  mind.  Even  at  that  period  much  more  stress  was  laid  upon  physical

exercise in the open air than in other educational institutions of the day. Only

in one respect did my brother find ground for complaint, and that was on

account of the scant attention paid to the pupils' eyesight. During the day the

rooms were not sufficiently lighted for all the boys to see equally well, an

evil which was aggravated in the evening by the more or less indifferent

petroleum lamps. My brother was sent a second time to Schillbach, of Jena,

who gave him a letter addressed to Dr. Zimmermann, the medical officer of

the  school,  in  which  he  said  that  more  attention  should  be  paid  to  my

brother's eyes. Unfortunately, however, this letter did not have the desired

result, but rather the contrary. Dr. Zimmermann took it as an unjustifiable

criticism of the hygienic conditions at Pforta, and to some extent a reproach

against himself for not having seen that the bad conditions were altered. My

brother accordingly lost the goodwill of this otherwise excellent person, and

during the whole of his stay at Pforta every one of his indispositions, more

particularly when they were connected with his eyes, were falsely diagnosed

by Zimmermann. Indeed, things reached such a pitch that one of our aunts,

who had known Zimmermann in her youth, had a quarrel with him, and the

situation  was  not  improved  when  my  brother,  who  was  otherwise  very

respectful towards his elders, in a moment of impatience once called Dr.

Zimmermann " an old woman " a remark which that worthy accidentally

overheard. These, however, were mere details, and Dr. Zimmermann was

perfectly right when he pointed persistently to my brother's excellent bodily

and mental development, for, as a matter of fact, Fritz's life in Pforta suited

him splendidly.

    Although my brother, to all outward appearance, soon got used to the

regulations at Pforta, he did not do so without great difficulty. For the first

few years he missed his friends, Wilhelm and Gustav, of Naumburg, and their

places were not filled by anyone else. He also felt the loss of that freedom of

communication on every subject, which impelled him to come to me, his

little sister, and confide to her, before anyone else heard them, all his secret

productions, his poems and dramas. It is true that we used to see each otheralmost every week on Sundays in a beautifully situated inn at Almrich, half-

way between Naumburg and Pforta. But our interviews were always very

short, for the boys in the lower school were only free to take a walk of two or

three hours. In order that as little as possible of these few hours should be

wasted in the journey we met at the above-mentioned place, but even so we

had  not  sufficient  time  at  our  disposal  to  allow  of  any  confidential

conversation. Nevertheless all through the week Fritz looked forward to this

Sunday meeting, and was very disappointed when it could not take place. But

above all he loved the holidays, which he describes in his diary and letters in

the most glowing terms, and many weeks before they began he used to buoy

up  his  courage  with  the  thought  of  them.  He  suffered  a  great  deal  from

homesickness, but did not yield to this feeling in a weak spirit, but sought

rather to conceal it, an effort which the severe and virile education at Pforta

encouraged every boy to make. Nevertheless Professor Buddensieg, his tutor,

who was also the chaplain, must have had occasion to comfort the boys on

their return from the holidays by one of his warm-hearted addresses. In my

brother's diary of August, 1859, we find the following touching note : " ' Cure

for Home Sickness ' (according to Professor Buddensieg) : " 1. If we wish to

learn anything valuable, we cannot always remain at home.

  " 2. Our dear parents do not wish us to remain at home ; we therefore

fulfil our parents' wishes.

  " 8. Our loved ones are in God's hands. We are continually accompanied

by their thoughts.

  " 4. If we work diligently our sad thoughts will vanish.

  " 5. If all this is of no avail, pray to God Almighty."

  Later on my brother always said that the only thing that made his life at

Pforta so difficult to bear was the fact that for the whole day, from early in

the morning till late in the evening, one always had to think of particular

things at particular moments. With the rich, inner life my brother led, which

very often had little to do with the studies the school prescribed, it must have

been very hard for him not to have a moment for meditation. But Pforta has

one excellent rule : every week there is a day of study which according to an

old custom is called the " Sluggards' Day " (Ausschlafetag), because upon it

the boys are allowed an extra hour in bed. No classes are held, but only so-

called " preparation," during which the pupils try to polish up all they have

learnt in the week and are allowed to devote themselves without restraint to

their  own  pet  subjects.  Fritz  writes  enthusiastically  :  "  Such  days  areparticularly suitable for some great private work." I believe that without these

" Sluggards' Days " Fritz would never have endured the life at Pforta.

  In any case he found the cut-and-dried arrangement of the life at Pforta

somewhat narrowing and oppressive. It was particularly irksome for a boy

who  did  not  make  friends  easily  and  who  met  with  some  difficulty  in

discovering a comrade who shared his views. Every room in the institution

has from twelve to sixteen inmates, and is divided again into three or four

tables ; at each of these there is a monitor (a Sixth Form boy), a sub-monitor

(or Lower Fifth boy), and two lower school boys (from the Fourth Form).

The younger boys are left in charge of the monitor, who supervises their

behaviour  and  their  lessons  ;  and  during  the  hour  of  preparation  already

mentioned, which takes place between four and five in the afternoon, he is

responsible for their learning the grammar of the dead languages and has to

give them exercises in Latin prose and in the art of Latin verse. In addition to

this every pupil has one of the masters of the school as a tutor, to whom he

may appeal on any question concerning his mind or body.

  My brother's monitors and sub-monitors were always very kind to him,

but  found  him  somewhat  serious  and  reserved  for  his  years.  At  times  he

would surprise them by the sudden performance of some heroic deed, which

he  would  carry  out  without  any  bragging  or  preliminaries  of  any  soil.  I

remember that on one occasion he greatly alarmed a boy called Kramer, who

was his monitor, and who as a lieutenant was killed in the battle of Sadowa in

1866. The younger boys were talking of Mucius Scsevola, and some rather

tender-hearted boy must have remarked that calmly to allow one's hand to be

burnt  away  was  really  too  dreadful  and  almost  impossible.  "Why?"  Fritz

demanded quietly ; and taking a bundle of matches held them out in the palm

of his hand, set light to them, and without flinching thrust his hand straight

out  before  him.  The  other  boys  were  struck  dumb  with  amazement  and

admiration.  Suddenly  the  monitor,  seeing  what  had  happened,  rushed

forward, and with one blow flung the matches out of Fritz's hand, though not

before they had caused some rather severe burns. The story was hushed up,

because the monitor felt to a large extent responsible to Fritz's tutor and to

my mother. But he confided the story to me and begged me to try and induce

my brother not to go in for such dreadful experiments again.

  As  regards  physical  exercise,  my  brother  preferred  swimming  and

skating, as I have already pointed out. But he also liked the old-fashioned

German game of ball, which we used to play with great zest when we werechildren at Pobles. He did not care for gymnastics, nor was he ever very good

at them. Deussen remarks, quite rightly, that his short-sightedness spoilt this

form of exercise for him, but in addition to this his blood rushed very quickly

to  his  head.  This  was  a  characteristic  he  inherited  from  our  thoroughly

healthy mother, for if ever the three of us went up to the mountains when the

weather  was  at  all  hot,  we  always  remarked  on  each  other's  red  faces.  I

cannot  remember  that  my  brother  was  particularly  fat  in  those  days  as

Deussen declares he was. He was certainly strongly built and far from thin,

but he was not corpulent, as his photographs are with us to show. I must also

point  out  another  error  in  Deussen'  s  description  of  his  friend.  The  good

manners,  which  he  had  possessed  from  his  earliest  childhood  and  which

struck  his  schoolmates  so  forcibly,  were  not  due  to  his  associates  in

Naumburg.  It  was  simply  a  characteristic  of  the  Metzsches,  as  I  have

explained exhaustively in a former chapter. It was this innate and respectful

dignity  which  prevented  his  being  party  to  those  little  classroom  revolts,

signified by the stamping of feet and the singing of glorias, which took place

at Pforta whenever a master had made himself unpopular in any way. The

fact that this reserve met with quite a false interpretation and was regarded as

a form of currying favour with the masters, I first learnt from the memoirs of

Deussen,  the  Privy  Councillor  ;  but  this  was  very  far  indeed  from  being

Fritz's object. Taken all in all, my brother must have been a perfect model of

a pupil in those days. His reports were brilliant; he always had the highest

marks for industry and good conduct ; and in such subjects as Latin and

German he also often came out top. I remember that the only reproach which

his tutor had to make against him in those days was that Fritz held himself

too much aloof from the other boys. It is true that with the greatest fidelity he

still remained loyal to his two friends Gustav and Wilhelm of Naumburg, and

that  many  years  passed  by  before  he  contracted  a  hearty  friendship  with

Deussen and later on with young Baron von Gersdorff .

  The unusual mixture of childishness and profound seriousness which we

find  in  his  letters  and  other  writings  of  this  period  is  extraordinary.  For

instance, on the 15th August, 1859, when he was full of one of those little

class revolts against a certain master, he describes the matter with childish

importance, but adds a host of philosophical remarks which seem more suited

to an older boy and which, perhaps, are the result of much that he had heard

and read. about the use of school time he writes as follows: "It is a common

thing to hear school days spoken of as solemn days ; they are indeed dayswhich may have the most profound influence on one's whole life, but they are

also extremely difficult years for the boys who have to go through them,

because their fresh young minds have to squeeze into such narrow limits. But

even for those to whom this period is one of great difficulty it is also often

very barren. For this reason it is very important that school life should be

used to the best advantage. The chief object should be to become equally

proficient in all the sciences, arts and other faculties, and that body and mind

should  go  hand  in  hand.  One  should  guard  against  specialising  in  one's

studies. All authors who are read should be studied for more than one reason

and  not  merely  for  grammar,  syntax  or  style,  but  also  for  their  historical

contents  and  the  particular  point  of  view  which  they  reveal.  Indeed,  the

writings of Greek and Latin poets should be studied side by side with the

German classical writers, and their respective points of view compared. In the

same  way  history  should  only  be  learnt  in  conjunction  with  geography,

mathematics with physics and music : then magnificent fruit will grow on the

tree of truth, permeated with the same spirit and illuminated by the same

sun."

  Other remarks, as, for instance, how Schiller embodies earlier poetical

attempts  in  his  play  "  The  Robbers,"  or  the  wishes  which  my  brother

expressed on his fifteenth birthday, when he said he would like us to give him

Don Quixote, Kleist's works, Platen's Biography, or Tristram Shandy (about

which he jotted down many an aphorism) all these things are surprising, and,

when taken in conjunction with the childish remarks of an exemplary son and

pupil, seem rather precocious. But his psychological retrospect of his own

development is particularly remarkable. He writes on October 25th, 1859 : " I

am now possessed by an extraordinary desire for knowledge and universal

culture : Humboldt has awakened this feeling in me, and I only hope it may

remain as constant in me as my predilection for poetry."

  He then proceeds to describe himself and his life up to his fifteenth year,

and all his various hobbies ; in the first place, his interest in flowers and

plants,  then  in  architecture,  then  in  military  matters  (awakened  by  the

Crimean War), and afterwards his interest in the stage, which was revealed by

his  production  of  the  play,  "  The  Gods  on  Olympus."  Finally  he  calls

attention to his love of poetry, which began in his ninth year, and above all to

his  passion  for  music,  which  in  his  eleventh  year  found  its  origin  in  his

admiration of sacred melodies. He also refers to his love of painting, and then

proceeds to say : " It must not be thought that these tendencies came directlyone upon another; they were so interwoven that it is impossible to discover a

beginning  or  an  end  to  them.  After  this  there  followed  my  later  love  of

literature,  geology,  mythology,  and  the  German  language  (including  Old

High German) of which the following classification may be made : " 1. Love

of Nature : (a) Geology ; (b) Botany ; (c) Astronomy.

  " 2. Love of Art : (a) Music ; (b) Poetry ; (c) Painting ; (d) Theatricals.

  "  8.  Imitative  performances  and  interests  :  (a)  Military  matters  ;  (b)

Architecture ; (c) Naval matters.

  "4.  My  favourite  aims  in  scholarship  :  (a)  A  good  Latin  style  ;  (b)

Mythology ; (c) Literature ; (d) The German language.

  " 5. My inward desire for universal culture embraces everything else and

includes much that is new : (A) Languages (a) Hebrew ; (b) Greek ; (c) Latin

; (d) German ; (c) English ; (/) French, etc.

  " (B) Arts : (a) Mathematics ; (b) Music ; (c) Poetry ; (d) Painting; (e)

Modelling; (/) Chemistry; (g) Architecture, etc.

  " (C) Imitative pastimes : (a) Military science ; (b) Naval science ; (c) The

knowledge of the various trades, etc.

  " (D) The Sciences : (a) Geography ; (b) History ; (c) Literature ; (d)

Geology ; (e) Natural History ; (/) Antiquity, etc., and above all, Religion, the

foundation of all knowledge.

  " Great is the domain of knowledge, eternal is the search for Truth ! "

  Apart from the somewhat precocious wisdom of these remarks, Fritz was

still, in many respects, very boyish, especially, for instance, in his joy over

the holidays. The mere planning of these holidays, and the picturing of them

beforehand, were a source of enormous pleasure to him, though this was

always  cast  into  the  shade  by  the  reality.  His  gladness  over  the  summer

holidays becomes almost dithyrambic ; he writes : " The summer holidays !

These  are  magic  words  for  every  alumnus  languishing  for  freedom,  an

Eldorado which gives us the courage to sail with good cheer across the great

ocean of the school term. What ecstasy when at last the cry, ' Land ! Land ! '

is heard. With great rejoicings everyone decks his ship of life with wreaths,

and the old familiar rooms of the boarding school are hung with garlands

which  bear  the  word  '  Hope  '  on  every  leaf.  Who  could  describe  the

overflowing feelings and the proud consciousness which waft up to the stars

? We utter no sigh or plaint when we tear ourselves from the arms of the

Alma Mater ; no, on the contrary, we feel as free and as happy as larks that

soar into the blazing firmament and plunge their wings into the surging floodof purple. But is this really freedom ? For five weeks only may we soar

through eternal distance over mountain and valley ; but then a peremptory cry

calls us back to the gloomy old walls."

  Not only the summer holidays, however, but every holiday was eagerly

expected and made the opportunity of some excursion or tour. But some of

the time was always spent at home, where he was really "happiest." The notes

he  made  upon  his  travels  and  visits  to  various  places  are  exceedingly

amusing. For instance, a visit paid to a relative in Jena, a Dr. Schenk, who

was  a  senior  alderman  of  that  city,  gave  him  occasion  to  write  the  most

enthusiastic descriptions ; for, not only his dear relatives, but the students as

well, were particularly kind to the fourteen year-old boy who was the nephew

of their senior alderman. A journey to the Hartz mountains, in the summer of

1861,  which  he  made  in  connection  with  a  visit  to  another  uncle,  is

exhaustively and enthusiastically described in one of the diaries of his travels.

At Easter, 1862, he was allowed to visit me in Dresden, where I was staying

with a charming family (the von Mosch's) to finish my education. A tender,

brotherly letter records a loving retrospect of this meeting, and in it he does

not omit to forward my education with a host of paternal admonitions, and to

chaff me about the tearful farewell I gave him, and the excess of gushing

expressions in my speech.

  " I am writing this at my standing desk ; my standing desk is against the

window, and the window offers a pleasant prospect over the lime trees and

the sun-bathed Saale hills. The delightful natural scenery reminds me very

much of Dresden, and the enjoyable days we spent there together. In order to

think of you, my dear Lizzie, do not imagine that I first require such a vast

jog to my memory as all this ; on the contrary, I think of you so often without

provocation, that I keep you almost constantly in my mind even when I am

asleep, for I dream fairly often of you and our times together.

  "  Didn't  everything  go  off  splendidly  ?  Until  I  had  actually  started,  I

scarcely believed that I should make the journey. But what beautiful days I

spent in Dresden, and what nice long talks we often had together. As a matter

of fact, you have been away barely seven weeks. Heavens, it seems quite a

century to me ! And now my stay in Dresden furnishes a richly coloured and

poetical background to my prosaic and humdrum life here. I trust that you

were not in any way disappointed that I could not stay longer in Dresden.

Heavens, the Michaelmas holidays are scarcely six months ahead, and we

shall see each other again then ! Do you regard that as poor comfort ? "Dresden is much too comfortable ; you will be able to bear the remaining

months there perfectly well ! above all try hard to know all the art treasures

of that city very well, so that you may derive profit in that direction also !

You must go through the picture galleries at least twice a week, even if you

only have time to take in one or two pictures thoroughly enough to be able to

give me a detailed account of them (in writing, of course). Very selfish, eh ? "

  During the summer holidays of 1862 he again went to the lower Hartz

mountains ; in the summer of 1863 he went to the Voigtland and across the

frontier into Bohemia, where he made a very pleasant tour, alone, from one

watering place to another in that province. The most cheerful descriptions

exist of these wanderings, which show what a regular high-spirited schoolboy

he was, and how little of the dreamer and brooder he revealed at that time.

  But the most beautiful summer resort of our childhood, the home of our

beloved grandparents at Pobles, came to an end in the summer of 1859. On

the 2nd August, 1859, we celebrated grandpapa Oehler's seventieth birthday.

Children, stepchildren and grandchildren all came together in great numbers.

When, on the following morning, I left my room rather early, Fritz, who was

already in the garden, came to meet me, and told me that he had awakened

very early because he had had an extraordinary dream. He had seen the whole

parsonage of Pobles lying in ruins, and our dear grandmother sitting alone

beneath its shattered framework amid the debris. This dream had made him

give vent to such, heart-breaking tears and sobs that he had not been able to

go to sleep again. Our mother forbade us to mention this dream. Besides, our

dear grandfather was so fresh and vigorous that anyone would have given

him another twenty years to live. Late in the summer, however, he caught

such a violent cold that he fell seriously ill. He who had never had the doctor,

save as a visitor to the house, was now compelled to call in his help. The

illness was declared to be influenza, and towards the middle of the winter, the

man we all loved so deeply departed this world and left an irreparable breach

in our midst. He had worked as the parson of his parish for forty years, and

had laid the foundations of the most friendly patriarchal relations between all.

Through  his  death  my  brother  lost  a  faithful  fatherly  friend,  and  a  most

affectionate adviser.

                              CHAPTER VIII CHANGES

  AT Easter, 1861, my brother was confirmed at Pforta. In his Memoirs,

Privy Councillor Deussen gives the following account of the beginning of the

friendship between himself and Fritz : " A new bond was formed on theSunday of Mid-Lent, 1861, through our both being confirmed together. When

the candidates for confirmation went up to the altar in couples in order to

receive the sacrament on their knees, Nietzsche and I, as the closest friends,

knelt  side  by  side.  I  still  have  a  vivid  recollection  of  the  holy  and

transcendental  mood  which  filled  us  during  the  weeks  before  and  after

confirmation.  We  were  prepared  to  leave  this  world  at  once  and  find

ourselves by the side of Christ, and all our thoughts, feelings and aspirations

were bathed in a celestial cheerfulness which, like a forced plant, could not

live long, and withered away as quickly as it had sprung up, beneath the

impressions of everyday life and learning. Yet a certain faith remained within

us until after our leaving examination, although it was really unconsciously

stifled  by  the  excellent  methods  of  historical  criticism  with  which  the

ancients were treated at Pforta, and which in those days was extended quite

naturally  to  the  domain  of  Biblical  literature.  For  instance,  Steinhart,  the

Professor  of  Hebrew,  explained  the  45th  Psalm  to  the  Sixth  Form  as  an

earthly marriage song."

  This description given by Deussen of the religious changes which both

friends underwent is certainly on the whole correct. In his utterances about

Christianity and religion in those days my brother was extremely cautious,

especially as he had once roused my mother and Aunt Rosalie (who was an

authority  on  dogma)  to  a  positive  storm  of  indignation  when  he

recommended The Life of Jesus (Strauss) and The History of the Church, by

Professor von Haase, as Christmas presents for myself. We should know little

of the religious feelings of my brother at this time if a certain note about "

Fate  and  History,"  written  in  the  spring  of  1862,  when  he  was  not  yet

eighteen  years  of  age,  did  not  give  us  a  certain  insight  into  his  inner

experiences.

  "  If  we  could  examine  Christian  doctrine  and  Church  History  with  a

perfectly impartial eye, we should be compelled to admit much which would

be opposed to generally accepted ideas. But, weighed down as we are from

the very first years of our life by the yoke of habit and prejudice, hindered in

the natural development of our mind and the formation of our character by

the impressions of our childhood, we feel bound to regard it almost as a sin to

adopt a more liberal standpoint, and from that position to give an impartial

verdict on religion and Christianity, in keeping with the age in which we live.

Such a task is not the matter of a few weeks but of a lifetime. For how, armed

with the results of mere youthful broodings, could one dare to annihilate theauthority of two thousand years and the testimony of the greatest intellects of

all ages ? How, by means of fanciful ideas and unripe opinions alone, could

one form a correct idea of all the deep consequences and the sorrows and

blessings of a religious development in the history of the world ? It is sheer

arrogance to try to solve philosophical problems about which there has been a

conflict of opinions for two thousand years, or to overthrow beliefs which

according to the convictions of the highest intellects are alone capable of

elevating the animal man into a true man, or to unite natural science and

philosophy without knowing the principal results of either ; or finally, to

construct a system of reality out of natural science and history, while the

unity of universal history and the fundamental principles thereof have not yet

been revealed to the human mind. . . .

  " How often have I not thought that all our philosophy is like the Tower

of  Babel  ;  to  storm  the  heavens  is  the  aim  of  all  great  aspirations  ;  the

Kingdom of Heaven on earth means practically the same thing. An infinite

confusion  of  ideas  among  the  people  is  the  discomforting  result  ;  great

revolutions will occur in the future, when once the great mass of mankind is

convinced that the whole fabric of Christianity rests upon assumptions ; the

existence of God, immortality, the authority of the Bible, inspiration, and

other  things  will  always  remain  problems.  I  have  attempted  to  deny

everything : Oh ! destruction is easy, but construction ! and even destruction

seems a lighter task than it really is. We are so influenced in our innermost

being by the impressions of our childhood and the influence of our parents

and  education,  that  these  deeply  imbedded  prejudices  are  not  so  easily

uprooted by means of rational arguments or a mere effort of the will. Force of

habit, the need of striving after a lofty goal, the breach with every existing

institution, the dissolution of every form of society, the suspicion as to the

possibility of having been misled for two thousand years by a mirage, the

sense of one's own arrogance and audacity all these considerations fight a

determined  battle  within  us,  until  at  last  painful  experiences  and  sad

occurrences lead our hearts back to the old beliefs of our childhood."

  This explanation, which reveals so much of my brother's inner feelings

about Christianity, we owe to a lecture which he delivered before a little

literary society called Germania. Once on a holiday tour with Wilhelm Finder

he  had  hit  upon  the  idea  of  this  literary  society,  and  on  their  return,  in

conjunction with Gustav Krug, it was founded with the utmost solemnity on

the 25th July, 1860. The friends bought a nine penny bottle of red Naumburgwine  and  set  forth  in  earnest  and  dignified  procession  to  the  ruin  of

Schonburg, at an hour's distance from the city. By means of an extremely

rickety ladder they climbed to the highest ledge of the watch tower, from

which there was a magnificent view over the picturesque Saale valley, and

from this position, far removed from the misty regions of the plain, they

discussed their plan for fulfilling their highest aspirations for culture. My

brother recalled this experience in later years in his lectures on The Future of

our Educational Institutions : "We resolved to found a kind of small club

which would consist of ourselves and a few friends, and the object of which

would be to provide us with a stable and binding organisation, directing and

adding interest to our creative impulses in art and literature ; or to put it more

plainly, each of us would be pledged to present an original piece of work to

the club once a month, either a poem, a treatise, an architectural design, or a

musical  composition,  upon  which  each  of  the  others,  in  a  friendly  spirit,

would have to pass free and unrestricted criticism. We thus hoped by means

of mutual correction to be able both to stimulate and to chasten our creative

impulses. And, as a matter of fact, the success of the scheme was such, that

we have always felt a sort of respectful attachment both to the hour and the

place at which it first took shape in our minds."

  At the end of the ceremony the youths pledged themselves to the bond of

friendship  and  community  of  ideas,  baptised  the  society  "Germania,"  and

hurled the empty bottle into the abyss.

  The Gernania experienced many vicissitudes. At one period, for instance,

contributions  poured  in  with  the  greatest  activity  and  regularity,  and  the

meetings were held in the holidays, but afterwards various other demands

took precedence, and the members did not remain true to their obligations

either in the matter of pecuniary or literary contributions. We were always

very  much  amused  at  the  solemn  and  courtly  tone  which  the  friends

constantly observed between themselves (save in the matter of mutual literary

criticism, when each was more or less driven to discourtesy), a tone which

prevailed not only at their meetings but also in their private intercourse. An

unvarnished account of the ups and downs in the literary life of this society is

contained in the minutes of the association written by my brother and dated

22nd September, 1862 : " Last term showed great activity on the part of the

members of the society and was concluded by a highly interesting meeting.

Accordingly  on  the  14th  April  of  this  year  we  felt  ourselves  justified  in

expressing the hope that in view of the eager activity, or better still the activeeagerness, with which we sought to strengthen and develop our Germania, we

might be able gradually to extend the narrow limits of our performances,

more particularly with regard to politics and modern history, but above all in

the domain of those arts which had not yet been touched upon.

  "  Since  April,  five  months  have  elapsed  which  have  produced  results

thoroughly unfavourable for the Germania. This may, perhaps, be accounted

for by the fact that circumstances were adverse one knows how easily school-

work, dancing lessons, love affairs, political excitement, etc., can overthrow

the meagre defences of our Germania statutes. Or maybe we are merely the

victims of the law of historical necessity, the inevitable reaction that follows

upon any violent state of activity (I make an exception in favour of friend P.

who  regards  this  as  un-Christian  and  lays  everything  on  the  shoulders  of

excessive school-work). At all events, whatever the reason may be, the fact

remains that a violation of our constitution has taken place, the sanctity of the

statutes has been assailed, and the Germania has almost gone to the dogs

through inner dissolution, dissension and apathy. Financial carelessness and

illegality characterise the beginning of this period, just as all great breaches

with the past, all revolutions and reformations, are inaugurated .by a financial

swindle. One sign, however, that our Germania is still sound at heart seems to

be that its members are on the whole awakening to the consciousness that

they have all sinned and that we now feel it incumbent upon us to show a

double degree of activity and energy. May this consciousness guide us in the

regeneration of our Germania and lay the proper means in our hands for its

thorough reconstruction. Our energies for the present must accordingly be

concentrated  principally  upon  the  following  points  :  "  1.  How  shall  each

member send in his over-due contributions and how much grace shall he be

given for this purpose ? " 2. How can we redress our state of financial distress

and how shall we regulate our statutes of purchase ? "3. How shall we so

reform  our  statutes  in  general  as  to  render  such  discrepancies  as  those

described  above  impossible  in  future  ?  "  4.  By  what  means  may  we  be

spurred to eager activity ? "

  The secretary goes on. to examine each point in. turn, after which he is in

a position to declare that for his part the twenty-five contributions such as

poems,  compositions  and  essays  due  for  the  twenty-five  months  that  the

Germania had been in existence had been regularly sent in. The same test

applied to the friends did not yield such favourable results and his report

continues  :  "  Our  financial  difficulties  are  to  be  ascribed  chiefly  to  thepurchase of Richard Wagner's Tristan und Isolde, made on the motion of

Gustav Krug. As he has declared himself unready to meet any of the claims

of the next new purchase, I beg him to state his views accurately in writing.

In addition to this the subscriptions of one or two members, among whom the

writer  confesses  himself  a  culprit,  have  also  been  failing  for  some  time.

Gustav Krug should be honourably mentioned for the general punctuality of

his payments. I leave it to the members to determine the limit of time within

which all overdue contributions, whether literary or pecuniary, should be sent

in. Finally I would entreat the treasurer to draw up an account of the financial

position of the Germania for these minutes and to make an exact estimate of

the debit and credit. " As regards the third point, that of an alteration in the

statutes, I expect a motion from one of the members which will lead to a

discussion on the subject.

  " There remains the proposal already moved by me with regard to a prize

for the best essay, to be given as a stimulus to enthusiasm. This proposal can

only be passed with the consent of the various members ; and the prescribed

limit of time must be stated in writing.

  " Finally, I venture to ask to be allowed to retain the post of secretary

until next Christmas, as hitherto I have not bad sufficient scope for activity in

this respect. At Christmas I shall once more refer to our Easter synod in my

summing up of the events of the year, and will also discuss any overdue

contributions which happen to reach the society before that time. " I conclude

with the hope that our present irregular synod may not prove only a bubble

blown out with gases from the decomposing body of our Germania, but rather

a decisive process of purification and amputation of everything rotten and

corrupted, and a refining of the pure and noble conceptions upon which our

society is founded.

  Ten additions were then made to the statutes and altogether the very best

resolutions were formed for the future ; but in spite of every effort the literary

life  and  vigorous  prosperity  which  the  Germania  had  enjoyed,  more

particularly in the winter of 1861-62, could not be revived. In the summer

holidays of 1863 the last synod of the Germania took place. The approach of

the leaving examination, which for the friends Wilhelm and Gustav was to

take place as early as the Easter of 1864, demanded the application of all their

intellectual  powers.  Only  Fritz,  who  on  account  of  his  having  been

transferred to Pforta had been put six months back in the school year, had a

little more time at his disposal, and was therefore able, as we may see fromthe following list, to send his contributions regularly to the society until July,

1863.  But  he  soon  got  tired  of  this  one-sided  arrangement,  and  at  the

abovementioned  meeting  of  the  synod  it  was  decided  that  the  Germania

should be laid to rest and not be resuscitated until the gay undergraduate life

began.

  LIST  OF  NIETZSCHE'S  CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  GERMANIA

FROM AUGUST, 1860 TO SEPTEMBER, 1862.

    August,  1860:  Overture  and  Chorus  to  the  Christmas  Oratorio.

September, 1860 : Journey in the Hartz Mountains. October, 1860 : Two

Shepherd  Choruses  for  the  Christmas  Oratorio.  November,  1860  :  Two

Choruses of the Prophets for the Christmas Oratorio.

    January,  1861  :  Seven  poems  (overdue).  February,  1861  :  The

Annunciation for the Christmas Oratorio. March, 1861 : " The Childhood of

Nations " (lecture before the synod).

  April,  1861  :  Translation  of  Servian  folk  songs.  May,  1861  :  The

Annunciation with fugue. June, 1861 : Chorus of Shepherds, Song of the

Moors. July, 1861 : Ermanarich, literary historical sketch (lecture before the

synod).

    August, 1861 : " Pain is the Fundamental Feature of Nature,"

  a piece of music. September, 1861 : Concerning the Dante Symphony

(lecture before the synod). October, 1861 : Autumn songs.

    November, 1861 : Servia (symphonic poem, Parts I. and II.). December,

1861 : Concerning Byron's dramatic works (lecture before the synod).

    January,  1862  :  Napoleon  III.  as  a  President.  February,  1862  :  Three

Hungarian sketches, musical pieces. March, 1862 : Siegfried, a poem.

  April, 1862 : Dates and history (lecture before the synod). May, 1862 :

Ermanarich's death, poem. June, 1862 : Hungarian March, " A Hero's Plaint."

July, 1862 : " The Days of Youth," a song. August, 1862 : " Be Still, my

Heart," Hungarian sketch. September, 1862 : New poems. October, 1862 : "

A Streamlet runneth through the Vale,"

  a  song.  November,  1862  :  "  Kriemhild's  Character  according  to  the

Nibelungen." December, 1862 : " Oh ! the Peal of the Bells on a Winter's

Night," song.

    January, 1868 : " Faithless Love," song. February, 1863 : " Characteristic

National Proverbs, etc.,"

    treatise.

    March,  1863  :  "  On  the  Sea,"  poem.  April,  1863  :  "Concerning  theDemoniacal Element in Music,"

  Part I. (lecture before the synod). May, 1863 : Ditto, Part II. June, 1863 : "

Two pages of criticism " (as secretary).

  In this list I miss the mention of a certain lecture my brother gave before

the synod about Holderlin ; though it is possible that I am only thinking of a

letter from Wilhelm Finder, written with the object of recommending the

purchase of Holderlin's poems for the Germania, and which was therefore

read aloud before the synod. My brother wrote an essay in the form of a letter

based upon this communication of Finder's, which in the autumn of 1861 he

presented at Pforta as a piece of German composition. It is impossible to read

this letter, which stands in the first Appendix to Vol. I of the large edition of

this biography, without some emotion ; for a good deal in it is very similar to

what was said about my beloved brother in later years. It is true that his form

master gave him fair second-class marks, but he added, " I should like to

advise the author in a friendly way to turn his attention to a more healthy, a

more lucid, and a more German poet."

  The literary society, the Germania, had a very valuable influence over my

brother's  development.  It  was  in  this  society  that  he  was  able  to  give

expression  to  his  deepest  feelings  without  restraint,  and  for  this  reason

nothing teaches us so much about his intellectual evolution as his essays and

reports written for the Germania. Observe, for instance, the change in his

views on music. How solemnly had not he expressed himself in favour of

classical music as late as 1858. He himself, however, already sets important

notes of interrogation to these remarks in 1860 ; the great revolution in his

views must therefore have taken place in the interval. When the Germania

was founded in July, 1860, it was decided that " the musical magazine Die

Zeitschrift fur Musik " should be taken in ; this was the only paper which at

that time was an enthusiastic champion of Wagner and his work. A resolution

was also passed to buy Wagner's Tristan. In the autumn of 1888 my brother

writes in the memoirs of his youth, " From the moment that Tristan was

arranged for the piano I was a Wagnerite." My own belief, however, is that

my brother was a Wagnerite before this and that Tristan only brought his

feelings to boiling point. I remember that the autumn holidays of 1862 were

employed by my brother and his friend Gustav from morning till night in

playing this arrangement for the piano. But as Gustav's father was entirely in

favour of classical music these Wagner orgies were celebrated at our house.

When Fritz asked me whether it was not " wonderfully beautiful," I bad toacknowledge that much to my regret the music did not appeal to me. I very

much doubt, by-the-bye, whether the performance of these two youths would

at this period have pleased anybody at all, for neither of them had as yet

heard the opera, and therefore did not know how to bring out the melody

properly from the superabundance of tone. They both made ail incredible

noise, and the sound of their powerful voices occasionally reminded one of

the howling of wolves. The story goes that a certain deaf woman who lived

opposite  us  anxiously  rushed  to  her  window,  when  she  heard  the  fearful

noises that seemed to have penetrated even her ears, because she thought

there must be a fire somewhere.

  It must not be thought, however, that the Germania list includes all my

brother's private works and studies during his stay at Pforta by no means.

There were in addition innumerable poems, compositions and private essays

of all sorts, which were written at this time. Unfortunately he destroyed a

good many of these, but those that have survived prove very distinctly a point

to which Raoul Richter calls attention in his lectures on Nietzsche, when he

says that " many of the characteristic features of the later Nietzsche already

existed in the germ in the Pforta days. This applies more particularly to his

most original trait of always having moods, of watching them, and of being

able to grasp and describe them, as the following sentences from an essay he

wrote as a Sixth Form boy about moods (who in those days wrote about

moods ?) certainly proves : ' When I examine my own thoughts and feelings

and hearken unto my own soul in dumb attention, I often feel as if I heard the

buzzing and roaring of wild contending parties, as if there were a rustling in

the air as when a thought or an eagle flies towards the sun ' (Vol. L, p. 824),

and  these  passionate  or  imaginary  moods,  the  children  of  his  will  and

temperament, already stand in opposition to those bright flashes of insight

which are the offspring of a clear understanding. The discord between will

and  intellect,  which  Nietzsche  persistently  attempted  to  harmonise,  finds

touching expression in one of the letters written to his sister : ' When for any

length of time I am allowed to think what I choose, I seek words for a melody

I possess, and a melody for words I possess, but the two together will not

harmonise, despite the fact that they both come from one soul. But that is my

fate ! ' "

  I  must  now  refer  to  other  changes  in  this  period  which  are  also  very

characteristic of my brother. Until he reached the Upper Fifth Form he was,

as I have already stated, an exemplary pupil, as can be proved by his report ofthe autumn of 1861, when he came out top of the first division of the Lower

Fifth Form : " Behaviour : Very good.

  " Industry : Very good.

  " Marks attained : Religion, very satisfactory ; Latin, excellent ; Greek,

very satisfactory ; Hebrew, satisfactory ; German, very satisfactory ; French,

very satisfactory ; Mathematics, satisfactory; History, very satisfactory.

  The cause which turned this exemplary boy into a somewhat slack scholar

it is now difficult to determine. It may have been due simply to the fact of his

having  reached  a  rather  critical  age  in  his  development.  The  school  was

beginning to bore him. He was fostering the idea of devoting himself entirely

to  music  ;  but  in  the  meanwhile  his  mind  was  full  of  virgin  forests  and

woodcutting, and constantly bewailed the steady jog-trot and the oppressive

narrowness of his life at that time.

  The extraordinary dissatisfaction with his surroundings which my brother

now began to feel, first manifested itself towards the beginning of the year

1862. A rather amusing feature connected with it was the fact that our keen-

sighted Aunt Rosalie associated this change in my brother with his passionate

study of Shakespeare's works, which he had received for Christmas, 1861 ;

but Byron might also have had something to do with it. Though we thought

this  idea  rather  far-fetched  at  the  time,  I  must  say  H  that  I  have  often

wondered since whether there was not a good deal of truth in it. Until that

time he had read only one or two things from either of these authors. Now,

however, these two spirits worked upon him with the whole power of their

art,  and  maybe  it  was  as  early  as  this  period  that  he  began  to  feel  that

admiration for strong and free men about which he wrote to me twenty-two

years later as follows : " Every form of strength is in itself refreshing and

delightful to behold. Read Shakespeare: he presents you with a crowd of such

strong men rough, hard, mighty man of granite. It is precisely in these men

that  our  age  is  so  poor."  The  narrow  limits  of  the  school  of  Pforta  were

certainly not fitted to Shakespeare's broad outlook.

  At all events, Shakespeare and Byron, whom he read with a schoolfellow

called Granier, who had a turn for poetry, exercised a great influence over his

own productions. Under the influence of these studies, both boys declared

that their former literary productions were " milk-and watery sentimentality."

They now resolved, therefore, to write poetry and prose with more irony,

strength and realism, and mutually to criticise each other's efforts. This period

was but a short one and my brother used afterwards to declare with greatcheerfulness that their compositions were very far from possessing any of the

above qualities, but had been only puerile, coarse, and indecent. But, as he

added with a laugh, they only possessed that innocent indecency which was

modelled on the strongest expressions they could find in Shakespeare and

Schiller. Granier seems to have gone to the greatest extremes in this respect ;

at least, when some time afterwards we were putting some old documents in

order,  my  brother,  with  cheerful  indignation,  thrust  all  this  youth's

productions into the fire. But Fritz, too, made an effort to surpass himself in

this direction, as the beginning of a story proves, which, in later years, his old

schoolfellow  Granier  published  without  either  explanation  or  permission.

This period cannot be said to have survived its earliest stage, for Fritz was

quickly  disgusted  with  this  immature  emulation  of  Shakespeare  and  soon

characterised it as " loathsome and childish."

  He plunged with passionate ardour, in those days, into interests which lay

outside the school curriculum, more particularly music. He also sent a great

many contributions to his literary society, the Germania, and his schoolwork

naturally suffered in consequence.

    Throughout my brother's life there was a struggle between his private

scientific  tastes  and  the  technical  demands  made  upon  him,  first  by  his

school, then by his University and the special course of study pursued there,

and  lastly  by  his  Professorship.  This  inner  conflict  is  sometimes  very

strikingly apparent, while occasionally it seems entirely to disappear ; for at

all times he endeavoured to search so deeply into the branches of knowledge

which  his  various  positions  imposed  upon  him,  and  so  to  extend  their

application, that he was able in the end to find, in some degree, a lively and

warm  satisfaction  even  in  those  studies  which  his  duties  entailed,  and  to

convert  them  into  a  means  of  promoting  and  assisting  his  chief  interests.

Naturally such a dual task the task of promoting his own most secret and

private aspirations without neglecting his actual duties exacted much strength

and  health.  Now,  whether  he  felt  that  his  private  studies  were  suffering

through  his  efforts  to  overcome  and  adjust  the  foreign  material  he  had

absorbed,  or  whether  he  thought  that  his  strength  was  not  equal  to  the

strenuous  dual  task,  at  any  rate,  he  became  possessed  by  a  profound

resentment towards that which was imposed upon him from outside. This

period  of  dissatisfaction  covers  the  months  between  the  January  and  the

autumn of 1862. Healthy and strong as he looked, he suffered a good deal

during this time from colds, hoarseness and repeated attacks of eye-troubleand headaches. Of course with all these disturbances he was not able to work

as well as usual, and this turned his heart against everything connected with

the school.

  The Fifth Form is proverbially the one in which the majority of boys

begin to think themselves misunderstood. In my brother's case this feeling

may have been even more acute than usual because, just at this time, his tutor

in Pforta, Professor Buddensieg, to whom he had grown very much attached,

fell ill and died. During his boyhood and youth my brother found it very

difficult to make new friends, and, even when he succeeded, he only opened

his heart and gave expression to the flood of thoughts that filled his mind,

when his whole soul was possessed with love and he felt confident that his

master was full of the best of goodwill towards him. But it took some time

for him to reach this point, as he was far from being easily pleased. Before he

would believe that any master was honestly well disposed towards him and

recognised his gifts, the appreciation had to be shown very plainly indeed ;

but in a school like Pforta such an attitude on the part of a master was quite at

variance with the educational principles of the establishment.

  I  believe  that  my  brother  was  often  falsely  judged  by  his  masters,

although they were always very friendly to him ; I was once told that they

suspected him of some irony towards them but this was quite a mistake. He

was  filled  with  the  most  enthusiastic  admiration  for  their  scientific

researches, set great store by the severity and honesty of their methods, and

spoke  of  them  only  in  terms  of  deep  reverence,  especially  of  Corssen,

Steinhardt,  Keil,  Koberstein,  and  Peter.  He  did  not  even  attempt  to  pass

judgment upon their weaknesses, whether great or small, but always let them

pass  ;  and  it  was  obviously  painful  to  him  to  discuss  them  at  all.  His

deferential  mind  recoiled  from  coarse  jokes  about  them  ;  for  as  he  says

himself in The Joyful Wisdom, he was " a reverent animal."

  Now this misunderstanding on the part of the masters makes a certain

incident, which in itself was quite harmless, perfectly comprehensible. My

brother relates the whole affair in a letter to our dear mother : "Dear Mamma

I am very sorry that I was unable to meet you at Almrich yesterday ; but I

was prevented from coming by being kept in. I will tell you the little story

connected with it.

  " Every week one of the newest Sixth Form boys has to undertake the

duties  of  school-house  prefect  that  is  to  say,  he  has  to  make  a  note  of

everything in the rooms, cupboards and lecture-rooms, which requires repair,and to send up the list of observations to the inspection office. Last week I

had this duty ; but it occurred to me that I might make this rather boring task

slightly less distasteful by the exercise of a little humour, and I wrote out a

list, in which all my observations were clothed in the form of jokes. The stern

masters who were very much surprised that any one should introduce humour

into so serious a matter, summoned me to attend the synod on Saturday, and

pronounced the following sentence : Three hours detention and the loss of

one or two walks. If I could accuse myself of any other fault than that of

thoughtlessness, I should be angry about it ; but, as it is, I have not troubled

for one moment about the matter, and have only drawn this moral from it : to

be more careful in future what I joke about At first our mother took the

matter quite lightly ; later on, however, she seemed more serious about it, and

gave expression to her second thoughts in a letter. Fritz replied with some

irritation as follows : " I cannot understand how you can for one moment

worry yourself about the consequences of that incident, for you understood it

perfectly well, as your letters to me have shown. Of course, I shall beware of

such thoughtless behaviour in future ; but it is useless to expect me to be

miserable about the affair one moment longer. Let others see what they like

in it. I know what was at the bottom of it, and I am perfectly satisfied. As I

say, I have seldom felt in better spirits than at present, and my work advances

splendidly. I have very varied and pleasant surroundings, and there is no

question of anybody exercising any influence over me, for in order for that to

happen I must first of all get to know people whom I feel to be my superiors.

Even the cold weather is quite pleasant to me in fact, I feel very well, and

nurture  no  bitter  feeling  against  anybody,  not  even  against  the  masters.

Maybe, as masters, it was impossible for them to regard the matter in any

other light, etc, etc."

  This humorous weekly report was afterwards read in Berlin before the

Pforta Old Boys' Club, to the general amusement of everyone present. I can

myself remember some of the remarks to which exception had been taken,

and they were extremely harmless ; for instance : "In such and such a lecture-

room the lamps burn so dimly that the boys are tempted to let their own

brilliance shine."

  "  The  forms  of  the  Fifth  Form  room  have  recently  been  painted  and

manifest an undesirable attachment for those who sit upon them," etc.

  The part of his letter in which my brother denies that his schoolfellows

exercised any influence over him, was a mistake ; for his companions did soin many, though, perhaps, superficial ways. My brother had a tendency to

overestimate the value of his school friends and spoke of their gifts with

extraordinary admiration. I know that in those days I used to feel that with

these eminently superior youths, of whom my brother was able to say in

terms of enthusiasm : "If only I were as gifted as so-and-so is, what should I

not do ! " an absolutely new order of the universe ought to begin. It was for

this reason that his appreciation of himself came to consciousness, only when

he was accused, as I have described above, of letting himself be influenced

by one or other of his friends ; then he would rebel, discover to his own

surprise  that  in  spite  of  everything  he  remained  very  much  himself,  and

expressed in vigorous language how fundamentally untouched he really was.

  Much more painful and much more detrimental to his school career was

the  following  incident,  which  struck  him  very  deeply.  In  April,  1863,  he

wrote to our mother as follows : " DEAR MOTHER, " If I write to you to-

day it certainly is about one of the saddest and most unpleasant incidents that

it has ever been my lot to relate. For I have been very wicked, and do not

even know whether you will or can forgive me. It is with a heavy heart and

most unwillingly that I take up my pen to write to you, more particularly

when I think of our pleasant and absolutely peaceful time together during the

Easter holidays. Well, last Sunday I got drunk, and have no other excuse than

this, that I did not know how much I could bear, and was rather excited that

afternoon. When I returned I was taxed about the matter by Mr. Kern, one of

the senior masters. He had me called before the synod on Tuesday, when I

was degraded to the third division, and one hour of my Sunday walk was

cancelled. You can imagine how depressed and miserable I feel about it, and

especially  at  having  to  cause  you  so  much  sorrow  for  such  a  disgraceful

affair, the like of which has never occurred in my life before. It also makes

me feel very sorry on the Rev. Kletschke's account, who had only just shown

me  such  unexpected  confidence  [he  had  just  made  Fritz  his  assistant].

Through  this  affair  I  have  spoilt  the  fairly  good  position  I  succeeded  in

winning for myself last term. I am so annoyed with myself that I can't even

get  on  with  my  work  or  settle  down  at  all.  Write  to  me  soon  and  write

severely, for I deserve it; and no one knows better than I, how much I deserve

it.

  " I do not need to give you any further assurances as to how seriously I

have pulled myself together, for now a lot depends upon it.

  " I had once again grown too cocksure of myself, and this self-confidencehas now, at all events, been very unpleasantly disturbed.

  " To-day I will go to the Rev. Kletschke and will have a talk with him.

By-the-bye, do not tell anyone anything about it if it is not already known.

Also please send me my muffler as soon as possible, for I am constantly

suffering from hoarseness and pains in the chest. Now goodbye, and write to

me very soon, and do not be too cross with me, dear mother.

  " Your very sorrowful " FRITZ."

  It is true that Fritz was very unhappy over what had happened. Certainly

he had done nothing disgraceful during his drunkenness, and had only talked

a little excited nonsense, stumbled about and fallen down ; but the condition

of a drunkard who loses all mastery over himself was repulsive to him. This

experience was followed by a severe cold, and he had to spend a long time in

the sickroom, during which he had more than enough leisure to think over the

unfortunate affair. He writes in his next letter to our mother as follows : "I

need not assure you any more that I have made the best resolutions for the

future, that this last incident has set me thinking about many things, and that I

have pondered more particularly over all that you have written to me, and

allowed it to work upon my mind. I trust that my future behaviour will prove

all this to you."

  He  eventually  recovered  his  old  spirit,  looked  courageously  and

confidently into the future, and began to concern himself about plans for his

University career. In May, 1863, he writes: "Now, more than ever before, do

I frequently think about my future ; external and internal reasons seem to

make it very vague and uncertain. I feel I might specialise in any subject if

only I had the strength to cast all other interests from me. "Write and tell me

your views about this ; I am pretty certain that I shall study hard ; Oh ! but if

only bread-and-butter study were not everywhere in demand ! "

  Our mother seems to have written to tell him to worry less about the

future than the present, but at the same time to bear practical ideas about the

future in mind. To this Fritz replied: " As regards my future, it is precisely my

practical doubts about it that concern me. The decision as to what subject I

shall specialise in will not come of its own accord. I must, therefore, consider

the question and choose, and it is precisely this choice which causes me so

many difficulties. Of course it will be my endeavour to study thoroughly

anything that I decide to take up, but it is precisely on this account that the

choice is so difficult ; for one feels constrained to choose that branch of study

in which one can hope to do something complete. And how illusory suchhopes often are : how often does one not allow oneself to be transported by a

momentary prepossession, or by an old family tradition, or by one's own

personal wishes, so that the choice of a calling seems like a lottery in which

there  are  a  large  number  of  blanks  and  very  few  prize  numbers.  Now  I

happen to be in the particularly unfortunate position of possessing a whole

host of interests connected with the most different branches of learning, and

though the general satisfaction of these interests may make a learned man of

me, they will scarcely convert me into a creature with a vocation. The fact,

therefore, that I must destroy some of these interests is perfectly clear to me,

as well as the fact that I must allow some new ones to find a home in my

brain. But which of them will be so unfortunate as to be cast overboard by me

perhaps just the children of my heart!"

  In view of all this he once more resumed his general work and studies

with particular eagerness. He again became the exemplary scholar of former

days,  and  very  soon  regained  the  goodwill  of  his  masters,  which  was

expressed  in  excellent  reports.  Privy  Councillor  Yolkmann,  who  was

afterwards Rector of Pforta, but who in those days was only a junior master

there,  told  me  later  that  at  this  time  the  masters  used  to  express  their

admiration  of  my  brother's  work  among  themselves.  But  Fritz  was  never

allowed to suspect a word of all this, for Pforta was not a school for softness,

and under no circumstances nattered its gifted scholars. If my brother was

afterwards  able  to  speak  with  such  whole-hearted  appreciation  of  the

beneficial  effect  of  a  hard  school  upon  young  men,  he  always  thought

gratefully of good old Pforta in so doing. Twenty -four years later he wrote :

" The most desirable thing of all, however, is under all circumstances to have

severe discipline at the right time, i.e., at the age when it makes us proud that

people should expect great things from us. For this is what distinguishes hard

schooling from every other schooling, namely, that a good deal is demanded ;

that goodness, nay, even excellence itself, is required as if it were normal;

that  praise  is  scanty,  that  leniency  is  non-existent  ;  that  blame  is  sharp,

practical, and has no regard to talent and antecedents. We are in every way in

need of such a school ; and this holds good of physical as well as of spiritual

things ; it would be fatal to draw distinctions here ! The same discipline

makes the soldier and the scholar efficient ; and, looked at more closely, there

is no true scholar who has not the instincts of a true soldier in his veins."

                      CHAPTER IX LAST YEARS AT SCHOOL

  AFTER all we have said and described, it may well be asked whether raybrother in those days gave one the impression that he would one day develop

into the man of worldwide renown he afterwards became. One or two of his

friends have declared that he did, but I am always a little suspicious about

these  recollections  of  remote  days,  as  one  involuntarily  judges  early

experiences  by  a  much  later  standard.  My  mistrust  of  these  testimonies,

written in later years by intimate friends, was to some extent confirmed by

the  Memoirs  of  that  schoolfellow  of  Fritz's  named  Gamier,  to  whom  I

referred in the last chapter. This boy ultimately became a doctor in Berlin,

and lost sight of my brother from the time that he left Pforta until, as he

himself declared ten years ago, he " saw him again in unexpected glory."

Gamier then proceeds to give an account of his recollections of my brother : "

In  Pforta,  Nietzsche,  as  is  well  known,  was  an  exceptionally  good  pupil.

Mathematics, if I remember rightly, was the only subject in which he did not

shine. He took no prominent position among his schoolfellows, because he

was always so engrossed by his school-work, more particularly by classics,

and his own particular studies. Among those who showed great intellectual

activity he cannot be said to have played a leading part. This role fell to two

other boys who died long before Nietzsche did. He showed no inclination to

share in the noisy games that used to be played in the school garden, but with

the rest of us he, as a Sixth Form boy, would readily walk to the village of

Attenburg (Almrich) close by ; he would not drink beer there, however, but

greatly preferred chocolate. Even during his schooldays he was extremely

short-sighted, and his deep-set eyes had a peculiar gleam. His voice was at

times very deep, but as a rule it was like his whole being, very gentle. The

fact that he would one day accomplish the Transvaluation of all Values could

not have been foreseen at that time."

    Somewhat different is the evidence given by young Baron von Gersdorff,

whom my brother afterwards described as " the friend of his heart " ; and

with whom he remained on intimate terms until his death. Gersdorff writes

about his Pforta reminiscences as follows : " I have unfortunately no written

notes concerning my life at Pforta ; nevertheless I still have the most vivid

recollection of how very much Nietzsche attracted my attention as early as

my days in the Lower Fifth Form, to which I was promoted at Easter, 1861.

He was half a year ahead of me, so that we were never able to spend more

than six months together in any one class. As an out-boy I lived with an old

Professor,  August  Koberstein,  the  well-known  literary  historian,  who  also

taught German in the Lower Fifth. On one occasion Nietzsche had quite ofhis own accord written a critico-historical essay on the Ermanarich saga, and

had presented it to Koberstein. The latter was highly delighted with it, and

was full of praise for the scholarship, the gift of construction, the penetration,

and the excellent style of his pupil. As a rule, Koberstein did not talk much at

meals  ;  as,  however,  on  this  occasion,  he  expressed  himself  in  such  a

delighted manner to me, I seized the opportunity of communicating what l

had heard to Nietzsche. I did this the more readily, seeing that, as I have

already pointed out, I had felt the very moment I entered the Lower Fifth that

this schoolmate of mine was infinitely superior to the other boys in intellect

and general bearing, and that one day he would do something great. This

incident about Koberstein did not, however, lead at once to any intimacy

between us ; we only began to see and talk to each other frequently when we

were  both  in  the  Sixth,  and  music  played  no  small  part  in  bringing  us

together. Every evening between 7 and 7.30 we used to meet in the music

room. Never in my life shall I forget his impromptu playing. I should have no

difficulty in believing that even Beethoven did not play extempore in a more

moving  manner  than  Nietzsche,  more  particularly  when  a  storm  was

threatening.''  Privy  Councillor  Paul  Deussen  notes  in  his  Memoirs  of

Nietzsche : " What would have become of me if I had not had him it is

difficult to say. It is true that it was in my nature to value nay, to overvalue

everything great and beautiful, as well as to feel a corresponding contempt

for everything which served only material ends. But the glowing spark was

fanned into a flame of whole-hearted enthusiasm for everything ideal by my

daily intercourse with Nietzsche, and was never to be extinguished even after

my own road and that of my friend had diverged."

  From these and other descriptions, this at least may be taken for granted,

that my brother, even at this time, was the leader who conducted his friends

to a whole host of interests of the most exalted kind. But I doubt whether

even these companions ever dreamt of the power and force that the name of

Nietzsche would one day have at the beginning of the twentieth century. This

boy  who  was  usually  so  correct  and  reserved,  so  tenderly  and  childishly

subject to his mother, and so honestly depressed when he caused her sorrow,

did not give one at all the impression of being an infant prodigy. Had I not

preserved the greater part of the things he wrote in secret, a habit of mine

which led to many a playful struggle between us, we too would now have to

ask with surprise : where are the germs out of which the great philosopher

and poet was afterwards to develop ? But these writings, of which a smallselection  has  been  printed  in  the  Appendix  to  the  large  edition  of  my

biography  of  him,  give  far  too  eloquent  a  testimony.  Nevertheless,  the

writings we actually possess constitute only a portion of all his compositions,

as his notes prove. He often felt the wish to set down some sort of accurate

statement about his private intellectual activities. Thus, for instance, we find

him writing : " My musical efforts in the year 1863. In the first part of the

year  I  played  many  of  Beethoven's  Sonatas  and  twelve  of  Haydn's

Symphonies.  Later  :  Schubert's  Fantasia,  Divertissement  a  I'Hongroise,

Lebenstiirme, the Pastoral Symphony, and above all, the Ninth Symphony.

  " In January I composed 'In a Shady Nook ' (melodramatic).

  " In the summer holidays I wrote ' ! Laugh for Once.' " In my mind I

thought out the Allegro of a sonata to be played as a duet ; this I forgot ; also

the Adagio of this piece, which I did not forget.

  " In the Christmas holidays I composed ' A New Year's Eve,' for violin

and piano.

  " Wrote the following verses : ' Faithless Love,' ' Before the Crucifix,' '

On the Shore,' ' Sounds from Afar,' ' above the Graves,' ' Now and Yesterday,'

' Now and Long Ago,' ' Rhapsody,' ' Homeward Bound,' five songs, ' An

overture  on  a  Rose  Petal,'  'The  Old  Hungarian/  'Fifty  Years  Ago,'

'Beethoven's  Death.'  "  In  the  Easter  holidays  I  wrote  :  '  Concerning  the

Demoniacal Element in Music,' I. and II.

  " In the summer holidays : Annotations to the ' Nibelungenlied.' " In the

Michaelmas holidays : Annotations to the ' Hildebrandslied.' " Autumn, 1863

: Essay on ' Ermanarich.' " Eead chiefly : Emerson, Bernhardy, ' A History of

Literature,'  Gervinus,  Shakespeare,  '  The  Edda,'  '  The  Symposium,'  '  The

Technique of Drama,' ' The Nibelungen,' Lachmann, Tacitus' ' Tiberius,' ' The

Clouds,' ' Plutus,' .Eschylus, and works on him."

  Two very amusing and rather surprising poems, called " Faithless Love,"

are to be found among these notes. From these poems one might suppose that

my brother had some kind of love trouble at this period. But, as a matter of

fact, these verses were composed, so to speak, through the soul of his friend,

Paul Deussen. He took the most lively interest in a touching love affair of his

friend's, and when the object of Deussen's passionate devotion was not able

to wait for the Sixth Form boy, and got engaged to someone else, my brother

was so strongly moved by his friend's sorrow (perhaps as a Sixth Form boy

himself he felt that in his friend the dignity of the Sixth had been assailed),

that he wrote the two poems "Faithless Love."  But Fritz seems to have come to the conclusion, not merely by means of

similar  experiences  on  the  part  of  his  friends,  that  the  emotions  which

constitute the passion of love in addition to their bitterness, also include a

good deal of sweetness. For instance, when the sister of one of his juniors,

Anna Redtel, came to pay a visit to her grandparents the Backs, in Kosen,

Fritz also lost his heart. She was a small, charming, ethereal girl from Berlin,

very  good-natured,  cultured  and  musical.  By  the  side  of  her  my  brother

appeared  a  very  big,  broad-shouldered,  vigorous,  and  rather  solemn,  stiff

young man. His idea that we women are really delicate birds, very highly

organised, and fragile creatures, may perhaps be traced to this first youthful

love affair. Fritz played duets with Anna, dedicated verses and a musical

rhapsody to her, and considered himself, I believe, very lucky to have fallen a

victim for once to those feelings about which his schoolfellows made such a

fuss.

  Fritz was, moreover, very gratified that I should take the affairs of his

heart and the moods that resulted from them so seriously. His love, however,

never  exceeded  a  rather  moderate  and  poetical  attachment.  This  was

thoroughly in keeping with the fact that throughout his life he never once fell

into the clutches of a great passion or of a vulgar love. His whole heart was

absorbed by the world of knowledge, and for this reason everything else only

aroused temperate feelings. Later in life, he was really sorry never to be able

to reach the heights of a regular amour-passion ; but any feelings he ever had

for a woman were very soon transformed into a delicate and warm friendship,

however bewilderingly beautiful the object of his attraction might be. It was

with great surprise that he watched the passionate joy and the upheavals and

ravages love caused among his friends. He was particularly sympathetic with

unlucky lovers, whom he used to comfort in their moments of misfortune.

When his friend Paul's affair took place, for instance, he tried to console him

with every kind of philosophical argument, and Deussen remembers to this

day how they would walk together of an evening through Pforta's shadowy

cloisters, while Fritz would seek to strengthen his friend by quoting all the

comforting  arguments  which  lay  hidden  in  the  dust  of  books  and  in  the

scholastic wisdom of the ancient Greeks and Romans. But he was never able

completely  to  conceal  his  astonishment  that  love  should  be  taken  so

seriously,  and  with  a  grave  shake  of  the  head  he  would  always  ask  his

friends, " Why all this for a little girl ? "

  The year 1864, at least until the autumn, was not so prolific in privatework as former years had been, because Fritz's spare time was chiefly filled

in preparing for his examination, and in getting together the material for the

great work it was customary at Pforta, in those days, to produce on leaving

the school. At the suggestion of Dr. Volkmann, who took a very friendly

interest in my brother, for which the latter was very grateful, Fritz chose

Theognis of Megara as the subject of his great Latin essay : De Theognide

Megarensi. The treatment of this material was full of significance for my

brother. Theognis, the moralist and aristocrat, who describes mob rule with

contempt and spurns it from him, had interested and attracted him for many

years, and was certainly the foundation upon which he afterwards built up his

daring, original and proud edifice : the description of Greek culture as he

understood it.

  The last long school holidays arrived, and were to be devoted to preparing

for the examination, and to the composition of the above-mentioned Latin

essay ; but it must not be supposed that they were entirely occupied in this

way. Imagination does not allow itself to be chained by arbitrary fetters. Fritz

describes his daily programme to Deussen as follows : " On Monday, with

much misgiving, I began my work, and on this day wrote seven large sheets.

On the second day by the evening I had written sixteen, on the third, twenty-

seven. Is there not a fine progression in these figures : I. 7, II. 8, III. 9 ?

Thursday and to-day I wrote the rest : altogether there are forty-two large

narrow pages, which, when copied out, would easily make sixty or probably

more. There is an introduction covering one page, and three chapters : " I. De

Megarensium Theog. estate rebus. De Theog. rite. " II. De Theog. scriptis.

  "  III.  Theog.  de  deis,  de  moribus,  de  rebus  publicis  opiniones

examinantur.

  " Then follows a short conclusion. As to whether I am satisfied with it all

No ! no ! But I could hardly have done better, even if I had taken very much

more trouble. One or two portions are tedious. Others are clumsy from the

point of view of style. Here and there are passages which are farfetched, as

for  instance,  when  I  compare  Theognis  with  the  Marquis  Posa.  All  my

previous notes about Theognis I have to a large extent copied out. I was

awfully  annoyed  at  having  to  copy  out  so  much.  I  have  given  so  many

quotations from Theognis that certainly the greater part of the fragments are

introduced into my work.

  " Now hear how I spend my day. Early, but not too early, I get up and

take coffee. Then I go to my room. A table stands there completely coveredwith  books,  for  the  most  part  lying  open  ;  there  is  also  a  comfortable

grandfather chair, and I am dressed in my beautiful dressing-gown. I now

proceed to write. At about one o'clock I join my mother and sister at table,

drink hot water, play the piano a little, and have coffee. Then I write again.

At six o'clock my tea and supper are taken to my room. I drink, eat and write.

It gets dark. I get up and look at the clock ; it is half-past eight. I dress

quickly, and, leaving my room, hurry in the gathering gloom of the falling

night into the Saale. This is cool and cold, and therefore refreshing : the river

rushes on, everything else is still, while the mist and I lie on the water. The

wind blows and I return ; I am in thoroughly good spirits ; up to the present I

am not showing any evil results from my somewhat strained manner of life . .

.

  " My musical activity is confined to practising ' Gretchen," the second

part of the Faust Symphony (by Liszt of course).

    Amazingly good and refreshing is this Gretchen. On the other hand Faust

is too bombastic for me and Mephisto too grotesque and cranky.

  " Melodies enter my head and vanish, for I have no time to work them

out. I have also tried to write some verses, but nothing came of them. Now

and again my sister sings a nice song to me.

  " Moreover I am so peaceful and well looked after and so entirely master

of my own time, that I have relegated my desire to be alone to the lumber-

room of old fads. Much that is pleasant and cheerful occurs in life. These

things broaden the spirit incalculably, much more than brooding isolation

does."

  Soon  after  this,  when  the  great  Latin  work  was  finished,  all  kinds  of

poetically productive moods forced themselves to the top in spite of every

obstacle,  and  discharged  themselves  in  verses,  poetical  notes,  and

compositions. These holidays were on the whole very enjoyable, for Fritz and

I eagerly studied music together and read good books, such as Emerson, with

each other. But it would have been better if, instead of occupying himself

with music and literature, Fritz had given more attention and industry during

these  weeks  of  freedom  to  the  subject  of  mathematics.  Yet  even  at  this

eleventh hour, when so much depended upon it, he could not bring himself to

give any serious thought to this science, which he had neglected throughout

almost the whole of his school career. His indifference in this respect only

vanished when he had done his written work. As it was, if Fritz had not done

extraordinarily well in three of the principal subjects upon which he wasexamined, he would have failed in his leaving examination, owing to his total

indifference to and dislike for mathematics. I was afterwards told of painful

scenes which occurred in the master's synod, when the mathematical master,

Professor  Buchbinder,  gave  vent  to  a  long  and  bitter  complaint  over

Nietzsche's indifference to mathematics. He was, however, interrupted by the

famous Corssen, with the following sarcastic question : "Perhaps you would

like us to plough the most gifted pupil that Pforta has ever had as long as I

can remember ? " "Whereupon the mathematical master ceased his plaint, as

Corssen's question was supported by a murmur of indignation from the most

important members of the staff. My brother however, could not be excused

the oral examination.

  But at last even that was over, and on the 4th of September in a state of

blissful joy he fell suddenly into our arms with the words : " Got happily

through. Oh, the glorious days of freedom have come ! "

  It is the custom in Pforta for a pupil before leaving the institution, once

more to give an account of his life, and to leave this written statement behind

him. Accordingly Fritz, before quitting the narrow walls of Pforta to enter the

new  and  strange  world,  looked  back  again  upon  the  experiences  through

which he had passed. For us as well it is a recapitulation of everything we

have already described. We have seen upon what things he laid the greatest

stress,  but  we  are  forced  at  the  same  time  to  feel  some  surprise  at  the

somewhat superior tone he allows himself in this essay. It reveals that in

Pforta he suffered more, inwardly, from many an incident than appearances

led us to suppose : " MY LIFE." The objects of a description of one's life are

exceedingly  multifarious,  and  therefore  demand  very  different  kinds  of

treatment. In the present case it is a matter of bequeathing to a school, to

whose  influence  I  owe  the  greatest  and  most  characteristic  part  of  my

intellectual growth, a picture of precisely this intellectual evolution. And this

I have to do at a moment when I am on the point of giving my mind a new

direction, and am on the eve of a fresh development, through leaving behind

me a method of existence to which I have grown accustomed, in order to

enter a new life in broader and higher spheres of culture.

  " Of the turning points in my life, which divide it into definite parts, I

must refer more particularly to two : the death of my father, the country

parson of Rocken near Liitzen, and the consequent removal of our family to

Naumburg, an event which closes my first five years of life ; and secondly

my transfer from Naumburg Grammar School to Pforta, which took place inmy fourteenth year. Of my earliest childhood I know little, and what I have

been told about it I do not feel inclined to repeat. In any case I certainly had

excellent  parents,  and  I  am  convinced  that  precisely  the  death  of  such  a

splendid father, whereas on the one hand, it deprived me of paternal help and

guidance, on the other laid the germ of seriousness and contemplation in my

soul. It is possible that it was a misfortune for me that my whole development

was not superintended by a manly eye, and that curiosity and perhaps, too,

the thirst for knowledge led me into the most confusing variety of paths to

culture. This was what might have been expected in the case of a youthful

mind which had scarcely left the parental nest, and whose spirit was confused

by manifold interests which jeopardised the foundations of sound learning.

Thus the whole period of my life between my ninth and fifteenth year is

characterised by a thirst for general knowledge, as I used to call it ; on the

other  hand  childish  games  were  not  neglected  but  pursued  with  such

doctrinaire eagerness that I used to write little books about almost every one

of my games, and would lay them before my friends for their edification.

Through an accidental inspiration I began, when I was nine years old, to take

a  passionate  interest  in  music,  and  started  composing  as  well  almost

immediately, if one may be allowed to call the efforts of an excited child to

transfer chords and sequences of tones to paper, and to sing Biblical texts

with  a  fanciful  pianoforte  accompaniment,  "  composing."  I  also  wrote

dreadful poems, but always with the greatest zeal. Nay, I even drew and

painted.  "  When  I  reached  Pforta  I  had  dabbled  to  some  extent  in  every

science and art, and felt an interest in almost every subject, except perhaps

such  sciences  as  were  a  little  too  exact,  and  tedious  mathematics.  In  the

course of time, however, I began to feel a certain repulsion to this erratic

wandering over all the departments of knowledge ; I wished to force upon

myself some definite limits, in order to be able to probe individual subjects

more deeply and thoroughly. I was able to carry this desire into effect by

means of a little scientific club which I formed with two friends who shared

my  views,  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  our  development.  The  monthly

contribution of essays and compositions, and the criticism passed upon them,

as well as the quarterly meetings, forced our minds to consider smaller but

more stimulating branches of knowledge, and also helped us to combat the

detrimental  effect  of  mere  impromptu  playing  by  the  thorough  study  of

harmony and counterpoint.

  " At the same time my devotion to classical studies grew by leaps andbounds. I have the most delightful recollections of my first impressions of

Sophocles, Aeschylus and Plato, more particularly in my favourite dialogue, '

The Symposium,' and also of Greek lyricists. In this striving to attain to a

greater profundity of knowledge I still find myself engaged to-day, and it is

quite natural that I should think as little of my own productions as of those of

others, because, in almost every subject to be treated, I always find either a

background which defies investigation or one which it is very difficult to

investigate. If I might mention the only work written during my schooldays

with which I was almost satisfied, it would be my essay on the Ermanarich

Saga. Now that I am on the point of going to the University I regard the

following law for my further advance in knowledge as absolutely binding : to

combat my tendency towards the detrimental acquirement of many subjects,

and  also  to  encourage  and  promote  my  taste  for  probing  a  matter  to  its

uttermost  depths,  and  for  tracing  it  to  its  remotest  causes.  Should  these

tendencies seem to cancel one another, this would certainly be no objection in

some cases, and I sometimes see in myself some such phenomenon. In my

fight  with  the  former  and  my  hope  to  promote  the  latter  I  trust  I  may

triumph."

  His leaving certificate gives a general survey of all his achievements ; the

attention of the reader is called more particularly to the galaxy of famous and

scholarly names which are written beneath it.

    CERTIFICATE OF PROFICIENCY for the scholar of the Royal School

of Pforta, FRIEDRICH WILHELM NIETZSCHE, Born in Rocken on the

10th of Oct., 1844.

  Religion : Protestant (Evangelical).

  Son of the late Pastor Nietzsche, under the guardianship of the lawyer

Diichsel, of Sangerhausen.

  He was six years in the Boyal School, of which he spent two in the Sixth

Form.

  I. GENERAL BEHAVIOUR AND INDUSTRY.

  After having during the middle of his career at the school roused some

indignation by various breaches of the school rules, he has kept himself free

from reproach throughout the latter part of his stay at Pforta, and earned the

universal commendation of his masters by his seriousness and intelligence.

He has also succeeded in maintaining a very praiseworthy attitude toward his

schoolfellows. In addition to this he has always shown a particularly active

and lively desire to increase his scientific knowledge, more especially in thestudy of languages. In mathematics, on the other hand, it must be confessed

that he was often deficient in application and regular industry.

  II. His KNOWLEDGE AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS.

  (a) Religion.

  In class he showed an active and lively interest in the Christian doctrine

of Salvation ; in this subject he acquired knowledge with ease and certainty,

and  united  it  with  a  good  understanding  of  the  original  text  of  the  New

Testament, which he could, moreover, discuss with clearness. He is therefore

given excellent ; for, even in the oral examination, he gave excellent answers.

  (b) German Language.

  The work he did for examination, both in thought and style, was very

successful, and his school compositions during the last few years were of a

quality that permits us to characterise his proficiency in style as excellent. In

the history of literature and in the Introduction to Philosophy he has acquired

good knowledge.

  (c) Latin.

  He shows wonderful skill in the translation of the classics, and his Latin

composition is correct, clear, and good; so that although his oral examination

left something to be desired he is nevertheless given excellent in this subject.

In Latin conversation he also shows considerable proficiency.

  (d) Greek.

  Seeing that he always showed a very praiseworthy interest in the subject

in  class,  to  which  an  extraordinary  essay,  written  for  examination,  on  a

Platonic theme, bears witness, both in his written and oral examination he

was accorded the comment of having good knowledge.

  (e) French. Satisfactory on the whole.

  (f) Hebrew.

  Owing to his deficient knowledge of the grammar he is at present not

very proficient in this language.

  (g) Mathematics.

  As  he  has  never  shown  any  regular  industry  in  mathematics,  he  has

always gone backwards, so to speak, both in his written and in his oral work

in  this  connection  ;  so  that  he  cannot  even  be  called  satisfactory  in  this

subject, and this deficiency on his part was only balanced by his excellent

results in German and Latin.

  (h) History and Geography.

  He showed great interest in class for these subjects, but his knowledge isnot very thorough. Satisfactory.

  (i) Natural Sciences. Satisfactory.

  (k) Drawing.

  He  attended  the  drawing  class  for  a  short  time  only.  He  did  nothing

satisfactory there.

  As he is now on the point of leaving the Royal School of Pforta in order

to enter the University of Bonn for the study of Philology and Theology we

grant him the certificate of Proficiency and wish him farewell with the hope

that by the aid of serious and thorough industry he will one day achieve

something really creditable in his calling.

  On the 7th. September Fritz, together with eight of his schoolfellows, left

Pforta  for  good.  In  accordance  with  an  old  custom,  he  addressed  a  few

solemn  words  to  those  whom  the  inmate  of  Pforta  had  to  thank  for  his

sojourn in that excellent institution, namely, God, the King, Pforta, and the

respected Masters ; finally he took his leave of his schoolmates : " What can I

say to you, my dear schoolfellows, and to you particularly, my dear friends,

now that I am going to leave ? You can understand that the plant which is

torn from its native soil can strike new roots only with great difficulty and

very slowly in a strange soil : shall I be able to tear myself from you ? Shall I

ever be able to accustom myself to another environment ? " Think of me : be

sure that I shall know when you think of me. Fare ye well ! "

  At the door, the carriage covered with garlands and with its gaily-clothed

postillions  was  waiting,  surrounded  by  a  crowd  of  school  friends.  Every

detail was just as Fritz had described it five years previously, in his diary, but

this  time  he  himself  was  one  of  those  who  with  tear-stained  eyes  bade

farewell to the old familiar scene. His heart beating with emotion, he stands

on the threshold which is to lead from narrowness and confinement to self-

reliant freedom.

                        PART III STUDENT LIFE, 1864-1869

                                  CHAPTER X BONN

  MY brother spent the first part of the happy time following his departure

from Pforta in the company of his friend Paul Deussen, with us at Naumburg.

These weeks were one long spell of cheerfulness and high spirits, and even

the grief we felt at parting with our Fritz, and at letting him go to Bonn so far

away from us, really found expression only when he had gone. Feeling that

he was somewhat of a stranger to the practical world, my brother resolved to

keep his eyes open, and to note everything of importance even down to thematters of eating and drinking. And in this resolve he was keenly supported

by  our  mother.  His  letters  show  that  he  carried  out  this  plan.  In  pious

Elberfeld, for instance, he observes that the devout girls are less beautiful

than the smart young women ; he also comments upon the differences of diet,

and when finally he reached the house of his friend's parents, in the village of

Oberdreis  (Westerwald),  he  declares  that  his  knowledge  of  the  life  and

customs of the people is growing richer and that he is observing everything,

their peculiarities, their occupations, their husbandry, etc. He describes the

people whom he has met, and writes with particular warmth about Deussen's

mother : "I should like you more especially to know Frau Deussen ; she is a

woman  of  such  culture,  refinement  of  feeling  and  speech,  and  of  such

activity,  as  is  seldom  met  with.  People  of  the  most  different  natures  are

unanimous in their praise of this woman.'' After leaving us at Naumburg, and

before going to Oberdreis, the two friends made a very enjoyable tour down

the  Rhine,  which  Deussen  describes  so  brightly  in  his  Memoirs.  A  third

person, a distant relative of Deussen's, called Ernst Schnabel, had joined the

couple on this tour.

  "  Witty,  highly  intellectual,  and  lively  to  excess,"  thus  does  Deussen

describe him ; " but also frivolous to the tips of his fingers this was the Ernst

Schnabel who joined our touring party, and he knew how to lead us into

many a mad adventure. The three of us went to Konigswinter, and, drunk

with wine and friendship, we allowed ourselves, despite our limited means, to

be persuaded to hire horses and to ascend the Drachenfels. It was the only

time I ever saw Nietzsche on horseback. He was in the sort of mood in which

a man takes more interest in the ears of his mount than in the beauty of the

scenery. He would persist in measuring them, and declared that he could not

be quite certain whether he was riding a horse or a donkey. We behaved more

madly, however, late in the evening. The three of us strolled through the

streets of the little town, in order to serenade the girls whose presence we

suspected behind the windows. Nietzsche was whistling and cooing, ' Pretty

darling, pretty darling,' Schnabel was talking all sorts of nonsense to a poor

Rhenish lad who begged for a night's shelter, and I stood by absolutely at a

loss to make head or tail of the new situation ; when, suddenly, a man burst

out into the street from a neighbouring door, and drove us away with a volley

of abuse and threats. As if in expiation of this event, which, by-the-bye, was

quite exceptional, on the following day we gathered in the music-room of the

'  Berliner  Hof,'  ordered  a  bottle  of  wine,  and  purified  our  souls  withNietzsche's  wonderful  improvisations.  At  last  we  all  reached  my  parents'

house in Oberdreis, and here, for weeks, we enjoyed the simple life in the

pure mountain air of the Westerwald, surrounded by my parents, brothers and

sisters, friends and acquaintances, who kept coming and going, and filling the

country parsonage with animation. On the 15th October we celebrated my

mother's  and  Nietzsche's  birthday,  and  then  crossed  over  the  hills  of  the

Westerwald into the valley of the Rhine to Neuwied, where a steamer took us

to Bonn in a few hours."

  On the following day my brother writes : a It is from Bonn, from my

rooms in Bonn, that you have news of me for the first time ; and I send it to

you full of good cheer and bright hopes, as well as with the deepest gratitude

;  for  it  was  your  hands  which,  in  the  most  charming  way  imaginable,

delighted  my  first  hours  in  my  new  world,  it  was  your  dear  wishes  and

prayers which consecrated my entry into a life of greater independence."

  He then describes the last days of his stay at the friendly parsonage, as

also the journey to Bonn, and finally makes a statement of the absolutely

necessary expenses which awaited him. The most indispensable and ordinary

things, such as rent, hire of piano, breakfast, lunch and supper, washing and

boot cleaning, amounted to 75 marks a month ; my brother's guardian had,

however, fixed 90 marks as the total of expenses for the month a sum with

which it would have been impossible for my brother to manage. My brother's

guardian ultimately granted him 120 marks, which, in those days, was a very

decent allowance for monthly expenses ; but although Fritz certainly spent

less in eating and drinking than other students, the satisfaction of his artistic

tastes, his little journeys, his music and his visits to the theatre, must have

cost him more than most of the men. In his early days, too, he was very

unpractical, and thus it happened that in the end he spent half as much again

as he was allowed. At last, towards the end of the first Session, there was a

deal of grumbling on both sides, and in his letters he complained that all

correspondence was quite spoilt for him by these money troubles. His desire

was to write us only pleasant and stimulating letters. Later on his chief cause

of annoyance was the expense into which he was dragged in connection with

a certain club he had joined. It was with joy and deliberation that he first took

this step which, subsequently, was to cause him such deep regret ; and on the

whole he was very satisfied with the first six months of it. At the end of

October he wrote to us about it for the first time, as follows : After bowing in

all directions in the most courteous way possible, I introduce myself to you asa member of the German Students' Association, the Franconia.

  " I can see you already shaking your heads in the most curious manner,

and giving vent to exclamations of astonishment. As a matter of fact, there is

a good deal of an extraordinary nature involved in this step, and I cannot

therefore take this attitude amiss in you. For instance, at about the same time

as I joined the Franconia, seven Pforta fellows became members as well ;

indeed, but for two men, the whole association consists exclusively of Pforta

men, who came together in Bonn; and among them there are several who are

in their fourth year. Let me name a few whom you will know : Deussen,

Stockert,  Haushalter,  Topelmann,  Stedtefeld,  Schleussner,  Michael,  and

myself.

  " Of course I have given the step careful thought, and, taking my tastes

into consideration, have concluded that it is almost a necessity for me. We

are, for the most part, all philologists as well as lovers of music. A generally

interesting  tone  prevails  in  the  Franconia,  and  the  older  members  have

pleased me mightily.

  "  My  experiences  on  all  sides  have  until  now  been  of  a  particularly

gratifying and delightful nature. A few days ago I paid a visit to the Musical

Director Brambach, with the view of becoming a member of the local Choral

Society. I have made an excursion to Rolandseck. It is a beautiful part of the

country, and we spent a few lovely days there. Yesterday the Franconians

went to Plittersdorf, where a fair was in full swing ; there was plenty of

dancing and new wine was drunk at a peasant's house. In the evening, in the

company of a Franconian of whom I am particularly fond my special chum I

walked back along the Rhine to Bonn. The hills sparkled with the lights of

the vintagers. You cannot imagine how beautiful everything is."

  Whether the step of joining the Students' Association was really deeply

considered or not may be to some extent doubted ; but I cannot admit that it

was a sudden inspiration, as Deussen says it was. Even before he left for

Bonn, Fritz had discussed with his guardian the pros and cons in regard to

joining  an  association  of  the  kind  in  question.  And  on  this  occasion  he

referred to the very same reasons in favour of the step as occur in the letter

quoted above. For what he wanted was to know life, and not only life as he

found it within the narrow circle of his friends, but the life of the world. To

this end he thought that the Students' Association, with the variety of young

men it contained, hailing from all the four corners of Germany, would surely

help him. And, as we see from all the letters he sent us during this period, atfirst he entered into the student life in a thoroughly ingenuous manner. It is

true that the gorgeous months of autumn, with all the festivities they entailed,

were particularly fitted to shed a certain poetical glamour over the life of the

association, and somewhat to dazzle a romantic young nature for a while.

This is the description he sent me of " the incomparable days "of an inaugural

festival : " I write this the first thing in the morning after having just torn

myself from bed, thus flatly disproving the notion that I may have a thick

head. Maybe the expression ' thick head ' conveys nothing to your mind.

Yesterday we had a great drinking bout and sang the solemn Landesrater, and

there were endless torrents of punch ; guests from Heidelberg and Gottingen ;

several professors were invited, among whom Schaarschmidt was one, and

they  all  made  very  nice  speeches.  Deussen  made  an  excellent  freshman's

speech,  and  innumerable  telegrams  were  received  from  all  corners  of  the

globe and all the Students' Associations, Vienna, Berlin, etc. We numbered

over forty men ; the public-house was beautifully decorated. I made a very

pleasant acquaintance in Dr. Deiters, who is a passionate friend of Schumann.

We  promised  to  visit  each  other;  so  I  have  at  last  found  a  thorough

connoisseur  of  music.  The  festival  yesterday  was  of  a  very  splendid  and

elevating nature. On such evenings, believe me, there is a general spirit of

enthusiasm which has little in common with the mere conviviality of the

beer-table. This afternoon we are all going to march through the High Street

in parade garb, and there will be a good deal of shouting and singing. Then

we go by steamer to Rolandseck, where we have a big dinner in the Hotel

Croyen ; but what will come after that is left to our own free choice. The bout

began on the evening of the day before yesterday ; we drank until two o'clock

in the morning, assembled yesterday at 11 a.m. for a morning pint, then went

on the spree in the market-place, and had lunch and coffee together at Kley's.

You observe that the activity and the strain is great and I am quite right in

saying with lofty consciousness that I have not got a thick head. . . .

  " This morning I continue the letter, and you will thus have a complete

description of our drinking bout. The weather has been beautiful ; our march

out, headed by a fine hussar band, attracted great attention ; the Rhine was a

beautiful  blue,  and  we  took  wine  with  us  on  board.  As  we  reached

Rolandseck a salute of guns was fired in our honour. We then feasted until

about six o'clock ; we were extraordinarily merry, and sang many an original

and ingenious song. Outside twilight had come ; the moon lay on the Rhine

and illuminated the peaks of the Siebengebirge, which loomed hazily throughthe blue mist. After the meal I sat by Gassmann, who is the editor of the Beer

Journal and the head of the commissariat, and is probably the most interesting

man in the Franconia ; we remained faithful to the good old Rhine wine while

the others drank champagne punch. The neighbourhood round about is really

worthy of three notes of exclamation, more particularly the little island of

Nonnenworth,  on  which  there  is  a  girls'  school  ;  and  behind  towers  the

Drachenfels, that great perpendicular wall of rock. The spot gives me the

impression of profound repose."

  As a matter of fact the whole of student life was somewhat foreign to my

brother's  tastes,  and  in  his  lectures  on  The  Future  of  our  Educational

Institutions he admirably described the extraordinary state in which he spent

the year 1864 1865: " Let us now imagine ourselves in the position of a

young  student  that  is  to  say,  in  a  position  which,  in  our  present  age  of

bewildering  movement  and  feverish  excitability,  has  become  an  almost

impossible one. It is necessary to have lived through it in order to believe that

such careless self petting and comfortable indifference to the moment, or to

time in general, are possible. In this condition I, and a friend of about my

own age, spent a year at the University of Bonn on the Rhine it was a year

which, in its complete lack of plans and projects for the future, seems almost

like a dream to me now a dream framed, as it were, by two periods of growth.

We  two  remained  quiet  and  peaceful,  although  we  were  surrounded  by

fellows who in the main were very differently disposed, and from time to

time  we  experienced  considerable  difficulty  in  meeting  and  resisting  the

somewhat too pressing advances of the young men of our own age. Now,

however, that I can look upon the stand we had to take against these opposing

forces, I cannot help associating them in my mind with those checks we are

wont to receive in our dreams, as, for instance, when we imagine we are able

to fly and yet feel ourselves held back by some incomprehensible power."

  My brother's time in Bonn did indeed resemble that state of sleep and

dreaminess in which one is continually asking how one can possibly have

entered this strange imbroglio, though one does not cease from striving to

adapt oneself to one's conditions. I do not think my brother gave people the

impression at that time of a man who was some day to rise so very much

above his contemporaries. No, he was a student like the rest, whose ambition

was to be a full-fledged member of his class, as his letters of the period

prove. But as our best powers are said to develop unconsciously in sleep, it

may  be  that  this  year,  in  which  his  real  personality  was  to  some  extentslumbering, was very beneficial to him. It is true that later on he thought

differently about his " lost year " as he called it.

  Fritz originally matriculated in theology and philology ; he himself was

from the first quite resolved to devote himself to philology alone, and it was

only to please our mother that he also entered for the Divinity Degree, in

order to attend lectures on that subject. But he gratified his deepest tastes at

Ritschl's and Jahn's lectures ; and in addition to this he attended Springer's

discourses on the History of Art, Sybel on History, and Schaarschmidt on

Philosophy. As he had, with the view of entertaining us, sent us many details

about his eventful and enjoyable life as a student, our good mother began to

think it necessary to write to him some words of admonition, in which she

counselled him to attend to his studies. He sent a very indignant reply to this

letter, and expressed surprise that we could possibly have suspected him of

neglecting  his  work  under  the  stress  of  the  gay  student  life,  which  was

already beginning to prove irksome to him. It was certainly not his intention

that the Students' Association should hinder him from pursuing his principal

studies; but that it ultimately did so cannot be doubted.

  In any case he took advantage of his stay in Bonn to attend as many

concerts and theatres there and at Cologne as he could possibly afford. And

he was very lucky, for he heard the most famous singers and actresses of the

period. For instance, he heard Patti in a wonderful concert, then Birde-Ney in

her principal parts in The Huguenots and Oberon, etc. He also saw Seebach

in a series of her most beautiful parts, and finally Friederike Grossmann in

several little comedies. "We Franconians," he writes, " were naturally in love

with her to a man, shouted her songs of an evening at the beer table, and

would drink general toasts in her honour."

  During this winter he gave a good deal of his time, privately, to the study

of Schumann, whose Manfred he had received as a Christmas present from

our Aunt Rosalie. This conduced greatly to cheering his lonely Christmas

holidays, as he suffered rather severely from homesickness. In addition to

sharing the general appreciation of Schumann, Bonn, where the musician lies

buried, showed a particular local enthusiasm for this magnificent composer,

and thus my brother heard a good deal of excellent Schumann music this

winter ; and, as the spirit of his compositions of this period shows, it seems to

have influenced him. For instance, he sent us as a Christmas present eight

charming musical settings to poems by Petofi and Chamisso, which are all

stamped with the character of Schumann's music : " Glad and Gladder," byChamisso.

  " The Tempest," by Chamisso.

  " To all Eternity," by Petofi.

  " Faded," by Petofi.

  " She Beckons and Bows," by Petofi.

  " The Child with the Extinguished Candle," by Chamisso.

  "A Serenade," by Petofi.

  " An Epilogue," by Petofi.

  In the letter accompanying this present on the 20th December, 1864, he

wrote: " MY DEAR MAMMA AND LIZZIE, " I should like you not to open

the parcel until Christmas Eve, so that you may have a little surprise, maybe

only a disappointment. All I ask you to do, is not to expect too much. I give

you  the  best  I  am  capable  of,  but  that  is  not  much.  You  will  be  able  to

appreciate at least the pains and industry expended on the work. During its

production I thought continually of you, and wished only that I might be with

you to witness your joy over it.

  " ' But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours, Most busy least,

when I do it."

  Thus  saith  Ferdinand  in  Shakespeare's  Tempest,  and  thus  say  I  :

refreshing labours and laborious refreshment ! " What should I give you, if

not a part of myself something in which I see myself reflected ? That is why I

have stuck the silhouette of my present self on the outside of the gift, so that

you may want to hold it in your hands, and to do so frequently. You already

perceive that I speak with a certain touch of vanity about my little work, and

yet it will have completely failed of its object if it does not please you."

  This present, which he had written out most carefully, and which he had

had bound in lilac-coloured morocco, K pleased us beyond bounds, and on

Christmas Eve I played and sang one or two of the songs. Fritz thought that I

would practice them in order to be able to sing them to him in the Easter

holidays, and with the manuscript he therefore sent a few directions in regard

to expression.

  " The easiest to sing is ' The Child with the Extinguished Candle.' It

should be sung as tenderly, as simply, and ingenuously as possible. The same

applies to the last song, which must also be sung simply, and with much lofty

resignation. It ought to please you. Do not forget that the passages ' in a

beautiful, wild and secluded spot of the woods ' and ' and finally to perish

with her,' should be sung full, loftily and grandly. The ' Serenade ' is low incompass, the accompaniment is a little more difficult, the melody is easily

sung.  The  '  Tempest,'  by  Chamisso,  will  please  you  ;  play  and  sing  it

seriously, mournfully, and with determination until the middle verse, which

presents a contrast to that which precedes and follows it. ' She Beckons and

Bows ' allows of full crescendo chords being struck, and of giving the voice

endless modulation. ' Faded ! ' is similar but easier. The conclusion is frigid ;

I wonder whether you will notice that. The best and also the most difficult

songs are ' Glad and Gladder ' and ' To all Eternity ! ' The first must be sung

with energy, a little nourish, and some grace, the other with great passion.

Take  the  middle  verse  more  slowly.  For  the  song  to  please,  the

accompaniment must be played to perfection."

  Later  on  these  directions  were  the  occasion  for  many  a  joke,  more

particularly when I sang "The Tempest" to him " seriously, mournfully, and

with determination," until we both cried with laughing. As a matter of fact

my delicate, fair, rosy, and smiling appearance, in those days, was ill-suited

to such a mood. After all our joking, however, Fritz always insisted, " but

your  inner  being,  your  soul,  could  easily  sing  seriously  and  with

determination, even if it could not do so mournfully."

  In the winter of 1864 1865 his life as a student bore a marked musical

stamp, and music was to some extent a counterpoise to a good many coarse

and unsympathetic features of which he soon began to be conscious in the life

of the Association. His nickname at his club was "Bitter Gluck" and he was

entrusted with the direction of many a little musical performance organised

by the Franconia. Thus he writes to us : " I pass here among the students, etc.,

for something of a musical authority, and as a queer customer besides, as, by-

the bye, all Pforta old boys in the Franconia are. I am not disliked at all, even

though  I  am  thought  a  little  scornful  and  ironical.  This  estimate  of  my

character  according  to  the  opinions  of  other  people  will  not  be  without

interest  to  you.  For  my  part  I  must  add  that  I  do  not  agree  to  the  first

particular, that I am frequently unhappy, and that I have too many moods and

am rather inclined to be a nagging spirit (Qualgeist), not only to myself but

also to others."

  I have often been asked what my brother could have meant by this word "

Qualgeist," and it was only long afterwards that I realised what he wished to

imply by this expression namely, that he had been somewhat of a thorn in the

side  to  his  friends.  He  always  urged  them  to  demand  the  highest  of

themselves, and to attain it. To be content with oneself, and to fold one's armscomplacently in the midst of one's strivings, was an abomination to him ; or

rather, it was incomprehensible to him, and made him impatient and, at times,

unjust. He was always seeking out that speciality in which he thought they

would be able to distinguish themselves best, and thus he tormented both

them and himself. Let anyone read his letters to Deussen during the period of

student life, and see how discomforting he could be as a friend or at least, as

long as he thought his fellow-student was on the wrong road.

  At Easter Fritz came to Naumburg for the first time as a student. I can still

see him vividly as he stood there, a picture of health and strength. He was

broad-shouldered  and  brown-skinned,  with  very  thick  chestnut  hair,  and

exactly  the  same  height  as  Goethe  a  fact  which  we  proved  by  the

measurements in the Goethe house at Frankfort ; but his body was perfectly

proportioned, whereas Goethe's trunk was too long in comparison with his

legs. Like Goethe, Fritz also possessed the quality of appearing taller than he

really was. His dignified and erect bearing was the cause of this illusion. The

holidays were long and enjoyable, but their tenor was not as even as it had

been of old. In the interval Fritz had developed extraordinary self-reliance ; in

his inmost soul, of course, he had always been self-reliant, much more so

than one would have thought from his kindly and courteous nature. Now,

however, his independence of spirit came prominently to the fore, and this

led to many differences of opinion with our good mother. (The differences of

opinion were chiefly in the sphere of religion, of which more details will be

given later.) From that time forward she was continually beset by the fear that

we were both too independent and too inclined to be idealistic, and she did all

in her power to bring our minds back to the practical aspect of things, and to

make  us  respect  the  opinions  of  other  people.  After  the  holidays  Fritz

apologised for the fact that he had often asserted his convictions with too

much warmth. This may perhaps have been so from time to time, in spite of

his excellent and courteous manners, but he had much too much humour not

to give a cheerful tone even to these differences of opinion.

  I can still remember one of Fritz's jokes at this period. In Naumburg a sort

of fair was being held, which had played a prominent part in our childhood,

and for the sake of old times we went to have a look at it for a little while.

There was a man in a certain corner selling red and green balloons ; a gust of

wind came, and the man did his utmost to keep his light-winged goods from

flying away. " Our dear mother," Fritz whispered to me with a smile. At this

moment the wind wrenched many of the strings out of the man's hands, andone or two of the red balloons soared high into the air and vanished.

  "That which would fly, flies indeed!" Fritz cried, delighted at the happy

omen.

  Until Easter, 1856, my brother was studying theology and philology at

Bonn  ;  but  during  the  following  summer  term,  he  studied  only  the  latter

subject. As his tastes, even in the late Pforta days, had been always on the

side of philology, he had paid attention to theology only in so far as he felt

drawn to it by its philological interest. Towards the beginning of 1869, he

writes : "My studies, in which I often used to take refuge with all my heart,

were strenuously directed towards the philological side of Gospel criticism

and to the investigation of the sources of the New Testament ; for at that time

I imagined that history and its researchers were able to return a direct answer

to certain religious and philosophical questions." It was at this period, as he

said later, that " like every young scholar, with the cautious slowness of a

cunning philologist," he " ruminated over The Life of Jesus, the work of the

incomparable Strauss."

  It will readily be understood that, by means of these critical studies, he

soon  left  our  mother's  Christian  standpoint  far  behind,  and  that  he

consequently  declined  to  go  with  us  to  Communion  during  the  Easter

Festival. There was a stormy discussion, which reduced our dear mother to

tears, but to which an end was soon put by our dogmatic and well-informed

Aunt Rosalie. She explained that in the life of every great theologian there

had been moments of doubt, and that it was much better at such moments to

avoid anything in the way of a discussion. This made things quite clear to our

mother, and she therefore expressed the wish that no further mention should

be made of all these spiritual difficulties, and also promised that Fritz should

not  be  compelled  to  do  anything  to  which  he  could  not  persuade  his

conscience.

  The religious and philosophical views which my brother had expressed

during these Easter holidays began, however, after a while to trouble me a

good deal. I therefore resolved to pay a visit to two of my pious uncles who

were parsons, in order " to allow myself to be re-confirmed in my faith " as I

said somewhat childishly. I informed my brother of my troubles ; for I was

too modest to take it for granted that views which in his opinion were great,

fine and glorious, must be the same for me. Fritz's estimate of me was not so

modest ; but what he was least able to grasp was, how extremely difficult it

was for me to differ in opinion from the brother whom I respected aboveeverything. He writes : "DEAR LIZZIE, " After such a charming letter, full

of girlish poetry, as your last to me, it would be wrong and ungrateful to keep

you waiting any longer for a reply.

  " In the first place, however, I must refer to a passage in your letter which

was written with as great a dash of the parson as of the Lama's heart. Do not

worry yourself, dear Lizzie. If your will is as good and as decided as you say

it is our dear uncles will not have much trouble. As to your fundamental

principle that the truth is always on the side of the most difficult things, I may

say that I more or less agree with you. By-the bye, it is difficult to believe

that twice two are not four ; but is it therefore truer ? " On the other hand is it

really so difficult simply to accept everything to which one has been brought

up, everything which has gradually struck deep roots into one's being, which

passes for truth not only amongst one's relatives but also in the minds of

many good men, and in addition to this, really comforts and elevates man? Is

it more difficult to do this than to fight with habit and custom, to face the

insecurity of an independent direction, and amid all kinds of spiritual qualms

and even pricks of conscience, to keep the goal which is truth, beauty and

goodness always in one's eye, and often with despair in one's heart to open up

a  new  road  ?  "  Should  it  then  be  our  endeavour  to  get  that  standpoint

concerning  God,  the  World,  and  ^Redemption,  which  makes  us  feel

comfortable?  For  the  genuine  investigator,  is  not  the  result  of  his

investigation  rather  a  matter  of  indifference  ?  Is  then  the  object  of  our

investigation, repose, peace, happiness ? No, but the truth however frightful

and ugly it might be.

  " A last question : If from our childhood onwards we had believed that all

our spiritual life proceeded from another than Jesus, let us say, Muhammed ;

is it not quite certain that we should have become equally attached to the

blessings of Muhammed ? Certainly faith alone saveth, not, however, the

thing behind the faith. I write this to you, my dear Lizzie, simply with the

view of meeting the line of proof usually adopted by religious people, who

appeal to their inner experiences, and demonstrate the reality of their faith

there from. Every true faith is real if it accomplishes that which the person

adopting it hopes to find ; it does not offer the smallest grounds, however, for

the demonstration of an objective truth.

  " It is here then that man comes to the cross-roads. Do you desire spiritual

peace and happiness ? very well, then, believe ! Do you wish to be a disciple

of truth ? so be it ; investigate ! But between the two main-roads there are ahost  of  turnings.  What  counts,  however,  is  the  principal  object  of  your

desire."

  This letter made a profound impression upon me, more particularly as my

clergymen uncles already mentioned told me nothing which could in any way

meet the clarity and seriousness of this argument. As, however, our mother

forbade all written or spoken discussions on religious questions, my brother

and I could refer to these matters only in secret. I have often thought since

that it is more proper for a mother to try and share the religious doubts of her

children, and not to separate herself from them ; for it was in this way that my

brother's and mother's spiritual lives gradually fell asunder. Fritz moreover

regarded it as rather a relief not to speak to her of his profoundly moving

changes of opinion ; for he was always afraid of being rude. I was also afraid

of his being rude, and besought him always to be as good and as kind to our

dear, respected mother as possible. From our earliest childhood, we had had it

impressed upon us that to be at all disrespectful towards our parents and

grandparents  was  something  execrable.  From  that  time  onward  the  most

difficult  task  of  my  life  began,  the  task  which,  as  my  brother  said,

characterised my type i.e., " to reconcile opposites."

  The summer of 1865 brought my brother another crop of great musical

joys, among which there was a great Lower Rhineland Musical Festival at

Cologne, of which he gave me the following exhaustive description : " On

Friday, the 2nd of June, I went to Cologne in order to attend the Lower

Rhineland Musical Festival. The International Exhibition was opened there

on the same day and Cologne really looked like a world metropolis. There

was an unspeakable confusion of languages and costumes, a huge number of

pickpockets and sharpers ; all the hotels were full to the attics, and the whole

town was gaily decorated with flags so much for the external impression. As

a singer I was given a red and white striped silk ribbon to wear on my breast,

and I went to the rehearsal. Unfortunately you do not know the Girzenich

Hall ; but during our last holidays I gave you an excellent idea of what it was

like by comparing it with the Exchange at Hamburg. Our choir consisted of

180 sopranos, 154 altos, 113 tenors, and 172 bass singers. In addition to this

our orchestra was composed of 160 players, among whom there were 52

violins, 20 violas, 21 cellos, and 14 contrabasses. Seven of the best soloists

and female singers had been engaged for the Festival. Hiller conducted the

whole  performance.  Among  the  ladies  several  were  conspicuous  for  their

youth and beauty. At the three principal concerts they all appeared in white,with blue scarves over their shoulders, and natural or artificial flowers in their

hair. Each of them held a lovely bouquet in her hand. We men were all in

evening  dress  and  white  waistcoats.  On  the  first  evening  we  remained

together until very late into the night, and in the end I slept in an armchair at

the house of an old Franconian. In the morning, I was as well folded up as a

pocket knife. In addition to this, let me tell you incidentally, that since the last

holidays, I have been suffering greatly from rheumatism in the left arm. On

the following night I slept in Bonn. On Sunday the first great concert took

place.  Handel's  Israel  in  Egypt  was  performed.  We  sang  with  inimitable

enthusiasm  when  the  temperature  was  100  Fahrenheit.  For  all  three  days

every  seat  in  the  Girzenich  was  booked.  The  ticket  of  admission  to  each

concert  cost  from  six  to  nine  marks.  The  general  opinion  was  that  the

performance was a perfect one. There were some scenes which I shall never

forget.

  When Staegemann and Julius Stockhausen ' the king of all bass-singers '

sang their famous heroic duet, an extraordinary storm of applause burst forth

;  the  singers  were  recalled  eight  times,  there  was  a  flourish  of  trumpets,

encore was cried from every corner of the hall, the whole of the 300 ladies

hurled their 300 bouquets into the faces of the singers ; and they were, so to

speak, enveloped in a cloud of flowers. This scene was repeated when the

singers gave their encore.

  "In the evening we men from Bonn began to carouse together, but we

were invited by the members of the Cologne Men's Choral Society to join

them in the Girzenich restaurant ; and we remained there drinking Carnival

toasts and singing songs which the people of Cologne do to perfection and

quartets amid waxing enthusiasm. At three o'clock in the morning, I and two

friends left the company, walked through the town and rang at all the doors,

but we could find no shelter ; even the Post Office would not take us in we

wanted to sleep in the mail cart until at last at the end of an hour and a half a

night-watchman opened the Dorn Hotel to us. We fell like logs on to the

benches in the dining-room, and in two seconds we were fast asleep. Outside

the day was dawning.

  "At the end of an hour and a half, the house servant came along and said

that the room had to be cleaned. We, therefore, decamped in a desperate

mood; went by way of the station to Deutz, where we had breakfast, and then,

with very weakened voices, we went to the rehearsal, where I fell asleep with

great enthusiasm to an obligato of trombones and kettledrums. But thanks tothis  little  rest  I  was  all  the  more  awake  during  the  performance  in  the

evening,  between  six  and  eleven  o'clock,  in  which  my  favourite  pieces,

Schumann's  Faust  music  and  Beethoven's  Symphony  in  A  major,  were

played. That night I was exceedingly anxious to get to bed, and called at

about thirteen hotels, all of which were full to overflowing. At last in the

fourteenth, after the host had assured me that there was no room, I coolly

exclaimed that in any case I should stop there, and asked him kindly to find

me a bed. This he did in one of the dining-rooms, where a camp-bed was

made, and for two marks I spent the night there.

  " At last on the third day, the final concert took place, in which a large

number of smaller things were performed. The finest moment of the whole

day occurred when Hiller's Symphony, entitled Spring must surely be here

soon, was produced. The musicians were all extraordinarily enthusiastic, for

all  of  us  admired  Hiller  immensely.  At  the  end  of  every  part  there  was

unheard-of applause, and, after the conclusion, there was a similar scene,

only  '  more  so,'  as  it  were.  His  throne  was  covered  with  wreaths  and

bouquets,  one  of  the  musicians  put  a  crown  of  laurel  on  his  head,  the

orchestra played a fanfare in his honour, and the old man covered his face

and wept at which the ladies were deeply moved."

  The following fragments from letters written between the 10th and the

12th of July, 1865, bear witness to his good-natured disposition and to many

of his feelings as a brother and a musician. " MY DEAR LIZZIE, " What I

wrote to Wilhelm Finder a few days ago is also true of your birthday : once it

was  a  day  of  general  rejoicing,  and  of  the  happiest  and  most  cheerful

moments together. Now it is a day of memories, of the most lovely memories

of that beautiful past.

  " It is at times such as these that girls grow sentimental and that I feel

stimulated  to  compose,  and  rummage  among  old  papers,  old  poems  and

writings.

  " In the midst of all this there came into my hand your dear letter in which

I find two nice verses from a Mendelssohn song ; I cannot do better than

point to those lovely words : ' We have remained the same in spite of all.' "

But,  in  order,  notwithstanding,  to  wish  you  something  on  your  birthday

something which has not already been included in the well-known doggerel

verse : ' I hope that each of us may be as good and as happy as the other could

wish, and that the picture, the delightful picture which each of us bears in his

breast of the other, may be as like the truth as possible.' " For this is only as itshould be. I do so hope you do not think of me as an ideal personage, for this

would be a shocking error, though I know my name must be written in your

heart with pretty lines and tender colouring. You may be sure that your name

holds the same place in my heart, though my talents as a painter are not so

great,  and  I  am  very  often  inclined  to  use  black  ink,  and,  in  certain

unfortunate moments to paint everything that I see before me persons, angels,

men and devils rather dark and unattractive. It still remains a fact that nobody

is so good as he appears in the eyes of those who love him. But it is precisely

on this account that goodness may act as a spur ; for we do not wish those

who like us most to be disappointed in us.

  "But there is another reason for this loving deception, and that is our great

distance from each other. You get only fragments of my life before you, and

these  fragments  are  my  letters.  And  letters,  as  evidence  of  an  exalted

moment, are prone to throw a transfiguring light upon him who writes them

that is to say, when they do not deal with money matters. And that is the

reason  why  in  the  holidays  you  express  your  astonishment  that  I  am  not

nearly so good and kind as you had pictured me. This is indeed sad, but I

have explained it to you psychologically.

  "Now as to the practical application of these wearisome words of mine :

my dear Lizzie, I feel particularly fond of you to-day, and my one wish is that

neither you should be deceived in me nor I in you. We are somewhat severe

judges of each other, for everything unpleasant that either of us hears about

the other tends to spoil the picture each bears in his soul." . . .

  " 12th July. On the afternoon of your birthday, which you must have

celebrated by a large girls' party, I composed for the first time this year. And I

did so with such energetic vigour that I soon finished the work. As your

birthday must have been the stimulus for this composition it follows very

naturally that it should be dedicated to you. It is a song conceived in the most

extreme Futurist style. It contains a natural cry and other ingredients of latent

foolishness. It is based upon a poem that I wrote as a Lower Fifth Form boy,

in Girenzen of all places in the world. A fisher maid yearning for her lover

voila le sujet ? "

  The  half  year,  from  the  April  to  the  autumn  of  1865,  was  a  most

remarkable one for my brother's inner development. During this period, he

freed  himself  from  many  ideas  and  points  of  view  which  had  formerly

governed him, and to his joyful surprise discovered in himself a great critical

faculty which he thought would be best employed in philology. about this hewrites as follows : " What I longed for was a counterweight to the changeful

and unrestful nature of my tastes hitherto ; I yearned for a science which

could be pursued with cold reflection, with logical coolness and steady work,

and with results that would not touch one's soul. All this I thought I should

find in philology, and the first prerequisites to its study are the very things

which  a  pupil  of  Pforta  has  ready  to  hand.  In  this  school  philological

exercises are periodically set, such, for instance, as critical commentaries of

certain choruses in Sophocles or Aeschylus. In addition to this, one of the

special  advantages  of  Pforta,  which  is  of  particular  value  to  the  future

philologist, is that among the pupils themselves a wide and strenuous reading

of Greek and Roman classics is considered the thing ; but the most fortunate

point of all is the fact that I there came in contact with teachers of philology

from whose personality I was able to form some opinion of their science. If at

that  time  I  had  had  masters  of  the  type  which  is  met  with  in  Grammar

Schools,  narrow-souled,  cold-blooded  precisians,  who  know  nothing  of

science save its learned dust, I should have thrust far from me the thought of

ever  belonging  to  a  scientific  body  served  by  such  hopeless  wretches.  In

Pforta, however, I had before my eyes such philologists as Steinhart, Keil,

Corssen, Peter, men whose outlook was free, who had a breeziness about

them, and who to a certain extent imparted even their tastes to me. Thus it

came about that even during my last two years at Pforta I was busily engaged

on two original philological works. In the first I wished to examine the sagas

on the Ostrogoth King, Ermanarich, in all their ramifications and from their

various sources (Jordanes, Edda, etc.). In the other I tried to give an account

of a particular form of Greek tyranny that which existed in Megara. It is the

custom on leaving Pforta to present the school with some kind of written

memento ; it was with this end in view that I prepared the second essay,

which  in  my  hands  soon  became  a  psychological  study  of  Theognis  of

Megara.

  " When after six years' study at Pforta I had bidden that severe but useful

instructress farewell I went to Bonn. It was here that I first realised to my

great surprise how exceedingly well instructed, yet how badly educated, a

pupil  of  such  a  royal  school  is  when  he  goes  to  the  University.  He  has

thought out a good deal for himself and yet he lacks the skill to express these

thoughts. He has not yet experienced any of the cultivating influences of

woman's society ; he fancies he knows life from books and from traditional

hearsay, and yet everything appears to him strange and unpleasant. This iswhat I felt at Bonn. The means to which I had recourse in order to mitigate

this evil state of affairs were not perhaps all of them carefully chosen ; and

vexations,  unpleasant  intercourse,  and  obligations  carelessly  undertaken

made this first year of University life very burdensome to me."

    Professor Raoul Richter gives a very happy and concise account of the

reasons which really made student life ever more and more difficult for Fritz :

" At first Nietzsche joyfully entered into all the students' ways. He joined

their conviviality's and took part in their duels. But the man whose heart even

in those days lay solely in spiritual things, who would have loved above all to

read  Greek  Tragedies  with  his  friend  Deussen  or  to  listen  to  Schumann's

Faust music, who carried a wreath to the composer's grave and himself wrote

some Manfred music, and was in consequence of all this regarded as a freak

by the rest of the students, could not fail in the course of time to feel himself

a stranger among his comrades (Letters, V., 98). It was in this spirit that he

wrote to Gersdorff, who just at this time was going through the same conflict

at Gottingen : ' One has already lost a good deal when one has lost one's

moral indignation at the bad things which daily occur in one's circle. This is

more particularly true of drink and drunkenness, and also of disrespect and

scorn of other men and other opinions ' (Letters, L, 12). And how deep was

the  gulf  which  separated  him  from  those  who  were  inferior  to  him  in

character, but unfortunately not in numbers and other advantages his fellow

students the following account given by Deussen in his Memoirs will prove.

Nietzsche once paid a visit to Cologne by himself and was shown over the

city by a servant. He asked the man to take him to a restaurant ; his guide,

however, misunderstanding his request, took him to a house of ill fame. '

Suddenly,' said Nietzsche to Deussen, ' I found myself surrounded by half a

dozen  creatures  in  tinsel  and  gauze  who  gazed  at  me  expectantly.  For  a

moment I stood absolutely dumbfounded in front of them ; then, as if driven

by instinct, I went to the piano as to the only thing with a soul in the whole

company and struck one or two chords. The music quickened my limbs and

in an instant I was out in the open ' (Deussen's Erinnerungen p. 24) . The fact

that such sensitiveness of soul and singleness of aim and interest must have

led to a breach with a Students' Association, in which, as in all such bodies,

baser  elements  were  mingled  with  those  of  a  higher  nature,  is  obvious

enough."

  My brother urged reform and, in so doing, set such a high and severe

standard of moral demands, that the majority of his fellow students revoltedagainst  this  arrogant  and  disconcerting  young  comrade.  It  must  not  be

thought, however, that the Franconia was particularly wild. On the contrary,

its  high  moral  tone  had  been  praised  by  others  ;  but  my  brother  really

expected too much.

  It was not to the fighting and fencing that he objected ; on the contrary, he

rather favoured these pastimes, as he did all the arts of chivalry. To this day

his  acquaintances  still  speak  of  the  amusing  and  unconventional  way  in

\which he involved himself in his first duel. When he felt that he had grown

sufficiently dexterous in the use of the sword to challenge someone to fight

with him, he went one day for a walk with a certain Herr D., who belonged to

an association which was on duelling terms with the Franconia. It suddenly

struck Fritz what a clever and pleasant adversary this man would be, and

turning to him in a friendly and courteous manner he said : " You are a man

after my own heart, could we not have a duel together ? Let us waive all the

usual preliminaries." The other fellow agreed in the most obliging way, but is

said to have afterwards given to his friends a very comical description of his

surprise at this incident.

  The circumstance which above all aroused my brother's wrath was the

detestable " beer materialism " with which he met on all sides, and owing to

these early experiences in Bonn he forever retained a very deep dislike to

smoking, drinking, and the whole of so-called " beer conviviality." He gave

expression to the bitterness of his feelings in a retrospect of his first year as a

student, which he wrote at the end of August, 1865, from Naumburg to his

new friend Mushacke in Bonn : " You will, perhaps, be able to understand

that I cannot think of Bonn save with unpleasant feelings. The vicissitudes

and experiences I had there are still, it is true, too fresh in my mind, and the

bitter husk of the present and of reality forbids me to have any joy in the

kernel. I hope that some day at any rate I shall be able to look back upon this

year from the standpoint of memory cheerfully, as a necessary link in the

chain of my development. For the moment this is not possible. I feel that in

many  respects  I  have  squandered  this  period  most  shamefully,  and  my

membership of the Association, to tell the honest truth, strikes me as a faux

pas, especially as regards the last summer term. It made me transgress my

principle, not to conform to institutions or individuals longer than it took me

to learn what they were like.

  " Such things bring their own punishment with them. I am very cross with

myself, and this feeling has somewhat spoilt my summer for me, and evendisturbed my objective judgment of the Association. I am not a heart-and-

soul supporter of the Franconia, and I can well imagine a more attractive

body. I regard its political judgment as very inferior, and depending merely

on a few heads. With respect to its attitude to the outside world, I consider it

both plebeian and revolting. As I have not held my tongue concerning my

unfavourable opinions about it, I have somewhat spoiled my position among

its members.

  " At this point, my dear friend, I must think gratefully of you. How often

have I not lost in your company, and in your company alone, that vexatious

spirit which was so habitual to me at Bonn ! That is why the pleasant pictures

of my happy times there will always be associated in my mind with you.

  " At bottom, too, I must also express myself dissatisfied with my studies,

although  I  hold  the  Association  largely  responsible  for  this,  because  it

thwarted my beautiful plans. I have only just learnt how restful and uplifting

it is for a man to be continually at work on some profound task. I so seldom

experienced this pleasure at Bonn. I cannot help looking with scorn upon the

work  I  did  in  the  Bonn  days.  There  was  a  composition  for  the  Gustavus

Adolfus Club, another for an Association evening, and yet another for the

Professor. Atrocious ! I blush when I think of the drivel ! Every one of the

things I wrote in my Grammar School days was better than these.

  " As regards lectures, with the exception of one or two things, I learnt

nothing. I am thankful to Springer for certain joys he gave me, and I might

also be grateful to Ritschl, if I had used him industriously. But on the whole I

am not dissatisfied in this respect. I believe a good deal in self-development

and  how  easy  it  is  to  be  fixed  for  ever  by  men  like  Ritschl,  or  actually

uprooted and planted, perhaps, precisely on roads which lie at some distance

from one's real nature.

  " The fact that I have gone a long way towards understanding myself I

regard as the greatest blessing of this year. And also the gaining of one friend

who is heartily sympathetic to me is not to be underrated."

  The vexation which he felt about this wasted year was not mitigated till

long afterwards ; for, two years later, he describes his departure from Bonn in

very gloomy language : " I left Bonn like a fugitive ; and when at midnight I

stood on the quay of the Rhine, accompanied by my friend Mushacke, and

waited for the steamer from Cologne, I did not feel the slightest twinge at

leaving  a  place  so  beautiful,  a  countryside  so  flourishing,  and  a  band  of

young companions. On the contrary, it was precisely they who were drivingme thence. I do not wish to begin to judge them unjustly, as I have often

done. I was still too timidly wrapped up in myself, and I had not the strength

to play an independent part amid all the influences which surrounded me

then.  Everything  obtruded  itself  upon  me,  and  I  could  not  succeed  in

dominating my environment. At first I tried to conform to the conventions,

and to become what is called a full-fledged student. As, however, I failed

ever more and more in this endeavour, and as the touch of poetry which

seemed to hang over this life had vanished as far as I was concerned, and I

realised clearly the course, Philistine spirit, reared in this excess of drinking,

of rowdyism and running into debt, whispers of revolt began to sound in my

heart. I withdrew from these empty pleasures, and with ever greater affection

turned to those peaceful joys to be found in Nature or in the study of Art,

with some sympathetic companion ; for every day I felt a greater stranger in

these circles, although to escape them was not yet possible. In addition to all

this I began to feel persistent rheumatic pains, and I was also weighed down

by the realisation that I had done nothing for science, little for life, and had

only  acquired  a  host  of  debts.  The  steamer  came  and  bore  me  away.  I

remained on the bridge in the damp wet night, and as I watched the little

lights  which  lined  the  river  bank  at  Bonn  slowly  disappear,  everything

conduced to give me the impression of flight."

  In spite of his irregularities the Franconia had given him an honourable

send off with a band. But Fritz regarded it as his duty not to conceal from his

old Association his real opinion of it. On the 20th October, 1865, he sent

back  his  sash,  with  the  accompanying  note  :  "  To  THE  STUDENTS'

ASSOCIATION, THE FRANCONIA.

  "I beg to inform the Association, the Franconia, that I herewith return it

my sash, and in so doing send in my resignation. By this I do not mean to

imply that I cease from valuing the principle of the Association. All I would

frankly declare is that its present features are not very pleasing to me. This

may be in part my own fault ; in any case it has proved a great effort for me

to endure my membership over the year. Nevertheless I regarded it as a duty

to become acquainted with the Society, and now that no narrow bonds unite

me with it I bid it a hearty farewell.

  " May the Franconia soon grow out of that stage of development at which

it now stands, and may it ever claim high-minded moral men for its members.

  The Association was indignant at this letter, and crossed my brother's

name  from  its  annals.  And  thus  his  first  year  as  a  student  ended  in  asomewhat melancholy fashion.

                                  CHAPTER XI LEIPZIG

  MY  brother  spent  his  long  vacation  from  the  University  with  us  at

Naumburg.  He  cured  the  rheumatism  contracted  at  Bonn,  and  gradually

developed a better frame of mind, so that he was able to look forward to his

new academic life with a cheerful and hopeful spirit. As he had suffered so

much in Bonn from the effects of uncomfortable lodgings, I proposed at first

that we should all move to Leipzig. Fritz was delighted at the idea, but our

dear mother not only feared the move and all the difficulties it involved, but

also thought that it was better for a son to get accustomed to depending on

himself. It was of course Ritschl's transfer from Bonn to Leipzig that led Fritz

to  choose  this  University.  During  the  great  dispute  between  the  two

Professors, Ritschl and Jahn, at Bonn, Fritz had not shown himself in the

least a blind partisan ; for he had a great personal respect for Jahn, who had

been very friendly to him ; but, whether Ritschl was right or wrong in this

quarrel, my brother considered him by far the more distinguished man of the

two.

  Before he went to Leipzig he spent a fortnight in Berlin with the parents

of his excellent friend Mushacke, and in later years he often thought of the

beautiful  excursions  he  made  from  this  city,  especially  to  such  places  as

Potsdam and Sans Souci.

  Thus his sojourn in Leipzig began under very different auspices from

those of his last days in Bonn, and if his acquaintance with Schopenhauer's

principal work at first seduced him to the cause of pessimism, it was, in his

case,  after  all  only  that  kind  of  youthful  pessimism  which  my  brother

afterwards declared one might well allow oneself if one were young and full

of  courage  and  strength.  He  wrote  an  exhaustive  description  of  the  two

Leipzig years 18651867 in the autumn of the latter year, and the small book

which  contained  this  account  was  only  saved  from  the  flames  by  earnest

entreaty on my part.

  " I reached the Berlin station at Leipzig with my friend Mushacke on the

17th October, 1865. We first of all wandered about in the centre of the city

quite aimlessly, and rejoiced at the sight of the lofty houses, the lively streets

and the activity everywhere. Then we adjourned for a little rest about midday

to  the  Reisse  Restaurant  (in  the  Kloster  Gasse)  and  thought  things  quite

tolerable,  although  the  atmosphere  was  not  free  from  black-red-and-gold

youths. It was on this occasion that I first read the newspaper at midday,which became a custom with me from that time forward. But that morning all

we  did  was  to  note  down  the  various  advertisements  of  respectable  or

comfortable rooms with bedchambers, etc. Then we set out, up and down

streets and stairs, to view the commodious apartments advertised, and found

them generally extremely uninviting. What smells would meet us, and what

opinions some people held of our standard of cleanliness ! Suffice it to say

that we very soon became annoyed and suspicious, and that it was only with

some hesitation that we followed an old curiosity shop man who had rooms

to let which seemed likely to suit us. We were already beginning to think the

way too long and complained of feeling tired, when he led us into a small

side street called the Blumen Gasse, where he stopped, took us through a

house  into  a  small  garden,  and  from  there  into  a  neighbouring  building,

where he showed us a small room adjoining a little sleeping box, which gave

one a pleasant impression of retirement and seemed admirably suited for the

shelter of a scholar. We agreed to terms, and my address became No. 4,

Blumen Gasse, c/o the antiquarian, Herr Rohn. My friend Mushacke found

diggings in the house next door. As we remarked later, T certainly had the

best of the bargain over the choice of the rooms. After our business had been

despatched on that day we went to a neighbouring cafe and, in spite of the

inclement autumnal weather, we sat in the open and drank our afternoon cup

of chocolate, while our hearts beat expectantly at the thought of all that would

enter our lives in this new home.

  " On the following day I announced myself to the Academic Board. It

happened to be a day on which the University was holding some sort of

celebration and conferring Doctor's Degrees the day on which, one hundred

years previously, Goethe had entered his name in the register. I cannot say

how delightfully stimulated I felt by this coincidence ; it was clearly a good

omen  for  my  year  in  Leipzig,  and  the  future  certainly  saw  to  it  that  its

promise should be fulfilled. Kahnis, who was then Rector, tried hard to make

us freshmen, who formed a considerable number, understand that a genius

often  chooses  extraordinary  paths  to  his  goal,  and  that  Goethe's  life  as  a

student should not in any way be regarded by us as an example. We replied to

this address of the rotund and active little man with covert smiles, and each of

us as we passed his black-robed form extended our hands for the customary

hand-shake. Later in the day we received our papers.

  " The first pleasant event so far as I was concerned was the arrival of

Ritschl, who landed safely at his destination. Academic etiquette requiredhim to give an inaugural public lecture in the great hall. Everybody was in a

tremendous state of excitement at the appearance of the famous man whose

behaviour in the affair at Bonn had brought his name into every paper and

every home. The hall was therefore packed to overflowing with members of

the University, but large numbers of the townspeople, who were not in any

way  attached  to  the  academic  body,  stood  in  the  background.  Suddenly

Ritschl made his way into the hall in his large felt slippers, though otherwise

he was faultlessly attired in evening dress, with a white tie. He looked good

humouredly  and  cheerfully  into  the  new  world  before  him,  and  soon

discovered faces which were not strange. While going from group to group in

the back of the hall he suddenly cried : ' Hullo ! There is Herr Nietzsche too !

' And he waved his hand gleefully at me. He soon had the whole circle of

Bonn pupils around him, with whom he talked in the most animated way, and

all the while the hall grew more and more crowded until at last the dignitaries

of  the  University  entered.  As  soon  as  he  saw  this  he  cheerfully  and

unceremoniously  ascended  the  platform  and  delivered  his  beautiful  Latin

address on the value and use of philology, while his independent look, the

energetic  youthfulness  of  his  language,  the  playful  fire  of  his  facial

expression provoked general astonishment. I heard a friendly old Saxon say

afterwards : ' Bless me, what a " fire " the old man had ! ' When he delivered

his first lecture in Lecture Room No. the crowd was also oppressively great.

He began his course by a lecture on Aeschylus's Tragedy The Seven against

Thebes, the most important part of which I heard and wrote down.

  " I will now say a word about my attendance of lectures. A significant

circumstance in this connection is that I do not possess one single complete

lecture note-book, but only sad fragments. For this irregularity on my part I

sometimes felt some anxiety and distress, but very soon I was able to find a

satisfactory explanation of it all. As a matter of fact what happened was this. I

was not in the least attracted by the matter of the greater part of the lectures.

All that interested me was the form in which the Professor conveyed his

wisdom. It was the method which fired my enthusiasm ; for I realised how

very little substantial knowledge is acquired at Universities, and how these

studies  have,  nevertheless,  the  highest  importance  attached  to  them

everywhere. It thus became clear to me that the principal and only effective

point was the method employed in treating a text, etc. Thus I limited myself

to the observation of how men taught, and what method they employed to

convey  a  science  to  young  minds.  I  persistently  imagined  myself  in  theposition of a don, and from this standpoint conferred either my approval or

my disapproval upon the efforts of well-known lecturers. Thus I devoted my

energies far more to discovering how one should teach, than to learning what

is  usually  taught,  at  Universities.  Meanwhile  I  was  fortified  by  the

consciousness that in the end I should not lack the knowledge I required, and

which  was  demanded  of  a  qualified  scholar  ;  for  I  depended  for  the

acquisition of this matter upon my own particular nature, which knew by

means of individual work and a system of its own, how to garner all that was

worth knowing. And hitherto my experience' had only endorsed this self-

confidence. The aim that lies before me is to become a really practical teacher

and to be able to awaken the necessary reflection and self-examination in

young people which enables them always to keep the why, the what, and the

how, of their science ever before their eyes.

  " No one can fail to see that there is a philosophical strain in this way of

looking at things. The young man should first of all fall into the state of

surprise. Once he has seen that life is a host of riddles he should consciously,

and with a resigned severity, confine himself to that which is knowable and,

according to his faculties, select his own subject from this vast field. I shall

now relate how I reached this standpoint. It is in this connection that the

name  of  Schopenhauer  will  appear  for  the  first  time  in  these  pages.  Bad

spirits and vexations of a personal kind easily assume a general character

with  young  men.  At  that  time  I  stood  absolutely  alone,  full  of  the  most

painful experiences and disappointments, without either help, fundamental

principles, hopes, or even pleasant memories. From morning to night my one

aim  was  to  make  a  fitting  road  for  myself  in  life.  To  achieve  this  end  I

severed the last links that chained me to my past at Bonn ; I tore the bond

asunder which united me with the Association. In the delightful seclusion of

my lodgings it became possible for me to gather myself together and, if I did

happen to meet friends, they were always Mushacke and von Gersdorff, who

for their part lived with similar ideas in their minds. Now let anyone try to

imagine how the reading of Schopenhauer's masterpiece must have affected

me in such circumstances. One day I came across this book at old Rohn's

curiosity shop, and taking it up very gingerly I turned over its pages. I know

not what demon whispered to me: 'Take this book home with thee.' At all

events, contrary to my habit not to be hasty in my purchase of books, I took it

home. Once in my room I threw myself into the corner of the sofa with my

booty, and began to allow that energetic and gloomy genius to work upon mymind. In this book, in which every line cried out renunciation, denial, and

resignation, I saw a mirror in which I espied the whole world, life and my

own mind depicted in frightful grandeur. In this volume the full celestial eye

of art gazed at me ; here I saw illness and recovery, banishment and refuge,

hell  and  heaven.  The  need  of  knowing  myself,  yea,  even  of  gnawing  at

myself, forcibly seized me. Evidences of this sudden change are still to be

found in the restless melancholy of the leaves of my diary at that period, with

all their useless self-reproach and their desperate gazing upwards for recovery

and for the transformation of the whole spirit of mankind. By drawing all my

qualities  and  my  aspirations  before  the  forum  of  gloomy  self-contempt  I

became bitter, unjust, and unbridled in my hatred of myself. I even practised

bodily penance ; for instance, I forced myself for a fortnight at a stretch to go

to bed at o'clock in the morning and to rise punctually at six. I became the

victim of nervous irritability, and who knows to what degree my foolishness

would have taken me, if the very allurements of life itself, of vanity, and the

discipline of regular studies, had not stood in my way.

  "It was at this period that the Philological Club was formed. One evening

several of the old Bonn students, of whom I was one, were invited to Ritschl's

house.  After  dinner  our  host  urged  us  warmly  to  consider  the  idea  of

founding a Philological Club. The ladies had just retired to the adjoining

room. Nothing therefore remained to disturb the outpourings of the vivacious

little  man,  who  had  a  good  deal  to  say  from  experience  about  the

effectiveness and the influence of such clubs. The thought took root in four of

us  that  is  to  say,  Wisser,  Koscher,  Arnold  and  myself.  We  discussed  the

matter  among  our  friends  and  invited  those  we  selected  to  meet  us  one

evening at the ' Deutsche Bierstube ' to consider the foundation of the Club.

A week later we held our first regular meeting. We got through the first year

without a President, and always elected a chairman at the beginning of each

meeting. Oh, what excited, uncontrolled debates we used to have ! In the

midst of the general uproar, how difficult it was to rescue anything which

might be called the opinion of the assembly ! It was on the 18th January,

1866, that I gave my first lecture there, and that in a way I made my debut in

the  philological  world.  I  had  announced  that  I  would  speak  in  the  Lion

Restaurant  in  the  Nikolai  Strasse  on  the  last  edition  of  the  Poems  of

Theognis. There in the vaulted room, once I had overcome my first feelings

of  shyness,  I  was  able  to  let  myself  go  with  force  and  emphasis,  and

succeeded so far that my friends expressed the greatest respect for what theyhad heard. Wonderfully refreshed, I returned home very late to write bitter

words in my diary, and do as much as I could to wipe my gratified vanity

from the tablet of my consciousness.

  " This success gave me courage to take my work just as it was, in folio,

and written over in the margin with endless notes, to Ritschl one afternoon,

and in the presence of Wilhelm Dindorf, I shyly handed him the manuscript. I

afterwards  learnt  how  unpleasant  and  disagreeable  such  unsolicited

contributions  were  to  Ritschl.  Suffice  it  to  say,  he  accepted  the  work,

probably because Dindorf was present ; and a few days later he summoned

me. He looked at me thoughtfully for a while and asked me to be seated. ' For

what purpose,' he asked, ' have you done this work ? ' I replied with the first

thought that came into my head that, as the basis of a lecture delivered at our

Club, it had already fulfilled its object. He then enquired my age, how long I

had  been  a  University  student,  etc.,  and  when  I  had  answered  all  these

questions,  he  declared  that  never  before  had  he  had  any  similar  work  so

severe in method and sure in construction handed to him by a student of the

third term. Thereupon he urged me most strongly to re-write the lecture in the

form of a small book and promised me his help in providing me with some

material. After this my self-esteem soared with me into the clouds. In the

afternoon I took a walk with my friends to Gohlis ; the weather was beautiful

and sunny and my heart overflowed with happiness. At last, when we were in

the inn drinking our coffee and eating our cakes, I could no longer restrain

myself, and told my astonished, but absolutely unenvious friends, what had

happened to me. For some time I went about quite bewildered ; this was the

period  in  which  I  was  born  again  to  the  calling  of  a  philologist,  for  I

anticipated the glory which was to be won by me in this walk of life.

  " From the day on which Ritschl formed such a favourable opinion of my

papers, I became much more closely related with him. I went twice almost

every week to see him at lunchtime, and on every occasion found him ready

to indulge in serious or frivolous conversation. As a rule he sat in his arm-

chair and had the Kolnische Zeitmig before him, which, together with the

Banner Zeitung, he had long been accustomed to read. As a rule, amid the

vast medley of papers there stood a glass of red wine. When he was at work,

he always used a seat which he had upholstered himself by cutting off the

embroidery from a cushion he had had given him, and nailing it on to a

wooden stool that had no back to it. In his talks he showed no restraint ; his

anger  with  his  friends,  his  discontentedness  with  existing  conditions,  thefaults of the University and the eccentricities of the Professors everything fell

from his lips ; so that in this respect, at least, his nature was certainly the

reverse of a diplomatist's. He likewise poked fun at himself, at his elementary

idea of managing his affairs, and would tell, for instance, how formerly he

had been in the habit of concealing the money he received, in notes of ten,

twenty, fifty or a hundred thalers, in books, so as to be able to enjoy the

surprise  of  their  discovery  later  on.  The  fact  that  at  times  extraordinary

complications would arise through the loan of books, and that many a poor

student was astonished by what he thought to be a gift, for which it would be

scarcely tactful to offer any thanks all this we were told by Frau Ritschl,

while Ritschl himself, with a shamefaced expression, would be obliged to

confirm all she said. As a matter of fact his eagerness to help others was

simply splendid ; and for this reason many young philologists, in addition to

being indebted to him for their advance in scientific knowledge, also felt

themselves bound to him intimately and personally by a debt of gratitude. It

is  true  that  he  greatly  over-estimated  his  special  subject,  and  therefore

showed some disapproval of philologists approaching philosophy too closely.

On the other hand he tried to make his pupils do useful work as soon as

possible, and thereby often went very near to over-stimulating the productive

talents of one or two of them. In addition to this he was absolutely free from

any scientific dogma, and was never more upset than when people showed an

unqualified and uncritical adherence to his results."

  In  spite  of  Schopenhauer's  influence  there  is  a  very  cheerful  spirit

prevalent  in  these  notes,  which  was  certainly  the  principal  result  of  my

brother's sojourn at Leipzig. Still it must not be forgotten that this description

of  his  experiences  was  only  written  down  after  the  close  of  his  time  at

Leipzig, when the feelings of his first period of Schopenhauer discipleship

had perhaps somewhat toned down. I remember that in the autumn of 1865

he had behaved in a most tragic manner, and it is greatly to be regretted that

his diary, The Book of Contemplations, which has already been mentioned,

was destroyed by him when he wrote the above descriptions in 1867. The

cover  of  the  book  alone  survived.  In  November  and  December  1865,  his

letters  were  full  of  Schopenhauerian  pessimism,  and  he  even  sought  to

convert us to the doctrine ; for instance, he wrote in a letter of 5th November,

1865, as follows : " We have once more fallen into the rut of our daily tasks,

thoughts, troubles and recreations ; how important the day seems to me now

and what a number of things are decided or have to be decided in the narrowchamber of the brain ! Do you really take so light-heartedly this contradictory

existence, in which nothing is clear save the fact that all is obscure ? It always

seems to me that you get over all this by joking about it. Or am I mistaken ?

How happy you must be if I see aright. ' Do thy duty ! ' Very well, my

friends, I do perform my duty, or I strive to do so, but whither does it lead ?

And supposing I fulfil my duty satisfactorily in every way, is the beast of

burden higher than man because it performs more dutifully that which is

demanded of it ? Has one paid enough attention to one's manhood if one

satisfies the demands which are made upon it by the circumstances in which

one  is  born  ?  What  power  is  it,  pray,  that  bids  us  be  determined  by  our

environment ? " But what if we refuse to do this, what if we are resolved to

consider ourselves and to force men to acknowledge us just as we are what

then ? What is it that we desire now ? Were it the thing to carve for oneself

the most tolerable form of existence possible ? Dear friends, there are two

roads : either we accustom ourselves to be as narrow as may be, and to turn

the light of our wits as low as possible, and then seek riches and to live on the

pleasures of the world ; or we know that life is miserable, we know that we

are the slaves of life the more we enjoy it, and so we discard the goods of this

world,  practise  abstinence,  are  mean  towards  ourselves  and  loving  to  all

others  simply  because  we  pity  our  comrades  in  misery  in  short  we  live

according to the strict precepts of primitive Christianity, not of the modern

sugary and formless Christianity. Christianity does not allow itself to be '

taken up,' either en passant or because it happens to be the fashion.

  " And does life then become bearable ? Certainly, because its burden

every day becomes less heavy and because no fetters bind us any longer to it.

It is endurable because it may be renounced without any pain."

  At  first  we  gathered  from  this  letter  that  his  gloomy  mood  had  been

induced by the disappearance of his box of books and manuscripts, for we

knew nothing then of his reading of Schopenhauer. But the mood persisted

even  after  the  recovery  of  the  important  box,  and  therefore  our  mother

forbade any such gloomy epistolary discussions in the future, and told him

that it would be better if he related some of his experiences. For our dear

mother could write the most beautiful letters about all she did, and wished us

to do the same. In Bonn, Fritz had certainly complied with this wish of hers,

but during his time in Leipzig, when he used to see us very often, he thought

such letters were superfluous. My French governess always used to say that I

was  a  little  espiegle,  and  when  Fritz  came  for  his  Christmas  holidays  Imaintained a sombre mien, and indulged in all sorts of profound observations

concerning the difficulties and obscurities of existence. Fritz did not know

what to make of this, and racked his brain to try to discover what had really

taken  place.  When,  however,  he  learnt  that  it  was  all  the  result  of  his

admonitions to take life seriously, he confessed to me that he would be ever

so much better pleased if I would stay as I used to be as " our laughs together

were such a boon to him." After that we really had very enjoyable Christmas

holidays. Indeed Fritz's clouds almost disappeared, and he really had ample

grounds for being happy and contented as he himself shows in his diary. Of

course  at  intervals  there  were  always  less  cheerful  moments  when

philological work did not go smoothly, and when he believed that Ritschl, on

whose good will he relied so much, was a little vexed by his refusal to enter

his class, or when his friend Deussen caused him annoyance by deciding in

accordance with his parents' wishes to study theology instead of philology, a

science for which Fritz thought him better fitted. His sensitiveness made him

susceptible to any attacks on his ideals, and made him feel it very deeply

when he had offended worthy people by his tactlessness. Speaking of his

friends, he says : " I immediately think of Hiffer, who continually tormented

and teased our two acquaintances Romundt and Wisser so much so that he

won the hostility of the one and the friendship of the other. He was a talented

man from whom Nature had withheld all sense of proportion ; he pursued the

liberal arts, more particularly music, with eagerness, was a skilful translator

of French, and as he was very wealthy, calmly foresaw the time when he

would swim up the stream of literary life. We were always at loggerheads

about musical matters, especially concerning Wagner, about whom we never

ceased disputing and pouring forth our venom on each other. Now, somewhat

late in the day, I must admit that his musical tastes were much more healthily

developed than my own. But, at that time, I was unable to see this and very

often  suffered  by  the  flatness  of  his  contradictions.  In  fact  he  easily  hurt

people's feelings by his unceremonious manner. Once, for instance, when we

were visiting some mutual friends, Hiffer, who had thrown his heavy person

into  a  chair,  exclaimed  when  the  legs  of  it  cracked  beneath  the  unusual

weight, ' Oh ! this chair is not kosher ' a remark which was obviously very

offensive to our hostess, who was a converted Jewess. Very much the same

thing happened on one occasion when we were in the dress circle of the

Leipzig Theatre, and were talking gaily about a singer who had made her first

appearance  the  day  before.  We  praised  her  singing  and  deplored  herextraordinarily ugly features all the more, and Hiffer in loud and forcible

tones described the latter with all manner of imagery. What were our feelings,

however,  when  a  lady  three  feet  in  front  of  us  turned  quietly  round  and

showed her face that same extraordinarily ugly face to its public decriers !

Grieved  at  having  gratuitously  wounded  anybody,  we  did  not  improve

matters  when,  after  the  performance,  we  sent  her  a  bouquet  with  the

inscription ' These roses to the nightingale ! ' My brother's inmost nature

developed in the freest way possible during his stay in Leipzig. He no longer

felt, as he had in Bonn, the desire to be a thorough-going student a thing for

which, he had small aptitude ; he was not obliged now to conform to the

regulations  of  any  association  regulations  which  seemed  to  him  both

unpleasant and plebeian ; nor was he required to defend his severe moral

principles against his scornful fellow students, nor shyly to conceal his real

nature ; but could at last exercise that influence over his environment which

he had always desired to have, but for which he had been unable to find an

opportunity in Bonn.

    Although he often came over to us from Leipzig, either alone or with

friends, each time that he spent his holidays with us in Naumburg we had

more  or  less  of  a  surprise  at  the  remarkable  manner  in  which  he  had

developed meanwhile, and at the great plans concerning his work with which

he returned every time to his home. For instance, at Easter, 1866, he was

assiduously engaged upon turning his studies of Theognis into a small book.

During these holidays, which were full of occupation, he wrote to Baron von

Gersdorff  :  "  Three  things  are  my  consolations  rare  consolations  !  my

Schopenhauer,  Schumann's  music,  and,  lastly,  solitary  walks.  Yesterday  a

heavy storm hung in the sky, and I hastened towards a neighbouring hill,

called Leusch (maybe you can explain the word to me). At the summit I

found a hut and a man, who, watched by his son, was killing two kids. The

storm  broke  in  all  its  power,  discharging  thunder  and  hail,  and  I  felt

inexpressibly well and full of zest, and realised with wonderful clearness that

to understand Nature one must go to her as I had just done, as a refuge from

all worries and oppressions. What was man to me then with his restless will ?

What mattered to me the eternal ' Thou shalt ' and ' Thou shalt not ' ? How

different are lightning, storm and hail ; free powers without ethics ! How

happy they are, how strong they are pure will without the troubles of the

intellect."

  The autumn of 1865 was one of very great interest to him, owing to allkinds of literary, musical, and political events, foremost among which was

the war between Prussia and Austria, which drew him into the atmosphere of

politics and made him once more an enthusiastic Prussian. " Who would not

be proud to be a Prussian in these days ? '' As may well be imagined, the

student associations were on the side of the Liberals during the hostilities, but

this attitude was more or less disavowed owing to the extraordinary turn of

events in the war of 1866. As a matter of fact Fritz might at that time very

easily have done more than remain a " mere dummy," as he called it, in all

these  great  movements.  Twice  he  offered  himself  to  the  authorities,  and

although, when examined, he was declared to be thoroughly healthy, he was

refused  with  regret  owing  to  his  excessive  short-sightedness.  He  would,

however, have been quite ready to serve as a soldier and to proceed to the

seat of war. In May, 1866, he concludes a letter to us as follows : " Greet all

our friends most heartily For me, alone out here ; And if our dear old aunts

you see, Tell them that I may shortly be A Prussian Grenadier."

  " ONE WHO is READY FOR WAR."

    Nevertheless it would have been very painful for him to be wrenched

from his studies. It was precisely in the week of Sadowa that he wrote his

work on Theognis for the Rheinisches Museum. Leipzig was occupied by the

Prussians, and my brother gave the most amusing description of the town in

its Prussian garb, and of the secret opposition of the Saxon Philistine.

  Despite these warlike events, music and science, but above all the stage,

played, as they always did, a great part in Leipzig affairs. Fritz was a member

of the Riedel Choral Society, which in those days used to give wonderfully

beautiful concerts. During the anxious week of war, in which Dresden closed

the doors of all its theatres owing to the lack of audiences, Hedwig Raabe

was cheered in the most enthusiastic manner by full houses at Leipzig, and

that city forgot all about the gravity of the present beneath the spell of this

enchanting artiste. My brother simply raved about her, and wrote a beautiful

little album of original poems and compositions in her honour. This volume

has, unfortunately, not been recovered to this day.

  Much to his regret, he had only a very slight personal acquaintance with

her, and this fact he deplored, more particularly as it would have been very

easy for him to have seen her frequently, since she was staying with a family,

the members of which we called uncle, aunt and cousins, though we were not

related to them in any way. Fritz, however, had not called on them at the

proper time, and had thus failed to make himself at home with them as a sortof relative. It now pained him deeply that the most he could do was to pay a

hasty visit there in order to secure an invitation whilst this charming creature

was still in the house. Fritz was honestly in love with Hedwig Raabe, and

Maximillian Harden is quite right when he says that she fulfilled the ideal of

womanhood which my brother admired throughout the whole of his life. It

was only necessary to hear him describe the piece "She has discovered her

heart" and to see how he represented her in it with ravished eyes in order to

know how he also had discovered his heart.

  Leipzig  enjoyed  other  and  even  higher  theatrical  amusements  in  the

summer of 1866. My brother saw the artiste Seebach once more in a series of

her best parts, and was deeply moved by her great art. It was hard for him to

tear himself away from Leipzig, and not by any means only on account of the

libraries there, which were essential to him in his philological work. At last,

however, a gruesome guest made its home for a while in the city. Cholera,

which had spread over the other parts of Saxony and Thuringia and reached

even Naumburg, entered Leipzig. Only a few watering places, such as Kosen,

remained untainted, and my mother and brother therefore went thither for the

midsummer holidays, while I paid a visit to relatives in the Voigtland. My

brother retained dreadful memories of the cholera. He declared that he had

twice been attacked by the epidemic, and that on both occasions he had cured

himself  only  by  continually  drinking  hot  water  and  inducing  heavy

perspiration. One night which he spent in the same house with a cholera

corpse remained indelibly and gruesomely stamped upon his memory.

  He employed his stay during the autumn in Kosen in active work, in

which he found the library at Pforta of great use. The Leipzig University

opened its doors rather late, for the authorities had thought it desirable to wait

for the cholera epidemic to subside. Fritz looked forward to his lovely plans

for the new term with a cheerful heart, and wrote to Mushacke as follows : "

This winter (1866 1867) we shall do all we possibly can. Above all, we are

thinking of giving a special impetus to our Philological Club, so that, like a

ball, it may roll forward over other terms, through which we, its founders,

will not be able to accompany it. Our aim will be to form a union of all the

really strenuous philologists of Leipzig. With this object in view we have

decided to elect twelve extraordinary members, and I, for my part, have a

large number of Pforta fellows particularly in view. My next lecture will treat

of  '  A  Theory  Concerning  Interpolations  in  the  Tragedians.'  I  have  also

arranged an evening with Romundt and two Pforta fellows, who are all threein  the  philological  moulting  stage,  on  which  we  shall  read  .Aeschylus'

Choephora together. We know from personal experience how hard it is to

endure this period, when we become aware of the endlessness of our study

and the momentary lack of success attending our labours. Maybe we shall be

able to give each other mutual support.

    "Finally,  I  may  tell  you  that,  with  the  majority  of  the  more  serious

members of our club, I am also a member of Ritschl's society, so that these

two institutions now go almost hand-in-hand together. In Ritschl's society we

shall read more, to which I am looking forward with great joy."

  The  month  of  January,  1867,  brought  us  a  sad  loss.  Our  dear  Aunt

Rosalie, who, as my brother had often said, came next to his mother and

sister in his affections and reverence, was taken from us. She was always

most devotedly concerned about our welfare, and had to some extent sought

to replace our father, her beloved brother Ludwig, in our midst. But what she

did above all was to keep alive and to maintain the family tradition, so that in

this respect, as my brother rightly declared, her loss was irreparable. This was

the first time that we experienced, with our full consciousness developed, the

days of sorrow at the death of a beloved and intimate relative, and this loss

therefore made the most profound impression on us both. She was quite ready

to die, and it was truly touching to see how happy she was until the last in the

thought that, as we were her next- of -kin, we should be the gainers. "Now

Fritz  can  pursue  his  academic  career,"  she  said  at  last,  with  an  affecting

brightness in her eyes, after a prolonged silence, just before she died. " Oh,

auntie dear ! " I cried, with deep affection, " Fritz would not mind being an

ordinary school teacher if only you could remain with us ! " " Ah. ! You are

good children," she said lovingly, " but God knows best."

  She  was  very  much  concerned  about  my  brother's  religious  and

philosophical views, but always confidently declared that he would be certain

to find the right road soon. She made him promise, however, never to impart

his philosophical views to me, or at least only when I was older and more

capable of judging for myself. Fritz kept this promise, but suffered a good

deal from not being able to pour the whole torrent of his enthusiasm for

Schopenhauer into my breast, and particularly during the year 1867 1868,

which he spent in Naumburg, he complained very often that he had no one

with whom he could discuss his most important affairs.

  He gave four important lectures in his Philological Club: 1. The latest

edition of the Poems of Theognis.