will be less highly esteemed ? Inevitably ! Or at all events for a fairly long

time, as long as the scale of valuations remains under the reacting influence

of former mistakes ! But we make some return for this by giving back to men

their good courage for the carrying out of actions that are now reputed to be

selfish, and thus restore their value, we relieve men's bad consciences ! and as

up to the present egoistic actions have been by far the most frequent, and will

be so to all eternity, we free the whole conception of these actions and of life

from its evil appearance ! This is a very high and important result. When men

no longer believe themselves to be evil, they cease to be so.

                                          BOOK III

  149

  LITTLE UNCONVENTIONAL ACTIONS ARE NECESSARY ! To act

occasionally in matters of custom against our own better judgments ; to yield

in  practice  while  reserving  our  own  intellectual  liberty  ;  to  behave  like

everybody else and thus to show ourselves amiable and considerate to all, to

compensate  them,  as  it  were,  even  if  only  to  some  extent,  for  our

unconventional opinions all this among many tolerably liberal-minded men is

looked upon not only as permissible but even as " honourable," " humane," "

tolerant," and " un-pedantic," or whatever fine words may be used to lull to

sleep the intellectual conscience. So, for example, one man, although he may

be an atheist, has his infant baptized in the usual Christian fashion ; another

goes through his period of military service, though he may severely condemn

all  hatred  between  nations  ;  and  a  third  runs  into  the  Church  with  a  girl

because she comes from a religious family, and makes his vows to a priest

without feeling ashamed of it. " It is of no importance if one of us does what

everyone  else  does  and  has  done  "  so  says  ignorant  prejudice!  What  a

profound mistake! For nothing is of greater importance than that a powerful,

long-established, and irrational custom should be once again confirmed by

the act of someone who is recognised as rational. In this way the proceeding

is thought to be sanctioned by reason itself! All honour to your opinions! but

little unconventional actions are of still greater value.

  150

  THE HAZARD OF MARRIAGES. If I were a god, and a benevolent god,

the marriages of men would cause me more displeasure than anything else.

An individual can make very great progress within the seventy years of his

life yes, even within thirty years : such progress, indeed, as to surprise even

the gods ! But when we then see him exposing the inheritance and legacy ofhis struggles and victories, the laurel crown of his humanity, on the first

convenient peg where any female may pick it to pieces for him ; when we

observe how well he can acquire and how little he is capable of preserving

his acquisitions, and how he does not even dream that by procreation he

might prepare a still more victorious life, we then, indeed, become impatient

and  say,  "Nothing  can  in  the  end  result  from  humanity,  individuals  are

wasted,  for  all  rationality  of  a  great  advance  of  humanity  is  rendered

impossible by the hazard of marriages : let us cease from being the assiduous

spectators and fools of this aimless drama ! " It was in this mood that the

gods of Epicurus withdrew long ago to their divine seclusion and felicity :

they were tired of men and their love affairs.

  151

  HERE ARE NEW IDEALS TO INVENT. At a time when a man is in

love he should not be allowed to come to a decision about his life and to

determine once and for all the character of his society on account of a whim.

We ought publicly to declare invalid the vows of lovers, and to refuse them

permission to marry : and this because we should treat marriage itself much

more  seriously,  so  that  in  cases  where  it  is  now  contracted  it  would  not

usually be allowed in future ! Are not the majority of marriages such that we

should not care to have them witnessed by a third party ? And yet this third

party is scarcely ever lacking the child and he is more than a witness ; he is

the whipping-boy and scapegoat.

  152

    FORMULA OF OATH. " If I am now telling a lie I am no longer an

honourable man, and everyone may say so to my face." I recommend this

formula in place of the present judicial oath and its customary invocation to

the Deity: it is stronger. There is no reason why even religious men should

oppose  it  ;  for  as  soon  as  the  customary  oath  no  longer  serves,  all  the

religious people will have to turn to their catechism, which says, " You shall

not take the name of the Lord your God in vain."

  153

  THE MALCONTENT. He Is one of the brave old warriors : angry with

civilisation because he believes that its object is to make all good things

honour, rewards, and fair women accessible even to cowards.

  154

    CONSOLATION AMID PERILS. The Greeks, in the course of a life that

was always surrounded by great dangers and cataclysms, endeavoured to findin meditation and knowledge a kind of security of feeling, a last refuge. We,

who live in a much more secure state, have introduced danger into meditation

and knowledge, and it is in life itself that we endeavour to find repose, a

refuge from danger.

  155

    EXTINCT  SCEPTICISM.  Hazardous  enterprises  are  rarer  in  modern

times than in antiquity and in the Middle Ages, probably because modern

times have no more belief in omens, oracles, stars, and soothsayers. In other

words, we have become incapable of believing in a future which is reserved

for us, as the ancients did, who in contradistinction to ourselves were much

less sceptical regarding that which is to be than that which is.

  156

  EVIL THROUGH EXUBERANCE. " Oh, that we should not feel too

happy ! " such was the secret fear of the Greeks in their best age. That is why

they preached moderation to themselves. And we ?

  157

  THE WORSHIP OF NATURAL SOUNDS. What signification can we

find in the fact that our culture is not only indulgent to the manifestations of

grief,  such  as  tears,  complaints,  reproaches,  and  attitudes  of  rage  and

humility, but even approves them and reckons them among the most noble

and essential things? while, on the other hand, the spirit of ancient philosophy

looked down upon them with contempt, without admitting their necessity in

any way. Let us remember how Plato who was by no means one of the most

inhuman of the philosophers speaks of the Philoctetus of the tragic stage. Is it

possible  that  our  modern  culture  is  wanting  in  "  philosophy  "  ?  or,  in

accordance with the valuations of those old philosophers, do we perhaps all

form part of the " mob " ?

158

  THE CLIMATE FOR FLATTERY. In our day flatterers should no longer

be sought at the courts of kings, since these have all acquired a taste for

militarism, which cannot tolerate flattery. But this flower even now often

grows in abundance in the neighbourhood of bankers and artists.

  159

  THE REVIVERS. Vain men value a fragment of the past more highly

from  the  moment  when  they  are  able  to  revive  it  in  their  imagination

(especially if it is difficult to do so), they would even like if possible to raise

it from the dead. Since, however, the number of vain people is always verylarge, the danger presented by historical studies, if an entire epoch devotes its

attention to them, is by no means small : too great an amount of strength is

then wasted on all sorts of imaginable resurrections. The entire movement of

romanticism is perhaps best understood from this point of view.

  160

  VAIN,  GREEDY,  AND  NOT  VERY  WISE.  Your  desires  are  greater

than your understanding, and your vanity is even greater than your desires, to

people  of  your  type  a  great  deal  of  Christian  practice  and  a  little

Schopenhauerian theory may be strongly recommended.

  161

    BEAUTY CORRESPONDING TO THE AGE. If our sculptors, painters,

and musicians wish to catch the significance of the age, they should represent

beauty  as  bloated,  gigantic,  and  nervous:  just  as  the  Greeks,  under  the

influence of their morality of moderation, saw and represented beauty in the

Apollo di Belvedere. We should, indeed, call him ugly ! But the pedantic "

classicists " have deprived us of all our honesty !

  162

  THE IRONY OF THE PRESENT TIME. At the present day it is the habit

of Europeans to treat all matters of great importance with irony, because, as

the  result  of  our  activity  in  their  service,  we  have  no  time  to  take  them

seriously.

  163

    AGAINST ROUSSEAU. If it is true that there is something contemptible

about  our  civilisation,  we  have  two  alternatives  :  of  concluding  with

Rousseau  that,  "  This  despicable  civilisation  is  to  blame  for  our  bad

morality," or to infer, contrary to Rousseau's view, that " Our good morality

is to blame for this contemptible civilisation. Our social conceptions of good

and evil, weak and effeminate as they are, and their enormous influence over

both body and soul, have had the effect of weakening all bodies and souls and

of  crushing  all  unprejudiced,  independent,  and  self-reliant  men,  the  real

pillars of a strong civilisation : wherever we still find the evil morality to-day,

we see the last crumbling ruins of these pillars." Thus let paradox be opposed

by paradox ! It is quite impossible for the truth to lie with both sides : and can

we say, indeed, that it lies with either ? Decide for yourself.

  164

    PERHAPS PREMATURE. It would seem at the present time that, under

many  different  and  misleading  names,  and  often  with  a  great  want  ofclearness,  those  who  do  not  feel  themselves  attached  to  morals  and  to

established laws are taking the first initial steps to organise themselves, and

thus to create a right for themselves ; while until now, as criminals, free-

thinkers, immoral men and miscreants, they have lived beyond the pale of the

law,  under  the  bane  of  outlawry  and  bad  conscience,  corrupted  and

corrupting.  On  the  whole,  we  should  consider  this  as  right  and  proper,

although  it  may  result  in  insecurity  for  the  coming  century  and  compel

everyone to bear arms. There is thereby a counterforce which continually

reminds us that there is no exclusively moral-making morality, and that a

morality which asserts itself to the exclusion of all other morality destroys

too much sound strength and is too dearly bought by mankind. The non-

conventional  and  deviating  people,  who  are  so  often  productive  and

inventive, must no longer be sacrificed : it must never again be considered as

a disgrace to depart from morality either in actions or thought; many new

experiments  must  be  made  upon  life  and  society,  and  the  world  must  be

relieved from a huge weight of bad conscience. These general aims must be

recognised and encouraged by all those upright people who are seeking truth.

  165

  A MORALITY WHICH DOES NOT BORE ONE. The principal moral

commandments which a nation permits its teachers to emphasise again and

again stand in relation to its chief defects, and that is why it does not find

them  tiresome.  The  Greeks,  who  so  often  failed  to  employ  moderation,

coolness, fair-mindedness, and rationality in general, turned a willing ear to

the four Socratic virtues, they stood in such need of them, and yet had so little

talent for them !

  166

  AT THE PARTING OF THE WAYS. Shame! You wish to form part of a

system in which you must be a wheel, fully and completely, or risk being

crushed by wheels ! where it is understood that each one will be that which

his superiors make of him ! where the seeking for " connections " will form

part of one's natural duties ! where no one feels himself offended when he has

his attention drawn to someone with the remark, " He may be useful to you

some time"; where people do not feel ashamed of paying a visit to ask for

somebody's intercession, and where they do not even suspect that by such a

voluntary submission to these morals, they are once and for all stamped as

the common pottery of nature, which others can employ or break up of their

free will without feeling in any way responsible for doing so, just as if onewere to say, " People of my type will never be lacking, therefore, do what

you will with me ! Do not stand on ceremony ! "

  167

    UNCONDITIONAL HOMAGE. When I think of the most read German

philosopher, the most popular German musician, and the most distinguished

German  statesman,  I  cannot  but  acknowledge  that  life  is  now  rendered

unusually arduous for these Germans, this nation of unconditional sentiments,

and that, too, by their own great men. We see three magnificent spectacles

spread out before us : on each occasion there is a river rushing along in the

bed which it has made for itself, and even so agitated that one thinks at times

it intends to flow uphill. And yet, however we might admire Schopenhauer,

who would not, all things considered, like to have other opinions than his ?

Who  in  all  greater  and  smaller  things  would  now  share  the  opinions  of

Richard  Wagner,  although  there  may  be  truth  in  the  view  expressed  by

someone : namely that wherever Wagner gave or took offence some problem

lay hidden, which, however, he did not unearth for us. And, finally, how

many are there who would be willing and eager to agree with Bismarck, if

only he could always agree with himself, or were even to show some signs of

doing so for the future ! It is true that it is by no means astonishing to find

statesmen without principles, but with dominant instincts ; a versatile mind,

actuated  by  these  dominant  and  violent  instincts,  and  hence  without

principles  these  qualities  are  looked  upon  as  reasonable  and  natural  in  a

statesman. But, alas, this has up to the present been so un-German ; as un-

German as the fuss made about music and the discord and bad temper excited

around  the  person  of  the  musician  ;  or  as  un-German  as  the  new  and

extraordinary position taken up by Schopenhauer : he did not feel himself to

be either above things or on his knees before them one or other of these

alternatives might still have been German but he assumed an attitude against

things ! How incredible and disagreeable! to range one's self with things and

nevertheless be their adversary, and finally the adversary of one's self, what

can the unconditional admirer do with such an example ? And what, again,

can he do with three such examples who cannot keep the peace towards one

another ! Here we see Schopenhauer as the antagonist of Wagner's music,

Wagner  attacking  Bismarck's  politics,  and  Bismarck  attacking  Wagnerism

and Schopenhauerism. What remains for us to do ? Where shall we flee with

our thirst for wholesale hero-worship ! Would it not be possible to choose

from the music of the musician a few hundred bars of good music whichappealed to the heart, and which we should like to take to heart because they

are inspired by the heart, could we not stand aside with this small piece of

plunder, and forget the rest ? And could we not make a similar compromise

as regards the philosopher and the statesman, select, take to heart, and in

particular forget the rest ? Yes, if only forgetfulness were not so difficult !

There was once a very proud man who would never on any account accept

anything, good or evil, from others, from any one, indeed, but himself. When

he wanted to forget, however, he could not bestow this gift upon himself, and

was three times compelled to conjure up the spirits. They came, listened to

his desire, and said at last, " This is the only thing it is not in our power to

give ! " Could not the Germans take warning by this experience of Manfred ?

Why, then, should the spirits be conjured up ? It is useless. We never forget

what we endeavour to forget. And how great would be the " balance " which

we  should  have  to  forget  if  we  wished  henceforth  to  continue  wholesale

admirers of these three great men ! It would therefore be far more advisable

to profit by the excellent opportunity offered us to try something new, i.e. to

advance in the spirit of honesty towards ourselves and become, instead of a

nation of credulous repetition and of bitter and blind animosity, a people of

conditional assent and benevolent opposition. We must come to learn in the

first place, however, that unconditional homage to people is something rather

ridiculous,  that  a  change  of  view  on  this  point  would  not  discredit  even

Germans,  and  that  there  is  a  profound  and  memorable  saying  :  "  Ce  qui

importe, ce ne sont point les personnes : mais les choses." This saying is like

the man who uttered it great, honest, simple, and silent, just like Carnot, the

soldier and Republican. But may I at the present time speak thus to Germans

of a Frenchman, and a Republican into the bargain ? Perhaps not : perhaps I

must not even recall what Niebuhr in his time dared to say to the Germans :

that  no  one  had  made  such  an  impression  of  true  greatness  upon  him  as

Carnot.

  168

  A MODEL. What do I like about Thucydides, and how does it come that

I esteem him more highly than Plato ? He exhibits the most widespread and

artless pleasure in everything typical in men and events, and finds that each

type is possessed of a certain quantity of good sense : it is this good sense

which he seeks to discover. He likewise exhibits a larger amount of practical

justice than Plato ; he never reviles or belittles those men whom he dislikes or

who have in any way injured him in the course of his life. On the contrary :while seeing only types, he introduces something noble and additional into all

things and persons ; for what could posterity, to which he dedicates his work,

do with things not typical ! Thus this culture of the disinterested knowledge

of the world attains in him, the poet-thinker, a final marvellous bloom, this

culture which has its poet in Sophocles, its statesman in Pericles, its doctor in

Hippocrates, and its natural philosopher in Democritus : this culture which

deserves to be called by the name of its teachers, the Sophists, and which,

unhappily, from the moment of its baptism at once begins to grow pale and

incomprehensible to us, for henceforward we suspect that this culture, which

was combated by Plato and all the Socratic schools, must have been very

immoral ! The truth of this matter is so complicated and entangled that we

feel unwilling to unravel it : so let the old error (error veritate simplicior) run

its old course.

  169

  THE GREEK GENIUS FOREIGN TO us. Oriental or modern, Asiatic or

European : compared with the ancient Greeks, everything is characterised by

enormity of size and by the revelling in great masses as the expression of the

sublime, while in Paestum, Pompeii, and Athens we are astonished, when

contemplating Greek architecture, to see with what small masses the Greeks

were able to express the sublime, and how they loved to express it thus. In the

same way, how simple were the Greeks in the idea which they formed of

themselves I How far we surpass them in the knowledge of man ! Again, how

full of labyrinths would our souls and our conceptions of our souls appear in

comparison with theirs ! If we had to venture upon an architecture after the

style of our own souls (we are too cowardly for that !) a labyrinth would have

to  be  our  model.  That  music  which  is  peculiar  to  us,  and  which  really

expresses us, lets this be clearly seen ! (for in music men let themselves go,

because they think there is no one who can see them hiding behind their

music).

  170

    ANOTHER POINT OF VIEW. How we babble about the Greeks ! What

do we understand of their art, the soul of which was the passion for naked

masculine beauty ! It was only by starting from this that they appreciated

feminine beauty. For the latter they had thus a perspective quite different

from ours. It was the same in regard to their love for women : their worship

was of a different kind, and so also was their contempt.

  171  THE FOOD OF THE MODERN MAN. He has learned to digest many

things  ;  nay,  almost  everything  ;  it  is  his  ambition  to  do  so.  He  would,

however, be really of a higher order if he did not understand this so well :

homo pamphagus is not the finest type of the human race. We live between a

past which had a more wayward and deranged taste than we, and a future

which will possibly have a more select taste, we live too much midway.

  172

    TRAGEDY AND MUSIC. Men of essentially warlike disposition, such,

for example, as the ancient Greeks in the time of Eschylus, are difficult to

rouse, and when pity once triumphs over their hardness they are seized as by

a  kind  of  giddiness  or  a  "  demoniacal  power,"  they  feel  themselves

overpowered  and  thrilled  by  a  religious  horror.  After  this  they  become

sceptical about their condition ; but as long as they are in it they enjoy the

charm  of  being,  as  it  were,  outside  themselves,  and  the  delight  of  the

marvellous mixed with the bitterest gall of suffering : this is the proper kind

of drink for fighting men, something rare, dangerous, and bitter-sweet, which

does not often fall to one's lot. Tragedy appeals to souls who feel pity in this

way,  to  those  fierce  and  warlike  souls  which  are  difficult  to  overcome,

whether by fear or pity, but which lose nothing by being softened from time

to time. Of what use, however, is tragedy to those who are as open to the "

sympathetic affections " as the sails of a ship to the wind ! When at the time

of Plato the Athenians had become more softened and sensitive, oh, how far

they were still removed from the gushing emotions of the inhabitants of our

modern  towns  and  villages  !  And  yet  even  then  the  philosophers  were

beginning to complain of the injurious nature of tragedy. An epoch full of

danger such as that now beginning, in which bravery and manliness are rising

in value, will perhaps again harden souls to such an extent that they will once

more stand in need of tragic poets : but in the meantime these are somewhat

superfluous, to put it mildly. For music, too, a better age may be approaching

(it will certainly be a more evil age !) when artists will have to make their

music appeal to strongly individual beings, beings which will have become

hard and which will be dominated by the gloomy earnestness of their own

passion ; but of what use is music to the little souls of the present age which

is fast passing away, souls that are too unsteady, ill-developed, half-personal,

inquisitive, and envious of everything ?

  173

  THE FLATTERERS OF WORK. In the glorification of" work " and thenever-ceasing talk about the " blessing of labour," I see the same secret idea

as I do in the praise bestowed on impersonal acts of a general interest, namely

a fear of everything individual. For at the sight of work that is to say, severe

toil from morning till night we have the feeling that it is the best police,

namely  that  it  holds  everyone  in  check  and  effectively  hinders  the

development of reason, of greed, and of desire for independence. For work

uses up an extraordinary proportion of nervous force, withdrawing it from

reflection,  meditation,  dreams,  cares,  love,  and  hatred  ;  it  dangles

unimportant aims before the eyes of the worker and affords easy and regular

gratification. Thus it happens that a society where work is continually being

performed  will  enjoy  greater  security,  and  it  is  security  which  is  now

venerated  as  the  supreme  deity.  And  now,  horror  of  horrors  !  it  is  the  "

workman  "  himself  who  has  become  dangerous  ;  the  whole  world  is

swarming with " dangerous individuals " and behind them follows the danger

of dangers - the individual !

  174

  THE  MORAL  FASHION  OF  A  COMMERCIAL  COMMUNITY.

Behind the principle of the present moral fashion : " Moral actions are actions

performed out of sympathy for others," I see the social instinct of fear, which

thus assumes an intellectual disguise: this instinct sets forth as its supreme,

most important, and most immediate principle that life shall be relieved of all

the dangerous characteristics which it possessed in former times, and that

everyone must help with all his strength towards the attainment of this end. It

is for that reason that only those actions which keep in view the general

security and the feeling of security of society are called " good." How little

joy must men now have in themselves when such a tyranny of fear prescribes

their supreme moral law, if they make no objection when commanded to turn

their eyes from themselves and to look aside from themselves ! And yet at the

same time they have lynx eyes for all distress and suffering elsewhere ! Are

we not, then, with this gigantic intention of ours of smoothing down every

sharp edge and corner in life, utilising the best means of turning mankind into

sand! Small, soft, round, infinite sand ! Is that your ideal, you harbingers of

the "sympathetic affections " ? In the meantime even the question remains

unanswered  whether  we  are  of  more  use  to  our  neighbour  in  running

immediately and continually to his help, which for the most part can only be

done in a very superficial way, as otherwise it would become a tyrannical

meddling and changing, or by transforming ourselves into something whichour neighbour can look upon with pleasure, something, for example, which

may be compared to a beautiful, quiet, and secluded garden, protected by

high  walls  against  storms  and  the  dust  of  the  roads,  but  likewise  with  a

hospitable gate.

  175

    FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF A CULTURE OF TRADERS. We have

now  an  opportunity  of  watching  the  manifold  growth  of  the  culture  of  a

society of which commerce is the soul, just as personal rivalry was the soul of

culture among the ancient Greeks, and war, conquest, and law among the

ancient  Romans.  The  tradesman  is  able  to  value  everything  without

producing it, and to value it according to the requirements of the consumer

rather than his own personal needs. " How many and what class of people

will consume this ? " is his question of questions. Hence, he instinctively and

incessantly  employs  this  mode  of  valuation  and  applies  it  to  everything,

including the productions of art and science, and of thinkers, scholars, artists,

statesmen,  nations,  political  parties,  and  even  entire  ages:  with  respect  to

everything produced or created he inquires into the supply and demand in

order to estimate for himself the value of a thing. This, when once it has been

made the principle of an entire culture, worked out to its most minute and

subtle details, and imposed upon every kind of will and knowledge, this is

what you men of the coming century will be proud of, if the prophets of the

commercial classes are right in putting that century into your possession ! But

I  have  little  belief  in  these  prophets.  Credat  Judaus  Apella  to  speak  with

Horace.

  176

  THE CRITICISM OF OUR ANCESTORS. Why should we now endure

the truth, even about the most recent past ? Because there is now always a

new generation which feels itself in contradiction to the past and enjoys in

this criticism the first fruits of its sense of power. In former times the new

generation, on the contrary, wished to base itself on the old and began to feel

conscious of its power, not only in accepting the opinions of its ancestors but,

if possible, taking them even more seriously. To criticise ancestral authority

was in former times a vice ; but at the present time our idealists begin by

making it their starting-point.

  177

  TO LEARN SOLITUDE. O you poor fellows in the great centres of the

world's politics, you young and talented men, who, urged on by ambition,think it your duty to propound your opinion of every event of the day, for

something is always happening, who, by thus making a noise and raising a

cloud of dust, mistake yourselves for the rolling chariot of history ; who,

because you always listen, always suit the moment when you can put in your

word or two, thereby lose all real productiveness. Whatever may be your

desire to accomplish great deeds, the deep silence of pregnancy never comes

to you ! The event of the day sweeps you along like straws before the wind

while you lie under the illusion that you are chasing the event, poor fellows !

If a man wishes to act the hero on the stage he must not think of forming part

of the chorus ; he should not even know how the chorus is made up.

  178

  DAILY WEAR AND TEAR. These young men are lacking neither in

character, nor talent, nor zeal, but they have never had sufficient time to

choose their own path ; they have, on the contrary, been habituated from the

most tender age to have their path pointed out to them. At the time when they

were ripe enough to be sent into the " desert," something else was done with

them. They were turned to account, estranged from themselves, and brought

up In such a way that they became accustomed to be worn out by their daily

toil. This was imposed on them as a duty, and now they cannot do without it ;

they would not wish it to be otherwise. The only thing that cannot be refused

to these poor beasts of burden is their " holidays " such is the name they give

to this ideal of leisure in an overworked century ; " holidays" in which they

may for once be idle, idiotic, and childish to their heart's content.

  179

  AS LITTLE STATE AS POSSIBLE ! All political and economic matters

are not of such great value that they ought to be dealt with by the most

talented minds: such a waste of intellect is at bottom worse than any state of

distress. These matters are, and ever will be, the province of smaller minds,

and  others  than  the  smaller  minds  should  not  be  at  the  service  of  this

workshop : it would be better to let the machinery work itself to pieces again

! But as matters stand at the present time, when not only do all people believe

that they must know all about it day by day, but wish likewise to be always

busy  about  it,  and  in  so  doing  neglect  their  own  work,  it  is  a  great  and

ridiculous mistake. The price that has to be paid for the " public safety " is far

too high, and, what is maddest of all, we effect the very opposite of " public

safety," a fact which our own dear century has undertaken to prove, as if this

had never been proved before I To make society secure against thieves andfire, and to render it thoroughly fit for all kinds of trade and traffic, and to

transform the State in a good and evil sense into a kind of Providence these

aims are low, mediocre, and not by any means indispensable ; and we should

not seek to attain them by the aid of the highest means and instruments which

exist means which we should reserve precisely for our highest and rarest aims

! Our epoch, however much it may babble about economy, is a spendthrift : it

wastes intellect, the most precious thing of all.

  180

    WARS. The great wars of our own day are the outcome of historical

study.

  181

    GOVERNING.  Some  people  govern  because  of  their  passion  for

governing ; others in order that they may not be governed, the latter choose it

as the lesser of two evils.

  182

  ROUGH AND READY CONSISTENCY. People say of a man with great

respect, " He is a character" that is, when he exhibits a rough and ready

consistency, when it is evident even to the dullest eye. But, whenever a more

subtle and profound intellect sets itself up and shows consistency in a higher

manner,  the  spectators  deny  the  existence  of  any  character.  That  is  why

cunning statesmen usually act their comedy under the cloak of a kind of

rough and ready consistency.

  183

  THE  OLD  AND  THE  YOUNG.  "  There  is  something  immoral  about

Parliaments," so many-people still think, " for in them views even against the

Government may be expressed." "We should always adopt that view of a

subject  which  our  gracious  Lord  commands,"  this  is  the  eleventh

commandment in many an honest old head, especially in Northern Germany.

We laugh at it as an out-of-date fashion, but in former times it was the moral

law  itself.  Perhaps  we  shall  again  some  day  laugh  at  that  which  is  now

considered  as  moral  by  a  generation  brought  up  under  a  parliamentary

regime, namely, the policy of placing one's party before one's own wisdom,

and of answering every question concerning the public welfare in such a way

as to fill the sails of the party with a favourable gust of wind. " We must take

that view of a subject which the position of our party calls for " such would

be the canon. In the service of such morals we may now behold every kind of

sacrifice, even martyrdom and conquest over one's self.  184

  THE  STATE  AS  A  PRODUCTION  OF  ANARCHISTS.  In  countries

inhabited by tractable men there are always a few backsliders and intractable

people. For the present the latter have joined the Socialists more than any

other  party.  If  it  should  happen  that  these  people  once  come  to  have  the

making of the laws, they may be relied upon to impose iron chains upon

themselves, and to practise a dreadful discipline, they know themselves ! and

they will endure these harsh laws with the knowledge that they themselves

have imposed them the feeling of power and of this particular power will be

too recent among them and too attractive for them not to suffer anything for

its sake.

  185

    BEGGARS. Beggars ought to be suppressed; because we get angry both

when we help them and when we do not.

  186

    BUSINESS MEN. Your business is your greatest prejudice, it binds you

to your locality, your society and your tastes. Diligent in business but lazy in

thought, satisfied with your paltriness and with the cloak of duty concealing

this contentment: thus you live, and thus you like your children to be.

  187

  A POSSIBLE FUTURE. Is it impossible for us to imagine a social state

in which the criminal will publicly denounce himself and dictate his own

punishment, in the proud feeling that he is thus honouring the law which he

himself has made, that he is exercising his power, the power of a lawmaker,

in thus punishing himself? He may offend for once, but by his own voluntary

punishment he raises himself above his offence, and not only expiates it by

his frankness, greatness, and calmness, but adds to it a public benefit. Such

would be the criminal of a possible future, a criminal who would, it is true,

presuppose a future legislation based upon this fundamental idea : " I yield in

great things as well as in small only to the law which I myself have made."

How many experiments must yet be made! How many futures have yet to

dawn upon mankind !

  188

    STIMULANTS AND FOOD. Nations are deceived so often because they

are always looking for a deceiver, i.e. a stimulating wine for their senses.

When they can only have this wine they are glad to put up even with inferior

bread. Intoxication is to them more than nutriment this is the bait with whichthey always let themselves be caught! What, to them, are men chosen from

among  themselves  although  they  may  be  the  most  expert  specialists  as

compared with the brilliant conquerors, or ancient and magnificent princely

houses ! In order that he may inspire them with faith, the demagogue must at

least  exhibit  to  them  a  prospect  of  conquest  and  splendour.  People  will

always obey, and even do more than obey, provided that they can become

intoxicated in doing so. We may not even offer them repose and pleasure

without  this  laurel  crown  and  its  maddening  influence.  This  vulgar  taste

which ascribes greater importance to intoxication than nutrition did not by

any means originate in the lower ranks of the population : it was, on the

contrary,  transplanted  there,  and  on  this  backward  soil  it  grows  in  great

abundance,  while  its  real  origin  must  be  sought  amongst  the  highest

intellects, where it flourished for thousands of years. The people is the last

virgin soil upon which this brilliant weed can grow. Well, then, is it really to

the people that we should entrust politics in order that they may thereby have

their daily intoxication ?

  189

  HIGH  POLITICS.  Whatever  may  be  the  influence  in  high  politics  of

utilitarianism  and  the  vanity  of  individuals  and  nations,  the  sharpest  spur

which urges them onwards is their need for the feeling of power a need which

rises not only in the souls of princes and rulers, but also gushes forth from

time to time from inexhaustible sources in the people. The time comes again

and again when the masses are ready to stake their lives and their fortunes,

their consciences and their virtue, in order that they may secure that highest

of all enjoyments and rule as a victorious, tyrannical, and arbitrary nation

over other nations (or at all events think that they do). On occasions such as

these,  feelings  of  prodigality,  sacrifice,  hope,  confidence,  extraordinary

audacity, and enthusiasm will burst forth so abundantly that a sovereign who

is ambitious or far-sighted will be able to seize the opportunity for making

war, counting upon the good conscience of his people to hide his injustice.

Great conquerors have always given utterance to the pathetic language of

virtue ; they have always been surrounded by crowds of people who felt

themselves, as it were, in a state of exaltation and would listen to none but the

most elevated oratory. The strange madness of moral judgments ! When man

experiences the sensation of power he feels and calls himself good ; and at

exactly the same time the others who have to endure his power call him evil !

Hesiod, in his fable of the epochs of man, has twice in succession depictedthe same epoch, that of the heroes of Homer, and has thus made two epochs

out  of  one  :  to  those  who  lived  under  the  terrible  iron  heel  of  those

adventurous despots, or had heard their ancestors speak of them, the epoch

appeared to be evil ; but the descendants of those chivalric races worshipped

it as the" good old times," and as an almost ideally blissful age. The poet

could thus not help doing what he did, his audience probably included the

descendants of both races.

  190

  FORMER GERMAN CULTURE. When the Germans began to interest

other European nations, which is not so very long ago, it was owing to a

culture which they no longer possess to-day, and which they have indeed

shaken off with a blind ardour, as if it had been some disease ; and yet they

have not been able to replace it by anything better than political and national

lunacy. They have in this way succeeded in becoming even more interesting

to other nations than they were formerly through their culture : and may that

satisfy  them  !  It  is  nevertheless  undeniable  that  this  German  culture  has

fooled Europeans, and that it did not deserve the interest shown in it, and

much less the imitation and emulation displayed by other nations in trying to

rival  it.  Let  us  look  back  for  a  moment  upon  Schiller,  Wilhelm  von

Humboldt,  Schleiermacher,  Hegel,  and  Schelling  ;  let  us  read  their

correspondence and mingle for a time with the large circle of their followers:

what have they in common, what characteristics have they, that fill us, as we

are now, partly with a feeling of nausea and partly with pitiful and touching

emotions ? First and foremost, the passion for appearing at all costs to be

morally exalted, and then the desire for giving utterance to brilliant, feeble,

and inconsequential remarks, together with their fixed purpose of looking

upon  everything  (characters,  passions,  times,  customs)  as  beautiful  "

beautiful," alas, in accordance with a bad and vague taste, which nevertheless

pretended to be of Hellenic origin. We behold in these people a weak, good-

natured, and glistening idealism, which, above all, wished to exhibit noble

attitudes and noble voices, something at once presumptuous and inoffensive,

and animated by a cordial aversion to " cold " or " dry " reality as also to

anatomy, complete passions, and every kind of philosophical continence and

scepticism, but especially towards the knowledge of nature in so far as it was

impossible to use it as religious symbolism. Goethe, in his own characteristic

fashion,  observed  from  afar  these  movements  of  German  culture:  placing

himself beyond their influence, gently remonstrating, silent, more and moreconfirmed in his own better course. A little later, and Schopenhauer also was

an observer of these movements a great deal of the world and devilry of the

world had again been revealed to him, and he spoke of it both roughly and

enthusiastically, for there is a certain beauty in this devilry ! And what was it,

then, that really seduced the foreigners and prevented them from viewing this

movement  as  did  Goethe  and  Schopenhauer,  or,  better,  from  ignoring  it

altogether ? It was that faint lustre, that inexplicable starlight which formed a

mysterious halo around this culture. The foreigners said to themselves : "

This  is  all  very  very  remote  from  us  ;  our  sight,  hearing,  understanding,

enjoyment, and powers of valuations are lost here, but in spite of that there

may be some stars ! There may be something in it ! Is it possible that the

Germans have quietly discovered some corner of heaven and settled there ?

We must try to come nearer to these Germans." So they did begin to come

nearer to the Germans, while not so very long afterwards the Germans put

themselves to some trouble to get rid of this starlight halo : they knew only

too well that they had not been in heaven, but only in a cloud !

  191

    BETTER MEN. They tell me that our art is meant for the men of the

present day, these greedy, unsatisfied, undisciplined, disgusted, and harassed

spirits, and that it exhibits to them a picture of happiness, exaltation, and un-

worldliness  beside  that  of  their  own  brutality,  so  that  for  once  they  may

forget  and  breathe  freely  ;  nay,  perhaps  find  that  they  may  derive  some

encouragement towards flight and conversion from that oblivion. Poor artists,

with such a public as this ; half of whose thoughts require the attention of a

priest, and the other half the attention of an alienist ! How much happier was

Corneille " Our great Corneille ! " as Madame de Svign exclaimed, with the

accent of a woman in the presence of a whole man, how far superior was his

audience, which he could please with pictures of chivalric virtues, strict duty,

generous devotion, and heroic self-denial ! How differently did he and they

love existence, not as coming from blind and confused " will," which we

curse because we cannot destroy it ; but loving existence as a place, so to

speak, where greatness joined with humanity is possible, and where even the

greatest restraint of form, such as submission to the caprice of priests and

princes, could not suppress either the pride, chivalric feeling, the grace or the

intellect of individuals, but could, on the contrary, be felt as a charm and

incentive, as a welcome contrast to innate self-glorification and distinction

and the inherited power of volition and passion.  192

  THE DESIRE FOR PERFECT OPPONENTS. It cannot be denied that

the French have been the most Christian nation in the world, not because the

devotion of masses in France has been greater than elsewhere, but because

those  Christian  ideals  which  are  most  difficult  to  realise  have  become

incarnated here instead of merely remaining fancies, intentions, or imperfect

beginnings. Take Pascal, for example, the greatest of all Christians in his

combination of ardour, intellect, and honesty, and consider what elements

had to be combined in his case ! Take Fenelon, the most perfect and attractive

embodiment of ecclesiastical culture in all its power: a sublime golden mean

of whom a historian would be tempted to prove the impossibility, while in

reality he was merely the perfection of something exceedingly difficult and

improbable.  Take  Madame  de  Guyon  among  her  companions,  the  French

Quietists : and everything that the eloquence and ardour of the Apostle Paul

has  endeavoured  to  divine  with  regard  to  the  Christian's  state  of  semi-

divinity, this most sublime, loving, silent, and ecstatic state is seen verified in

her, without, however, that Jewish obtrusiveness that Paul showed towards

God due in the case of Madame de Guyon to the real old French artlessness

in  words  and  gestures,  artlessness  at  once  womanly,  subtle,  and

distinguished. Consider, again, the founder of the Trappists the last person

who really took seriously the ascetic ideal of Christianity, not because he was

an exception among Frenchmen, but because he was a true Frenchman : for

up to our own day his gloomy organisation has not been able to acclimatise

itself and to prosper, except among Frenchmen ; and it has followed them

into  Alsace  and  Algeria.  Let  us  not  forget  the  Huguenots,  either  :  that

combination of a martial and industrial spirit, refined manners and Christian

severity, has never been more beautifully exhibited. And it was at Port Royal

that the great Christian erudition beheld its last era of prosperity ; and in

France more than anywhere else great men know how to prosper. Though not

at all superficial, a great Frenchman has always his apparent superficiality ;

he has, so to speak, a natural skin for his real contents and depth, while, on

the other hand, the depth of a great German is generally, as it were, closed up

in an ugly-shaped box, like an elixir, which, by means of a hard and curious

covering, endeavours to preserve itself from the light of day and the touch of

thoughtless hands. And now let us endeavour to find out why a people like

the  French,  so  prolific  in  perfect  types  of  Christians,  likewise  necessarily

brought forth the perfect contrary types, those of unchristian free-thought !The French free-thinker, in his own inward being, had to fight against truly

great men, and not, like the free-thinkers of other nations, merely against

dogmas and sublime abortions.

  193

    ESPRIT  AND  MORALS.  The  German,  who  possesses  the  secret  of

knowing how to be tedious in spite of wit, knowledge, and feeling, and who

has habituated himself to consider tediousness as moral, is in dread in the

presence of French esprit lest it should tear out the eyes of morality but a

dread mingled with " fascination/' like that experienced by the little bird in

the presence of the rattlesnake. Amongst all the celebrated Germans none

possessed more esprit than Hegel, but he also had that great German dread of

it which brought about his peculiar and defective style. For the nature of this

style resembles a kernel, which is wrapped up so many times in an outer

covering  that  it  can  scarcely  peep  through,  now  and  then  glancing  forth

bashfully and inquisitively, like " young women peeping through their veils,"

to use the words of that old woman-hater, Eschylus. This kernel, however, is

a witty though often impertinent joke on intellectual subjects, a subtle and

daring combination of words, such as is necessary in a society of thinkers as

gilding for a scientific pill but, enveloped as it is in an almost impenetrable

cover, it exhibits itself as the most abstruse science, and likewise as the worst

possible  moral  tediousness.  Here  the  Germans  had  a  permissible  form  of

esprit  and  they  revelled  in  it  with  such  boundless  delight  that  even

Schopenhauer's unusually fine understanding could not grasp it during the

whole of his life he thundered against the spectacle that the Germans offered

to him, but he could never explain it.

  194

  VANITY  OF  THE  TEACHERS  OF  MORALS.  The  relatively  small

success which teachers of morals have met with may be explained by the fact

that they wanted too much at once, i.e. they were too ambitious and too fond

of laying down precepts for everybody. In other words, they were beating the

air and making speeches to animals in order to turn them into men ; what

wonder, then, that the animals thought this tedious ! We should rather choose

limited  circles  and  endeavour  to  find  and  promote  morals  for  them  :  for

instance, we should make speeches to wolves with the object of turning them

into dogs ; but, above all, the greatest success will remain for the man who

does not seek to educate either everybody or certain limited circles, but only

one single individual, and who cannot be turned to the right or left from hisstraight purpose. The last century was superior to ours precisely because it

possessed so many individually educated men, as well as educators in the

same proportion, who had made this their life's task, and who with this task

were dignified not only in their own eyes but in those of all the remaining "

good society."

  195

  THE SO-CALLED CLASSICAL EDUCATION. Alas ! we discover that

our life is consecrated to knowledge and that we should throw it away, nay,

that we should even have to throw it away if this consecration did not protect

us from ourselves : we repeat this couplet, and not without deep emotion :

you, Fate, I follow, though I gladly would not, And yet I must, with many a

sigh and groan ! And then, in looking backwards over the course of our lives,

we discover that there is one thing that cannot be restored to us : the wasted

period of our youth, when our teachers did not utilise these ardent and eager

years to lead us to the knowledge of things, but merely to this so-called "

classical  education  "  !  Only  think  of  this  wasted  youth,  when  we  were

inoculated clumsily and painfully with an imperfect knowledge of the Greeks

and Romans as well as of their languages, contrary to the highest principle of

all culture, which holds that we should not give food except to those who

hunger for it ! Think of that period of our lives when we had mathematics and

physics forced down our throats, instead of being first of all made acquainted

with  the  despair  of  ignorance,  instead  of  having  our  little  daily  life,  our

activities, and everything occurring in our houses, our workshops, in the sky,

and in nature, split up into thousands of problems, painful, humiliating and

irritating problems and thus having- our curiosity made acquainted with the

fact that we first of all require a mathematical and mechanical knowledge

before we can be allowed to rejoice in the absolute logic of this knowledge !

If we had only been imbued with reverence for those branches of science, if

we had only been made to tremble with emotion were it only for once at the

struggles, the defeats, and the renewed combats of those great men, of the

martyrdom which is the history of pure science ! But, on the contrary, we

were allowed to develop a certain contempt for those sciences in favour of

historical  training,  formal  education  and  "  classicism."  And  we  allowed

ourselves to be so easily deceived ! Formal education ! Might we not have

pointed  to  the  best  teachers  at  our  high  schools  and  asked  laughingly,  "

Where then do they keep their formal education ? and, if it is wanting in

them, how can they teach it ? " And classicism ! Did we get any of thatinstruction which the ancients used to impart to their youth ? Did we learn to

speak or to write like them ? Did we ceaselessly exercise ourselves in that

duel of speech, dialectic ? Did we learn to move as beautifully and proudly as

they did, and to excel as they did in wrestling, throwing, and boxing ? Did we

learn anything of that practical asceticism of all the Greek philosophers ? Did

we receive any training in a single ancient virtue, and in the way in which the

ancients were trained in it ? Was not all meditation upon morals wanting in

our  education  ?  And  how  much  more  the  only  possible  criticism  on  the

subject of morality, those courageous and earnest attempts to live according

to this or that morality ! Did our teachers ever stir up a feeling in us which the

ancients valued more highly than moderns ? Did they in the spirit of the

ancients indicate to us the divisions of the day and of life, and those aims by

which  the  lives  of  the  ancients  were  guided  ?  Did  we  learn  the  ancient

languages as we now learn the modern ones, namely that we might speak

them fluently and well ? Nowhere can we find a real proficiency or any new

faculty as the result of those toilsome years ! only the knowledge of what

men had learnt and were able to do in past ages ! And what knowledge !

Nothing becomes clearer to me year by year than the fact that the entire

Greek and ancient mode of life, however simple and evident it must seem to

our eyes, is in truth very difficult to understand, and even scarcely accessible,

and that the customary ease with which we babble about the ancients is either

giddy  levity  or  the  old  hereditary  conceit  of  our  thoughtlessness.  We  are

deceived by words and ideas which appear to resemble our own, but behind

them  there  is  always  concealed  a  feeling  which  must  be  strange,

incomprehensible,  or  painful  to  our  modern  conceptions.  And  these  are

realms in which boys are allowed to roam about I Enough : we roamed about

them  in  our  childhood,  and  there  we  became  seized  with  an  almost

ineradicable antipathy for all antiquity, the antipathy arising from an intimacy

which was apparently too great ! For so great is the conceit of our classical

teachers, who would almost make it appear that they had gained full control

over the ancients, that they pass on this conceit to their pupils, together with

the suspicion that such a possession is of little use for making people happy,

but is good enough for honest, foolish old bookworms. " Let them brood over

their treasure : it is well worthy of them ! " It is with this unexpressed thought

that we completed our classical education. It can't be changed now for us, at

all events ! But let us not think of ourselves alone !

  196  THE MOST PERSONAL QUESTIONS OF TRUTH. What am I really

doing, and what do I mean by doing it ? That is the question of truth which is

not  taught  under  our  present  system  of  education,  and  consequently  not

asked, because there is no time for it. On the other hand, we have always time

and inclination for talking nonsense with children, rather than telling them

the truth ; for flattering women who will later on be mothers, rather than

telling them the truth ; and for speaking with young men about their future

and  their  pleasures,  rather  than  about  the  truth  !  But  what,  after  all,  are

seventy years ! Time passes, and they soon come to an end ; it matters as

little to us as it does to the wave to know how and whither it is rolling ! No, it

might even be wisdom not to know it. " Agreed ; but it shows a want of pride

not even to inquire into the matter; our culture does not tend to make people

proud." " So much the better ! " " Is it really ? "

  197

    ENMITY OF THE GERMANS TOWARDS ENLIGHTENMENT. Let us

consider the contributions which in the first half of this century the Germans

made to general culture by their intellectual work. In the first place, let us

take the German philosophers : they went back to the first and oldest stage of

speculation, for they were content with conceptions instead of explanations,

like the thinkers of dreamy epochs a pre-scientific type of philosophy was

thus  revived  by  them.  Secondly,  we  have  the  German  historians  and

romanticists : their efforts on the whole aimed at restoring to the place of

honour certain old and primitive sentiments, especially Christianity, the "soul

of the people," folklore, folk-speech, medievalism, Oriental asceticism, and

Hinduism. In the third place, there are the natural philosophers who fought

against  the  spirit  of  Newton  and  Voltaire,  and,  like  Goethe  and

Schopenhauer, endeavoured to re-establish the idea of a deified or diabolised

nature, and of its absolute ethical and symbolical meaning. The main general

tendency  of  the  Germans  was  directed  against  enlightenment  and  against

those social revolutions which were stupidly mistaken for the consequences

of enlightenment: the piety towards everything that existed tried to become

piety towards everything that had ever existed, only in order that heart and

mind might be permitted to fill themselves and gush forth again, thus leaving

no space for future and novel aims. The cult of feeling took the place of the

cult of reason, and the German musicians, as the best exponents of all that is

invisible, enthusiastic, legendary, and passionate, showed themselves more

successful in building up the new temple than all the other artists in wordsand thoughts. If, in considering these details, we have taken into account the

fact that many good things were said and investigated, and that many things

have since then been more fairly judged than on any previous occasion, there

yet remains to be said of the whole that it was a general danger, and one by

no  means  small,  to  set  knowledge  altogether  below  feeling,  under  the

appearance of an entire and definitive acquaintance with the past and, to use

that expression of Kant, who thus defined his own particular task " To make

way again for belief by fixing the limits of knowledge." Let us once more

breathe freely, the hour of this danger is past ! And yet, strange to say, the

very spirits which these Germans conjured up with such eloquence have at

length become the most dangerous for the intentions of those who did conjure

them up: history, the comprehension of origin and development, sympathy

with the past, the new passion for feeling and knowledge, after they had been

for a long time at the service of this obscure exalted and retrograde spirit,

have  once  more  assumed  another  nature,  and  are  now  soaring  with

outstretched wings above the heads of those who once upon a time conjured

them forth, as new and stronger genii of that very enlightenment to combat

which they had been resuscitated. It is this enlightenment which we have now

to carry forward, caring nothing for the fact that there has been and still is " a

great revolution," and again a great " reaction " against it : these are but

playful crests of foam when compared with the truly great current on which

we float, and want to float.

  198

    ASSIGNING PRESTIGE TO ONE'S COUNTRY. It is the men of culture

who determine the rank of their country, and they are characterised by an

innumerable number of great inward experiences, which they have digested

and can now value justly. In France and Italy this fell to the lot of the nobility

; in Germany, where up to now the nobility has been, as a rule, composed of

men who had not much intellect to boast about (perhaps this will soon cease

to be the case), it was the task of the priests, the school teachers and their

descendants.

  199

  WE  ARE  NOBLER.  Fidelity,  generosity,  concern  for  one's  good

reputation : these three qualities, combined in one sentiment, we call noble,

distinguished, aristocratic ; and in this respect we excel the Greeks. We do

not wish to give this up at any cost under the pretext that the ancient objects

of  these  virtues  have  rightly  fallen  in  esteem,  but  we  wish  cautiously  tosubstitute new objects for these most precious and hereditary impulses. To

understand why the sentiments of the noblest Greeks must be considered as

inferior and scarcely respectable in the present age, where we are still under

the influence of the chivalric and feudal nobility, we must recall the words of

consolation  to  which  Ulysses  gave  utterance  in  the  midst  of  the  most

humiliating situations, " Bear with it, my dear heart, bear with it ! You have

borne with many more swinish things than these ! " As an instance of this

mythical example, consider also the tale of that Athenian officer, who, when

threatened with a stick by another officer in the presence of the entire general

staff, shook off his disgrace with the words, " Strike, but listen to me." (This

was Themistocles, that ingenious Ulysses of the classical epoch, who was just

the man at the moment of disgrace to address to his " dear heart " that verse

of comfort and affliction.) The Greeks were far from making light of life and

death because of an insult, as we, influenced by a hereditary spirit of chivalric

adventurousness and self-devotion, are in the habit of doing ; or from looking

for opportunities of honourably risking life and death, as in duels ; or from

valuing  the  preservation  of  an  unstained  name  (honour)  more  than  the

acquirement of an evil reputation, when the latter was compatible with glory

and the feeling of power ; or from remaining faithful to the prejudices and the

articles of faith of a caste, when these could prevent them from becoming

tyrants. For this is the ignoble secret of the good Greek aristocrat : out of

sheer jealousy he treats every one of the members of his caste as being on an

equal footing with himself, but he is ready at every moment to spring like a

tiger  on  his  prey  despotism.  What  matter  lies,  murders,  treason,  or  the

betrayal of his native city to him ! Justice was an extremely difficult matter

for  people  of  this  kind  to  understand  nay,  justice  was  almost  something

incredible. " The just man " was to the Greeks what "the saint" was to the

Christians.  When  Socrates,  however,  laid  down  the  axiom,  "The  most

virtuous man is the happiest," they could not trust their ears ; they thought

they had heard a madman speaking. For, as a picture of the happiest man,

every nobleman had in his mind the cheeky audacity and devilry of the tyrant

who sacrifices everything and everyone to his own exuberance and pleasure.

Among people whose imagination secretly raved about such happiness, the

worship of the State could not, of course, have been too deeply implanted but

I think that men whose desire for power does not rage so blindly as that of the

Greek noblemen no longer stand in need of such idolatry of the State, by

means of which, in past ages, such a passion was kept within due bounds.  200

    ENDURANCE OF POVERTY. There is one great advantage in noble

extraction : it makes us endure poverty better.

  201

  THE  FUTURE  OF  THE  NOBILITY.  The  bearing  of  the  aristocratic

classes shows that, in all the members of their body the consciousness of

power is continually playing its fascinating game. Thus people of aristocratic

habits, men or women, never sink worn out into a chair ; when everyone else

makes himself comfortable, as in a train, for example, they avoid reclining at

their ease ; they do not appear to get tired after standing at Court for hours at

a stretch ; they do not furnish their houses in a comfortable manner, but in

such a way as to produce the impression of something grand and imposing, as

if they had to serve as a residence for greater and taller beings ; they reply to

a  provoking  speech  with  dignity  and  clearness  of  mind,  and  not  as  if

scandalised, crushed, shamed, or out of breath in the plebeian fashion. As the

aristocrat is able to preserve the appearance of being possessed of a superior

physical force which never leaves him, he likewise wishes by his aspect of

constant  serenity  and  civility  of  disposition,  even  in  the  most  trying

circumstances, to convey the impression that his mind and soul are equal to

all dangers and surprises. A noble culture may resemble, so far as passions

are concerned, either a horseman who takes pleasure in making his proud and

fiery animal trot in the Spanish fashion, we have only to recollect the age of

Louis XIV,, or like the rider who feels his horse dart away with him like the

elemental forces, to such a degree that both horse and rider come near losing

their heads, but, owing to the enjoyment of the delight, do keep very clear

heads : in both these cases this aristocratic culture breathes power, and if very

often in its customs only the appearance of the feeling of power is required,

nevertheless the real sense of superiority continues constantly to increase as

the result of the impression which this display makes upon those who are not

aristocrats. This indisputable happiness of aristocratic culture, based as it is

on the feeling of superiority, is now beginning to rise to ever higher levels ;

for  now,  thanks  to  the  free  spirits,  it  is  henceforth  permissible  and  not

dishonourable  for  people  who  have  been  born  and  reared  in  aristocratic

circles  to  enter  the  domain  of  knowledge,  where  they  may  secure  more

intellectual consecrations and learn chivalric services even higher than those

of  former  times,  and  where  they  may  look  up  to  that  ideal  of  victorious

wisdom which as yet no age has been able to set before itself with so good aconscience as the period which is about to dawn. Lastly, what is to be the

occupation of the nobility in the future if it becomes more evident from day

to day that it is less and less indecorous to take any part in politics ?

  202

  THE CARE OF THE HEALTH. We have scarcely begun to devote any

attention to the physiology of criminals, and yet we have already reached the

inevitable conclusion that between criminals and madmen there is no really

essential difference : if we suppose that the current moral fashion of thinking

is a healthy way of thinking. No belief, however, is nowadays more firmly

believed in than this one, so we should not therefore shrink from drawing the

inevitable conclusion and treating the criminal like a lunatic above all, not

with haughty pity, but with medical skill and good will. He may perhaps be

in  need  of  a  change  of  air,  a  change  of  society,  or  temporary  absence  :

perhaps of solitude and new occupations very well I He may perhaps feel that

it would be to his advantage to live under surveillance for a short time in

order  thus  to  obtain  protection  from  himself  and  from  a  troublesome

tyrannical impulse very well ! We should make clear to him the possibility

and  the  means  of  curing  him  (the  extermination,  transformation,  and

sublimation of these impulses), and also, in the worst cases the improbability

of a cure ; and we should offer to the incurable criminal, who has become a

useless  burden  to  himself,  the  opportunity  of  committing  suicide.  While

holding this in reserve as an extreme measure of relief, we should neglect

nothing  which  would  tend  above  all  to  restore  to  the  criminal  his  good

courage and freedom of spirit ; we should free his soul from all remorse, as if

it were something unclean, and show him how he may atone for a wrong

which he may have done someone by benefiting someone else, perhaps the

community at large, in such a way that he might even do more than balance

his  previous  offence.  All  this  must  be  done  with  the  greatest  tact  !  The

criminal  must,  above  all,  remain  anonymous  or  adopt  an  assumed  name,

changing his place of residence frequently, so that his reputation and future

life may suffer as little as possible. At the present time it is true that the man

who has been injured, apart altogether from the manner in which this injury

might be redressed, wishes for revenge in addition, and applies to the courts

that he may obtain it and this is why our dreadful penal laws are still in force

:  Justice,  as  it  were,  holding  up  a  pair  of  shopkeeper's  scales  and

endeavouring to balance the guilt by punishment ; but can we not take a step

beyond this ? Would it not be a great relief to the general sentiment of life if,while getting rid of our belief in guilt, we could also get rid of our old craving

for vengeance, and gradually come to believe that it is a refined wisdom for

happy men to bless their enemies and to do good to those who have offended

them, exactly in accordance with the spirit of Christian teaching ! Let us free

the world from this idea of sin, and take care to cast out with it the idea of

punishment. May these monstrous ideas henceforth live banished far from the

abodes of men if, indeed, they must live at all, and do not perish from disgust

with themselves. Let us not forget also, however, that the injury caused to

society and to the individual by the criminal is of the same species as that

caused by the sick : for the sick spread cares and ill-humour ; they are non-

productive, consume the earnings of others, and at the same time require

attendance, doctors, and support, and they really live on the time and strength

of the healthy. In spite of this, however, we should designate as inhuman

anyone who, for this reason, would wish to wreak vengeance on the sick. In

past ages, indeed, this was actually done : in primitive conditions of society,

and even now among certain savage peoples, the sick man is treated as a

criminal and as a danger to the community, and it is believed that he is the

resting-place of certain demoniacal beings who have entered into his body as

the result of some offence he has committed those ages and peoples hold that

the sick are the guilty ! And what of ourselves ? Are we not yet ripe for the

contrary conception? Shall we not be allowed to say, " The guilty are the sick

" ? No ; the hour for that has not yet come. We still lack, above all, those

physicians who have learnt something from what we have until now called

practical morals and have transformed it into the art and science of healing.

We still lack that intense interest in those things which some day perhaps

may seem not unlike the " storm and stress " of those old religious ecstasies.

The Churches have not yet come into the possession of those who look after

our health ; the study of the body and of dietary are not yet amongst the

obligatory subjects taught in our primary and secondary schools ; there are as

yet no quiet associations of those people who are pledged to one another to

do without the help of law courts, and who renounce the punishment and

vengeance now meted out to those who have offended against society. No

thinker has as yet been daring enough to determine the health of society, and

of the individuals who compose it, by the number of parasites which it can

support ; and no statesman has yet been found to use the ploughshare in the

spirit of that generous and tender saying, " If you wilt till the land, till it with

the plough ; then the bird and the wolf, walking behind your plough, willrejoice in you all creatures will rejoice in you."

  203

    AGAINST BAD DIET. Fie upon the meals which people nowadays eat in

hotels and everywhere else where the well-off classes of society live ! Even

when  eminent  men  of  science  meet  together  their  tables  groan  under  the

weight of the dishes, in accordance with the principle of the bankers : the

principle of too many dishes and too much to eat. The result of this is that

dinners are prepared with a view to their mere appearance rather than the

consequences that may follow from eating them, and that stimulating drinks

are required to help in driving away the heaviness in the stomach and in the

brain. Fie on the dissoluteness and extreme nervousness which must follow

upon all this ! Fie upon the dreams that such repasts bring ! Fie upon the arts

and books which must be the desert of such meals ! Despite all the efforts of

such people their acts will taste of pepper and ill-temper, or general weariness

! (The wealthy classes in England stand in great need of their Christianity in

order to be able to endure their bad digestions and their headaches.) Finally,

to mention not only the disgusting but also the more pleasant side of the

matter, these people are by no means mere gluttons : our century and its spirit

of activity has more power over the limbs than the belly. What then is the

meaning of these banquets ? They represent ! What in Heaven's name do they

represent  ?  Rank  ?  no,  money  !  There  is  no  rank  now!  We  are  all

"individuals"! but money now stands for power, glory, pre-eminence, dignity,

and influence ; money at the present time acts as a greater or lesser moral

prejudice for a man in proportion to the amount he may possess. Nobody

wishes to hide it under a bushel or display it in heaps on a table : hence

money  must  have  some  representative  which  can  be  put  on  the  table  so

behold our banquets !

  204

  AND THE GOD OF GOLD. Whence arises this excessive impatience in

our day which turns men into criminals even in circumstances which would

be more likely to bring about the contrary tendency ? What induces one man

to use false weights, another to set his house on fire after having insured it for

more than its value, a third to take part in counterfeiting, while three-fourths

of our upper classes indulge in legalised fraud, and suffer from the pangs of

conscience  that  follow  speculation  and  dealings  on  the  Stock  Exchange  :

what gives rise to all this ? It is not real want, for their existence is by no

means precarious ; perhaps they have even enough to eat and drink withoutworrying, but they are urged on day and night by a terrible impatience at

seeing their wealth pile up so slowly, and by an equally terrible longing and

love for these heaps of gold. In this impatience and love, however, we see re-

appear  once  more  that  fanaticism  of  the  desire  for  power  which  was

stimulated in former times by the belief that we were in the possession of

truth, a fanaticism which bore such beautiful names that we could dare to be

inhuman with a good conscience (burning Jews, heretics, and good books,

and exterminating entire cultures superior to ours, such as those of Peru and

Mexico). The means of this desire for power are changed in our day, but the

same volcano is still smouldering, impatience and intemperate love call for

their victims, and what was once done " for the love of God " is now done for

the love of money, i.e. for the love of that which at present affords us the

highest feeling of power and a good conscience.

  205

  THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. One of the spectacles which the next century

will invite us to witness is the decision regarding the fate of the European

Jews. It is quite obvious now that they have cast their die and crossed their

Rubicon : the only thing that remains for them is either to become masters of

Europe or to lose Europe, as they once centuries ago lost Egypt, where they

were  confronted  with  similar  alternatives.  In  Europe,  however,  they  have

gone through a schooling of eighteen centuries such as no other nation has

ever undergone, and the experiences of this dreadful time of probation have

benefited not only the Jewish community but, even to a greater extent, the

individual. As a consequence of this, the resourcefulness of the modern Jews,

both  in  mind  and  soul,  is  extraordinary.  Amongst  all  the  inhabitants  of

Europe it is the Jews least of all who try to escape from any deep distress by

recourse to drink or to suicide, as other less gifted people are so prone to do.

Every Jew can find in the history of his own family and of his ancestors a

long  record  of  instances  of  the  greatest  coolness  and  perseverance  amid

difficulties  and  dreadful  situations,  an  artful  cunning  in  fighting  with

misfortune and hazard. And above all it is their bravery under the cloak of

wretched submission, their heroic spernere se sperni that surpasses the virtues

of all the saints. People wished to make them contemptible by treating them

contemptibly  for  nearly  twenty  centuries,  and  refusing  them  access  to  all

honourable positions and dignities, and by pushing them further down into

the meaner trades and under this process indeed they have not become any

cleaner,  But  contemptible  ?  They  have  never  ceased  for  a  moment  frombelieving themselves qualified for the very highest functions, nor have the

virtues of the suffering ever ceased to adorn them. Their manner of honouring

their  parents  and  children,  the  rationality  of  their  marriages  and  marriage

customs, distinguishes them amongst all Europeans. Besides this, they have

been able to create for themselves a sense of power and eternal vengeance

from  the  very  trades  that  were  left  to  them  (or  to  which  they  were

abandoned). Even in palliation of their usury we cannot help saying that,

without this occasional pleasant and useful torture inflicted on their scorners,

they would have experienced difficulty in preserving their self-respect for so

long. For our self-respect depends upon our ability to make reprisals in both

good and evil things. Nevertheless, their revenge never urges them on too far,

for they all have that liberty of mind, and even of soul, produced in men by

frequent  changes  of  place,  climate,  and  customs  of  neighbours  and

oppressors,  they  possess  by  far  the  greatest  experience  in  all  human

intercourse, and even in their passions they exercise the caution which this

experience has developed in them. They are so certain of their intellectual

versatility and shrewdness that they never, even when reduced to the direst

straits,  have  to  earn  their  bread  by  manual  labour  as  common  workmen,

porters, or farm hands. In their manners we can still see that they have never

been inspired by chivalric and noble feelings, or that their bodies have ever

been  girt  with  fine  weapons  :  a  certain  obtrusiveness  alternates  with  a

submissiveness  which  Is  often  tender  and  almost  always  painful.  Now,

however, that they unavoidably inter-marry more and more year after year

with the noblest blood of Europe, they will soon have a considerable heritage

of good intellectual and physical manners, so that in another hundred years

they  will  have  a  sufficiently  noble  aspect  not  to  render  themselves,  as

masters,  ridiculous  to  those  whom  they  will  have  subdued.  And  this  is

important ! and therefore a settlement of the question is still premature. They

themselves know very well that the conquest of Europe or any act of violence

is not to be thought of; but they also know that some day or other Europe

may, like a ripe fruit, fall into their hands, if they do not clutch at it too

eagerly. In the meantime, it is necessary for them to distinguish themselves in

all departments of European distinction and to stand in the front rank : until

they shall have advanced so far as to determine themselves what distinction

shall mean. Then they will be called the pioneers and guides of the Europeans

whose modesty they will no longer offend. And then where shall an outlet be

found for this abundant wealth of great impressions accumulated during suchan extended period and representing Jewish history for every Jewish family,

this  wealth  of  passions,  virtues,  resolutions,  resignations,  struggles,  and

conquests of all kinds where can it find an outlet but in great intellectual men

and works ! On the day when the Jews will be able to exhibit to us as their

own work such jewels and golden vessels as no European nation, with its

shorter and less profound experience, can or could produce, when Israel shall

have changed its eternal vengeance into an eternal benediction for Europe:

then that seventh day will once more appear when old Jehovah may rejoice in

Himself, in His creation, in His chosen people and all, all of us, will rejoice

with Him !

  206

  THE IMPOSSIBLE CLASS. Poverty, cheerfulness, and independence it

is possible to find these three qualities combined in one individual; poverty,

cheerfulness, and slavery this is likewise a possible combination : and I can

say nothing better to the workmen who serve as factory slaves ; presuming

that it does not appear to them altogether to be a shameful thing to be utilised

as they are, as the screws of a machine and the stopgaps, as it were, of the

human spirit of invention. Fie on the thought that merely by means of higher

wages the essential part of their misery, i.e. their impersonal enslavement,

might be removed ! Fie, that we should allow ourselves to be convinced that,

by an increase of this impersonality within the mechanical working of a new

society, the disgrace of slavery could be changed into a virtue ! Fie, that there

should be a regular price at which a man should cease to be a personality and

become a screw instead ! Are you accomplices in the present madness of

nations which desire above all to produce as much as possible, and to be as

rich as possible? Would it not be your duty to present a counter-claim to

them, and to show them what large sums of internal value are wasted in the

pursuit of such an external object ? But where is your internal value when

you no longer know what it is to breathe freely ; when you have scarcely any

command over your own selves, and often feel disgusted with yourselves as

with some stale food; when you zealously study the newspapers and look

enviously at your wealthy neighbour, made envious by the rapid rise and fall

of power, money, and opinions : when you no longer believe in a philosophy

in rags, or in the freedom of spirit of a man who has few needs ; when a

voluntary and idyllic poverty without profession or marriage, such as should

suit the more intellectual ones among you, has become for you an object of

derision ? On the other hand, the piping of the Socialistic rat-catchers whowish to inspire you with foolish hopes is continually sounding in your ears :

they tell you to be ready and nothing further, ready from this day to the next,

so that you wait and wait for something to come from outside, though living

in all other respects as you lived before until this waiting is at length changed

into  hunger  and  thirst  and  fever  and  madness,  and  the  day  of  the  bestia

triumphans at last dawns in all its glory. Every one of you should on the

contrary say to himself: " It would be better to emigrate and endeavour to

become  a  master  in  new  and  savage  countries,  and  especially  to  become

master over myself, changing my place of abode whenever the least sign of

slavery threatens me, endeavouring to avoid neither adventure nor war, and,

if things come to the worst, holding myself ready to die : anything rather than

continuing in this state of disgraceful thraldom, this bitterness, malice and

rebelliousness ! " This would be the proper spirit : the workmen in Europe

ought to make it clear that their position as a class has become a human

impossibility, and not merely, as they at present maintain, the result of some

hard and aimless arrangement of society. They should bring about an age of

great swarming forth from the European beehive such as has never yet been

seen, protesting by this voluntary and huge migration against machines and

capital and the alternatives that now threaten them either of becoming slaves

of the State or slaves of some revolutionary party. May Europe be freed from

one-fourth of her inhabitants ! Both she and they will experience a sensation

of relief. It is only far in the distance, in the undertaking of vast colonisations,

that we shall be able to observe how much rationality, fairness, and healthy

suspicion mother Europe has incorporated in her sons these sons who could

no longer endure life in the home of the dull old woman, always running the

danger of becoming as bad-tempered, irritable, and pleasure-seeking as she

herself.  The  European  virtues  will  travel  along  with  these  workmen  far

beyond the boundaries of Europe ; and those very qualities which on their

native soil had begun to degenerate into a dangerous discontent and criminal

inclinations  will,  when  abroad,  be  transformed  into  a  beautiful,  savage

naturalness and will be called heroism ; so that at last a purer air would again

be wafted over this old, over-populated, and brooding Europe of ours. What

would it matter if there was a scarcity of " hands " ? Perhaps people would

then recollect that they had accustomed themselves to many wants merely

because it was easy to gratify them it would be sufficient to unlearn some of

these wants ! Perhaps also Chinamen would be called in, and these would

bring with them their modes of living and thinking, which would be foundvery suitable for industrious ants. They would also perhaps help to imbue this

fretful  and  restless  Europe  with  some  of  their  Asiatic  calmness  and

contemplation, and what is perhaps most needful of all their Asiatic stability.

  207

  THE ATTITUDE OF THE GERMANS TO MORALITY. A German is

capable of great things, but he is unlikely to accomplish them, for he obeys

whenever  he  can,  as  suits  a  naturally  lazy  intellect.  If  he  is  ever  in  the

dangerous situation of having to stand alone and cast aside his sloth, when he

finds it no longer possible to disappear like a cipher in a number (in which

respect he is far inferior to a Frenchman or an Englishman), he shows his true

strength: then he becomes dangerous, evil, deep, and audacious, and exhibits

to  the  light  of  day  that  wealth  of  latent  energy  which  he  had  previously

carried hidden in himself, and in which no one, not even himself, had ever

believed. When in such a case a German obeys himself it is very exceptional

for  him  to  do  so  he  does  so  with  the  same  heaviness,  inflexibility,  and

endurance with which he obeys his prince and performs his official duties: so

that, as I have said, he is then capable of great things which bear no relation

to the " weak disposition " he attributes to himself. As a rule, however, he is

afraid of depending upon himself alone, he is afraid of taking the initiative :

that  is  why  Germany  uses  up  so  many  officials  and  so  much  ink.  Light-

heartedness is a stranger to the German ; he is too timid for it : but in entirely

new  situations  which  rouse  him  from  his  torpor  he  exhibits  an  almost

frivolous spirit he then delights in the novelty of his new position as if it were

some  intoxicating  drink,  and  he  is,  as  we  know,  quite  a  connoisseur  in

intoxication. It thus happens that the German of the present day is almost

always  frivolous  in  politics,  though  even  here  he  has  the  advantage  and

prejudice of thoroughness and seriousness ; and, although he may take full

advantage of these qualities in negotiations with other political powers, he

nevertheless  rejoices  inwardly  at  being  able  for  once  in  his  life  to  feel

enthusiastic  and  capricious,  to  show  his  fondness  for  innovations,  and  to

change  persons,  parties,  and  hopes  as  if  they  were  masks.  Those  learned

German scholars, who until now have been considered as the most German of

Germans,  were  and  perhaps  still  are  as  good  as  the  German  soldiers  on

account  of  their  profound  and  almost  childish  inclination  to  obey  in  all

external things, and on account of being often compelled to stand alone in

science and to answer for many things : if they can only preserve their proud,

simple, and patient disposition, and their freedom from political madness atthose times when the wind changes, we may yet expect great things from

them such as they are or such as they were, they are the embryonic stage of

something higher. So far the advantages and disadvantages of the Germans,

including even their learned men, have been that they were more given to

superstition and showed greater eagerness to believe than any of the other

nations ; their vices are, and always have been, their drunkenness and suicidal

inclinations (the latter a proof of the clumsiness of their intellect, which is

easily  tempted  to  throw  away  the  reins).  Their  danger  is  to  be  sought  in

everything that binds down the faculties of reason and unchains the passions

(as, for example, the excessive use of music and spirits), for the German

passion acts contrarily to its own advantage, and is as self-destructive as the

passions of the drunkard. Indeed, German enthusiasm is worth less than that

of other nations, for it is barren. When a German ever did anything great it

was done at a time of danger, or when his courage was high, with his teeth

firmly  set  and  his  prudence  on  the  alert,  and  often  enough  in  a  fit  of

generosity. Intercourse with these Germans is indeed advisable, for almost

every one of them has something to give, if we can only understand how to

make him find it, or rather recover it (for he is very untidy in storing away his

knowledge). Well: when people of this type occupy themselves with morals,

what precisely will be the morality that will satisfy them ? In the first place,

they  will  wish  to  see  idealised  in  their  morals  their  sincere  instinct  for

obedience. " Man must have something which he can implicitly obey " this is

a German sentiment, a German deduction ; it is the basis of all German moral

teaching. How different is the impression, however, when we compare this

with  the  entire  morality  of  the  ancient  world  !  All  those  Greek  thinkers,

however varied they may appear to us, seem to resemble, as moralists, the

gymnastic teacher who encourages his pupils by saying, " Come, follow me !

Submit to my discipline ! Then perhaps you may carry off the prize from all

the other Greeks." Personal distinction : such was the virtue of antiquity.

Submission, obedience, whether public or private : such is German virtue.

Long before Kant set forth his doctrine of the Categorical Imperative, Luther,

actuated by the same impulse, said that there surely must be a being in whom

man could trust implicitly it was his proof of the existence of God ; it was his

wish,  coarser  and  more  popular  than  that  of  Kant,  that  people  should

implicitly  obey  a  person  and  not  an  idea,  and  Kant  also  finally  took  his

roundabout route through morals merely that he might secure obedience for

the person. This is indeed the worship of the German, the more so as there isnow  less  worship  left  in  his  religion.  The  Greeks  and  Romans  had  other

opinions on these matters, and would have laughed at such " there must be a

being " : it is part of the boldness of their Southern nature to take up a stand

against  "implicit  belief,  and  to  retain  in  their  inmost  heart  a  trace  of

scepticism against all and every one, whether God, man, or idea. The thinker

of antiquity went even further, and said nil admirari: in this phrase he saw

reflected  all  philosophy.  A  German,  Schopenhauer,  goes  so  far  in  the

contrary  direction  as  to  say:  admirari  id  est  philosophari.  But  what  if,  as

happens now and then, the German should attain to that state of mind which

would enable him to perform great things ? if the hour of exception comes,

the hour of disobedience ? I do not think Schopenhauer is right in saying that

the single advantage the Germans have over other nations is that there are

more atheists among them than elsewhere ; but I do know this : whenever the

German reaches the state in which he is capable of great things, he invariably

raises  himself  above  morals  !  And  why  should  he  not  ?  Now  he  has

something new to do, namely to command either himself or others ! But this

German morality of his has not taught him how to command ! Commanding

has been forgotten in it.

                                          BOOK IV

  208

  A QUESTION OF CONSCIENCE. " Now, in summa, tell me what this

new thing is that you want." " We no longer wish causes to be sinners and

effects to be executioners."

  209

  THE UTILITY OF THE STRICTEST THEORIES. People are indulgent

towards a man's moral weaknesses, and in this connection they use a coarse

sieve,  provided  that  he  always  professes  to  hold  the  most  strict  moral

theories. On the other hand, the lives of free-thinking moralists have always

been examined closely through a microscope, in the tacit belief that an error

in  their  lives  would  be  the  best  argument  against  their  disagreeable

knowledge.

  210

  THE  "THING  IN  ITSELF."  We  used  to  ask  formerly  :  What  is  the

ridiculous  ?  as  if  there  were  something  above  and  beyond  ourselves  that

possessed the quality of provoking laughter, and we exhausted ourselves in

trying to guess what it was (a theologian even held that it might be " the

naivete of sin "). At the present time we ask : What is laughter ? how does itarise ? We have considered the point, and finally reached the conclusion that

there is nothing which is good, beautiful, sublime, or evil in itself; but rather

that there are conditions of soul which lead us to attribute such qualities to

things outside ourselves and in us. We have taken back their predicates from

things ; or we have at all events recollected that we have merely lent the

things these predicates. Let us be careful that this insight does not cause us to

lose the faculty of lending, and that we do not become at the same time

wealthier and more avaricious.

  211

  To  THOSE  WHO  DREAM  OF  IMMORTALITY.  So  you  desire  the

everlasting perpetuity of this beautiful consciousness of yourselves ? Is it not

shameful? Do you forget all those other things which would in their turn have

to support you for all eternity, just as they have borne with you up to the

present with more than Christian patience ? Or do you think that you can

inspire them with an eternally pleasant feeling towards yourself? A single

immortal  man  on  earth  would  imbue  everyone  around  him  with  such  a

disgust  for  him  that  a  general  epidemic  of  murder  and  suicide  would  be

brought  about.  And  yet,  you  petty  dwellers  on  earth,  with  your  narrow

conceptions of a few thousand little minutes of time, you would wish to be an

everlasting burden on this everlasting universal existence ! Could anything be

more impertinent ? After all, however, let us be indulgent towards a being of

seventy years : he has not been able to exercise his imagination in conceiving

his own " eternal tediousness " he had not time enough for that !

  212

    WHEREIN  WE  KNOW  OURSELVES.  As  soon  as  one  animal  sees

another it mentally compares itself with it ; and men of uncivilised ages did

the same. The consequence is that almost all men come to know themselves

only as regards their defensive and offensive faculties.

  213

  MEN WHOSE LIVES HAVE BEEN FAILURES. Some men are built of

such stuff that society is at liberty to do what it likes with them they will do

well in any case, and will not have to complain of having failed in life. Other

men are formed of such peculiar material it need not be a particularly noble

one, but simply rarer that they are sure to fare ill except in one single instance

: when they can live according to their own designs, in all other cases the

injury has to be borne by society. For everything that seems to the individual

to  be  a  wasted  or  blighted  life,  his  entire  burden  of  discouragement,powerlessness,  sickness,  irritation,  covetousness,  is  attributed  by  him  to

society  and  thus  a  heavy,  vitiated  atmosphere  is  gradually  formed  round

society, or, in the most favourable cases, a thundercloud.

  214

  WHAT INDULGENCE! You suffer, and call upon us to be indulgent

towards you, even when in your suffering you are unjust towards things and

men ! But what does our indulgence matter ! You, however, should take

greater precautions for your own sake ! That's a nice way of compensating

yourself for your sufferings, by imposing still further suffering on your own

judgment  !  Your  own  revenge  recoils  upon  yourselves  when  you  start

reviling something : you dim your own eyes in this way, and not the eyes of

others; you accustom yourself to looking at things in the wrong way, and

with a squint,

  215

  THE  MORALITY  OF  VICTIMS.  "  Enthusiastic  sacrifice,"  "  self-

immolation  "  these  are  the  catchwords  of  your  morality,  and  I  willingly

believe that you, as you say, " mean it honestly " : but I know you better than

you know yourselves, if your " honesty " is capable of going arm in arm with

such a morality. You look down from the heights of this morality upon that

other sober morality which calls for self-control, severity, and obedience ;

you even go so far as to call it egoistic and you are indeed frank towards

yourselves in saying that it displeases you it must displease you ! For, in

sacrificing and immolating yourselves with such enthusiasm, you delight in

the intoxication of the thought that you are now one with the powerful being,

God  or  man,  to  whom  you  are  consecrating  yourselves:  you  revel  in  the

feeling  of  his  power,  which  is  again  attested  by  this  sacrifice.  In  reality,

however, you only appear to sacrifice yourselves ; for your imagination turns

you into gods and you enjoy yourselves as such. Judged from the point of

view of this enjoyment, how poor and feeble must that other " egoistic "

morality of obedience, duty, and reason seem to you : it is displeasing to you

because in this instance true self-sacrifice and self-surrender are called for,

without the victim thinking himself to be transformed into a god, as you do.

In a word, you want intoxication and excess, and this morality which you

despise takes up a stand against intoxication and excess no wonder it causes

you some displeasure !

  216

  EVIL PEOPLE AND Music. Should the full bliss of love, which consistsin unlimited confidence, ever have fallen to the lot of persons other than

those who are profoundly suspicious, evil, and bitter? For such people enjoy

in this bliss the gigantic, unlooked-for, and incredible exception of their souls

!  One  day  they  are  seized  with  that  infinite,  dreamy  sensation  which  is

entirely  opposed  to  the  remainder  of  their  private  and  public  life,  like  a

delicious enigma, full of golden splendour, and impossible to be described by

mere words or similes. Implicit confidence makes them speechless there is

even a species of suffering and heaviness in this blissful silence ; and this is

why souls that are overcome with happiness generally feel more grateful to

music than others and better ones do : for they see and hear through music, as

through a coloured mist, their love becoming, as it were, more distant, more

touching, and less heavy. Music is the only means that such people have of

observing  their  extraordinary  condition  and  of  becoming  aware  of  its

presence with a feeling of estrangement and relief. When the sound of music

reaches the ears of every lover he thinks : " It speaks of me, it speaks in my

stead ; it knows everything ! "

  217

  THE ARTIST. The Germans wish to be transported by the artist into a

state of dreamy passion ; by his aid the Italians wish to rest from their real

passions ; the French wish him to give them an opportunity of showing their

judgment and of making speeches. So let us be just !

  218

  TO  DEAL  LIKE  AN  ARTIST  WITH  ONE'S  WEAKNESSES.  If  we

must positively have weaknesses and come in the end to look upon them as

laws beyond ourselves, I wish that everybody may be possessed of as much

artistic capacity as will enable him to set off his virtues by means of his

weaknesses, and to make us, through his weaknesses, desirous of acquiring

his  virtues  :  a  power  which  great  musicians  have  possessed  in  quite  an

exceptional  degree.  How  frequently  do  we  notice  in  Beethoven's  music  a

coarse, dogmatic, and impatient tone ; in Mozart, the joviality of an honest

man,  whose  heart  and  mind  have  not  overmuch  to  give  us  ;  in  Richard

Wagner, an abrupt and aggressive restlessness, in the midst of which, just as

the most patient listener is on the point of losing his temper, the composer

regains his powers, and likewise the others. Through their very weaknesses,

these musicians have created in us an ardent desire for their virtues, and have

given us a palate which is ten times more sensitive to every note of this

tuneful intellect, tuneful beauty, and tuneful goodness.  219

  DECEIT IN HUMILIATION. By your foolishness you have done a great

wrong to your neighbour and destroyed his happiness irretrievably and then,

having overcome your vanity, you humble yourself before him, surrender

your foolishness to his contempt, and fancy that, after this difficult scene,

which is an exceedingly painful one for you, everything has been set right,

that your own voluntary loss of honour compensates your neighbour for the

injury you have done to his happiness. With this feeling you take your leave

comforted,  believing  that  your  virtue  has  been  re-established.  Your

neighbour,  however,  suffers  as  intensely  as  before.  He  finds  nothing  to

comfort him in the fact that you have been irrational and have told him so :

on the contrary, he remembers the painful appearance you presented to him

when you were disparaging yourself in his presence it is as if another wound

had been inflicted on him. He does not think of revenging himself, however ;

and cannot conceive how a proper balance can be struck between you and

him. In point of fact, you have been acting that scene for yourself and before

yourself: you invited a witness to be present, not on his account, but on your

own don't deceive yourself!

  220

  DIGNITY  AND  TIMIDITY.  Ceremonies,  official  robes  and  court

dresses, grave countenances, solemn aspects, the slow pace, involved speech

everything, in short, known as dignity are all pretences adopted by those who

are timid at heart : they wish to make themselves feared (themselves or the

things they represent). The fearless (i.e. originally those who naturally inspire

others with awe) have no need of dignity and ceremonies: they bring into

repute or, still more, into ill-repute honesty and straightforward words and

bearing, as characteristics of their self-confident awefulness.

  221

  THE MORALITY OF SACRIFICE. The morality which is measured by

the spirit of sacrifice is that of a semi-civilised state of society. Reason in this

instance gains a hard-fought and bloody victory within the soul; for there are

powerful contrary instincts to be overcome. This cannot be brought about

without the cruelty which the sacrifices to cannibal gods demand.

  222

  WHERE FANATICISM is TO BE DESIRED. Phlegmatic natures can be

rendered enthusiastic only by being fanaticised.

  223  THE DREADED EYE. Nothing is dreaded more by artists, poets, and

writers  than  the  eye  which  sees  through  their  little  deceptions  and

subsequently notices how often they have stopped at the boundary where the

paths branch off either to innocent delight in themselves or to the straining

after effect ; the eye which checks them when they try to sell little things

dear, or when they try to exalt and adorn without being exalted themselves ;

the eye which, despite all the artifices of their art, sees the thought as it first

presented itself to them, perhaps as a charming vision of light, perhaps also,

however,  as  a  theft  from  the  whole  world,  or  as  an  everyday  conception

which they had to expand, contract, colour, wrap up, and spice, in order to

make something out of it, instead of the thought making something out of

them.  Oh,  this  eye,  which  sees  in  your  work  all  your  restlessness,

inquisitiveness, and covetousness, your imitation and exaggeration (which is

only envious imitation) which knows both your blush of shame and your skill

in concealing it from others and interpreting it to yourselves !

  224

  THE  "  EDIFYING  "  ELEMENT  IN  OUR  NEIGHBOUR'S

MISFORTUNE, He is in distress, and straightway the "compassionate" ones

come to him and depict his misfortune to him. At last they go away again,

satisfied  and  elevated,  after  having  gloated  over  the  unhappy  man's

misfortune and their own, and spent a pleasant Sunday afternoon.

  225

  To  BE  QUICKLY  DESPISED.  A  man  who  speaks  a  great  deal,  and

speaks quickly, soon sinks exceedingly low in our estimation, even when he

speaks rationally not only to the extent that he annoys us personally, but far

lower. For we conjecture how great a burden he has already proved to many

other people, and we thus add to the discomfort which he causes us all the

contempt which we presume he has caused to others.

  226

    RELATIONS WITH CELEBRITIES. A. But why do you shun this great

man  ?  B,  I  should  not  like  to  misunderstand  him.  Our  defects  are

incompatible with one another : I am short-sighted, and he wears his false

diamonds as willingly as his real ones.

  227

  THE CHAIN-WEARERS. Beware of all those intellects which are bound

in chains ! clever women, for example, who have been banished by fate to

narrow and dull surroundings, amid which they grow old. True, there they liein the sun, apparently lazy and half-blind ; but at every unknown step, at

everything unexpected, they start up to bite : they revenge themselves on

everything that has escaped from their dog-kennel.

  228

    REVENGE IN PRAISE. Here we have a written page which is covered

with  praise,  and  you  call  it  lat;  but  when  you  find  out  that  revenge  is

concealed  n  this  praise  you  will  find  it  almost  too  subtle,  and  you  will

experience a great deal of pleasure in the numerous delicate and bold strokes

and similes. It is not the man himself, but his revenge, which is 50

  subtle, rich, and ingenious : he himself is scarcely aware of it.

  229

    PRIDE. Ah, not one of you knows the feeling of the tortured man after he

has been put to the torture, when he is being carried back to his cell, and his

secret with him ! he still holds it in a stubborn and tenacious grip. What know

you of the exultation of human pride ?

  230

    "UTILITARIAN." At the present time men's sentiments on moral things

run in such labyrinthine paths that, while we demonstrate morality to one

man by virtue of its utility, we refute it to another on account of this utility.

  231

  ON  GERMAN  VIRTUE.  How  degenerate  in  its  taste,  how  servile  to

dignities, ranks, uniforms, pomp, and splendour must a nation have been,

when it began to consider the simple as the bad, the simple man (schlichf) as

the bad man (schlechf) ! We should always oppose the moral bumptiousness

of the Germans with this one little word " bad," and nothing else.

  232

  FROM A DISPUTE. A. Friend, you have talked yourself hoarse. B. Then

I am refuted, so let's drop the subject.

  233

  THE " CONSCIENTIOUS " ONES. Have you noticed the kind of men

who  attach  the  greatest  value  to  the  most  scrupulous  conscientiousness  ?

Those  who  are  conscious  of  many  mean  and  petty  sentiments,  who  are

anxiously  thinking  of  and  about  themselves,  are  afraid  of  others,  and  are

desirous  of  concealing  their  inmost  feelings  as  far  as  possible.  They

endeavour  to  impose  upon  themselves  by  means  of  this  strict

conscientiousness  and  rigorousness  of  duty,  and  by  the  stern  and  harsh

impression which others, especially their inferiors, cannot fail to receive ofthem.

  234

  DREAD  OF  FAME.  A.  The  endeavour  to  avoid  one's  renown,  the

intentional  offending  of  one's  panegyrists,  the  dislike  of  hearing  opinions

about one's self, and all through fear of renown : instances like these are to be

met with ; they actually exist believe it or not ! B. They are found, no doubt !

They exist I A little patience, Sir Arrogance !

  235

    REFUSING THANKS. We are perfectly justified in refusing a request,

but it is never right to refuse thanks or, what comes to the same thing, to

accept them coldly and conventionally. This gives deep offence and why ?

  236

    PUNISHMENT. A strange thing, this punishment of ours ! It does not

purify the criminal ; it is not a' form of expiation ; but, on the contrary, it is

even more defiling than the crime itself.

  237

  PARTY GRIEVANCES. In almost every party there is a ridiculous, but

nevertheless somewhat dangerous grievance. The sufferers from it are those

who have long been the faithful and honourable upholders of the doctrine

propagated  by  the  party,  and  who  suddenly  remark  that  one  day  a  much

stronger figure than themselves has got the ear of the public. How can they

bear  being  reduced  to  silence  ?  So  they  raise  their  voices,  sometimes

changing their notes.

  238

    STRIVING  FOR  GENTLENESS.  When  a  vigorous  nature  has  not  an

inclination  towards  cruelty,  and  is  not  always  preoccupied  with  itself,  it

involuntarily strives after gentleness this is its distinctive characteristic. Weak

natures, on the other hand, have a tendency towards harsh judgments they

associate  themselves  with  the  heroes  of  the  contempt  of  mankind,  the

religious  or  philosophical  traducers  of  existence,  or  they  take  up  their

position behind strict habits and punctilious "callings" : in this way they seek

to give themselves a character and a kind of strength. This is likewise done

quite involuntarily.

  239

  A HINT TO MORALISTS. Our musicians have made a great discovery.

They have found out that interesting ugliness is possible even in their art ;

this is why they throw themselves with such enthusiastic intoxication into thisocean of ugliness, and never before has it been so easy to make music. It is

only now that we have got the general, dark -coloured background, upon

which every luminous ray of fine music, however faint, seems tinged with

golden emerald lustre ; it is only now that we dare to inspire our audience

with feelings of impetuosity and indignation, taking away their breath, so to

speak, in order that we may afterwards, in an interval of restful harmony,

inspire them with a feeling of bliss which will be to the general advantage of

a proper appreciation of music. We have discovered the contrast : it is only

now that the strongest effects are possible and cheap. No one bothers any

more about good music. But you must hurry up ! When any art has once

made this discovery, it has but a short space of time to live. Oh, if only our

thinkers  could  probe  into  the  depths  of  the  souls  of  our  musicians  when

listening to their music ! How long we must wait until we again have an

opportunity of surprising the inward man in the very act of his evil doing, and

his innocence of this act ! For our musicians have not the slightest suspicion

that it is their own history, the history of the disfigurement of the soul, which

they are transposing into music. In former times a good musician was almost

forced by the exigencies of his art to become a good man and now !

  240

  THE MORALITY OF THE STAGE. The man who imagines that the

effect of Shakespeare's plays is a moral one, and that the sight of Macbeth

irresistibly induces us to shun the evil of ambition, is mistaken, and he is

mistaken once more if he believes that Shakespeare himself thought so. He

who is truly obsessed by an ardent ambition takes delight in beholding this

picture of himself; and when the hero is driven to destruction by his passion,

this is the most pungent spice in the hot drink of this delight. Did the poet feel

this in another way ? How royally and with how little of the knave in him

does his ambitious hero run his course from the moment of his great crime !

It is only from this moment that he becomes " demoniacally " attractive, and

that  he  encourages  similar  natures  to  imitate  him.  There  is  something

demoniacal here : something which is in revolt against advantage and life, in

favour of a thought and an impulse. Do you think that Tristan and Isolde are

warnings against adultery, merely because adultery has resulted in the death

of both of them ? This would be turning poets upside down, these poets who,

especially Shakespeare, are in love with the passions in themselves, and not

less so with the readiness for death which they give rise to : this mood in

which the heart no more clings to life than a drop of water does to the glass.It is not the guilt and its pernicious consequences which interests these poets

Shakespeare  as  little  as  Sophocles  (in  the  Ajax,  Philoctetes,  Oedipus]

however easy it might have been in the cases just mentioned to make the guilt

the lever of the play, it was carefully avoided by the poets. In the same way

the tragic poet by his images of life does not wish to set us against life. On

the  contrary,  he  exclaims  :  "  It  is  the  charm  of  charms,  this  exciting,

changing, and dangerous existence of ours, so often gloomy and so often

bathed in sun ! Life is an adventure whichever side you may take in life it

will always retain this character ! " Thus speaks the poet of a restless and

vigorous  age,  an  age  which  is  almost  intoxicated  and  stupefied  by  its

superabundance of blood and energy, in an age more evil than our own : and

this is why it is necessary for us to adapt and accommodate ourselves first to

the purpose of a Shakespearian play, that is, by misunderstanding it.

  241

  FEAR AND INTELLIGENCE. If that which is now expressly maintained

is true, namely that the cause of the black pigment of the skin must not be

sought  in  light,  might  this  phenomenon  perhaps  be  the  ultimate  effect  of

frequent fits of passion accumulated for century after century (and an afflux

of  blood  under  the  skin)  ?  while  in  other  and  more  intelligent  races  the

equally frequent spasms of fear and blanching may have resulted in the white

colour of the skin ? For the degree of timidity is the standard by which the

intelligence may be measured ; and the fact that men give themselves up to

blind anger is an indication that their animal nature is still near the surface,

and is longing for an opportunity to make its presence felt once more. Thus a

brownish-grey would probably be the primitive colour of man something of

the ape and the bear, as is only proper.

  D 242

      INDEPENDENCE. Independence (which in its weakest form is called "

freedom of thought ") is the type of resignation which the tyrannical man

ends by accepting he who for a long time had been looking for something to

govern, but without finding anything except himself.

  243

  THE TWO COURSES. When we endeavour to examine the mirror in

itself we discover in the end that we can detect nothing there but the things

which it reflects. If we wish to grasp the things reflected we touch nothing in

the end but the mirror. This is the general history of knowledge.

  D 244  DELIGHT IN REALITY. Our present inclination to take delight in reality

for almost everyone of us possesses it can only be explained by the fact that

we have taken delight in the unreal for such a long time that we have got tired

of  it.  This  inclination  in  its  present  form,  without  choice  and  without

refinement, is not without danger its least danger is its want of taste.

  245

  THE  SUBTLETY  OF  THE  FEELING  OF  POWER.  Napoleon  was

greatly mortified at the fact that he could not speak well, and he did not

deceive himself in this respect : but his thirst for power, which never despised

the slightest opportunity of showing itself, and which was still more subtle

than his subtle intellect, led him to speak even worse than he might have

done. It was in this way that he revenged himself upon his own mortification

(he was jealous of all his emotions because they possessed power) in order to

enjoy  his  autocratic  pleasure.  He  enjoyed  this  pleasure  a  second  time  in

respect to the ears and judgment of his audience, as if it were good enough

for them to be addressed in this way. He even secretly enjoyed the thought of

bewildering their judgment and good taste by the thunder and lightning of his

highest authority that authority which lies in the union of power and genius

while both his judgment and his good taste held fast proudly and indifferently

to the truth that he did not speak well. Napoleon, as the complete and fully

developed  type  of  a  single  instinct,  belongs  to  ancient  humanity,  whose

characteristic  the  simple  construction  and  ingenious  development  and

realisation of a single motive or a small number of motives may be easily

enough recognised.

  246

    ARISTOTLE AND MARRIAGE. Insanity makes its appearance in the

children of great geniuses, and stupidity in those of the most virtuous so says

Aristotle. Did he mean by this to invite exceptional men to marry?

  247

  THE ORIGIN OF A BAD TEMPERAMENT. Injustice and instability in

the minds of certain men, their disordered and immoderate manner, are the

ultimate  consequences  of  the  innumerable  logical  inexactitudes,

superficialities,  and  hasty  conclusions  of  which  their  ancestors  have  been

guilty. Men of a good temperament, on the other hand, are descended from

solid and meditative races which have set a high value upon reason whether

for praiseworthy or evil purposes is of no great importance.

  248    DISSIMULATION AS A DUTY. Kindness has been best developed by

the long dissimulation which endeavoured to appear as kindness : wherever

great  power  existed  the  necessity  for  dissimulation  of  this  nature  was

recognised it inspires security and confidence, and multiplies the actual sum

of our physical power. Falsehood, if not actually the mother, is at all events

the nurse of kindness. In the same way, honesty has been brought to maturity

by  the  need  for  a  semblance  of  honesty  and  integrity  :  in  hereditary

aristocracies. The persistent exercise of such a dissimulation ends by bringing

about the actual nature of the thing itself: the dissimulation in the long run

suppresses itself, and organs and instincts are the unexpected fruits in this

garden of hypocrisy.

  249

  WHO, THEN, IS EVER ALONE. The fainthearted wretch does not know

what it means to be lonely. An enemy is always prowling in his tracks. Oh,

for  the  man  who  could  give  us  the  history  of  that  subtle  feeling  called

loneliness !

  250

  NIGHT AND Music. It was only at night time, and in the semi-obscurity

of  dark  forests  and  caverns,  that  the  ear,  the  organ  of  fear,  was  able  to

develop itself so well, in accordance with the mode of living of the timid that

is, the longest human epoch which has ever yet existed : when it is clear

daylight the ear is less necessary. Hence the character of music, which is an

art of night and twilight.

  251

    STOICAL. The Stoic experiences a certain sense of cheerfulness when he

feels oppressed by the ceremonial which he has prescribed for himself: he

enjoys himself then as a ruler.

  252

    CONSIDER. The man who is being punished is no longer he who has

done the deed. He is always the scapegoat.

  253

    APPEARANCE. Alas ! what must be best and most resolutely proved is

appearance itself; for only too many people lack eyes to observe it. But it is

so tiresome !

  254

  THOSE WHO ANTICIPATE. What distinguishes poetic natures, but is

also a danger for them, is their imagination, which exhausts itself in advance :which anticipates what will happen or what may happen, which enjoys and

suffers in advance, and which at the final moment of the event or the action is

already fatigued. Lord Byron, who was only too familiar with this, wrote in

his diary : " If ever I have a son he shall choose a very prosaic profession that

of a lawyer or a pirate."

  255

    CONVERSATION ON MUSIC. A. What do you say to that music ? B. It

has overpowered me, I can say nothing about it. Listen ! there it is beginning

again. A. All the better ! This time let us do our best to overpower it. Will

you allow me to add a few words to this music ? and also to show you a

drama which perhaps at your first hearing you did not wish to observe ? B.

Very well, I have two ears and even more if necessary ; move up closer to

me. A. We have not yet heard what he wishes to say to us, up to the present

he has only promised to say something, something as yet unheard, so he gives

us to understand by his gestures, for they are gestures. How he beckons !

How he raises himself up ! How he gesticulates ! and now the moment of

supreme tension seems to have come to him : two more fanfares, and he will

present us with his superb and splendidly-adorned theme, rattling, as it were,

with  precious  stones.  Is  it  a  handsome  woman  ?  or  a  beautiful  horse  ?

Enough, he looks about him as if enraptured, for he must assemble looks of

rapture. It is only now that his theme quite pleases him : it is only now that he

becomes inventive and risks new and audacious features. How he forces out

his theme ! Ah, take care ! he not only understands how to adorn, but also

how to gloss it over ! Yes, he knows what the colour of health is, and he

knows how to make it up, he is more subtle in his self-consciousness than I

thought. And now he is convinced that he has convinced his hearers ; he sets

off his impromptus as if they were the most important things under the sun :

he points to his theme with an insolent finger as if it were too good for this

world. Ah, how distrustful he is ! He is afraid we may get tired ! that is why

he buries his melody in sweet notes. Now he even appeals to our coarser

senses that he may excite us and thus get us once again into his power. Listen

to him as he conjures up the elementary force of tempestuous and thundering

rhythms  !  And  now  that  he  sees  that  these  things  have  captivated  our

attention, strangle us, and almost overwhelm us, he once again ventures to

introduce his theme amidst this play of the elements in order to convince us>

confused and agitated as we are, that our confusion and agitation are the

effects of his miraculous theme. And from now onwards his hearers believein him : as soon as the theme is heard once more they are reminded of its

thrilling elementary effects. The theme profits by this recollection now it has

become  demoniacal  !  What  a  connoisseur  of  the  soul  he  is  !  He  gains

command over us by all the artifices of the popular orator. But the music has

stopped again. B. And I am glad of it ; for I could no longer bear listening to

your observations ! I should prefer ten times over to let myself be deceived to

knowing the truth once after your version, A. That is just what I wished to

hear from you. The best people now are just like you : you are quite content

to let yourselves be deceived. You come here with coarse, lustful ears, and

you do not bring with you your conscience of the art of listening. On the way

here you have cast away your intellectual honesty, and thus you corrupt both

art and artists. Whenever you applaud and cheer you have in your hands the

conscience of the artists and woe to art if they get to know that you cannot

distinguish between innocent and guilty music ! I do not indeed refer to "

good " and " bad " music we meet with both in the two kinds of music

mentioned ! but I call innocent music that which thinks only of itself and

believes only in itself, and which on account of itself has forgotten the world

at large this spontaneous expression of the most profound solitude which

speaks  of  itself  and  with  itself,  and  has  entirely  forgotten  that  there  are

listeners,  effects,  misunderstandings  and  failures  in  the  world  outside.  In

short, the music which we have just heard is precisely of this rare and noble

type ; and everything I said about it was a fable pardon my little trick if you

will ! B. Oh, then you like this music, too ? In that case many sins shall be

forgiven you !

  256

  THE HAPPINESS OF THE EVIL ONES. These silent, gloomy, and evil

men possess a peculiar something which you cannot dispute with them an

uncommon  and  strange  enjoyment  in  the  "dolce  far  niente"  a  sunset  and

evening rest, such as none can enjoy but a heart which has been too often

devoured, lacerated, and poisoned by the passions.

  257

    WORDS PRESENT IN OUR MINDS. We always express our thoughts

with those words which lie nearest to hand. Or rather, if I may reveal my full

suspicion  ;  at  every  moment  we  have  only  the  particular  thought  for  the

words that are present in our minds.

  258

    FLATTERING THE DOG. You have only to stroke this dog's coat once,and he immediately splutters and gives off sparks like any other flatterer and

he is witty in his own way. Why should we not endure him thus ?

  259

  THE QUONDAM PANEGYRIST. " He has now become silent now in

regard to me, although he knows the truth and could tell it ; but it would

sound like vengeance and he values truth so highly, this honourable man ! "

  260

  THE  AMULET  OF  DEPENDENT  MEN.  He  who  is  unavoidably

dependent upon some master ought to possess something by which he can

inspire his master with fear, and keep him in check : integrity, for example, or

probity, or an evil tongue. 26l. WHY SO SUBLIME ! Oh, I know them well

this breed of animals ! Certainly it pleases them better to walk on two legs "

like a god " but it pleases me better when they fall back on their four feet.

This is incomparably more natural for them !

  262

  THE DEMON OF POWER. Neither necessity nor desire, but the love of

power, is the demon of mankind. You may give men everything possible

health,  food,  shelter,  enjoyment  but  they  are  and  remain  unhappy  and

capricious,  for  the  demon  waits  and  waits  ;  and  must  be  satisfied.  Let

everything else be taken away from men, and let this demon be satisfied, and

then they will nearly be happy as happy as men and demons can be ; but why

do I repeat this ? Luther has already said it, and better than I have done, in the

verses : " And though they take our life, Goods, honour, children, wife, Yet is

their profit small, These things shall vanish all, The Kingdom it remains."

The Kingdom ! there it is again !

  263

    CONTRADICTION  INCARNATE  AND  ANIMATED.  There  is  a

physiological contradiction in what is called genius : genius possesses on the

one hand a great deal of savage disorder and involuntary movement, and on

the other hand a great deal of superior activity in this movement Joined to

this a genius possesses a mirror which reflects the two movements beside one

another, and within one another, but often opposed to one another. Genius in

consequence  of  this  sight  is  often  unhappy,  and  if  it  feels  its  greatest

happiness in creating, it is because it forgets that precisely then, with the

highest determinate activity, it does something fantastic and irrational (such

is all art) and cannot help doing it.

  264    DECEIVING ONE'S SELF. Envious men with a discriminating intuition

endeavour not to become too closely acquainted with their rivals in order that

they may feel themselves superior to them.

  265

  THERE is A TIME FOR THE THEATRE. When the imagination of a

people  begins  to  diminish,  there  arises  the  desire  to  have  its  legends

represented  on  the  stage  :  it  then  tolerates  the  coarse  substitutes  for

imagination. In the age of the epic rhapsodist, however, the theatre itself, and

the actor dressed up as a hero, form an obstacle in the path of the imagination

instead of acting as wings for it too near, too definite, too heavy, and with too

little of dreamland and the flights of birds about them.

  266

    WITHOUT CHARM. He lacks charm and knows it. Ah, how skilful he is

in masking this defect ! He does it by a strict virtue, gloomy looks, and

acquired  distrust  of  all  men,  and  of  existence  itself;  by  coarse  jests,  by

contempt for a more refined manner of living, by pathos and pretensions, and

by a cynical philosophy yes, he has even developed into a character through

the continual knowledge of his deficiency.

  267

  WHY SO PROUD ? A noble character is distinguished from a vulgar one

by the fact that the latter has not at ready command a certain number of habits

and points of view like the former : fate willed that they should not be his

either by inheritance or by education.

  268

  THE ORATOR'S SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS. How difficult it was in

Athens to speak in such a way as to win over the hearers to one's cause

without repelling them at the same time by the form in which one's speech

was cast, or withdrawing their attention from the cause itself by this form !

How difficult it still is to write thus in France !

  269

  SICK PEOPLE AND ART. For all kinds of sadness and misery of soul

we should first of all try a change of diet and severe manual labour ; but in

such cases men are in the habit of having recourse to mental intoxicants, to

art for example which is both to their own detriment and that of art ! Can you

not  see  that  when  you  call  for  art  as  sick  people  you  make  the  artists

themselves sick ?

  270    APPARENT TOLERATION. Those are good, benevolent, and rational

words on and in favour of science, but, alas ! I see behind these words your

toleration of science. In a corner of your inmost mind you think, in spite of all

you say, that it is not necessary for you y that it shows magnanimity on your

part to admit and even to advocate it, more especially as science on its part

does not exhibit this magnanimity in regard to your opinion ! Do you know

that  you  have  no  right  whatever  to  exercise  this  toleration  ?  that  this

condescension of yours is an even coarser disparagement of science than any

of that open scorn which a presumptuous priest or artist might allow himself

to indulge in towards science ? What is lacking in you is a strong sense for

everything that is true and actual, you do not feel grieved and worried to find

that science is in contradiction to your own sentiments, you are unacquainted

with that intense desire for knowledge ruling over you like a law, you do not

feel  a  duty  in  the  need  of  being  present  with  your  own  eyes  wherever

knowledge exists, and to let nothing that is " known " escape you. You do not

know that which you are treating with such toleration ! and it is only because

you do not know it that you can succeed in adopting such a gracious attitude

towards it. You, indeed, would look upon science with hatred and fanaticism

if it for once cast its shining and illuminating glance upon you ! What does it

matter to us, then, if you do exhibit toleration and towards a phantom ! and

not even towards us ! and what do we matter !

  271

    FESTIVE MOODS. It is exactly those men who aspire most ardently

towards power who feel it indescribably agreeable to be overpowered ! to

sink suddenly and deeply into a feeling as into a whirlpool ! To suffer the

reins to be snatched out of their hand, and to watch a movement which takes

them they know not where ! Whatever or whoever may be the person or thing

that renders us this service, it is nevertheless a great service : we are so happy

and breathless, and feel around us an exceptional silence, as if we were in the

most central bowels of the earth. To be for once entirely powerless ! the

plaything of the elementary forces of nature ! There is a restfulness in this

happiness, a casting away of the great burden, a descent without fatigue, as if

one had been given up to the blind force of gravity. This is the dream of the

mountain climber, who, although he sees his goal far above him, nevertheless

falls asleep on the way from utter exhaustion, and dreams of the happiness of

the contrast this effortless rolling down hill. I describe happiness as I imagine

it to be in our present-day society, the badgered, ambitious society of Europeand  America.  Now  and  then  they  wish  to  fall  back  into  impotence  this

enjoyment is offered them by wars, arts, religions, and geniuses. When a man

has  temporarily  abandoned  himself  to  a  momentary  impression  which

devours  and  crushes  everything  and  this  is  the  modern  festive  mood  he

afterwards becomes freer, colder, more refreshed, and more strict, and again

strives tirelessly after the contrary of all this : power.

  272

  THE PURIFICATION OF RACES. It is probable that there are no pure

races,  but  only  races  which  have  become  purified,  and  even  these  are

extremely  rare.  We  more  often  meet  with  crossed  races,  among  whom,

together with the defects in the harmony of the bodily forms (for example

when the eyes do not accord with the mouth) we necessarily always find

defects of harmony in habits and appreciations. (Livingstone heard someone

say,"  God  created  white  and  black  men,  but  the  devil  created  the  half-

castes.")  Crossed  races  are  always  at  the  same  time-crossed  cultures  and

crossed moralities : they are, as a rule, more evil, cruel, and restless. Purity is

the final result of innumerable adjustments, absorptions, and eliminations ;

and progress towards purity in a race is shown by the fact that the latent

strength in the race is more and more restricted to a few special functions,

while it formerly had to carry out too many and often contradictory things.

Such a restriction will always have the appearance of an impoverishment, and

must be judged with prudence and moderation. In the long run, however,

when the process of purification has come to a successful termination, all

those  forces  which  were  formerly  wasted  in  the  struggle  between  the

disharmonious qualities are at the disposal of the organism as a whole, and

this is why purified races have always become stronger and more beautiful.

The Greeks may serve us as a model of a purified race and culture ! and it is

to be hoped that someday a pure European race and culture may arise.

  273

  PRAISE. Here is someone who, you perceive, wishes to praise you : you

bite your lips and brace up your heart: Oh, that that cup might go hence ! But

it does not, it comes ! let us therefore drink the sweet impudence of the

panegyrist, let us overcome the disgust and profound contempt that we feel

for the innermost substance of his praise, let us assume a look of thankful joy

for he wished to make himself agreeable to us ! And now that it is all over we

know that he feels greatly exalted ; he has been victorious over us. Yes, and

also over himself, the villain ! for it was no easy matter for him to wring thispraise from himself.

  274

  THE RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF MAN. We human beings are the

only creatures who, when things do not go well with us, can blot ourselves

out like a clumsy sentence, whether we do so out of honour for humanity or

pity for it, or on account of the aversion we feel towards ourselves.

  275

  THE TRANSFORMED BEING. Now he becomes virtuous ; but only for

the sake of hurting others by being so. Don't pay so much attention to him.

  276

  HOW OFTEN ! HOW UNEXPECTED ! How may married men have

some morning awakened to the fact that their young wife is dull, although she

thinks quite the contrary ! not to speak of those wives whose flesh is willing

but whose intellect is weak !

  277

  WARM AND COLD VIRTUES. Courage is sometimes the consequence

of cold and unshaken resolution, and at other times of a fiery and reckless

bravery. For these two kinds of courage there is only the one name! but how

different, nevertheless, are cold virtues and warm virtues! and the man would

be a fool who could suppose that " goodness" could only be brought about by

warmth, and no less a fool he who would only attribute it to cold. The truth is

that mankind has found both warm and cold courage very useful, yet not

often enough to prevent it from setting them both in the category of precious

stones.

  278

  THE  GRACIOUS  MEMORY.  A  man  of  high  rank  will  do  well  to

develop a gracious memory, that is, to note all the good qualities of people

and  remember  them  particularly  ;  for  in  this  way  he  holds  them  in  an

agreeable  dependence.  A  man  may  also  act  in  this  way  towards  himself:

whether  or  not  he  has  a  gracious  memory  determines  in  the  end  the

superiority,  gentleness,  or  distrust  with  which  he  observes  his  own

inclinations and intentions, and finally even the nature of these inclinations

and intentions.

  279

    WHEREIN WE BECOME ARTISTS. He who makes an idol of someone

endeavours to justify himself in his own eyes by idealising this person : in

other words, he becomes an artist that he may have a clear conscience. Whenhe suffers he does not suffer from his ignorance, but from the lie he has told

himself to make himself ignorant - The inmost misery and desire of such a

man and all passionate lovers are included in this category - it cannot be

exhausted by normal means.

  280

    CHILDLIKE,  Those  who  live  like  children-  those  who  have  not  to

struggle for their daily bread, and do not think that their actions have any

ultimate signification remain childlike.

  281

  OUR  EGO  DESIRES  EVERYTHING.  It  would  seem  as  if  men  in

general were only inspired by the desire to possess : languages at least would

permit of this supposition, for they view past actions from the standpoint that

we have been put in possession of something " I have spoken, struggled,

conquered " as if to say, I am now in possession of my word, my struggle, my

victory. How greedy man appears in this light ! he cannot even let the past

escape him : he even wishes to have it still !

  282

  DANGER IN BEAUTY. This woman is beautiful and intelligent : alas,

how  much  more  intelligent  she  would  have  become  if  she  had  not  been

beautiful !

  283

    DOMESTIC AND MENTAL PEACE. Our habitual mood depends upon

the mood in which we maintain our habitual entourage.

  284

  NEW  THINGS  AS  OLD  ONES.  Many  people  seem  irritated  when

something new is told them : they feel the ascendancy which the news has

given to the person who has learnt it first.

  285

  WHAT ARE THE LIMITS OF THE EGO. The majority of people take

under their protection, as it were, something that they know, as if the fact of

knowing  it  was  sufficient  in  itself  to  make  it  their  property.  The

acquisitiveness of the egoistic feeling has no limits : Great men speak as if

they had behind them the whole of time, and had placed themselves at the

head of this enormous host ; and good women boast of the beauty of their

children, their clothes, their dog, their physician, or their native town, but the

only thing they dare not say is, " I am all that." "Chi non ha non e" as they say

in Italy.  286

    DOMESTIC  ANIMALS,  PETS  AND  THE  LIKE.  Could  there  be

anything more repugnant than the sentimentality which is shown to plants

and animals and this on the part of a creature who from the very beginning

has made such ravages among them as their most ferocious enemy, and who

ends by even claiming affectionate feelings from his weakened and mutilated

victims ! Before this kind of "nature " man must above all be serious, if he is

any sort of a thinking being.

  287

  Two FRIENDS. They were friends once, but now they have ceased to be

so,  and  both  of  them  broke  off  the  friendship  at  the  same  time,  the  one

because he believed himself to be too greatly misunderstood, and the other

because he thought he was known too intimately and both were wrong ! For

neither of them knew himself well enough.

  288

  THE COMEDY OF THE NOBLE SOULS. Those who cannot succeed in

exhibiting a noble and cordial familiarity endeavour to let the nobleness of

their nature be seen by their exercise of reserve and strictness, and a certain

contempt for familiarity, as if their strong sense of confidence were ashamed

to show itself.

  289

  WHERE  WE  MAY  SAY  NOTHING  AGAINST  VIRTUE.  Among

cowards  it  is  thought  bad  form  to  say  anything  against  bravery,  for  any

expression of this kind would give rise to some contempt ; and unfeeling

people are irritated when anything is said against pity.

  290

  A WASTE. We find that with irritable and abrupt people their first words

and actions generally afford no indication of their actual character they are

prompted by circumstances, and are to some extent simply reproductions of

the spirit of these circumstances. Because, however, as the words have been

uttered and the deeds done, the subsequent words and deeds, indicating the

real nature of such people, have often to be used to reconcile, amend, or

extinguish the former.

  291

    ARROGANCE. Arrogance is an artificial and simulated pride ; but it is

precisely the essential nature of pride to be incapable of artifice, simulation,

or  hypocrisy  and  thus  arrogance  is  the  hypocrisy  of  the  incapacity  forhypocrisy, a very difficult thing, and one which is a failure in most cases. But

if we suppose that, as most frequently happens, the presumptuous person

betrays himself, then a treble annoyance falls to his lot : people are angry

with  him  because  he  has  endeavoured  to  deceive  them,  and  because  he

wished  to  show  himself  superior  to  them,  and  finally  they  laugh  at  him

because he failed in both these endeavours. How earnestly, therefore, should

we dissuade our fellowmen from arrogance !

  292

  A SPECIES OF MISCONCEPTION. When we hear somebody speak it is

often sufficient for his pronunciation of a single consonant (the letter r, for

example) to fill us with doubts as to the honesty of his feelings : we are not

accustomed  to  this  particular  pronunciation,  and  should  have  to  make  it

ourselves as it were arbitrarily it sounds "forced" to us. This is the domain of

the greatest possible misconception : and it is the same with the style of a

writer who has certain habits which are not the habits of everybody. His "

artlessness " is felt as such only by himself, and precisely in regard to that

which he himself feels to be " forced " (because he has yielded in this matter

to the prevailing fashion and to so called " good taste "), he may perhaps give

pleasure and inspire confidence.

  293

    THANKFUL. One superfluous grain of gratitude and piety makes one

suffer  as  from  a  vice  in  spite  of  all  one's  independence  and  honesty  one

begins to have a bad conscience.

  294

    SAINTS.  It  is  the  most  sensual  men  who  find  it  necessary  to  avoid

women and to torture their bodies.

  295

  THE SUBTLETY OF SERVING. One of the most subtle tasks in the

great art of serving is that of serving a more than usually ambitious man,

who, indeed, is excessively egoistic in all things, but is entirely adverse to

being thought so (this is part of his ambition). He requires that everything

shall be according to his own will and humour, yet in such a way as to give

him  the  appearance  of  always  having  sacrificed  himself,  and  of  rarely

desiring anything for himself alone.

  296

    DUELLING. I think it a great advantage, said someone, to be able to

fight a duel if, of course, it is absolutely necessary ; for I have at all timesbrave  companions  about  me.  The  duel  is  the  last  means  of  thoroughly

honourable suicide left to us ; but it is unfortunately a circuitous means, and

not even a certain one.

  297

    PERNICIOUS. A young man can be most surely corrupted when he is

taught to value the likeminded more highly than the differently minded.

  298

    HERO-WORSHIP AND ITS FANATICS. The fanatic of an ideal that

possesses flesh and blood is right as a rule so long as he assumes a negative

attitude, and he is terrible in his negation : he knows what he denies as well

as he knows himself, for the simple reason that he comes thence, that he feels

at home there, and that he has always the secret fear of being forced to return

there someday. He therefore wishes to make his return impossible by the

manner of his negation. As soon as he begins to affirm, however, he partly

shuts  his  eyes  and  begins  to  idealise  (frequently  merely  for  the  sake  of

annoying  those  who  have  stayed  at  home).  We  might  say  that  there  was

something artistic about this agreed, but there is also something dishonest

about it. The idealist of a person imagines this person to be so far from him

that he can no longer see him distinctly, and then he travesties that which he

can just perceive into something " beautiful " that is to say, symmetrical,

vaguely outlined, uncertain. Since he wishes to worship from afar that ideal

which floats on high in the distance, he finds it essential to build a temple for

the object of his worship as a protection from the profanum vulgus. He brings

into this temple for the object of his worship all the venerable and sanctified

objects which he still possesses, so that his ideal may benefit by their charm,

and that, nourished in this way, it may grow more and more divine. In the end

he really succeeds in forming his God, but, alas for him ! there is someone

who knows how all this has been done, namely his intellectual conscience ;

and there is also someone who, quite unconsciously, begins to protest against

these things, namely the deified one himself, who, in consequence of all this

worship, praise, and incense, now becomes completely unbearable and shows

himself in the most obvious and dreadful manner to be non-divine, and only

too human. In a case like this there is only one means of escape left for such a

fanatic ; he patiently suffers himself and his fellows to be maltreated, and

interprets all this misery in maiorem del gloriam by a new kind of self-deceit

and noble falsehood. He takes up a stand against himself, and in doing so

experiences,  as  an  interpreter  and  ill-treated  person,  something  likemartyrdom and in this way he climbs to the height of his conceit. Men of this

kind to be found, for example, in the entourage of Napoleon: indeed, perhaps

it may have been he who inspired the soul of his century with that romantic

prostration in the presence of the " genius " and the " hero," which was so

foreign to the spirit of rationalism of the nineteenth century a man about

whom even Byron was not ashamed to say that he was a "worm compared

with such a being." (The formulae of this prostration have been discovered by

Thomas Carlyle, that arrogant old muddle-head and grumbler, who spent his

long life in trying to romanticise the common sense of his Englishmen : but

in vain !)

  299

  THE APPEARANCE OF HEROISM. Throwing ourselves in the midst of

our enemies may be a sign of cowardice.

  300

      CONDESCENDING TOWARDS THE FLATTERER. It is the ultimate

prudence of insatiably ambitious men not only to conceal their contempt for

man  which  the  sight  of  flatterers  causes  them  :  but  also  to  appear  even

condescending to them, like a God who can be nothing if not condescending.

  301

  " STRENGTH OF CHARACTER." " What I have said once I will do "

This manner of thinking is believed to indicate great strength of character.

How many actions are accomplished, not because they have been selected as

being the most rational, but because at the moment when we thought of them

they influenced our ambition and vanity by some means or another, so that

we do not stop until we have blindly carried them out. Thus they strengthen

in  us  our  belief  in  our  character  and  our  good  conscience,  in  short  our

strength ; while the choice of the most rational acts possible brings about a

certain amount of scepticism towards ourselves, and thus encourages a sense

of weakness in us.

  302

  ONCE, TWICE, AND THRICE TRUE. Men lie unspeakably and often,

but they do not think about it afterwards, and generally do not believe in it.

  303

  THE PASTIME OF THE PSYCHOLOGIST. He thinks he knows me,

and  fancies  himself  to  be  subtle  and  important  when  he  has  any  kind  of

relations with me ; and I take care not to undeceive him. For in such a case I

should suffer for it, while now he wishes me well because I arouse in him afeeling of conscious superiority. There is another, who fears that I think I

know him, and feels a sense of inferiority at this. As a result he behaves in a

timid and vacillating manner, in my presence, and endeavours to mislead me

in regard to himself so that he may regain an ascendancy over me.

  304

  THE  DESTROYOURS  OF  THE  WORLD.  When  some  men  fail  to

accomplish what they desire to do they exclaim angrily, " May the whole

world perish ! " This odious feeling is the height of envy which reasons thus :

because  I  cannot  have  one  thing  the  whole  world  in  general  must  have

nothing ! the whole world shall not exist !

  305

    GREED. When we set out to buy something our greed increases with the

cheapness of the object Why ? Is it because the small differences in price

make up the little eye of greed ?

  306

  THE GREEK IDEAL. What did the Greeks admire in Ulysses ? Above

all his capacity for lying and for taking a shrewd and dreadful revenge, his

being equal to circumstances, his appearing to be nobler than the noblest

when necessary, his ability to be everything he desired, his heroic pertinacity,

having  all  means  within  his  command,  possessing  genius  the  genius  of

Ulysses is an object of the admiration of the gods, they smile when they think

of it all this is the Greek ideal ! What is most remarkable about it is that the

contradiction between seeming and being was not felt in any way, and that as

a  consequence  it  could  not  be  morally  estimated.  Were  there  ever  such

accomplished actors ?

  307

    FACTA! YES, FACTA FICTA! The historian need not concern himself

with  events  which  have  actually  happened,  but  only  those  which  are

supposed to have happened ; for none but the latter have produced an effect.

The same remark applies to the imaginary heroes. His theme this so-called

world-history  what  is  it  but  opinions  on  imaginary  actions  and  their

imaginary motives, which in their turn give rise to opinions and actions the

reality of which, however, is at once evaporated, and is only effective as

vapour,  a  continual  generating  and  impregnating  of  phantoms  above  the

dense mists of unfathomable reality. All historians record things which have

never existed, except in imagination.

  308  NOT TO UNDERSTAND TRADE IS NOBLE. To sell one's virtue only

at the highest price, or even to carry on usury with it as a teacher, a civil

servant, or an artist, for instance, brings genius and talent down to the level of

the common tradesman. We must be careful not to be clever with our wisdom

!

  309

  FEAR  AND  LOVE.  The  general  knowledge  of  mankind  has  been

furthered to a greater extent by fear than by love ; for fear endeavours to find

out  who  the  other  is,  what  he  can  do,  and  what  he  wants:  it  would  be

dangerous and prejudicial to be deceived on this point. On the other hand,

love is induced by its secret craving to discover as many beautiful qualities as

possible in the loved object, or to raise this loved object as high as possible :

it is a joy and an advantage to love to be deceived in this way and this is why

it does it.

  310

    GOOD-NATURED PEOPLE. Good-natured people have acquired their

character from the continual fear of foreign attacks in which their ancestors

lived, these ancestors, who were in the habit of mitigating and tranquillising,

humbling  themselves,  preventing,  distracting,  flattering,  and  apologising,

concealing their grief and anger, and preserving an unruffled countenance,

and they ultimately bequeathed all this delicate and well-formed mechanism

to  their  children  and  grandchildren.  These  latter,  thanks  to  their  more

favourable lot, did not experience this feeling of dread, but they nevertheless

continue in the same groove.

  311

  THE SO-CALLED SOUL. The sum-total of those internal movements

which come naturally to men, and which they can consequently set in motion

readily and gracefully, is called the soul - men are looked upon as void of

soul when they let it be seen that their inward emotions are difficult and

painful to them.

  312

  THE FORGETFUL ONES. In outbursts of passion and the delusions of

dreams and madness, man rediscovers his own primitive history, and that of

humanity : animality and its savage grimaces. For once his memory stretches

back  into  the  past,  while  his  civilised  condition  is  developed  from  the

forgetfulness of these primitive experiences, that is to say, from the failing of

this memory. He who, as a forgetful man of a higher nature, has alwaysremained  aloof  from  these  things,  does  not  understand  men  but  it  is  an

advantage if from time to time there are individuals who do not understand

men, individuals who are, so to speak, created from the divine seed and born

of reason.

  313

  THE FRIEND WHOM WE WANT NO LONGER. That friend whose

hopes we cannot satisfy we should prefer to have as an enemy.

  314

  IN  THE  SOCIETY  OF  THINKERS.  In  the  midst  of  the  ocean  of

becoming we adventurers and birds of passage wake up on an island no larger

than a small boat, and here we look round us for a moment with as much

haste and curiosity as possible ; for how quickly may some gale blow us

away  or  some  wave  sweep  over  the  little  island  and  leave  nothing  of  us

remaining ! Here, however, upon this little piece of ground we meet with

other birds of passage and hear of still earlier ones, and thus we live together

for  one  precious  minute  of  recognition  and  divining,  amid  the  cheerful

fluttering of wings and joyful chirping, and then adventure in spirit far out on

the ocean, feeling no less proud than the ocean itself.

  315

  PARTING WITH SOMETHING. To give up some of our property, or to

waive a right, gives pleasure when it denotes great wealth. Generosity may be

placed in this category.

  316

  WEAK  SECTS.  Those  sects  which  feel  that  they  will  always  remain

weak hunt up a few intelligent individual adherents, wishing to make up in

quality  what  they  lack  in  quantity.  This  gives  rise  to  no  little  danger  for

intelligent minds.

  317

  THE JUDGMENT OF THE EVENING. The man who meditates upon

his day's and life's work when he has reached the end of his journey and feels

weary, generally arrives at a melancholy conclusion ; but this is not the fault

of the day or his life, but of weariness. In the midst of creative work we do

not take time, as a rule, to meditate upon life and existence, nor yet in the

midst of our pleasures ; but if by a chance this did happen once we should no

longer believe him to be right who waited for the seventh day and for repose

to find everything that exists very beautiful. He had missed the right moment.

  318    BEWARE OF SYSTEMISERS ! There is a certain amount of comedy

about systemisers : in trying to complete a system and to round off its horizon

they have to try to let their weaker qualities appear in the same style as their

stronger ones. They wish to represent complete and uniformly strong natures.

  319

    HOSPITALITY. The object of hospitality is to paralyse all hostile feeling

in a stranger. When we cease to look upon strangers as enemies, hospitality

diminishes ; it flourishes so long as its evil presupposition does.

  320

  THE  WEATHER.  An  exceptional  and  uncertain  state  of  the  weather

makes men suspicious even of one another : at the same time they come to

like innovations, for they must diverge from their accustomed habits. This is

why despots like those countries where the weather is moral.

  321

  DANGER IN INNOCENCE. Innocent people become easy victims in all

circumstances  because  their  lack  of  knowledge  prevents  them  from

distinguishing between moderation and excess, and from being betimes on

their guard against themselves. It is as a result of this that innocent, that is,

ignorant  young  women  become  accustomed  to  the  frequent  enjoyment  of

sexual intercourse, and feel the want of it very much in later years when their

husbands fall ill or grow prematurely old. It is on account of this harmless

and orthodox conception, as if frequent sexual intercourse were right and

proper, that they come to experience a need which afterwards exposes them

to the severest tribulations, and even worse. Considering the matter, however,

from a higher and more general point of view, whoever loves a man or a

thing without knowing him or it, falls a prey to something which he would

not love if he could see it. In all cases where experience, precautions, and

prudent  steps  are  required,  it  is  the  innocent  man  who  will  be  most

thoroughly corrupted, for he has to drink with closed eyes the dregs and most

secret poison of everything put before him. Let us consider the procedure of

all princes, churches, sects, parties, and corporations : Is not the innocent man

always used as the sweetest bait for the most dangerous and wicked traps ?

just as Ulysses availed himself of the services of the innocent Neoptolemos to

cheat the old and infirm anchorite and ogre of Lemnos out of his bow and

arrows. Christianity, with its contempt for the world, has made ignorance a

virtue innocence, perhaps because the most frequent result of this innocence

is precisely, as I have indicated above, guilt, the sense of guilt, and despair :In other words, a virtue which leads to Heaven by the circuitous route of Hell

; for only then can the gloomy entrances of Christian salvation be thrown

open,  and  only  then  is  the  promise  of  a  posthumous  second  innocence

effective. This is one of the finest inventions of Christianity !

  322

  LIVING WITHOUT A DOCTOR WHEN POSSIBLE. It seems to me

that a sick man lives more carelessly when he is under medical observation

than when he attends to his own health. In the first case it suffices for him to

obey strictly all his Doctor's prescriptions ; but in the second case he gives

more attention to the ultimate object of these prescriptions, namely, his health

; he observes much more, and submits himself to a more severe discipline

than the directions of his physician would compel him to do. All rules have

this effect: they distract our attention from the fundamental aim of the rule,

and make us more thoughtless. But to what heights of immoderation and

destruction would men have risen if ever they had completely and honestly

left everything to the Godhead as to their physician, and acted in accordance

with the words "as God will"!

  323

  THE DARKENING OF THE HEAVENS. Do you know the vengeance

of those timid people who behave in society just as if they had stolen their

limbs ? The vengeance of the humble, Christianlike souls who just manage to

slink quietly through the world ? The vengeance of those who always judge

hastily, and are as hastily said to be in the wrong ? The vengeance of all

classes of drunkards, for whom the morning is always the most miserable part

of the day? and also of all kinds of invalids and sick and depressed people

who have no longer the courage to become healthy ? The number of these

petty  vengeful  people,  and,  even  more,  the  number  of  their  petty  acts  of

revenge, is incalculable. The air around us is continually whizzing with the

discharged arrows of their malignity, so that the sun and the sky of their lives

become darkened thereby, and, alas not only theirs, but more often ours and

other men's : and this is worse than the frequent wounds which they make on

our skins and hearts. Do we not occasionally deny the existence of the sun

and sky merely because we have not seen them for so long ? Well then,

solitude ! because of this, solitude !

  324

  THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE ACTOR. It is the blissful illusion of all

great  actors  to  imagine  that  the  historical  personages  whom  they  arerepresenting were really in the same state of mind as they themselves are

when interpreting them but in this they are very much mistaken. Their powers

of imitation and divination, which they would gladly exhibit as a clairvoyant

faculty, penetrate only far enough to explain gestures, accent, and looks, and

in general anything exterior : that is, they can grasp the shadow of the soul of

a great hero, statesman, or warrior, or of an ambitious, jealous, or desperate

person they penetrate fairly near to the soul, but they never reach the inmost

spirit  of  the  man  they  are  imitating.  It  would,  indeed,  be  a  fine  thing  to

discover  that  instead  of  thinkers,  psychologists,  or  experts  we  required

nothing  but  clairvoyant  actors  to  throw  light  upon  the  essence  of  any

condition. Let us never forget, whenever such pretensions are heard, that the

actor is nothing but an ideal ape so much of an ape is he, indeed, that he is

not capable of believing in the "essence" or in the "essential": everything

becomes for him merely performance, intonation, attitude, stage, scenery, and

public.

  325

  LIVING  AND  BELIEVING  APART.  The  means  of  becoming  the

prophet and wonder-worker of one's age are the same to-day as in former

times : one must live apart, with little knowledge, some ideas, and a great

deal  of  presumption  we  then  finish  by  believing  that  mankind  cannot  do

without us, because it is clear that we can do without it When we are inspired

with this belief we find faith. Finally, a piece of advice to him who needs it (it

was given to Wesley by Boehler, his spiritual teacher) : " Preach faith until

you have it; then you will preach it because you have it 1"

  326

    KNOWING OUR CIRCUMSTANCES. We may estimate our powers,

but not our power. Not only do circumstances conceal it from us and show it

to us time about, but they even exaggerate or diminish it. We must consider

ourselves as variable quantities whose productive capacity may in favourable

circumstances reach the greatest possible heights : we must therefore reflect

upon these circumstances, and spare no pains in studying them.

  327

  A FABLE. The Don Juan of knowledge no philosopher or poet has yet

succeeded  in  discovering  him.  He  is  wanting  in  love  for  the  things  he

recognises, but he possesses wit, a lust for the hunting after knowledge, and

the intrigues in connection with it, and he, finds enjoyment in all these, even

up to the highest and most distant stars of knowledge until at last there isnothing left for him to pursue but the absolutely injurious side of knowledge,

just as the drunkard who ends by drinking absinthe and nitric acid. That is

why last of all he feels a longing for hell, for this is the final knowledge

which seduces him. Perhaps even this would disappoint him, as all things do

which one knows ! and then he would have to stand still for all eternity, a

victim to eternal deception, and transformed into his enemy, the Stony Guest,

who longs for an evening meal of knowledge which will never more fall to

his share ! for the whole world of things will not have another mouthful left

to offer to these hungry men.

  328

  WHAT IDEALISTIC THEORIES DISCLOSE. We are most certain to

find idealistic theories among unscrupulously practical men ; for such men

stand in need of the lustre of these theories for the sake of their reputation.

They adopt them instinctively without by any means feeling hypocritical in

doing so no more hypocritical than Englishmen with their Christianity and

their Sabbath-keeping. On the other hand, contemplative natures who have to

keep themselves on their guard against all kinds of fantasies and who dread to

be reputed as enthusiasts, are only to be satisfied with hard realistic theories:

they take possession of them under the same instinctive compulsion without

thereby losing their honesty.

  329

  THE CALUMNIATORS OF CHEERFULNESS. People who have been

deeply wounded by the disappointments of life look with suspicion upon all

cheerfulness as if it were something childish and puerile, and revealed a lack

of common sense that moves them to pity and tenderness, such as one would

experience when seeing a dying child caressing his toys on his death-bed.

Such men appear to see hidden graves under every rose; rejoicings, tumult,

and cheerful music appear to them to be the voluntary illusions of a man who

is  dangerously  ill  and  yet  wishes  to  take  a  momentary  draught  from  the

intoxicating cup of life. But this judgment about cheerfulness is merely the

reflection of the latter on the dark background of weariness and ill-health : in

itself  it  is  something  touching,  irrational,  and  pitiable,  even  childlike  and

puerile, but connected with that second childhood which follows in the train

of old age, and is the harbinger of death.

  330

  NOT YET ENOUGH! It is not sufficient to prove a case, we must also

tempt  or  raise  men  to  it  :  hence  the  wise  man  must  learn  to  convey  hiswisdom ; and often in such a manner that it may sound like foolishness !

  331

  RIGHT AND LIMITS. Asceticism is the proper mode of thinking for

those who must extirpate their carnal instincts, because these are ferocious

beasts, but only for such people !

  332

  THE  BOMBASTIC  STYLE.  An  artist  who  does  not  wish  to  put  his

elevated  feelings  into  a  work  and  thus  unburden  himself,  but  who  rather

wishes to impart these feelings of elevation to others, becomes pompous, and

his style becomes the bombastic style.

  333

    "HUMANITY." We do not consider animals as moral beings. But do you

think that animals consider us as moral beings ? An animal which had the

power  of  speech  once  said  :  "  Humanity  is  a  prejudice  from  which  we

animals at least do not suffer."

  334

  THE CHARITABLE MAN. The charitable man gratifies a need of his

own inward feelings when doing good. The stronger this need is the less does

such a man try to put himself in the place of those who serve the purpose of

gratifying his desire : he becomes indelicate and sometimes even offensive.

(This remark applies to the benevolence and charity of the Jews, which, as is

well known, is somewhat more effusive than that of other peoples.)

  335

  THAT LOVE MAY BE FELT AS LOVE. We must be honest towards

ourselves, and must know ourselves very well indeed, to be able to practise

upon others that humane dissimulation known as love and kindness.

  336

  WHAT ARE WE CAPABLE OF ? A man who had been tormented all

day by his wicked and malicious son slew him in the evening, and then with a

sigh of relief said to the other members of his family : " Well now we can

sleep in peace." Who knows what circumstances might drive us to !

  337

    "NATURAL." To be natural, at least in his deficiencies, is perhaps the

last  praise  that  can  be  bestowed  upon  an  artificial  artist,  who  is  in  other

respects theatrical and half genuine. Such a man will for this very reason

boldly parade his deficiencies.

  338      CONSCIENCE-SUBSTITUTE. One man is another's conscience : and

this is especially important when the other has none else.

  339

  THE TRANSFORMATION OF DUTIES. When our duties cease to be

difficult  of  accomplishment,  and  after  long  practice  become  changed  into

agreeable delights and needs, then the rights of others to whom our duties

(though now our inclinations) refer change into something else: that is, they

become the occasion of pleasant feelings for us. Henceforth the "other," by

virtue of his rights, becomes an object of love to us instead of an object of

reverence and awe as formerly. It is our own pleasure we seek when we

recognise and maintain the extent of his power. When the Quietists no longer

felt their Christian faith as a burden, and experienced their delight only in

God, they took the motto : " Do all to the glory of God." Whatever they

performed henceforth in this sense was no longer a sacrifice, it was as much

as to say, " Everything for the sake of our pleasure." To demand that duty

should be always rather burdensome, as Kant does, is to demand that it shall

never develop into a habit or custom. There is a small residue of ascetic

cruelty in this demand.

  340

    APPEARANCES ARE AGAINST THE HISTORIAN. It is a sufficiently

demonstrated fact that human beings come from the womb ; nevertheless

when children grow up and stand by the side of their mother this hypothesis

appears very absurd all appearances are against it.

  341

  THE ADVANTAGE OF IGNORANCE. Someone has said that in his

childhood he experienced such a contempt for the caprices and whims of a

melancholy  temperament  that,  until  he  had  grown  up  and  had  become  a

middle-aged man, he did not know what his own temperament was like : it

was precisely a melancholy temperament. He declared that this was the best

of all possible kinds of ignorance.

  342

  Do NOT BE DECEIVED ! Yes, he examined the matter from every side

and you think him to be a man of profound knowledge. But he only wishes to

lower the price he wants to buy it !

  343

  A MORAL PRETENCE. You refuse to be dissatisfied with yourselves or

to suffer from yourselves, and this you call your moral tendency ! Very well ;another may perhaps call it your cowardice ! One thing, however, is certain,

and that is that you will never take a trip round the world (and you yourselves

are this world), and you will always remain in yourselves an accident and a

clod on the face of the earth ! Do you fancy that we who hold different views

from  you  are  merely  exposing  ourselves  out  of  pure  folly  to  the  journey

through our own deserts, swamps, and glaciers, and that we are voluntarily

choosing grief and disgust with ourselves, like the Stylites ?

  344

    SUBTLETY IN MISTAKES. If Homer, as they say, sometimes nodded,

he  was  wiser  than  all  the  artists  of  sleepless  ambition.  We  must  allow

admirers to stop for a time and take breath by letting them find fault now and

then ; for nobody can bear an uninterruptedly brilliant and untiring excellence

and instead of doing good such a master would merely become a taskmaster,

whom we hate while he precedes us.

  345

  OUR HAPPINESS is NOT AN ARGUMENT EITHER PRO OR CON.

Many men are only capable of a small share of happiness : and it is not an

argument against their wisdom if this wisdom is unable to afford them a

greater degree of happiness, any more than it is an argument against medical

skill that many people are incurable, and others always ailing. May everyone

have the good fortune to discover the conception of existence which will

enable him to realise his greatest share of happiness ! though this will not

necessarily prevent his life from being miserable and not worth envying.

  346

  THE ENEMIES OF WOMEN. " Woman is our enemy " the man who

speaks to men in this way exhibits an unbridled lust which not only hates

itself but also its means.

  347

  THE SCHOOL OF THE ORATOR. When a man has kept silence for a

whole  year  he  learns  to  stop  chattering,  and  to  discourse  instead.  The

Pythagoreans were the best statesmen of their age.

  348

  THE FEELING OF POWER. Note the distinction : the man who wishes

to  acquire  the  feeling  of  power  seizes  upon  any  means,  and  looks  upon

nothing as too petty which can foster this feeling. He who already possesses

power, however, has grown fastidious and refined in his tastes; few things

can be found to satisfy him.  349

  NOT SO VERY IMPORTANT. When we are present at a death-bed there

regularly arises in us a thought that we immediately suppress from a false

sense of propriety : the thought that the act of dying is less important than the

customary veneration of it would wish us to believe, and that the dying man

has probably lost in his life things which were more important than he is now

about to lose by his death. In this case the end is certainly not the goal.

  350

  THE BEST WAY TO PROMISE. When a man makes a promise it is not

merely the word that promises, but what lies unexpressed behind the word.

Words indeed weaken a promise by discharging and using up a power which

forms  part  of  that  power  which  promises.  Therefore  shake  hands  when

making a promise, but put your finger on your lips in this way you will make

the safest promises.

  351

    GENERALLY  MISUNDERSTOOD.  In  conversation  we  sometimes

observe people endeavouring to set a trap in which to catch others not out of

evil-mindedness,  as  one  might  suppose,  but  from  delight  in  their  own

shrewdness. Others again prepare a joke so that someone else may utter it,

they tie the knot so that others may undo it : not out of goodwill, as might be

supposed, but from wickedness, and their contempt for coarse intellects.

  352

  CENTRE. The feeling, " I am the centre of the world," forcibly comes to

us when we are unexpectedly overtaken by disgrace : we then feel as if we

were standing dazed in the midst of a surge, and dazzled by the glance of one

enormous eye which gazes down upon us from all sides and looks us through

and through.

  353

    FREEDOM  OF  SPEECH.  "The  truth  must  be  told,  even  if  the  world

should  be  shivered  in  fragments"  so  cries  the  eminent  and  grandiloquent

Fichte.  Yes,  certainly  ;  but  we  must  have  it  first.  What  he  really  means,

however, is that each man should speak his mind, even if everything were to

be turned upside down. This point, however, is open to dispute,

  354

  THE  COURAGE  FOR  SUFFERING.  Such  as  we  now  are,  we  are

capable  of  bearing  a  tolerable  amount  of  displeasure,  and  our  stomach  is

suited to such indigestible food. If we were deprived of it, indeed, we shouldperhaps  think  the  banquet  of  life  insipid  ;  and  if  it  were  not  for  our

willingness to suffer pain we should have to let too many pleasures escape us

!

  355

    ADMIRERS. The man who admires up to the point that he would be

ready to crucify anyone who did not admire, must be reckoned among the

executioners of his party beware of shaking hands with him, even when he

belongs to your own side.

  356

  THE  EFFECT  OF  HAPPINESS.  The  first  effect  of  happiness  is  the

feeling of power, and this feeling longs to manifest itself, whether towards

ourselves  or  other  men,  or  towards  ideas  and  imaginary  beings.  Its  most

common  modes  of  manifestation  are  making  presents,  derision,  and

destruction all three being due to a common fundamental instinct.

  357

    MORAL MOSQUITOES. Those moralists who are lacking in the love of

knowledge, and who are only acquainted with the pleasure of giving pain,

have the spirit and tediousness of provincials. Their pastime, as cruel as it is

lamentable, is to observe their neighbour with the greatest possible closeness,

and, unperceived, to place a pin in such position that he cannot help pricking

himself with it. Such men have preserved something of the wickedness of

schoolboys,  who  cannot  amuse  themselves  without  hunting  and  torturing

either the living or the dead.

  358

    REASONS AND THEIR UNREASON. You feel a dislike for him, and

adduce innumerable reasons for this dislike, but I only believe in your dislike

and  not  in  your  reasons  !  You  flatter  yourself  by  adducing  as  a  rational

conclusion, both to yourself and to me, that which happens to be merely a

matter of instinct.

  359

    APPROVING OF SOMETHING. We approve of marriage in the first

place because we are not yet acquainted with it, in the second place because

we have accustomed ourselves to it, and in the third place because we have

contracted it that is to say, in most cases. And yet nothing has been proved

thereby in favour of the value of marriage in general.

  360

  No UTILITARIANS. " Power which has greatly suffered both in deedand  in  thought  is  better  than  powerlessness  which  only  meets  with  kind

treatment" such was the Greek way of thinking. In other words, the feeling of

power was prized more highly by them than any mere utility or fair renown.

  361

  UGLY  IN  APPEARANCE.  Moderation  appears  to  itself  to  be  quite

beautiful : it is unaware of the fact that in the eyes of the immoderate it seems

coarse and insipid, and consequently ugly.

  362

    DIFFERENT IN THEIR HATRED. There are men who do not begin to

hate until they feel weak and tired : in other respects they are fair-minded and

superior. Others only begin to hate when they see an opportunity for revenge

:  in  other  respects  they  carefully  avoid  both  secret  and  open  wrath,  and

overlook it whenever there is any occasion for it.

  363

  MEN OF CHANCE. It is pure hazard which plays the essential part in

every invention, but most men do not meet with this hazard.

  364

    CHOICE  OF  ENVIRONMENT.  We  should  beware  of  living  in  an

environment where we are neither able to maintain a dignified silence nor to

express our loftier thoughts, so that only our complaints and needs and the

whole story of our misery are left to be told. We thus become dissatisfied

with ourselves and with our surroundings, and to the discomfort which brings

about our complaints we add the vexation which we feel at always being in

the position of grumblers. But we should, on the contrary, live in a place

where we should be ashamed to speak of ourselves and where it would not be

necessary to do so. Who, however, thinks of such things, or of the choice in

such things ? We talk about our " fate," brace up our shoulders, and sigh,

"Unfortunate Atlas that I am I "

  365

    VANITY. Vanity is the dread of appearing to be original. Hence it is a

lack of pride, but not necessarily a lack of originality.

  366

  THE CRIMINAL'S GRIEF. The criminal who has been found out does

not suffer because of the crime he has committed, but because of the shame

and annoyance caused him either by some blunder which he has made or by

being deprived of his habitual element ; and keen discernment is necessary to

distinguish such cases. Everyone who has had much experience of prisonsand  reformatories  is  astonished  at  the  rare  instances  of  really  genuine  "

remorse," and still more so at the longing shown to return to the old wicked

and beloved crime.

  367

    ALWAYS  APPEARING  HAPPY.  When,  in  the  Greece  of  the  third

century, philosophy had become a matter of public emulation, there were not

a few philosophers who became happy through the thought that others who

lived according to different principles, and suffered from them, could not but

feel envious of their happiness. They thought they could refute these other

people with their happiness better than anything else, and to achieve this

object they were content to appear to be always happy; but, following this

practice,  they  were  obliged  to  become  happy  in  the  long  run  !  This,  for

example, was the case of the cynics.

  368

  THE  CAUSE  OF  MUCH  MISUNDERSTANDING.  The  morality  of

increasing nervous force is joyful and restless ; the morality of diminishing

nervous force, towards evening, or in invalids and old people, is passive,

calm, patient, and melancholy, and not rarely even gloomy. In accordance

with what we may possess of one or other of these moralities, we do not

understand  that  which  we  lack,  and  we  often  interpret  it  in  others  as

immorality and weakness.

  369

    RAISING  ONE'S  SELF  ABOVE  ONE'S  OWN  LOWNESS.  "  Proud"

fellows they are indeed, those who, in order to establish a sense of their own

dignity  and  importance,  stand  in  need  of  other  people  whom  they  may

tyrannise  and  oppress  those  whose  powerlessness  and  cowardice  permits

someone  to  make  sublime  and  furious  gestures  in  their  presence  with

impunity,  so  that  they  require  the  baseness  of  their  surroundings  to  raise

themselves for one short moment above their own baseness ! For this purpose

one man requires a dog, another a friend, a third a wife, a fourth a party, a

fifth, again, one very rarely to be met with, a whole age.

  370

  TO WHAT EXTENT THE THINKER LOVES HIS ENEMY, Make it a

rule never to withhold or conceal from yourself anything that may be thought

against  your  own  thoughts.  Vow  it  !  This  is  the  essential  requirement  of

honest thinking. You must undertake such a campaign against yourself every

day. A victory and a conquered position are no longer your concern, but thatof truth and your defeat also is no longer your concern !

  371

  THE EVIL OF STRENGTH. Violence as the outcome of passion, for

example, of rage, must be understood from the physiological point of view as

an attempt to avoid an imminent fit of suffocation. Innumerable acts arising

from animal spirits and vented upon others are simply outlets for getting rid

of sudden congestion by a violent muscular exertion : and perhaps the entire "

evil of strength " must be considered from this point of view. (This evil of

strength wounds others unintentionally it must find an outlet somewhere ;

while the evil of weakness wishes to wound and to see signs of suffering.)

  372

  To THE CREDIT OF THE CONNOISSEUR. As soon as someone who is

no connoisseur begins to pose as a judge we should remonstrate, whether it is

a  male  or  female  whipper-snapper.  Enthusiasm  or  delight  in  a  thing  or  a

human being is not an argument; neither is repugnance or hatred.

  373

    TREACHEROUS BLAME. "He has no knowledge of men " means in the

mouth of some " He does not know what baseness is " ; and in the mouths of

others, " He does not know the exception and knows only too well what

baseness means."

  374

  THE VALUE OF SACRIFICE. The more the rights of states and princes

are questioned as to their right to sacrifice the individual (for example, in the

administration of justice, conscription, etc.), the more will the value of self-

sacrifice rise.

  375

    SPEAKING  TOO  DISTINCTLY.  There  are  several  reasons  why  we

articulate  our  words  too  distinctly  :  in  the  first  place,  from  distrust  of

ourselves when using a new and unpractised language ; secondly, when we

distrust  others  on  account  of  their  stupidity  or  their  slowness  of

comprehension.  The  same  remark  applies  to  intellectual  matters:  our

communications are sometimes too distinct, too painful, because if it were

otherwise those to whom we communicate our ideas would not understand

us.  Consequently  the  perfect  and  easy  style  is  only  permissible  when

addressing a perfect audience.

  376

  PLENTY OF SLEEP. What can we do to arouse ourselves when we areweary and tired of our ego ? Some recommend the gambling table, others

Christianity,  and  others  again  electricity.  But  the  best  remedy,  my  dear

hypochondriac, is, and always will be, plenty of sleep in both the literal and

figurative sense of the word. Thus another morning will at length dawn upon

us. The knack of worldly wisdom is to find the proper time for applying this

remedy in both its forms.

  377

  WHAT WE MAY CONCLUDE FROM FANTASTIC IDEALS. Where

our deficiencies are, there also is our enthusiasm. The enthusiastic principle

"love your enemies " had to be invented by the Jews, the best haters that ever

existed ; and the finest glorifications of chastity have been written by those

who in their youth led dissolute and licentious lives.

  378

  CLEAN HANDS AND CLEAN WALLS. Do not paint the picture either

of God or the devil on your walls : for in so doing you will spoil your walls

as well as your surroundings.

  379

    PROBABLE  AND  IMPROBABLE.  A  woman  secretly  loved  a  man,

raised him far above her, and said to herself hundreds of times in her inmost

heart,  "  If  a  man  like  that  were  to  love  me,  I  should  look  upon  it  as  a

condescension before which I should have to humble myself in the dust,"

And the man entertained the same feelings towards the woman, and in his

inmost heart he felt the very same thought. When at last both their tongues

were loosened, and they had communicated their most secret thoughts to one

another, a deep and meditative silence ensued. Then the woman said in a cold

voice : " The thing is quite clear ! We are neither of us that which we loved !

If you are what you say you are, and nothing more, then I have humbled

myself in vain and loved you ; the demon misled me as well as you." This

very probable story never happens and why doesn't it ?

  380

    TESTED  ADVICE.  Of  all  the  means  of  consolation  there  is  none  so

efficacious for him who has need of it as the declaration that in his case no

consolation can be given. This implies such a distinction that the afflicted

person will at once raise his head again.

  381

    KNOWING ONE'S " INDIVIDUALITY." We too often forget that in the

eyes of strangers who see us for the first time we are quite different beingsfrom what we consider ourselves to be in most cases we exhibit nothing more

than one particular characteristic which catches the eye of the stranger, and

determines the impression we make on him. Thus the most peaceful and fair-

minded man, if only he has a big moustache, may, as it were, repose in the

shade  of  this  moustache  ;  for  ordinary  eyes  will  merely  see  in  him  the

accessory  of  a  big  moustache,  that  is  to  say,  a  military,  irascible,  and

occasionally violent character, and will act accordingly.

  382

    GARDENERS  AND  GARDENS.  Wet  dreary  days,  loneliness,  and

unkind words give rise within us to conclusions like fungi ; some morning we

find that they have grown up in front of us we know not whence, and there

they scowl at us, sullen and morose. Woe to the thinker who instead of being

the gardener of his plants, is merely the soil from which they spring.

  383

  THE COMEDY OF PITY. However much we may feel for an unhappy

friend  of  ours,  we  always  act  with  a  certain  amount  of  insincerity  in  his

presence : we refrain from telling him everything we think, and how we think

it, with all the circumspection of a doctor standing by the bedside of a patient

who is seriously ill.

  384

    CURIOUS  SAINTS.  There  are  pusillanimous  people  who  have  a  bad

opinion of everything that is best in their works, and who at the same time

interpret and comment upon them badly : but also, by a kind of revenge, they

entertain  a  bad  opinion  of  the  sympathy  of  others,  and  do  not  believe  in

sympathy  at  all  ;  they  are  ashamed  to  appear  to  be  carried  away  from

themselves, and feel a defiant comfort in appearing or becoming ridiculous.

States of soul like these are to be found in melancholy artists.

  385

  VAIN  PEOPLE.  We  are  like  shop-windows,  where  we  ourselves  are

constantly arranging, concealing, or setting in the foreground those supposed

qualities which others attribute to us in order to deceive ourselves

  386

    PATHETIC  AND  NAIVE.  It  may  be  a  very  vulgar  habit  to  let  no

opportunity slip of assuming a pathetic air for the sake of the enjoyment to be

experienced in imagining the spectator striking his breast and feeling himself

to be small and miserable. Consequently it may also be the indication of a

noble  mind  to  make  fun  of  pathetic  situations,  and  to  behave  in  anundignified manner in them. The old, warlike nobility of France possessed

that kind of distinction and delicacy.

  387

  A REFLECTION BEFORE MARRIAGE. Supposing she loved me, what

a burden she would be to me in the long run ! and supposing that she did not

love me, what a much greater burden she would be to me in the long run !

We have to choose between two different kinds of burdens ; therefore let us

marry.

  388

    RASCALITY  WITH  A  GOOD  CONSCIENCE.  It  is  exceedingly

annoying to be cheated in small bargains in certain countries, in the Tyrol, for

example, because, in addition to the bad bargain, we are compelled to accept

the evil countenance and coarse greediness of the man who has cheated us,

together with his bad conscience and his hostile feeling against us. At Venice,

on the other hand, the cheater is highly delighted at his successful fraud, and

is not in the least angry with the man he has cheated nay, he is even inclined

to show him some kindness, and above all to have a hearty laugh with him if

he likes. In short, one must possess wit and a good conscience in order to be a

knave, and this will almost reconcile the cheated one with the cheat.

  389

    RATHER TOO AWKWARD. Good people who are too awkward to be

polite and amiable promptly endeavour to return an act of politeness by an

important service, or by a contribution beyond their power. It is touching to

see them timidly producing their gold coins when others have offered them

their gilded coppers !

  390

  HIDING ONE'S INTELLIGENCE. When we surprise someone in the act

of hiding his intelligence from us we call him evil : the more so if we suspect

that it is his civility and benevolence which have induced him to do so.

  391

  THE EVIL MOMENT. Lively dispositions only lie for a moment : after

this they have deceived themselves, and are convinced and honest.

  392

  THE CONDITION OF POLITENESS. Politeness is a very good thing,

and really one of the four chief virtues (although the last), but in order that it

may  not  result  in  our  becoming  tiresome  to  one  another  the  person  with

whom I have to deal must be either one degree more or less polite than Iotherwise we should never get on, and the ointment would not only anoint us,

but would cement us together.

  393

    DANGEROUS VIRTUES. " He forgets nothing, but forgives everything"

wherefore he shall be doubly detested, for he causes us double shame by his

memory and his magnanimity.

  394

    WITHOUT VANITY. Passionate people think little of what others may

think ; their state of mind raises them above vanity

  395

    CONTEMPLATION. In some thinkers the contemplative state peculiar to

a thinker is always the consequence of a state of fear, in others always of

desire.  In  the  former,  contemplation  thus  seems  allied  to  the  feeling  of

security, in the latter to the feeling of surfeit in other words, the former are

spirited in their mood, the latter over-satiated and neutral.

  396

    HUNTING.  The  one  is  hunting  for  agreeable  truths,  the  other  for

disagreeable ones. But even the former takes greater pleasure in the hunt than

in the booty.

  397

    EDUCATION. Education is a continuation of procreation, and very often

a kind of supplementary varnishing of it.

  398

  HOW  TO  RECOGNISE  THE  CHOLERIC.  Of  two  persons  who  are

struggling together, or who love and admire one another, the more choleric

will always be at a disadvantage. The same remark applies to two nations,

  399

    SELF-EXCUSE. Many men have the best possible right to act in this or

that way ; but as soon as they begin to excuse their actions we no longer

believe that they are right and we are mistaken,

  400

    MORAL  PAMPERING.  There  are  tender,  moral  natures  who  are

ashamed of all their successes and feel remorse after every failure.

  401

    DANGEROUS UNLEARNING. We begin by unlearning to love others,

and end by finding nothing lovable in ourselves.

  402    ANOTHER FORM OF TOLERATION. "To remain a minute too long on

red-hot  coals  and  to  be  burnt  a  little  does  no  harm  either  to  men  or  to

chestnuts.  The  slight  bitterness  and  hardness  makes  the  kernel  all  the

sweeter." Yes, this is your opinion, you who enjoy the taste ! You sublime

cannibals !

  403

    DIFFERENT PRIDE. Women turn pale at the thought that their lover

may not be worthy of them ; Men turn pale at the thought that they may not

be worthy of the women they love. I speak of perfect women, perfect men.

Such men, who are self-reliant and conscious of power at ordinary times,

grow diffident and doubtful of themselves when under the influence of a

strong passion. Such women, on the other hand, though always looking upon

themselves as the weak and devoted sex, become proud and conscious of

their power in the great exception of passion, they ask : " Who then is worthy

of me ? "

  404

  WHEN  WE  SELDOM  DO  JUSTICE.  Certain  men  are  unable  to  feel

enthusiasm for a great and good cause without committing a great injustice in

some other quarter : this is their kind of morality.

  405

    LUXURY. The love of luxury is rooted in the depths of a man's heart : it

shows that the superfluous and immoderate is the sea wherein his soul prefers

to float.

  406

  TO  IMMORTALISE.  Let  him  who  wishes  to  kill  his  opponent  first

consider whether by doing so he will not immortalise him in himself.

  407

    AGAINST OUR CHARACTER. If the truth which we have to utter goes

against our character as very often happens we behave as if we had uttered a

clumsy falsehood, and thus rouse suspicion.

  408

  WHERE  A  GREAT  DEAL  OF  GENTLENESS  is  NEEDED.  Many

natures  have  only  the  choice  of  being  either  public  evil-doers  or  secret

sorrow-bearers.

  409

    ILLNESS. Among illness are to be reckoned the premature approach of

old  age,  ugliness,  and  pessimistic  opinions  three  things  that  always  gotogether.

  410

  TIMID PEOPLE. It is the awkward and timid people who easily become

murderers : they do not understand slight but sufficient means of defence or

revenge, and their hatred, owing to their lack of intelligence and presence of

mind, can conceive of no other expedient than destruction.

  411

    WITHOUT HATRED. You wish to bid farewell to your passion ? Very

well,  but  do  so  without  hatred  against  it  !  Otherwise  you  have  a  second

passion. The soul of the Christian who has freed himself from sin is generally

ruined afterwards by the hatred for sin. Just look at the faces of the great

Christians ! they are the faces of great haters.

  412

    INGENIOUS  AND  NARROW-MINDED.  He  can  appreciate  nothing

beyond  himself,  and  when  he  wishes  to  appreciate  other  people  he  must

always  begin  by  transforming  them  into  himself.  In  this,  however,  he  is

ingenious.

  413

    PRIVATE AND PUBLIC ACCUSERS. Watch closely the accuser and

inquirer, for he reveals his true character ; and it is not rare for this to be a

worse character than that of the victim whose crime he is investigating. The

accuser believes in all innocence that the opponent of a crime and criminal

must be by nature of good character, or at least must appear as such and this

is why he lets himself go, that is to say, he drops his mask.

  414

    VOLUNTARY BLINDNESS. There is a kind of enthusiastic and extreme

devotion to a person or a party which reveals that in our inmost hearts we feel

ourselves  superior  to  this  person  or  party,  and  for  this  reason  we  feel

indignant with ourselves. We blind ourselves, as it were, of our own free will

to punish our eyes for having seen too much.

  415

    REMEDWM AMORIS. That old radical remedy for love is now in most

cases as effective as it always was : love in return.

  416

  WHERE is OUR WORST ENEMY ? He who can look after his own

affairs well, and knows that he can do so, is as a rule conciliatory towards his

adversary. But to believe that we have right on our side, and to know that weare incapable of defending it this gives rise to a fierce and implacable hatred

against the opponent of our cause. Let everyone judge accordingly where his

worst enemies are to be sought.

  417

  THE  LIMITS  OF  ALL  HUMILITY.  Many  men  may  certainly  have

attained that humility which says "credo quia absurdum est y" and sacrifices

its reason ; but, so far as I know, not one has attained to that humility which

after all is only one step further, and which says credo quia absurdus sum.

  418

    ACTING THE TRUTH. Many a man is truthful, not because he would be

ashamed to exhibit hypocritical feelings, but because he would not succeed

very well in inducing others to believe in his hypocrisy. In a word, he has no

confidence in his talent as an actor, and therefore prefers honestly to act the

truth.

  419

    COURAGE IN A PARTY. The poor sheep say to their bell-wether : "

Only lead us, and we shall never lack courage to follow you." But the poor

bell- wether thinks in his heart : " Only follow me, and I shall never lack

courage to lead you."

  420

    CUNNING OF THE VICTIM. What a sad cunning there is in the wish to

deceive ourselves with respect to the person for whom we have sacrificed

ourselves, when we give him an opportunity in which he must appear to us as

we should wish him to be !

  421

    THROUGH OTHERS. There are men who do not wish to be seen except

through the eyes of others: a wish which implies a great deal of wisdom.

  422

  MAKING OTHERS HAPPY. Why is the fact of our making others happy

more gratifying to us than all other pleasures? Because in so doing we gratify

fifty cravings at one time. Taken separately they would, perhaps, be very

small pleasures ; but when put into one hand, that hand will be fuller than

ever before and the heart also.

                                          BOOK V

  423

  IN THE GREAT SILENCE. Here is the sea, here may we forget the

town. It is true that its bells are still ringing the Angelus that solemn andfoolish  yet  sweet  sound  at  the  junction  between  day  and  night,  but  one

moment more ! now all is silent. Yonder lies the ocean, pale and brilliant ; it

cannot speak. The sky is glistening with its eternal mute evening hues, red,

yellow, and green : it cannot speak. The small cliffs and rocks which stretch

out  into  the  sea  as  if  each  one  of  them  were  endeavouring.  to  find  the

loneliest  spot  they  too  are  dumb.  Beautiful  and  awful  indeed  is  this  vast

silence, which so suddenly overcomes us and makes our heart swell. Alas !

what deceit lies in this dumb beauty ! How well could it speak, and how

evilly, too, if it wished ! Its tongue, tied up and fastened, and its face of

suffering happiness all this is but malice, mocking at your sympathy : be it so

! I do not feel ashamed to be the plaything of such powers ! but I pity you, oh

nature, because you must be silent, even though it be only malice that binds

your tongue : nay, I pity you for the sake of your malice ! Alas, the silence

deepens, and once again my heart swells within me : it is startled by a fresh

truth it, too, is dumb; it likewise sneers when the mouth calls out something

to this beauty ; it also enjoys the sweet malice of its silence. I come to hate

speaking ; yes, even thinking. Behind every word I utter do I not hear the

laughter of error, imagination, and insanity ? Must I not laugh at my pity and

mock my own mockery ? Oh sea, oh evening, you are bad teachers ! You

teach man how to cease to be a man. Is he to give himself up to you ? Shall

he become as you now are, pale, brilliant, dumb, immense, reposing calmly

upon himself? exalted above himself?

  424

  FOR WHOM THE TRUTH EXISTS. Up to the present time errors have

been the power most fruitful in consolations : we now expect the same effects

from accepted truths, and we have been waiting rather too long for them.

What if these truths could not give us this consolation we are looking for ?

Would that be an argument against them ? What have these truths in common

with the sick condition of suffering and degenerate men that they should be

useful to them? It is, of course, no proof against the truth of a plant when it is

clearly established that it does not contribute in any way to the recovery of

sick people. Formerly, however, people were so convinced that man was the

ultimate end of nature that they believed that knowledge could reveal nothing

that was not beneficial and useful to nay, there could not, should not be, any

other things in existence. Perhaps all this leads to the conclusion that truth as

an  entity  and  a  coherent  whole  exists  only  for  those  natures  who,  like

Aristotle, are at once powerful and harmless, joyous and peaceful : just asnone but these would be in a position to seek such truths ; for the others seek

remedies for themselves however proud they may be of their intellect and its

freedom, they do not seek truth. Hence it comes about that these others take

no  real  joy  in  science,  but  reproach  it  for  its  coldness,  dryness,  and

inhumanity.  This  is  the  judgment  of  sick  people  about  the  games  of  the

healthy. Even the Greek gods were unable to administer consolation ; and

when  at  length  the  entire  Greek  world  fell  ill,  this  was  a  reason  for  the

destruction of such gods.

  425

  WE  GODS  IN  EXILE.  Owing  to  errors  regarding  their  descent,  their

uniqueness, their mission, and by claims based upon these errors, men have

again and again "surpassed themselves"; but through these same errors the

world  has  been  filled  with  unspeakable  suffering,  mutual  persecution,

suspicion,  misunderstanding,  and  an  even  greater  amount  of  individual

misery. Men have become suffering creatures in consequence of their morals,

and the sum-total of what they have obtained by those morals is simply the

feeling that they are far too good and great for this world, and that they are

enjoying merely a transitory existence on it. As yet the " proud sufferer " is

the highest type of mankind.

  426

  THE COLOUR-BLINDNESS OF THINKERS. How differently from us

the Greeks must have viewed nature, since, as we cannot help admitting, they

were quite colour-blind in regard to blue and green, believing the former to

be a deeper brown, and the latter to be yellow. Thus, for instance, they used

the same word to describe the colour of dark hair, of the corn-flower, and the

southern sea ; and again they employed exactly the same expression for the

colour of the greenest herbs, the human skin, honey, and yellow raisins :

whence it follows that their greatest painters reproduced the world they lived

in only in black, white, red, and yellow. How different and how much nearer

to mankind, therefore, must nature have seemed to them, since in their eyes

the tints of mankind predominated also in nature, and nature was, as it were,

floating  in  the  coloured  ether  of  humanity  !  (blue  and  green  more  than

anything  else  dehumanise  nature).  It  is  this  defect  which  developed  the

playful  facility  that  characterised  the  Greeks  of  seeing  the  phenomena  of

nature  as  gods  and  demi-gods  that  is  to  say,  as  human  forms.  Let  this,

however,  merely  serve  as  a  simile  for  another  supposition.  Every  thinker

paints his world and the things that surround him in fewer colours than reallyexist, and he is blind to individual colours. This is something more than a

mere  deficiency.  Thanks  to  this  nearer  approach  and  simplification,  he

imagines he sees in things those harmonies of colours which possess a great

charm, and may greatly enrich nature. Perhaps, indeed, it was in this way that

men first learnt to take delight in viewing existence, owing to its being first of

all presented to them in one or two shades, and consequently harmonised.

They practised these few shades, so to speak, before they could pass on to

any more. And even now certain individuals endeavour to get rid of a partial

colour-blindness  that  they  may  obtain  a  richer  faculty  of  sight  and

discernment, in the course of which they find that they not only discover new

pleasures, but are also obliged to lose and give up some of their former ones.

  427

  THE  EMBELLISHMENT  OF  SCIENCE.  In  the  same  way  that  the

feeling that " nature is ugly, wild, tedious we must embellish it (embellir la

nature) " brought about rococo horticulture, so does the view that " science is

ugly, difficult, dry, dreary and weary, we must embellish it," invariably gives

rise to something called philosophy. This philosophy sets out to do what all

art and poetry endeavour to do, namely, giving amusement above all else ;

but it wishes to do this, in conformity with its hereditary pride, in a higher

and more sublime fashion before an audience of superior intellects. It is no

small  ambition  to  create  for  these  intellects  a  kind  of  horticulture,  the

principal charm of which like that of the usual gardening is to bring about an

optical illusion (by means of temples, perspective, grottos, winding walks,

and waterfalls, to speak in similes), exhibiting science in a condensed form

and in all kinds of strange and unexpected illuminations, infusing into it as

much indecision, irrationality, and dreaminess as will enable us to walk about

in it " as in savage nature," but without trouble and boredom. Those who are

possessed  of  this  ambition  even  dream  of  making  religion  superfluous

religion, which among men of former times served as the highest kind of

entertainment. All this is now running its course, and will one day attain its

highest tide. Even now hostile voices are being raised against philosophy,

exclaiming : " Return to science, to nature, and the naturalness of science ! "

and thus an age may begin which may discover the most powerful beauty

precisely in the " savage and ugly " domains of science, just as it is only since

the time of Rousseau that we have discovered the sense for the beauty of high

mountains and deserts.

  428  TWO KINDS OF MORALISTS. To see a law of nature for the first time,

and to see it whole (for example, the law of gravity or the reflection of light

and sound), and afterwards to explain such a law, are two different things and

concern different classes of minds. In the same way, those moralists who

observe  and  exhibit  human  laws  and  habits  moralists  with  discriminating

ears,  noses,  and  eyes  differ  entirely  from  those  who  interpret  their

observations. These latter must above all be inventive, and must possess an

imagination untrammelled by sagacity and knowledge.

  429

  THE NEW PASSION. Why do we fear and dread a possible return to

barbarism ? Is it because it would make people less happy than they are now

? Certainly not ! the barbarians of all ages possessed more happiness than we

do : let us not deceive ourselves on this point ! but our impulse towards

knowledge is too widely developed to allow us to value happiness without

knowledge, or the happiness of a strong and fixed delusion : it is painful to us

even to imagine such a state of things ! Our restless pursuit of discoveries and

divinations has become for us as attractive and indispensable as hapless love

to the lover, which on no account would he exchange for indifference, nay,

perhaps we, too, are hapless lovers ! Knowledge within us has developed into

a  passion,  which  does  not  shrink  from  any  sacrifice,  and  at  bottom  fears

nothing  but  its  own  extinction.  We  sincerely  believe  that  all  humanity,

weighed down as it is by the burden of this passion, are bound to feel more

exalted and comforted than formerly, when they had not yet overcome the

longing for the coarser satisfaction which accompanies barbarism. It may be

that mankind may perish eventually from this passion for knowledge ! but

even  that  does  not  daunt  us.  Did  Christianity  ever  shrink  from  a  similar

thought  ?  Are  not  love  and  death  brother  and  sister  ?  Yes,  we  detest

barbarism,  we  all  prefer  that  humanity  should  perish  rather  than  that

knowledge should enter into a stage of retrogression. And, finally, if mankind

does not perish through some passion it will perish through some weakness :

which would we prefer ? This is the main question. Do we wish its end to be

in fire and light, or in the sands ?

  430

    LIKEWISE HEROIC. To do things of the worst possible odour, things %

of which we scarcely dare to speak, but which are nevertheless useful and

necessary, is also heroic. The Greeks were not ashamed of numbering even

the cleansing of a stable among the great tasks of Hercules. 431  THE  OPINIONS  OF  OPPONENTS.  In  order  to  measure  the  natural

subtlety  or  weakness  of  even  the  cleverest  heads,  we  must  consider  the

manner in which they take up and reproduce the opinions of their adversaries,

for the natural measure of any intellect is thereby revealed. The perfect sage

involuntarily  idealises  his  opponent  and  frees  his  inconsistencies  from  all

defects and accidentalities : he only takes up arms against him when he has

thus turned his opponent into a god with shining weapons.

  432

    INVESTIGATOR AND ATTEMPTER. There is no exclusive method of

knowing in science. We must deal with things tentatively, treating them by

turns harshly or justly, passionately or coldly. One investigator deals with

things  like  a  policeman,  another  like  a  confessor,  and  yet  a  third  like  an

inquisitive traveller. We force something from them now by sympathy and

now by violence : the one is urged on ward and led to see clearly by the

veneration which the secrets of the things inspire in him, and the other again

by the indiscretion and malice met with in the explanation of these secrets.

We investigators, like all conquerors, explorers, navigators, and adventurers,

are men of a daring morality, and we must put up with our liability to be in

the main looked upon as evil.

  433

  SEEING WITH NEW EYES. Presuming that by the term " beauty in art "

is always implied the imitation of something that is happy and this I consider

to be true according as an age or a people or a great autocratic individuality

represents happiness : what then is disclosed by the so-called realism of our

modern artists in regard to the happiness of our epoch ? It is undoubtedly its

type of beauty which we now understand most easily and enjoy best of any,

As a consequence, we are induced to believe that this happiness which is now

peculiar to us is based on realism, on the sharpest possible senses, and on the

true conception of the actual that is to say, not upon reality, but upon what we

know of reality. The results of science have already gained so much in depth

and  extent  that  the  artists  of  our  century  have  involuntarily  become  the

glorifiers of scientific " blessings " per $e.

  434

    INTERCESSION. Unpretentious regions are subjects for great landscape

painters ; remarkable and rare regions for inferior painters : for the great

things  of  nature  and  humanity  must  intercede  in  favour  of  their  little,

mediocre, and vain admirers whereas the great man intercedes in favour ofunassuming things.

  435

  NOT TO PERISH UNNOTICED. It is not only once but continuously

that our excellence and greatness are constantly crumbling away; the weeds

that grow among everything and cling to everything ruin all that is great in us

the wretchedness of our surroundings, which we always try to overlook and

which is before our eyes at every hour of the day, the innumerable little roots

of mean and petty feelings which we allow to grow up all about us, in our

office, among our companions, or our daily labours. If we permit these small

weeds to escape our notice we shall perish through them unnoticed ! And, if

you must perish, then do so immediately and suddenly ; for in that case you

will perhaps leave proud ruins behind you ! and not, as is now to be feared,

merely molehills, covered with grass and weeds these petty and miserable

conquerors, as humble as ever, and too wretched even to triumph.

  436

    CASUISTIC: We are confronted with a very bitter and painful dilemma,

for the solution of which not every one's bravery and character are equal :

when, as passengers on board a steamer, we discover that the captain and the

helmsman are making dangerous mistakes, and that we are their superiors in

nautical  science  and  then  we  ask  ourselves:  "What  would  happen  if  we

organised a mutiny against them, and made them both prisoners ? Is it not our

duty to do so in view of our superiority ? and would not they in their turn be

justified in putting us in irons for encouraging disobedience ? " This is a

simile for higher and worse situations ; and the final question to be decided

is, What guarantees our superiority and our faith in ourselves in such a case ?

Success ? but in order to do that we must do the very thing in which all the

danger lies not only dangerous for ourselves, but also for the ship.

  437

    PRIVILEGES. The man who really owns himself, that is to say, he who

has  finally  conquered  himself,  regards  it  as  his  own  right  to  punish,  to

pardon, or to pity himself : he need not concede this privilege to any one,

though he may freely bestow it upon someone else a friend, for example but

he knows that in doing this he is conferring a right, and that rights can only

be conferred by one who is in full possession of power.

  438

  MAN AND THINGS. Why does the man not see the things ? He himself

is in the way : he conceals the things,  439

    CHARACTERISTICS OF HAPPINESS. There are two things common

to  all  sensations  of  happiness  :  a  profusion  of  feelings,  accompanied  by

animal spirits, so that, like the fishes, we feel ourselves to be in our element

and  play  about  in  it.  Good  Christians  will  understand  what  Christian

exuberance means.

  440

  NEVER RENOUNCE. Renouncing the world without knowing it, like a

nun, results in a fruitless and perhaps melancholy solitude. This has nothing

in common with the solitude of the vita contemplativa of the thinker : when

he chooses this form of solitude he wishes to renounce nothing ; but he would

on the contrary regard it as a renunciation, a melancholy destruction of his

own self, if he were obliged to continue in the vita practica. He forgoes this

latter because he knows it, because he knows himself. So he jumps into his

water, and thus gains his cheerfulness.

  441

  WHY  THE  NEAREST  THINGS  BECOME  EVER  MORE  DISTANT

FOR US. The more we give up our minds to all that has been and will be, the

paler will become that which actually is. When we live with the dead and

participate  in  their  death,  what  are  our  "  neighbours  "  to  us  ?  We  grow

lonelier simply because the entire flood of humanity is surging round about

us.  The  fire  that  burns  within  us,  and  glows  for  all  that  is  human,  is

continually increasing and hence we look upon everything that surrounds us

as if it had become more indifferent, more shadowy, but our cold glance is

offensive.

  442

  THE RULE. " The rule always appears to me to be more interesting than

the  exception  "  whoever  thinks  thus  has  made  considerable  progress  in

knowledge, and is one of the initiated.

  443

  ON EDUCATION. I have gradually come to see daylight in regard to the

most general defect in our methods of education and training : nobody learns,

nobody teaches, nobody wishes, to endure solitude.

  444

    SURPRISE AT RESISTANCE. Because we have reached the point of

being able to see through a thing we believe that henceforth it can offer us no

further resistance and then we are surprised to find that we can see through itand yet cannot penetrate through it. This is the same kind of foolishness and

surprise as that of the fly on a pane of glass.

  445

  WHERE THE NOBLEST ARE MISTAKEN. We give someone at length

our dearest and most valued possession, and then love has nothing more to

give : but the recipient of the gift will certainly not consider it as his dearest

possession,  and  will  consequently  be  wanting  in  that  full  and  complete

gratitude which we expect from him.

  446

    HIERARCHY. First and foremost, there are the superficial thinkers, and

secondly the profound thinkers such as dive into the depths of a thing, thirdly,

the thorough thinkers, who get to the bottom of a thing which is of much

greater importance than merely diving into its depths, and, finally, those who

leap head foremost into the marsh : though this must not be looked upon as

indicating either depth or thoroughness ! these are the lovers of obscurity.

  447

    MASTER  AND  PUPIL.  By  cautioning  his  pupils  against  himself  the

teacher shows his humanity.

  448

    HONOURING REALITY. How can we look at this exulting multitude

without tears and acquiescence ? at one time we thought little of the object of

their exultation, and we should still think so if we ourselves had not come

through a similar experience. And what may these experiences lead us to !

what are our opinions ! In order that we may not lose ourselves and our

reason  we  must  fly  from  experiences.  It  was  thus  that  Plato  fled  from

actuality, and wished to contemplate things only in their pale mental concepts

:  he  was  full  of  sensitiveness,  and  knew  how  easily  the  waves  of  this

sensitiveness would drown his reason. Must the sage therefore say, " I will

honour reality, but I will at the same time turn my back to it because I know

and  dread  it  ?  "  Ought  he  to  behave  as  certain  African  tribes  do  in  the

presence of their sovereign, whom they approach backwards, thus showing

their reverence at the same time as their dread ?

  449

  WHERE ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT ? Oh, how greatly it goes against

my grain to impose my own thoughts upon others ! How I rejoice over every

mood and secret change within me as the result of which the thoughts of

others are victorious over my own ! but from time to time I enjoy an evengreater  satisfaction,  when  I  am  allowed  to  give  away  my  intellectual

possessions, like the confessor sitting in his box and anxiously awaiting the

arrival of some distressed person who stands in need of consolation, and will

be only too glad to relate the full misery of his thoughts so that the listener's

hand and heart will once again be filled, and the troubled soul eased ! Not

only has the confessor no desire for renown : he would gladly shun gratitude

as well, for it is obtrusive, and does not stand in awe of solitude or silence.

But to live without a name, and even to be slightly sneered at ; too obscure to

arouse envy or enmity; with a head free from fever, a handful of knowledge,

and a pocketful of experience ; a physician, as it were, of the poor in spirit,

helping this one or that one whose head is troubled with opinions, without the

latter perceiving who has actually helped him ! without any desire to appear

to be in the right in the presence of his patient, or to carry off a victory. To

speak to him in such a way that, after a short and almost imperceptible hint or

objection, the listener may find out for himself what is right and proudly walk

away ! To be like an obscure and unknown inn which turns no one away who

is in need, but which is afterwards forgotten and laughed at ! To be without

any advantages over others neither possessing better food nor purer air, nor a

more cheerful mind but always to be giving away, returning, communicating,

and becoming poorer ! To know how to be humble in order to be accessible

to many people and humiliating to none ! To take a great deal of injustice on

his shoulders and creep through the cracks and crannies of all kinds of errors,

in order that we may reach many obscure souls on their secret paths ! Forever

in  possession  of  some  kind  of  love,  and  some  kind  of  egoism  and  self-

enjoyment ! in possession of power, and yet at the same time hidden and

resigned ! constantly basking in the sunshine and sweetness of grace, and yet

knowing that quite near to us stands the ladder leading to the sublime ! that

would be life ! that would indeed be a reason for a long life !

  450

  THE TEMPTATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE. A glance through the gate of

science  acts  upon  passionate  spirits  as  the  charm  of  charms  :  they  will

probably become dreamers, or in the most favourable cases poets, so great is

their desire for the happiness of the man who can discern. Does it not enter

into  all  your  senses,  this  note  of  sweet  temptation  by  which  science  has

announced its joyful message in a thousand ways, and in the thousand and

first way, the noblest of all, " Be gone, illusion ! for then ' Woe is me also

vanished, and with it woe itself is gone" (Marcus Aurelius).  451

  FOR WHOM A COURT JESTER is NEEDFUL. Those who are very

beautiful, very good, and very powerful scarcely ever learn the full and naked

truth about anything, for in their presence we involuntarily lie a little, because

we feel their influence, and in view of this influence convey a truth in the

form  of  an  adaptation  (by  falsifying  the  shades  and  degrees  of  facts,  by

omitting or adding details, and withholding that which is insusceptible of

adaptation). If, however, in spite of all this, people of this description insist

upon  hearing  the  truth,  they  must  keep  a  court  jester  a  being  with  the

madman's privilege of being unable to adapt himself.

  452

    IMPATIENCE. There is a certain degree of impatience in men of thought

and action, which in cases of failure at once drives them to the opposite

camp, induces them to take a great interest in it, and to give themselves up to

new undertakings until here again the slowness of their success drives them

away. Thus they rove about, like so many reckless adventurers, through the

practices of many kingdoms and natures ; and in the end, as the result of their

wide knowledge of men and things, acquired by their unheard of travel and

practice,  and  with  a  certain  moderation  of  their  craving,  they  become

powerful practical men. Hence a defect in character may become the school

of genius.

  453

  A MORAL INTERREGNUM. Who is now in a position to describe that

which will one day supplant moral feelings and judgments ! however certain

we may be that these are founded on error, and that the building erected upon

such foundations cannot be repaired: their obligation must gradually diminish

from day to day, in so far as the obligation of reason does not diminish ! To

carry out the task of re-establishing the laws of life and action is still beyond

the power of our sciences of physiology and medicine, society and solitude :

though it is only from them that we can borrow the foundation-stones of new

ideals (but not the ideals themselves). Thus we live a preliminary or after

existence, according to our tastes and talents, and the best we can do in this

interregnum is to be as much as possible our own " reges" and to establish

small experimental states. We are experiments : if we want to be sol

  454

  A DIGRESSION. A book like this is not intended to be read through at

once,  or  to  be  read  aloud.  It  is  intended  more  particularly  for  reference,especially on our walks and travels : we must take it up and put it down again

after a short reading, and, more especially, we ought not to be amongst our

usual surroundings.

  455

  THE PRIMARY NATURE. As we are now brought up, we begin by

acquiring  a  secondary  nature,  and  we  possess  it  when  the  world  calls  us

mature, of age, efficient. A few have sufficient of the serpent about them to

cast this skin some day, when their primary nature has come to maturity

under it. But in the majority of people the germ of it withers away.

  456

  A  VIRTUE  IN  PROCESS  OF  BECOMING.  Such  assertions  and

promises  as  those  of  the  ancient  philosophers  on  the  unity  of  virtue  and

felicity, or that of Christianity, " Seek you first the Kingdom of God and His

righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you," have never been

made  with  absolute  sincerity,  but  always  without  a  bad  conscience

nevertheless. People were in the habit of boldly laying down principles which

they wished to be true exactly as if they were truth itself, in spite of all

appearances to the contrary, and in doing this they felt neither religious nor

moral compunction ; for it was in honorem maiorem of virtue or of God that

one had gone beyond truth, without, however, any selfish intention ! Many

good  people  still  act  up  to  this  degree  of  truthfulness  :  when  they  feel

unselfish  they  think  it  permissible  to  treat  truth  more  lightly.  Let  it  be

remembered that the word honesty is neither to be found among the Socratic

nor the Christian virtues : it is one of our most recent virtues, not yet quite

mature, frequently misconstrued and misunderstood, scarcely conscious of

itself something in embryo, which we may either promote or check according

to our inclination.

  457

    FINAL TACITURNITY. There are some men who fare like the digger

after  hidden  treasures:  they  quite  accidentally  discover  the  carefully

preserved secrets of another's soul, and as a result come into the possession of

knowledge which it is often a heavy burden to bear. In certain circumstances

we may know the living and the dead, and sound their inmost thoughts to

such an extent that it becomes painful to us to speak to others about them : at

every word we utter we are afraid of being indiscreet. I can easily imagine a

sudden silence on the part of the wisest historian.

  458  THE GREAT PRIZE. There is a very rare thing, but a very delightful one,

namely the man with a nobly-formed intellect who possesses at the same time

the character and inclinations, and even meets with the experiences, suited to

such an intellect.

  459

  THE  MAGNANIMITY  OF  THE  THINKER.  Both  Rousseau  and

Schopenhauer  were  proud  enough  to  inscribe  upon  their  lives  the  motto,

Vitam impendere vero. And how they both must have suffered in their pride

because they could not succeed in verum impendere vita! verum y such as

each  of  them  understood  it,  when  their  lives  ran  side  by  side  with  their

knowledge  like  an  uncouth  bass  which  is  not  in  tune  with  the  melody.

Knowledge, however, would be in a bad way if it were measured out to every

thinker  only  in  proportion  as  it  can  be  adapted  to  his  own  person.  And

thinkers would be in a bad way if their vanity were so great that they could

only endure such an adaptation, for the noblest virtue of a great thinker is his

magnanimity, which urges him on in his search for knowledge to sacrifice

himself  and  his  life  unshrinkingly,  often  shamefacedly,  and  often  with

sublime scorn, and smiling.

  460

    UTILISING  OUR  HOURS  OF  DANGER.  Those  men  and  conditions

whose every movement may mean danger to our possessions, honour, and

life or death, and to those most dear to us, we shall naturally learn to know

thoroughly. Tiberius, for instance, must have meditated much more deeply on

the character and methods of government of the Emperor Augustus, and must

have  known  far  more  about  them  than  even  the  wisest  historian.  At  the

present day we all live, relatively speaking, in a security which is much too

great  to  make  us  true  psychologists  :  some  survey  their  fellow-men  as  a

hobby, others out of ennui, and others again merely from habit ; but never to

the extent they would do if they were told " Discern or perish ! " As long as

truths do not cut us to the quick we assume an attitude of contempt towards

them : they still appear to us too much like the " winged dreams/' as if we

could or could not have them at our discretion, as if we could likewise be

aroused from these truths as from a dream !

  461

  HIC RHODUS, HIC SALTA. Our music, which can and must change

into everything, because like the demon of the sea, it has no character of its

own : this music in former times devoted its attention to the Christian savant,and transposed his ideals into sounds : why cannot it likewise find those

brighter, more cheerful, and universal sounds which correspond to the ideal

thinker ? a music which could rock itself at ease in the vast floating vaults of

the soul ? So far our music has been so great and so good ; nothing seemed

impossible to its powers. May it therefore prove possible to create these three

sensations at one time : sublimity, deep and warm light, and rapture of the

greatest possible consistency !

  462

  SLOW CURES. Chronic illnesses of the soul, like those of the body, are

very rarely due to one gross offence against physical and mental reason, but

as a general rule they arise from innumerable and petty negligences of a

minor order. A man, for example, whose breathing becomes a trifle weaker

every day, and whose lungs, by inhaling too little air, are deprived of their

proper amount of exercise, will end by being struck down by some chronic

disease of the lungs. The only remedy for cases like these is a countless

number  of  minor  exercises  of  a  contrary  tendency  making  it  a  rule,  for

example, to take a long and deep breath every quarter of an hour, lying flat on

the ground if possible. For this purpose a clock which strikes the quarters

should be chosen as a lifelong companion. All these remedies are slow and

trifling but yet the man who wishes to cure his soul will carefully consider a

change, even in his least important habits. Many a man will utter a cold and

angry word to his surroundings ten times a day without thinking about it, and

he will forget that after a few years it will have become a regular habit with

him to put his surroundings out of temper ten times a day. But he can also

acquire the habit of doing good to them ten times.

  463

  ON THE SEVENTH DAY. "You praise this as my creation ? but I have

only put aside what was a burden to me ! my soul is above the vanity of

creators. You praise this as my resignation? but I have only stripped myself

of  what  had  become  burdensome  !  My  soul  is  above  the  vanity  of  the

resigned ones ! "

  464

  THE  DONOR'S  MODESTY.  There  is  such  a  want  of  generosity  in

always posing as the donor and benefactor, and showing one's face when

doing so ! But to give and bestow, and at the same time to conceal one's name

and favour ! or not to have a name at all, like nature, in whom this fact is

more refreshing to us than anything else here at last we no more meet withthe giver and bestower, no more with a "gracious countenance." It is true that

you have now forfeited even this comfort, for you have placed a God in this

nature and now everything is once again fettered and oppressed ! Well ? are

we never to have the right of remaining alone with ourselves? are we always

to be watched, guarded, surrounded by leading strings and gifts? If there is

always someone round about us, the best part of courage and kindness will

ever remain impossible of attainment in this world. Are we not tempted to fly

to  hell  before  this  continual  obtrusiveness  of  heaven,  this  inevitable

supernatural neighbour? Never mind, it was only a dream ; let us wake up !

  465

  AT A MEETING. A. What are you looking at? you have been standing

here for a very long time. B. Always the new and the old over again ! the

helplessness of a thing urges me on to plunge into it so deeply that I end by

penetrating to its deepest depths, and perceive that in reality it is not worth so

very much. At the end of all experiences of this kind we meet with a kind of

sorrow and stupor. I experience this on a small scale several times a day.

  466

  A LOSS OF RENOWN. What an advantage it is to be able to speak as a

stranger to mankind ! When they take away our anonymity, and make us

famous, the gods deprive us of " half our virtue."

  467

  DOUBLY PATIENT. "By doing this you will hurt many people." I know

that, and I also know that I shall have to suffer for it doubly: in the first place

out of pity for their suffering, and secondly from the revenge they will take

on me. But in spite of this I cannot help doing what I do.

  468

  THE KINGDOM OF BEAUTY is GREATER. We move about in nature,

cunning and cheerful, in order that we may surprise everything in the beauty

peculiar to it ; we make an effort, whether in sunshine or under a stormy sky,

to see a distant part of the coast with its rocks, bays, and olive and pine trees

under an aspect in which it achieves its perfection and consummation. Thus

also we should walk about among men as their discoverers and explorers,

meting out to them good and evil in order that we may unveil the peculiar

beauty which is seen with some in the sunshine, in others under thunder-

clouds, or with others again only in twilight and under a rainy sky. Are we

then  forbidden  to  enjoy  the  evil  man  like  some  savage  landscape  which

possesses its own bold and daring lines and luminous effects, while this sameman, so long as he behaves well, and in conformity with the law, appears to

us to be an error of drawing, and a mere caricature which offends us like a

defect  in  nature  ?  Yes,  this  is  forbidden  :  for  as  yet  we  have  only  been

permitted  to  seek  beauty  in  anything  that  is  morally  good,  and  this  is

sufficient to explain why we have found so little and have been compelled to

look for beauty without either flesh or bones ! in the same way as evil men

are familiar with innumerable kinds of happiness which the virtuous never

dream of, we may also find among them innumerable types of beauty, many

of them as yet undiscovered.

  469

  THE INHUMANITY OF THE SAGE. The heavy and grinding progress

of the sage, who in the words of the Buddhist song, " Wanders lonely like the

rhinoceros," now and again stands in need of proofs of a conciliatory and

softened  humanity,  and  not  only  proofs  of  those  accelerated  steps,  those

polite  and  sociable  witticisms  ;  not  only  of  humour  and  a  certain  self-

mockery,  but  likewise  of  contradictions  and  occasional  returns  to  the

predominating inconsistencies. In order that he may not resemble the heavy

roller  that  rolls  along  like  fate,  the  sage  who  wishes  to  teach  must  take

advantage of his defects, and utilise them for his own adornment ; and when

saying  "despise  me"  he  will  implore  permission  to  be  the  advocate  of  a

presumptuous truth. This sage wishes to lead you to the mountains, and he

will perhaps endanger your life : therefore as the price of his enjoyment he

willingly authorises you to take your revenge either before or afterwards on

such a guide. Do you remember what thoughts came into your head when he

once led you to a gloomy cavern over a slippery path? Your distrustful heart

beat rapidly, and said inwardly, "This guide might surely do something better

than crawl about here ! he is one of those idle people who are full of curiosity

is it not doing him too much honour to appear to attach any value at all to him

by following him ? "

  470

  MANY AT THE BANQUET. How happy we are when we are fed like

the birds by the hand of someone who throws them their crumbs without

examining them too closely, or inquiring into their worthiness ! To live like a

bird which comes and flies away, and does not carry its name on its beak ! I

take great pleasure in satisfying my appetite at the banquet of the many.

  471

    ANOTHER TYPE OF LOVE FOR ONE'S NEIGHBOUR. Everythingthat is agitated, noisy, fitful, and nervous forms a contrast to the great passion

which,  glowing  in  the  heart  of  man  like  a  quiet  and  gloomy  flame,  and

gathering about it all that is flaming and ardent, gives to man the appearance

of  coldness  and  indifference,  and  stamps  a  certain  impassiveness  on  his

features. Such men are occasionally capable of showing their love for their

neighbour, but this love is different from that of sociable people who are

anxious to please. It is a mild, contemplative, and calm amiability : these

people, as it were, look out of the windows of the castle which serves them as

a  stronghold,  and  consequently  as  a  prison  ;  for  the  outlook  into  the  far

distance, the open air, and a different world is so pleasant for them !

  472

  NOT JUSTIFYING ONESELF. A. But why are you not willing to justify

yourself? B. I could do it in this instance, as in dozens of others ; but I

despise the pleasure which lies in justification, for all that matters little to me,

and I would rather bear a stained reputation than give those petty folks the

spiteful pleasure of saying, " He takes these things very seriously." This is not

true. Perhaps I ought to have more consideration for myself, and look upon it

as a duty to rectify erroneous opinions about myself I am too indifferent and

too indolent regarding myself, and consequently also regarding everything

that is brought about through my agency.

  473

  WHERE TO BUILD ONE'S HOUSE. If you feel great and productive in

solitude,  society  will  belittle  and  isolate  you,  and  vice  versa.  A  powerful

mildness such as that of a father : wherever this feeling takes possession of

you, there build your house, whether in the midst of the multitude, or on

some silent spot. Ubi pater sum, ibi patria

  474

  THE ONLY MEANS. "Dialectic is the only means of reaching the divine

essence, and penetrating behind the veil of appearance." This declaration of

Plato  in  regard  to  dialectic  is  as  solemn  and  passionate  as  that  of

Schopenhauer in regard to the contrary of dialectic and both are wrong. For

that to which they wish to point out the way to us does not exist. And so far

have not all the great passions of mankind been passions for something non-

existent? and all their ceremonies - ceremonies for something non-existent

also ?

  475

    BECOMING HEAVY. You know him not : whatever weights he mayattach to himself he will nevertheless be able to raise them all with him. But

you,  judging  from  the  weak  flapping  of  your  own  wings,  come  to  the

conclusion that he wishes to remain below, merely because he does burden

himself with those weights.

  476

  AT THE HARVEST THANKSGIVING OF THE INTELLECT. There is

a daily increase and accumulation of experiences, events, opinions upon these

experiences and events, and dreams upon these opinions a boundless and

delightful display of wealth ! its aspect dazzles the eyes : I can no longer

understand  how  the  poor  in  spirit  can  be  called  blessed  !  Occasionally,

however, I envy them when I am tired : for the superintendence of such vast

wealth is no easy task, and its weight frequently crushes all happiness. Alas,

if only the mere sight of it were sufficient ! If only we could be misers of our

knowledge !

  477

  FREED  FROM  SCEPTICISM.  A.  Some  men  emerge  from  a  general

moral scepticism bad-tempered and feeble, corroded, worm-eaten, and even

partly consumed but I on the other hand, more courageous and healthier than

ever,  and  with  my  instincts  conquered  once  more.  Where  a  strong  wind

blows,  where  the  waves  are  rolling  angrily,  and  where  more  than  usual

danger is to be faced, there I feel happy. I did not become a worm, although I

often had to work and dig like a worm. B. You have just ceased to be a

sceptic ; for you deny ! A. And in doing so I have learnt to say yes again.

  478

  LET US PASS BY. Spare him ! Leave him in his solitude ! Do you wish

to crush him down entirely? He became cracked like a glass into which some

hot liquid was poured suddenly and he was such a precious glass !

  479

  LOVE AND TRUTHFULNESS. Through our love we have become dire

offenders against truth, and even habitual dissimulators and thieves, who give

out more things as true than seem to us to be true. On this account the thinker

must from time to time drive away those whom he loves (not necessarily

those who love him), so that they may show their sting and wickedness, and

cease to tempt him. Consequently the kindness of the thinker will have its

waning and waxing moon.

  480

    INEVITABLE.  No  matter  what  your  experience  may  be,  anyone  whodoes not feel well disposed towards you will find in this experience some

pretext  for  disparaging  you  !  You  may  undergo  the  greatest  possible

revolutions of mind and knowledge, and at length, with the melancholy smile

of the convalescent, you may be able to step out into freedom and bright

stillness, and yet someone will say : " This fellow looks upon his illness as an

argument, and takes his impotence to be a proof of the impotence of all others

he is vain enough to fall ill that he may feel the superiority of the sufferer."

And again, if somebody were to break the chains that bound him down, and

wounded  himself  severely  in  doing  so,  someone  else  would  point  at  him

mockingly and cry : " How awkward he is ! there is a man who had got

accustomed to his chains, and yet he is fool enough to burst them asunder ! "

  481

  Two  GERMANS.  If  we  compare  Kant  and  Schopenhauer  with  Plato,

Spinoza, Pascal, Rousseau, and Goethe, with reference to their souls and not

their  intellects,  we  shall  see  that  the  two  first-named  thinkers  are  at  a

disadvantage: their thoughts do not constitute a passionate history of their

souls we are not led to expect in them romance, crises, catastrophes, or death

struggles. Their thinking is not at the same time the involuntary biography of

a  soul,  but  in  the  case  of  Kant  merely  of  a  head;  and  in  the  case  of

Schopenhauer again merely the description and reflection of a character (" the

invariable ") and the pleasure which this reflection causes, that is to say, the

pleasure  of  meeting  with  an  intellect  of  the  first  order.  Kant,  when  he

shimmers through his thoughts, appears to us as an honest and honourable

man in the best sense of the words, but likewise as an insignificant one: he is

wanting in breadth and power ; he had not come through many experiences,

and  his  method  of  working  did  not  allow  him  sufficient  time  to  undergo

experiences,  Of  course,  in  speaking  of  experiences,  I  do  not  refer  to  the

ordinary external events of life, but to those fatalities and convulsions which

occur in the course of the most solitary and quiet life which has some leisure

and glows with the passion for thinking. Schopenhauer has at all events one

advantage over him ; for he at least was distinguished by a certain fierce

ugliness  of  disposition,  which  showed  itself  in  hatred,  desire,  vanity,  and

suspicion : he was of a rather more ferocious disposition, and had both time

and leisure to indulge this ferocity. But he lacked " development," which was

also wanting in his range of thought : he had no " history."

  482

    SEEKING ONE'S COMPANY. Arc we then looking for too much whenwe seek the company of men who have grown mild, agreeable to the taste,

and nutritive, like chestnuts which have been put into the fire and taken out

just at the right moment ? Of men who expect little from life, and prefer to

accept this little as a present rather than as a merit of their own, as if it were

carried to them by birds and bees ? Of men who are too proud ever to feel

themselves  rewarded,  and  too  serious  in  their  passion  for  knowledge  and

honesty  to  have  time  for  or  pleasure  in  fame?  Such  men  we  should  call

philosophers  ;  but  they  themselves  will  always  find  some  more  modest

designation.

  483

    SATIATED  WITH  MANKIND.  A.  Seek  for  knowledge  !  Yes  !  but

always as a man ! What ? must I always be a spectator of the same comedy,

and  always  play  a  part  in  the  same  comedy,  without  ever  being  able  to

observe things with other eyes than those ? and yet there may be countless

types of beings whose organs are better adapted for knowledge than ours ! At

the end of all their searching for knowledge what will men at length come to

know ? Their organs ! which perhaps is as much as to say : the impossibility

of knowledge ! misery and disgust ! B. This is a bad attack you have reason is

attacking  you  !  to-morrow,  however,  you  will  again  be  in  the  midst  of

knowledge, and hence of irrationality that is to say, delighted about all that is

human. Let us go to the sea !

  484

  GOING OUR OWN WAY. When we take the decisive step, and make up

our minds to follow our own path, a secret is suddenly revealed to us : it is

clear that all those who had until now been friendly to us and on intimate

terms with us judged themselves to be superior to us, and are offended now.

The best among them are indulgent, and are content to wait patiently until we

once more find the " right path " they know it, apparently. Others make fun of

us, and pretend that we have been seized with a temporary attack of mild

insanity, or spitefully point out some seducer. The more malicious say we are

vain fools, and do their best to blacken our motives ; while the worst of all

see in us their greatest enemy, someone who is thirsting for revenge after

many years of dependence, and are afraid of us. What, then, are we to do ?

My own opinion is that we should begin our sovereignty by promising to all

our acquaintances in advance a whole year's amnesty for sins of every kind.

  485

  FAR-OFF PERSPECTIVES. A. But why this solitude? B. I am not angrywith anybody. But when I am alone it seems to me that I can see my friends

in a clearer and rosier light than when I am with them ; and when I loved and

felt music best I lived far from it. It would seem that I must have distant

perspectives in order that I may think well of things.

  486

  GOLD  AND  HUNGER.  Here  and  there  we  meet  with  a  man  who

changes into gold everything that he touches. But some fine evil day he will

discover  that  he  himself  must  starve  through  this  gift  of  his.  Everything

around him is brilliant, superb, and unapproachable in its ideal beauty, and

now he eagerly longs for things which it is impossible for him to turn into

gold and how intense is this longing ! like that of a starving man for a meal !

Query : What will he seize ?

  487

    SHAME. Look at that noble steed pawing the ground, snorting, longing

for a ride, and loving its accustomed rider but, shameful to relate, the rider

cannot mount to-day, he is tired. Such is the shame felt by the weary thinker,

in the presence of his own philosophy !

  488

    AGAINST THE WASTE OF LOVE. Do we not blush when we surprise

ourselves in a state of violent aversion ? Well, then, we should also blush

when  we  find  ourselves  possessed  of  strong  affections  on  account  of  the

injustice  contained  in  them.  More:  there  are  people  who  feel  their  hearts

weighed down and oppressed when someone gives them the benefit of his

love and sympathy to the extent that he deprives others of a share. The tone

of his voice reveals to us the fact that we have been specially selected and

preferred ! but, alas ! I am not thankful for being thus selected : I experience

within  myself  a  certain  feeling  of  resentment  against  him  who  wishes  to

distinguish me in this way he shall not love me at the expense of others ! I

shall always try to look after myself and to endure myself, and my heart is

often filled to overflowing, and with some reason. To such a man nothing

ought to be given of which others stand so greatly in need.

  489

    FRIENDS  IN  NEED.  We  may  occasionally  remark  that  one  of  our

friends sympathises with another more than with us. His delicacy is troubled

thereby, and his selfishness is not equal to the task of breaking down his

feelings of affection : in such a case we should facilitate the separation for

him, and estrange him in some way in order to widen the distance betweenus. This is also necessary when we fall into a habit of thinking which might

be detrimental to him : our affection for him should induce us to ease his

conscience in separating himself from us by means of some injustice which

we voluntarily take upon ourselves.

  490

  THOSE PETTY TRUTHS. " You know all that, but you have never lived

through it so I will not accept your evidence. Those ' petty truths ' you deem

them petty because you have not paid for them with your blood ! " But are

they really great, simply because they have been bought at so high a price ?

and blood is always too high a price ! " Do you really think so ? How stingy

you are with your blood !"

  491

    SOLITUDE, THEREFORE ! A. So you wish to go back to your desert?

B. I am not a quick thinker ; I must wait for myself a long time it is always

later and later before the water from the fountain of my own ego spurts forth,

and I have often to go thirsty longer than suits my patience. That is why I

retire into solitude in order that I may not have to drink from the common

cisterns. When I live in the midst of the multitude my life is like theirs, and I

do not think like myself; but after some time it always seems to me as if the

multitude wished to banish me from myself, and to rob me of my soul. Then I

get angry with all these people, and afraid of them; and I must have the desert

to become well disposed again.

  492

  UNDER THE SOUTH WIND. A. I can no longer understand myself! It

was only yesterday that I felt myself so tempestuous and ardent, and at the

same time so warm and sunny and exceptionally bright ! but to-day I Now

everything is calm, wide, oppressive, and dark like the lagoon at Venice. I

wish for nothing, and draw a deep breath, and yet I feel inwardly indignant at

this  "wish  for  nothing"  so  the  waves  rise  and  fall  in  the  ocean  of  my

melancholy. B. You describe a petty, agreeable illness. The next wind from

the north-east will blow it away. A. Why so?

  493

  ON  ONE'S  OWN  TREE.  A.  No  thinker's  thoughts  give  me  so  much

pleasure as my own : this, of course, proves nothing in favour of their value ;

but I should be foolish to neglect fruits which are tasteful to me only because

they happen to grow on my own tree ! and I was once such a fool. B. Others

have the contrary feeling : which likewise proves nothing in favour of theirthoughts, nor yet is it any argument against their value,

  494

  THE LAST ARGUMENT OF THE BRAVE MAN. There are snakes in

this little clump of trees. Very well, I will rush into the thicket and kill them.

But by doing that you will run the risk of falling a victim to them, and not

they to you. But what do I matter?

  495

  OUR TEACHERS. During our period of youth we select our teachers and

guides from our own times, and from those circles which we happen to meet

with : we have the thoughtless conviction that the present age must have

teachers who will suit us better than any others, and that we are sure to find

them without having to look very far. Later on we find that we have to pay a

heavy  penalty  for  this  childishness:  we  have  to  expiate  our  teachers  in

ourselves, and then perhaps we begin to look for the proper guides. We look

for them throughout the whole world, including even present and past ages

but perhaps it may be too late, and at the worst we discover that they lived

when we were young and that at that time we lost our opportunity.

  496

  THE  EVIL  PRINCIPLE.  Plato  has  marvellously  described  how  the

philosophic thinker must necessarily be regarded as the essence of depravity

in the midst of every existing society : for as the critic of all its morals he is

naturally  the  antagonist  of  the  moral  man,  and,  unless  he  succeeds  in

becoming the legislator of new morals, he lives long in the memory of men as

an instance of the "evil principle." From this we may judge to how great an

extent the city of Athens, although fairly liberal and fond of innovations,

abused the reputation of Plato during his lifetime. What wonder then that he

who, as he has himself recorded, had the " political instinct " in his body

made  three  different  attempts  in  Sicily,  where  at  that  time  a  united

Mediterranean Greek State appeared to be in process of formation ? It was in

this  State,  and  with  its  assistance,  that  Plato  thought  he  could  do  for  the

Greeks what Mohammed did for the Arabs several centuries later: namely

establishing  both  minor  and  more  important  customs,  and  especially

regulating the daily life of every man. His ideas were quite practicable just as

certainly  as  those  of  Mohammed  were  practicable  ;  for  even  much  more

incredible ideas, those of Christianity, proved themselves to be practicable ! a

few hazards less and a few hazards more and then the world would have

witnessed the Platonisation of Southern Europe; and, if we suppose that thisstate  of  things  had  continued  to  our  own  days,  we  should  probably  be

worshipping Plato now as the " good principle." But he was unsuccessful, and

so his traditional character remains that of a dreamer and a Utopian stronger

epithets than these passed away with ancient Athens.

  497

  THE  PURIFYING  EYE.  We  have  the  best  reason  for  speaking  of

"genius"  in  men  for  example,  Plato,  Spinoza,  and  Goethe  whose  minds

appear  to  be  but  loosely  linked  to  their  character  and  temperament,  like

winged beings which easily separate themselves from them, and then rise far

above  them.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  never  succeeded  in  cutting

themselves loose from their temperament, and who knew how to give to it the

most intellectual, lofty, and at times even cosmic expression (Schopenhauer,

for instance) have always been very fond of speaking about their genius.

These geniuses could not rise above themselves, but they believed that, fly

where they would, they would always find and recover themselves this is

their " greatness," and this can be greatness ! The others who are entitled to

this name possess the pure and purifying eye which does not seem to have

sprung out of their temperament and character, but separately from them, and

generally in contradiction to them, and looks out upon the world as on a God

whom it loves. But even people like these do not come into possession of

such an eye all at once : they require practice and a preliminary school of

sight, and he who is really fortunate will at the right moment also fall in with

a teacher of pure sight.

  498

  NEVER DEMAND ! You do not know him ! it is true that he easily and

readily submits both to men and things, and that he is kind to both his only

wish is to be left in peace but only in so far as men and things do not demand

his submission. Any demand makes him proud, bashful, and warlike.

  499

  THE EVIL ONE. " Only the solitary are evil ! " thus spoke Diderot, and

Rousseau at once felt deeply offended. Thus he proved that Diderot was right

Indeed, in society, or amid social life, every evil instinct is compelled to

restrain itself, to assume so many masks, and to press itself so often into the

Procrustean  bed  of  virtue,  that  we  are  quite  justified  in  speaking  of  the

martyrdom of the evil man. In solitude, however, all this disappears. The evil

man is still more evil in solitude and consequently for him whose eye sees

only a drama everywhere he is also more beautiful.  500

    AGAINST THE GRAIN. A thinker may for years at a time force himself

to think against the grain : that is, not to pursue the thoughts that spring up

within  him,  but,  instead,  those  which  he  is  compelled  to  follow  by  the

exigencies of his office, an established division of time, or any arbitrary duty

which he may find it necessary to fulfil. In the long run, however, he will fall

ill ; for this apparently moral self-command will destroy his nervous system

as thoroughly and completely as regular debauchery.

  501

    MORTAL  SOULS.  Where  knowledge  is  concerned  perhaps  the  most

useful conquest that has ever been made is the abandonment of the belief in

the immortality of the soul. Humanity is henceforth at liberty to wait : men

need no longer be in a hurry to swallow badly-tested ideas as they had to do

in former times. For in those times the salvation of this poor " immortal soul "

depended upon the extent of the knowledge which could be acquired in the

course of a short existence : decisions had to be reached from one day to

another, and " knowledge " was a matter of dreadful importance ! Now we

have  acquired  good  courage  for  errors,  experiments,  and  the  provisional

acceptance of ideas all this is not so very important ! and for this very reason

individuals and whole races may now face tasks so vast in extent that in

former years they would have looked like madness, and defiance of heaven

and hell. Now we have the right to experiment upon ourselves ! Yes, men

have the right to do so ! the greatest sacrifices have not yet been offered up to

knowledge  nay,  in  earlier  periods  it  would  have  been  sacrilege,  and  a

sacrifice of our eternal salvation, even to surmise such ideas as now precede

our actions.

  502

  ONE  WORD  FOR  THREE  DIFFERENT  CONDITIONS.  When  in  a

state of passion one man will be forced to let loose the savage, dreadful,

unbearable animal. Another when under the influence of passion will raise

himself to a high, noble, and lofty demeanour, in comparison with which his

usual  self  appears  petty.  A  third,  whose  whole  person  is  permeated  with

nobility of feeling, has also the most noble storm and stress : and in this state

he represents Nature in her state of savageness and beauty, and stands only

one degree lower than Nature in her periods of greatness and serenity, which

he usually represents. It is while in this state of passion, however, that men

understand him better, and venerate him more highly at these moments forthen he is one step nearer and more akin to them. They feel at once delighted

and horrified at such a sight and call it divine.

  503

    FRIENDSHIP.  The  objection  to  a  philosophic  life  that  it  renders  us

useless to our friends would never have arisen in a modern mind : it belongs

rather to classical antiquity. Antiquity knew the stronger bonds of friendship,

meditated  upon  it,  and  almost  took  it  to  the  grave  with  it.  This  is  the

advantage it has over us : we, on the other hand, can point to our idealisation

of sexual love. All the great excellencies of ancient humanity owed their

stability to the fact that man was standing side by side with man, and that no

woman  was  allowed  to  put  forward  the  claim  of  being  the  nearest  and

highest, nay even sole object of his love, as the feeling of passion would

teach. Perhaps our trees do not grow so high now owing to the ivy and the

vines that cling round them.

  504

    RECONCILIATION.  Should  it  then  be  the  task  of  philosophy  to

reconcile what the child has learnt with what the man has come to recognise ?

Should philosophy be the task of young men because they stand midway

between child and man and possess intermediate necessities ? It would almost

appear to be so if you consider at what ages of their life philosophers are now

in the habit of setting forth their conceptions : at a time when it is too late for

faith and too early for knowledge.

  505

    PRACTICAL PEOPLE. We thinkers have the right of deciding good taste

in all things, and if necessary of decreeing it. The practical people finally

receive it from us : their dependence upon us is incredibly great, and is one of

the  most  ridiculous  spectacles  in  the  world,  little  though  they  themselves

know it and however proudly they like to carp at us unpractical people. Nay,

they would even go so far as to belittle their practical life if we should show a

tendency to despise it whereto at times we might be urged on by a slightly

vindictive feeling.

  506

  THE NECESSARY DESICCATION OF EVERYTHING GOOD. What !

must we conceive of a work exactly in the spirit of the age that has produced

it ? but we experience greater delight and surprise, and get more information

out of it when we do not conceive it in this spirit ! Have you not remarked

that every new and good work, so long as it is exposed to the damp air of itsown age is least valuable just because it still has about it all the odour of the

market, of opposition, of modern ideas, and of all that is transient from day to

day ? Later on, however, it dries up, its " actuality " dies away : and then only

does it obtain its deep lustre and its perfume and also, if it is destined for it,

the calm eye of eternity.

  507

    AGAINST THE TYRANNY OF TRUTH. Even if we were mad enough

to consider all our opinions as truth, we should nevertheless not wish them

alone  to  exist.  I  cannot  see  why  we  should  ask  for  an  autocracy  and

omnipotence of truth : it is sufficient for me to know that it is a great power.

Truth, however, must meet with opposition and be able to fight, and we must

be  able  to  rest  from  it  at  times  in  falsehood  otherwise  truth  will  grow

tiresome, powerless, and insipid, and will render us equally so.

  508

  NOT TO TAKE A THING PATHETICALLY. What we do to benefit

ourselves should not bring us in any moral praise, either from others or from

ourselves, and the same remark applies to those things which we do to please

ourselves. It is looked upon as bon ton among superior men to refrain from

taking  things  pathetically  in  such  cases,  and  to  refrain  from  all  pathetic

feelings  :  the  man  who  has  accustomed  himself  to  this  has  retrieved  his

naivety.

  509

  THE THIRD EYE. What! You are still in need of the theatre ! are you

still so young ? Be wise, and seek tragedy and comedy where they are better

acted,  and  where  the  incidents  are  more  interesting,  and  the  actors  more

eager. It is indeed by no means easy to be merely a spectator in these cases

but learn ! and then, amid all difficult or painful situations, you will have a

little gate leading to joy and refuge, even when your passions attack you.

Open your stage eye, that big third eye of yours, which looks out into the

world through the other two.

  510

    ESCAPING FROM ONE'S VIRTUES. Of what account is a thinker who

does not know how to escape from his own virtues occasionally ! Surely a

thinker should be more than " a moral being " !

  511

  THE TEMPTRESS. Honesty is the great temptress of all fanatics. What

seemed to tempt Luther in the guise of the devil or a beautiful woman, andfrom which he defended himself in that uncouth way of his, was probably

nothing but honesty, and perhaps in a few rarer cases even truth.

  512

  BOLD  TOWARDS  THINGS.  The  man  who,  in  accordance  with  his

character, is considerate and timid towards persons, but is courageous and

bold towards things, is afraid of new and closer acquaintances, and limits his

old  ones  in  order  that  he  may  thus  make  his  incognito  and  his

inconsiderateness coincide with truth.

  513

  LIMITS AND BEAUTY. Are you looking for men with a fine culture ?

Then you will have to be satisfied with restricted views and sights, exactly as

when you are looking for fine countries. There are, of course, such panoramic

men : they are like panoramic regions, instructive and marvellous : but not

beautiful.

  514

  TO THE STRONGER. You stronger and arrogant intellects, we ask you

for only one thing : throw no further burdens upon our shoulders, but take

some of our burdens upon your own, since you are stronger ! but you delight

in doing the exact contrary : for you wish to soar, so that we must carry your

burden in addition to our own we must crawl !

  515

  THE  INCREASE  OF  BEAUTY.  Why  has  beauty  increased  by  the

progress of civilisation ? because the three occasions for ugliness appear ever

more rarely among civilised men : first, the wildest outbursts of ecstasy ;

secondly, extreme bodily exertion, and, thirdly, the necessity of inducing fear

by one's very sight and presence a matter which is so frequent and of so great

importance in the lower and more dangerous stages of culture that it even

lays down the proper gestures and ceremonials and makes ugliness a duty.

  516

  NOT TO IMBUE OUR NEIGHBOURS WITH OUR OWN DEMON.

Let us in our age continue to hold the belief that benevolence and beneficence

are the characteristics of a good man ; but let us not fail to add " provided that

in  the  first  place  he  exhibits  his  benevolence  and  beneficence  towards

himself." For if he acts otherwise that is to say, if he shuns, hates, or injures

himself he is certainly not a good man. He then merely saves himself through

others : and let these others take care that they do not come to grief through

him, however well disposed he may appear to be to them ! but to shun andhate one's own ego, and to live in and for others, this has up to the present,

with  as  much  thoughtlessness  as  conviction,  been  looked  upon  as  "

unselfish," and consequently as " good."

  517

    TEMPTING INTO LOVE. We ought to fear a man who hates himself;

for we are liable to become the victims of his anger and revenge. Let us

therefore try to tempt him into self-love.

  518

    RESIGNATION. What is resignation ? It is the most comfortable position

of a patient, who, after having suffered a long time from tormenting pains in

order to find it, at last became tired and then found it.

  519

    DECEPTION. When you wish to act you must close the door upon doubt,

said a man of action. And are you not afraid of being deceived in doing so ?

replied the man of a contemplative mind.

  520

    ETERNAL OBSEQUIES. Both within and beyond the confines of history

we might imagine that we were listening to a continual funeral oration : we

have buried, and are still burying, all that we have loved best, our thoughts,

and our hopes, receiving in exchange pride, gloria mundi that is, the pomp of

the graveside speech. It is thus that everything is made good ! Even at the

present time the funeral orator remains the greatest public benefactor.

  521

    EXCEPTIONAL  VANITY.  Yonder  man  possesses  one  great  quality

which serves as a consolation for him: his look passes with contempt over the

remainder of his being, and almost his entire character is included in this. But

he recovers from himself when, as it were, he approaches his sanctuary ;

already the road leading to it appears to him to be an ascent on broad soft

steps and yet, you cruel ones, you call him vain on this account !

  522

  WISDOM WITHOUT EARS. To hear every day what is said about us, or

even to endeavour to discover what people think of us, will in the end kill

even the strongest man. Our neighbours permit us to live only that they may

exercise a daily claim upon us ! They certainly would not tolerate us if we

wished to claim rights over them, and still less if we wished to be right ! In

short, let us offer up a sacrifice to the general peace, let us not listen when

they Speak of us, when they praise us, blame us, wish for us, or hope for usnay, let us not even think of it.

  523

  A QUESTION OF PENETRATION. When we are confronted with any

manifestation which someone has permitted us to see, we may ask : what is it

meant  to  conceal  ?  What  is  it  meant  to  draw  our  attention  from?  What

prejudices does it seek to raise ? and again, how far does the subtlety of the

dissimulation go ? and in what respect is the man mistaken ?

  524

  THE  JEALOUSY  OF  THE  LONELY  ONES.  This  is  the  difference

between sociable and solitary natures, provided that both possess an intellect:

the former are satisfied, or nearly satisfied, with almost anything whatever ;

from  the  moment  that  their  minds  have  discovered  a  communicable  and

happy version of it they will be reconciled even with the devil himself! But

the lonely souls have their silent rapture, and their speechless agony about a

thing: they hate the ingenious and brilliant display of their inmost problems

as much as they dislike to see the women they love too loudly dressed they

watch her mournfully in such a case, as if they were just beginning to suspect

that she was desirous of pleasing others. This is the jealousy which all lonely

thinkers and passionate dreamers exhibit with regard to the esprit.

  525

  THE EFFECT OF PRAISE. Some people become modest when highly

praised, others insolent.

  526

    UNWILLING TO BE A SYMBOL. I sympathise with princes: they are

not at liberty to discard their high rank even for a short time, and thus they

come to know people only from the very uncomfortable position of constant

dissimulation  their  continual  compulsion  to  represent  something  actually

ends by making solemn ciphers of them. Such is the fate of all those who

deem it their duty to be symbols.

  527

  THE HIDDEN MEN. Have you never come across those people who

check  and  restrain  even  their  enraptured  hearts,  and  who  would  rather

become mute than lose the modesty of moderation ? and have you never met

those embarrassing, and yet so often good-natured people who do not wish to

be recognised, and who time and again efface the tracks they have made in

the sand ? and who even deceive others as well as themselves in order to

remain obscure and hidden ?  528

    UNUSUAL FORBEARANCE. It is often no small indication of kindness

to be unwilling to criticise someone, and even to refuse to think of him.

  529

  How  MEN  AND  NATIONS  GAIN  LUSTRE.  How  many  really

individual actions are left undone merely because before performing them we

perceive  or  suspect  that  they  will  be  misunderstood  !  those  actions,  for

example, which have some intrinsic value, both in good and evil. The more

highly an age or a nation values its individuals, therefore, and the more right

and ascendancy we accord them, the more will actions of this kind venture to

make themselves known, and thus in the long run a lustre of honesty, of

genuineness in good and evil, will spread over entire ages and nations, so that

they the Greeks, for example like certain stars, will continue to shed light for

thousands of years after their sinking.

  530

    DIGRESSIONS OF THE THINKER. The course of thought in certain

men is strict and inflexibly bold. At times it is even cruel towards such men,

although considered individually they may be gentle and pliable. With well-

meaning hesitation they will turn the matter ten times over in their heads, but

will at length continue their strict course. They are like streams that wind

their way past solitary hermitages : there are places in their course where the

stream plays hide and seek with itself, and indulges in short idylls with islets,

trees, grottos, and cascades and then it rushes ahead once more, passes by the

rocks, and forces its way through the hardest stones.

  531

    DIFFERENT  FEELINGS  TOWARDS  ART.  From  the  time  when  we

begin to live as a hermit, consuming and consumed, our only company being

deep and prolific thoughts, we expect from art either nothing more, or else

something quite different from what we formerly expected in a word, we

change our taste. For in former times we wished to penetrate for a moment by

means of art into the element in which we are now living permanently: at that

time we dreamt ourselves into the rapture of a possession which we now

actually possess. Indeed, flinging away from us for the time being what we

now have, and imagining ourselves to be poor, or to be a child, a beggar, or a

fool, may now at times fill us with delight.

  532

  "  LOVE  EQUALISES."  Love  wishes  to  spare  the  other  to  whom  itdevotes itself any feeling of strangeness : as a consequence it is permeated

with disguise and simulation ; it keeps on deceiving continuously, and feigns

an  equality  which  in  reality  does  not  exist.  And  all  this  is  done  so

instinctively that women who love deny this simulation and constant tender

trickery, and have even the audacity to assert that love equalises (in other

words that it performs a miracle) ! This phenomenon is a simple matter if one

of  the  two  permits  himself  or  herself  to  be  loved,  and  does  not  deem  it

necessary to feign, but leaves this to the other. No drama, however, could

offer  a  more  intricate  and  confused  instance  than  when  both  persons  are

passionately in love with one another; for in this case both are anxious to

surrender and to endeavour to conform to the other, and finally they are both

at a loss to know what to imitate and what to feign. The beautiful madness of

this spectacle is too good for this world, and too subtle for human eyes.

  533

  WE BEGINNERS. How many things does an actor see and divine when

he watches another on the stage ! He notices at once when a muscle fails in

some  gesture;  he  can  distinguish  those  little  artificial  tricks  which  are  so

calmly practised separately before the mirror, and are not in conformity with

the whole ; he feels when the actor is surprised on the stage by his own

invention, and when he spoils it amid this surprise. How differently, again,

does a painter look at someone who happens to be moving before him ! He

will see a great deal that does not actually exist in order to complete the

actual appearance of the person, and to give it its full effect. In his mind he

attempts several different illuminations of the same object, and divides the

whole by an additional contrast. Oh, that we now possessed the eyes of such

an actor and such a painter for the province of the human soul !

  534

  SMALL  DOSES.  If  we  wish  a  change  to  be  as  deep  and  radical  as

possible, we must apply the remedy in minute doses, but unremittingly for

long periods. What great action can be performed all at once? Let us therefore

be careful not to exchange violently and precipitately the moral conditions

with which we are familiar for a new valuation of things, nay, we may even

wish to continue living in the old way for a long time to come, until probably

at  some  very  remote  period  we  become  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  new

valuation has made itself the predominating power within us, and that its

minute doses to which we must henceforth become accustomed have set up a

new nature within us. We now also begin to understand that the last attemptat  a  great  change  of  valuations  that  which  concerned  itself  with  political

affairs  (the  "  great  revolution  ")  was  nothing  more  than  a  pathetic  and

sanguinary piece of quackery which, by means of sudden crises, was able to

inspire  a  credulous  Europe  with  the  hope  of  a  sudden  recovery,  and  has

therefore made all political invalids impatient and dangerous up to this very

moment.

  535

  TRUTH REQUIRES POWER. Truth in itself is no power at all, in spite

of all that flattering rationalists are in the habit of saying to the contrary.

Truth  must  either  attract  power  to  its  side,  or  else  side  with  power,  for

otherwise it will perish again and again. This has already been sufficiently

demonstrated, and more than sufficiently !

  536

  THE  THUMBSCREW.  It  is  disgusting  to  observe  with  what  cruelty

everyone charges his two or three private virtues to the account of others who

may  perhaps  not  possess  them,  and  whom  he  torments  and  worries  with

them. Let us therefore deal humanely with the "sense of honesty," although

we may possess in it a thumbscrew with which we can worry to death all

these presumptuous egoists who even yet wish to impose their own beliefs

upon the whole world we have tried this thumbscrew on ourselves !

  537

    MASTERY.  We  have  reached  mastery  when  we  neither  mistake  nor

hesitate in the achievement.

  538

  THE MORAL INSANITY OF GENIUS, In a certain category of great

intellects we may observe a painful and partly horrible spectacle : in their

most productive moments their flights aloft and into the far distance appear to

be out of harmony with their general constitution and to exceed their power

in one way or another, so that each time there remains a deficiency, and also

in  the  long  run  a  defectiveness  in  the  entire  machinery,  which  latter  is

manifested among those highly intellectual natures by various kinds of moral

and  intellectual  symptoms  more  regularly  than  by  conditions  of  bodily

distress. Thus those incomprehensible characteristics of their nature all their

timidity, vanity, hatefulness, envy, their narrow and narrowing disposition

and that too personal and awkward element in natures like those of Rousseau

and Schopenhauer, may very well be the consequences of a periodical attack

of heart disease; and this in its turn may be the result of a nervous complaint,and this latter the consequence of - . So long as genius dwells within us we

are full of audacity, yes, almost mad, and heedless of health, life, and honour

; we fly through the day as free and swift as an eagle, and in the darkness we

feel as confident as an owl. But let genius once leave us and we are instantly

overcome by a feeling of the most profound despondency : we can no longer

understand ourselves ; we suffer from everything that we experience and do

not experience ; we feel as if we were in the midst of shelter-less rocks with

the tempest raging round us, and we are at the same time like pitiful childish

souls, afraid of a rustle or a shadow. Three-fourths of all the evil committed

in the world is due to timidity ; and this is above all a physiological process.

  539

  DO YOU KNOW WHAT YOU WANT ? Have you never been troubled

by the fear that you might not be at all fitted for recognising what is true ? by

the fear that your senses might be too dull, and even your delicacy of sight far

too  blunt  ?  If  you  could  only  perceive,  even  once,  to  what  extent  your

volition dominates your sight ! How, for example, you wished yesterday to

see more than someone else, while to-day you wish to see it differently ! and

how from the start you were anxious to see something which would be in

conformity with or in opposition to anything that people thought they had

observed up to the present. Oh, those shameful cravings ! How often you

keep your eyes open for what is efficacious, for what is soothing, just because

you  happen  to  be  tired  at  the  moment  !  Always  full  of  secret

predeterminations of what truth should be like, so that you, you, indeed !

might accept it ! or do you think that to-day, because you are as frozen and

dry as a bright winter morning, and because nothing is weighing on your

mind, you have better eyesight ! Are not ardour and enthusiasm necessary to

do justice to the creations of thought ? and this indeed is what is called sight !

as if you could treat matters of thought any differently from the manner in

which you treat men. In all relations with thought there is the same morality,

the same honesty of purpose, the same reservations, the same slackness, the

same faint-heartedness your whole lovable and hateful self! Your physical

exhaustion will lend the things pale colours while your feverishness will turn

them into monsters I Does not your morning show the things in a different

light  from  the  evening?  Are  you  not  afraid  of  finding  in  the  cave  of  all

knowledge your own phantom, the veil in which truth is wrapped up and

hidden  from  your  sight?  Is  it  not  a  dreadful  comedy  in  which  you  so

thoughtlessly wish to take part ?  540

    LEARNING. Michelangelo considered Raphael's genius as having been

acquired by study, and upon his own as a natural gift : learning as opposed to

talent ; though this is mere pedantry, with all due respect to the great pedant

himself.  For  what  is  talent  but  a  name  for  an  older  piece  of  learning,

experience, exercise, appropriation, and incorporation, perhaps as far back as

the times of our ancestors, or even earlier ! And again : he who learns forms

his own talents, only learning is not such an easy matter and depends not only

upon our willingness, but also upon our being able to learn at all. Jealousy

often prevents this in an artist, or that pride which, when it experiences any

strange feeling, at once assumes an attitude of defence instead of an attitude

of scholarly receptiveness. Raphael, like Goethe, lacked this pride, on which

account  they  were  great  learners,  and  not  merely  the  exploiters  of  those

quarries  which  had  been  formed  by  the  manifold  genealogy  of  their

forefathers. Raphael vanishes before our eyes as a learner in the midst of that

assimilation of what his great rival called his " nature " : this noblest of all

thieves daily carried off a portion of it ; but before he had appropriated all the

genius of Michelangelo he died and the final series of his works, because it is

the beginning of a new plan of study, is less perfect and good, for the simple

reason that the great student was interrupted by death in the midst of his most

difficult task, and took away with him that justifying and final goal which he

had in view.

  541

  HOW WE SHOULD TURN TO STONE. By slowly, very, very slowly,

becoming hard like a precious stone, and at last lie still, a joy to all eternity.

  542

  THE PHILOSOPHER AND OLD AGE. It is not wise to permit evening

to act as a judge of the day ; for only too often in this case weariness becomes

the  judge  of  success  and  good  will.  We  should  also  take  the  greatest

precautions in regard to everything connected with old age and its judgment

upon life, more especially since old age, like the evening, is fond of assuming

a new and charming morality, and knows well enough how to humiliate the

day by the glow of the evening skies, twilight and a peaceful and wistful

silence. The reverence which we feel for an old man, especially if he is an old

thinker and sage, easily blinds us to the deterioration of his intellect, and it is

always  necessary  to  bring  to  light  the  hidden  symptoms  of  such  a

deterioration  and  lassitude,  that  is  to  say,  to  uncover  the  physiologicalphenomenon which is still concealed behind the old man's moral judgments

and prejudices, in case we should be deceived by our veneration for him, and

do something to the disadvantage of knowledge, For it is not seldom that the

illusion of a great moral renovation and regeneration takes possession of the

old man. Basing his views upon this, he then proceeds to express his opinions

on the work and development of his life as if he had only then for the first

time  become  clear-sighted  and  nevertheless  it  is  not  wisdom,  but  fatigue,

which prompts his present state of well-being and his positive judgments.

The most dangerous indication of this weariness is above all the belief in

genius, which as a rule only arises in great and semi-great men of intellect at

this  period  of  their  lives  :  the  belief  in  an  exceptional  position,  and

exceptional rights. The thinker who thus believes himself to be inspired by

genius henceforth deems it permissible for him to take things more easily,

and takes advantage of his position as a genius to decree rather than to prove.

It is probable, however, that the need felt by the weary intellect for alleviation

is the main source of this belief it precedes it in time, though appearances

may indicate the contrary. At this time too, as the result of the love which all

weary and old people feel for enjoyment, such men as those I am 'speaking of

wish to enjoy the results of their thinking instead of again testing them and

scattering  the  seeds  abroad  once  more.  This  leads  them  to  make  their

thoughts palatable and enjoyable, and to take away their dryness, coldness,

and want of flavour ; and thus it comes about that the old thinker apparently

raises himself above his life's work, while in reality he spoils it by infusing

into  it  a  certain  amount  of  fantasy,  sweetness,  flavour,  poetic  mists,  and

mystic  lights.  This  is  how  Plato  ended,  as  did  also  that  great  and  honest

Frenchman,  Auguste  Comte,  who,  as  a  conqueror  of  the  exact  sciences,

cannot  be  matched  either  among  the  Germans  or  the  Englishmen  of  this

century. There is a third symptom of fatigue: that ambition which actuated

the great thinker when he was young, and which could not then find anything

to satisfy it, has also grown old, and, like one that has no more time to lose, it

begins to snatch at the coarser and more immediate means of its gratification,

means  which  are  peculiar  to  active,  dominating,  violent,  and  conquering

dispositions. From this time onwards the thinker wishes to found institutions

which shall bear his name, instead of erecting mere brain-structures. What are

now to him the ethereal victories and honours to be met with in the realm of

proofs and refutations, or the perpetuation of his fame in books, or the thrill

of exultation in the soul of the reader ? But the institution, on the other hand,is a temple, as he well knows a temple of stone, a durable edifice, which will

keep its god alive with more certainty than the sacrifices of rare and tender

souls. Perhaps, too, at this period of his life the old thinker will for the first

time meet with that love which is fitted for a god rather than for a human

being, and his whole nature becomes softened and sweetened in the rays of

such a sun, like fruit in autumn. Yes, he grows more divine and beautiful, this

great old man, and nevertheless it is old age and weariness which permit him

to  ripen  in  this  way,  to  grow  more  silent,  and  to  repose  in  the  luminous

adulation of a woman. Now it is all up with his former desire a desire which

was superior even to his own ego for real disciples, followers who would

carry on his thought, that is, true opponents. This desire arose from his until

now undiminished energy, the conscious pride he felt in being able at any

time to become an opponent himself, nay, even the deadly enemy of his own

doctrine, but now his desire is for resolute partisans, unwavering comrades,

auxiliary forces, heralds, a pompous train of followers. He is now no longer

able to bear that dreadful isolation in which every intellect that advances

beyond the others is compelled to live. From this time forward he surrounds

himself with objects of veneration, companionship, tenderness, and love ; but

he also wishes to enjoy the privileges of all religious people, and to worship

what he venerates most highly in his little community he will even go as far

as to invent a religion for the purpose of having a community. Thus lives the

wise old man, and in living thus he falls almost imperceptibly into such a

deplorable proximity to priestly and poetic extravagances that it is difficult to

recollect all his wise and severe period of youth, the former rigid morality of

his mind, and his truly virile dread of fancies and misplaced enthusiasm.

When  he  was  formerly  in  the  habit  of  comparing  himself  with  the  older

thinkers, he did so merely that he might measure his weakness against their

strength,  and  that  he  might  become  colder  and  more  audacious  towards

himself; but now he only makes this comparison to intoxicate himself with

his own delusions. Formerly he looked forward with confidence to future

thinkers, and he even took a delight in imagining himself to be cast into the

shade by their brighter light. Now, however, he is mortified to think that he

cannot be the last : he endeavours to discover some way of imposing upon

mankind,  together  with  the  inheritance  which  he  is  leaving  to  them,  a

restriction of sovereign thinking. He fears and reviles the pride and the love

of freedom of individual minds : after him no one must allow his intellect to

govern with absolute unrestriction : he himself wishes to remain forever thebulwark on which the waves of ideas may break these are his secret wishes,

and perhaps, indeed, they are not always secret. The hard fact upon which

such wishes are based, however, is that he himself has come to a halt before

his teaching, and has set up his boundary stone, his " thus far and no farther."

In canonising himself he has drawn up his own death warrant : from now on

his  mind  cannot  develop  further.  His  race  is  run  ;  the  hour-hand  stops.

Whenever  a  great  thinker  tries  to  make  himself  .a  lasting  institution  for

posterity,  we  may  readily  suppose  that  he  has  passed  the  climax  of  his

powers, and is very tired, very near the setting of his sun.

  543

  WE MUST NOT MAKE PASSION AN ARGUMENT FOR TRUTH.

Oh, you kind-hearted and even noble enthusiasts, I know you ! You wish to

seem right in our eyes as well as in your own, but especially in your own !

and an irritable and subtle evil conscience so often spurs you on against your

very  enthusiasm  !  How  ingenious  you  then  become  in  deceiving  your

conscience, and lulling it to sleep ! How you hate honest, simple, and clean

souls ; how you avoid their innocent glances ! That better knowledge whose

representatives they are, and whose voice you hear only too distinctly within

yourselves when it questions your belief, how you try to cast suspicion upon

it as a bad habit, as a disease of the age, as the neglect and infection of your

own intellectual health ! It drives you on to hate even criticism, science,

reason ! You must falsify history to make it testify in your favour ; you must

deny virtues in case they should obscure those of your own idols and ideals.

Coloured  images  where  arguments  are  needed  !  Ardour  and  power  of

expression ! Silver mists ! Ambrosian nights ! well do you know how to

enlighten and to darken to darken by means of light ! and indeed when your

passion can no longer be kept within bounds the moment comes when you

say to yourselves, " Now I have won for myself a good conscience, now I am

exalted, courageous, self-denying, magnanimous; now I am honest!" How

you long for these moments when your passion will confer upon you full and

absolute rights, and also, as it were, innocence. How happy you are when

engaged in battle and inspired with ecstasy or courage, when you are elated

beyond yourself, when gnawing doubt has left you, and when you can even

decree : " Any man who is not in ecstasy as we are cannot by any chance

know what or where truth is." How you long to meet with those who share

your belief in this state which is a state of intellectual depravity and to set

your own fire alight with their flames ! Oh, for your martyrdom, your victoryof the sanctified lie ! Must you really inflict so much pain upon yourselves?

Must you ?

  544

  HOW PHILOSOPHY IS NOW PRACTISED. I can see quite well that

our  philosophising  youths,  women,  and  artists  require  from  philosophy

exactly the opposite of what the Greeks derived from it. What does he who

does not hear the continual exultation that resounds through every speech and

counter-argument  in  a  Platonic  dialogue,  this  exultation  over  the  new

invention of rational thinking, know about Plato or about ancient philosophy

? At that time souls were filled with enthusiasm when they gave themselves

up to the severe and sober sport of ideas, generalisations, refutations, that

enthusiasm which perhaps those old, great, severe, and prudent contrapuntists

in music have also known. At that time the Greek palate still possessed that

older and formerly omnipotent taste : and by the side of this taste their new

taste  appeared  to  be  enveloped  in  so  much  charm  that  the  divine  art  of

dialectic was sung by hesitating voices as if its followers were intoxicated

with the frenzy of love. That old form of thinking, however, was thought

within the bounds of morality, and for it nothing existed but fixed judgments

and established facts, and it had no reasons but those of authority. Thinking,

therefore, was simply a matter of repetition, and all the enjoyment of speech

and dialogue could only lie in their form. Wherever the substance of a thing

is looked upon as eternal and universally approved, there is only one great

charm, the charm of variable forms, that is, of fashion. Even in the poets ever

since the time of Homer, and later on in the case of the sculptors, the Greeks

did not enjoy originality, but its contrary. It was Socrates who discovered

another  charm,  that  of  cause  and  effect,  of  reason  and  sequence,  and  we

moderns  have  become  so  used  to  it,  and  have  been  brought  up  to  the

necessity of logic that we look upon it as the normal taste, and as such it

cannot but be repugnant to ardent and presumptuous people. Such people are

pleased by whatever stands out boldly from the normal : their more subtle

ambition  leads  them  to  believe  only  too  readily  that  they  are  exceptional

souls, not dialectic and rational beings, but, let us say, " intuitive " beings

gifted with an " inner sense," or with a certain " intellectual perception."

Above all, however, they wish to be " artistic natures " with a genius in their

heads, and a demon in their bodies, and consequently with special rights in

this world and in the world to come especially the divine privilege of being

incomprehensible.  And  people  like  these  are  "  going  in  for  "  philosophynowadays ! I fear they will discover one day that they have made a mistake

what they are looking for is religion !

  545

  BUT  WE  DO  NOT  BELIEVE  YOU.  You  would  gladly  pass  for

psychologists,  but  we  shall  not  allow  it  !  Are  we  not  to  notice  that  you

pretend to be more experienced, profound, passionate, and perfect than you

actually  are  ?  just  as  we  notice  in  yonder  painter  that  there  is  a  trifling

presumptuousness  in  his  manner  of  wielding  the  brush,  and  in  yonder

musician that he brings forward his theme with the desire to make it appear

superior to what it really is. Have you experienced history within yourselves,

commotions, earthquakes, long and profound sadness, and sudden flashes of

happiness ? Have you acted foolishly with great and little fools ? Have you

really undergone the delusions and woe of the good people? and also the woe

and the peculiar happiness of the most evil ? Then you may speak to me of

morality, but not otherwise !

  546

  SLAVE AND IDEALIST. The followers of Epictetus would doubtless

not be to the taste of those who are now striving after the ideal. The constant

tension  of  his  being,  the  indefatigable  inward  glance,  the  prudent  and

reserved incommunicativeness of his eye whenever it happens to gaze upon

the outer world, and above all, his silence or laconic speech : all these are

characteristics of the strictest fortitude, and what would our idealists, who

above all else are desirous of expansion, care for this ? But in spite of all this

the Stoic is not fanatical. He detests the display and boasting of our idealists :

his pride, however great it may be, is not eager to disturb others. It permits of

a certain gentle approach, and has no desire to spoil anybody's good humour

nay,  it  can  even  smile.  A  great  deal  of  ancient  humanity  is  to  be  seen

exemplified in this ideal. The most excellent feature about it, however, is that

the thinker is completely free from the fear of God, strictly believes in reason,

and is no preacher of penitence. Epictetus was a slave : his ideal man is

without any particular rank, and may exist in any grade of society, but above

all he is to be sought in the deepest and lowest social classes, as the silent and

self-sufficient man in the midst of a general state of servitude, a man who

defends himself alone against the outer world, and is constantly living in a

state  of  the  highest  fortitude.  He  is  distinguished  from  the  Christian

especially, because the latter lives in hope in the promise of " unspeakable

glory," permits presents to be made to him, and expects and accepts the bestthings from divine love and grace, and not from himself. Epictetus, on the

other hand, neither hopes nor allows his best treasure to be given him he

possesses it already, holds it bravely in his hand, and defies the world to take

it  away  from  him.  Christianity  was  devised  for  another  class  of  ancient

slaves, for those who had a weak will and weak reason that is to say, for the

majority of slaves.

  547

  THE TYRANTS OF THE INTELLECT. The progress of science is at the

present time no longer hindered by the purely accidental fact that man attains

to about seventy years, which was the case far too long. In former times

people wished to master the entire extent of knowledge within this period,

and  all  the  methods  of  knowledge  were  valued  according  to  this  general

desire.  Minor  questions  and  individual  experiments  were  looked  upon  as

unworthy  of  notice  :  people  wanted  to  take  the  shortest  path  under  the

impression that, since everything in this world seemed to be arranged with a

view to man's needs, even the acquirement of knowledge was regulated in

view of the limits of human life. To solve everything at a single stroke, with

one word this was the secret desire ; and the task was represented in the

symbol of the Gordian knot or the egg of Columbus. No one doubted that it

was possible to reach the goal of knowledge after the manner of Alexander or

Columbus, and to settle all questions with one answer. " There is a mystery to

be solved," seemed to be the aim of life in the eyes of the philosopher : it was

necessary in the first place to find out what this enigma was, and to condense

the problem of the world into the simplest enigmatical formula possible. The

boundless  ambition  and  delight  of  being  the  "  unraveller  of  the  world  "

charmed  the  dreams  of  many  a  thinker  :  nothing  seemed  to  him  worth

troubling  about  in  this  world  but  the  means  of  bringing  everything  to  a

satisfactory conclusion. Philosophy thus became a kind of supreme struggle

for the tyrannical sway over the intellect, and no one doubted that such a

tyrannical domination was reserved for some very happy, subtle, ingenious,

bold,  and  powerful  person  a  single  individual  !  and  many  (the  last  was

Schopenhauer) fancied themselves to be this privileged person. From this it

follows that, on the whole, science has up to the present remained in a rather

backward state owing to the moral narrow-mindedness of its disciples, and

that henceforth it will have to be pursued from a higher and more generous

motive. " What do I matter ? " is written over the door of the thinker of the

future.  548

    VICTORY OVER POWER. If we consider all that has been venerated up

to the present as " superhuman intellect " or " genius," we must come to the

sad conclusion that, considered as a whole, the intellectuality of mankind

must have been extremely low and poor: so little mind has until now been

necessary in order to feel at once considerably superior to all this ! Alas for

the cheap glory of " genius " ! How quickly has it been raised to the throne,

and its worship grown into a custom ! We still fall on our knees before power

according to the old custom of slaves and nevertheless, when the degree of

venerability comes to be determined, only the degree of reason in the power

will be the deciding factor. We must find out, indeed, to how great an extent

power has been overcome by something higher, which it now obeys as a tool

and  instrument.  As  yet,  however,  there  have  been  too  few  eyes  for  such

investigations : even in the majority of cases the mere valuation of genius has

almost been looked upon as blasphemy. And thus perhaps everything that is

most  beautiful  still  takes  place  in  the  midst  of  darkness  and  vanishes  in

endless night almost as soon as it has made its appearance, I refer to the

spectacle of that power which a genius does not lay out upon works, but upon

himself as a work, that is, his own self-control, the purifying of his own

imagination, the order and selection in his inspirations and tasks. The great

man ever remains invisible in the greatest thing that claims worship, like

some distant star : his victory over power remains without witnesses, and

hence also without songs and singers. The hierarchy of the great men in all

the past history of the human race has not yet been determined.

  549

  FLIGHT FROM ONE'S SELF. Those sufferers from intellectual spasms

who  are  impatient  towards  themselves  and  look  upon  themselves  with  a

gloomy eye such as Byron or Alfred de Musset and who, in everything that

they do, resemble runaway horses, and from their own works derive only a

transient joy and an ardent passion which almost bursts their veins, followed

by sterility and disenchantment how are they able to bear up ! They would

gladly  attain  to  something  "  beyond  themselves."  If  we  happen  to  be

Christians, and are seized by such a desire as this, we strive to reach God and

to become one with Him ; if we are a Shakespeare we shall be glad to perish

in images of a passionate life ; if we are like Byron we long for actions,

because  these  detach  us  from  ourselves  to  an  even  greater  extent  than

thoughts, feelings, and works. And should the desire for performing greatdeeds really be at bottom nothing but a flight from our own selves ? as Pascal

would ask us. And indeed this assertion might be proved by considering the

most noble representations of this desire for action : in this respect let us

remember, bringing the knowledge of an alienist to our aid, that four of the

greatest men of all ages who were possessed of this lust for action were

epileptics  Alexander  the  Great,  Caesar,  Mohammed,  and  Napoleon  ;  and

Byron likewise was subject to the same complaint.

  550

    KNOWLEDGE AND BEAUTY. If men, as they are still in the habit of

doing, reserve their veneration and feelings of happiness for works of fancy

and  imagination,  we  should  not  be  surprised  if  they  feel  chilled  and

displeased by the contrary of fancy and imagination. The rapture which arises

from even the smallest, sure, and definite step in advance into insight, and

which our present state of science yields to so many in such abundance this

rapture is in the meantime not believed in by all those who are in the habit of

feeling enraptured only when they leave reality altogether and plunge into the

depths of vague appearance romanticism. These people look upon reality as

ugly,  but  they  entirely  overlook  the  fact  that  the  knowledge  of  even  the

ugliest reality is beautiful, and that the man who can discern much and often

is in the end very far from considering as ugly the main items of that reality,

the discovery of which has always inspired him with the feeling of happiness.

Is  there  anything  "beautiful  in  itself"?  The  happiness  of  those  who  can

recognise augments the beauty of the world, bathing everything that exists in

a sunnier light : discernment not only envelops all things in its own beauty,

but in the long run permeates the things themselves with its beauty may ages

to come bear witness to the truth of this statement ! In the meantime let us

recall an old experience: two men so thoroughly different in every respect as

Plato  and  Aristotle  were  agreed  in  regard  to  what  constituted  superior

happiness not merely their own and that of men in general, but happiness in

itself, even the happiness of the gods. They found this happiness to lie in

knowledge, in the activity of a well practised and inventive understanding

(not in " intuition " like the German theologians and semi-theologians ; not in

visions, like the mystics ; and not in work, like the merely practical men).

Similar  opinions  were  expressed  by  Descartes  and  Spinoza.  What  great

delight must all these men have felt in knowledge ! and how great was the

danger that their honesty might give way, and that they themselves might

become panegyrists of things !  551

    FUTURE VIRTUES. How has it come about that, the more intelligible

the world has become, the more all kinds of ceremonies have diminished ?

Was fear so frequently the fundamental basis of that awe which overcame us

at the sight of anything until now unknown and mysterious, and which taught

us to fall upon our knees before the unintelligible, and to beg for mercy? And

has the world, perhaps, through the very fact that we have grown less timid,

lost some of the charms it formerly had for us ? Is it not possible that our own

dignity and stateliness, our formidable character, has decreased together with

our spirit of dread? Perhaps we value the world and ourselves less highly

since we have begun to think more boldly about it and ourselves ? Perhaps

there  will  come  a  moment  in  the  future  when  this  courageous  spirit  of

thinking  will  have  reached  such  a  point  that  it  will  feel  itself  soaring  in

supreme pride, far above men and things when the wise man, being also the

boldest, will see himself, and even more particularly existence, the lowest of

all beneath himself? This type of courage, which is not far removed from

excessive generosity, has been lacking in humanity up to the present. Oh, that

our poets might once again become what they once were : seers, telling us

something about what might possibly happen ! now that what is real and what

is past are being ever more and more taken from them, and must continue to

be taken from them for the time of innocent counterfeiting is at an end ! Let

them try to enable us to anticipate future virtues, or virtues that will never be

found on earth, although they may exist somewhere in the world ! purple-

glowing constellations and whole Milky Ways of the beautiful ! Where are

you, you astronomers of the ideal ?

  552

  IDEAL  SELFISHNESS.  Is  there  a  more  sacred  state  than  that  of

pregnancy ? To perform everyone of our actions in the silent conviction that

in one way or another it will be to the benefit of that which is being generated

within  us  that  it  must  augment  its  mysterious  value,  the  very  thought  of

which fills us with rapture ? At such a time we refrain from many things

without having to force ourselves to do so : we suppress the angry word, we

grasp the hand forgivingly ; our child must be born from all that is best and

gentlest. We shun our own harshness and brusqueness in case it should instil

a drop of unhappiness into the cup of the beloved unknown. Everything is

veiled, ominous ; we know nothing about what is going on, but simply wait

and  try  to  be  prepared.  During  this  time,  too,  we  experience  a  pure  andpurifying  feeling  of  profound  irresponsibility,  similar  to  that  felt  by  a

spectator before a drawn curtain ; it is growing, it is coming to light ; we have

nothing to do with determining its value, or the hour of its arrival. We are

thrown back altogether upon indirect, beneficent and defensive influences. "

Something greater than we are is growing here " such is our most secret hope

: we prepare everything with a view to his birth and prosperity not merely

everything that is useful, but also the noblest gifts of our souls. We should,

and can, live under the influence of such a blessed inspiration ! Whether what

we are looking forward to is a thought or a deed, our relationship to every

essential  achievement  is  none  other  than  that  of  pregnancy,  and  all  our

vainglorious boasting about " willing " and " creating " should be cast to the

winds  !  True  and  ideal  selfishness  consists  in  always  watching  over  and

restraining  the  soul,  so  that  our  productiveness  may  come  to  a  beautiful

termination. Thus in this indirect manner we must provide for and watch over

the good of all ; and the frame of mind, the mood in which we live, is a kind

of soothing oil which spreads far around" us on the restless souls. Still, these

pregnant ones are funny people! let us therefore dare to be funny also, and

not  reproach  others  if  they  must  be  the  same.  And  even  when  this

phenomenon becomes dangerous and evil we must not show less respect to

that which is generating within us or others than ordinary worldly justice,

which does not allow the judge or the hangman to interfere with a pregnant

woman.

  553

    CIRCUITOUS ROUTES. Where does all this philosophy mean to end

with its circuitous routes ? Does it do more than transpose into reason, so to

speak, a continuous and strong impulse a craving for a mild sun, a bright and

bracing atmosphere, southern plants, sea breezes, short meals of meat, eggs,

and fruit, hot water to drink, quiet walks for days at a time, little talking, rare

and  cautious  reading,  living  alone,  pure,  simple,  and  almost  soldier-like

habits a craving, in short, for all things which are suited to my own personal

taste ? a philosophy which is in the main the instinct for a personal regimen

an instinct that longs for my air, my height, my temperature, and my kind of

health, and takes the circuitous route of my head to persuade me to it ! There

are many other and certainly more lofty philosophies, and not only such as

are more gloomy and pretentious than mine and are they perhaps, taking them

as a whole, nothing but intellectual circuitous routes of the same kind of

personal  impulses?  In  the  meantime  I  look  with  a  new  eye  upon  themysterious and solitary flight of a butterfly high on the rocky banks of the

lake where so many plants are growing : there it flies hither and thither,

heedless of the fact that its life will last only one more day, and that the night

will be too cold for its winged fragility. For it, too, a philosophy might be

found, though it might not be my own.

  554

    LEADING. When we praise progress we only praise the movement and

those who do not let us remain on the same spot, and in the circumstances

this  is  certainly  something,  especially  if  we  live  among  Egyptians.  In

changeable Europe, however, where movement is " understood," to use their

own  expression,  "  as  a  matter  of  course  "  alas,  if  we  only  understood

something about it too ! I praise leaders and forerunners : that is to say, those

who always leave themselves behind, and do not care in the least whether

anyone is following them or not. " Wherever I halt I find myself alone : why

should I halt ! the desert is still so wide ! " such is the sentiment of the true

leader.

  555

  THE  LEAST  IMPORTANT  ARE  SUFFICIENT.  We  ought  to  avoid

events  when  we  know  that  even  the  least  important  of  them  frequently

enough leave a strong impression upon us and these we cannot avoid. The

thinker must possess an approximate canon of all the things he still wishes to

experience.

  556

  THE  FOUR  VIRTUES.  Honest  towards  ourselves,  and  to  all  and

everything friendly to us ; brave in the face of our enemy ; generous towards

the vanquished ; polite at all times : such do the four cardinal virtues wish us

to be.

  557

    MARCHING  AGAINST  AN  ENEMY.  How  pleasant  is  the  sound  of

even bad music and bad motives when we are setting out to march against an

enemy !

  558

  NOT CONCEALING ONE'S VIRTUES. I love those men who are as

transparent as water, and who, to use Pope's expression, hide not from view

the  turbid  bottom  of  their  stream.  Even  they,  however,  possess  a  certain

vanity, though of a rare and more sublimated kind : some of them would wish

us to see nothing but the mud, and to take no notice of the clearness of thewater  which  enables  us  to  look  right  to  the  bottom.  No  less  a  man  than

Gautama Buddha has imagined the vanity of these few in the formula, " Let

your  sins  appear  before  men,  and  conceal  your  virtues."  But  this  would

exhibit a disagreeable spectacle to the world it would be a sin against good

taste.

  559

    "NOTHING IN EXCESS!" How often is the individual recommended to

set up a goal which it is beyond his power to reach, in order that he may at

least attain that which lies within the scope of his abilities and most strenuous

efforts ! Is it really so desirable, however, that he should do so ? Do not the

best men who try to act according to this doctrine, together with their, best

deeds, necessarily assume a somewhat exaggerated and distorted appearance

on account of their excessive tension ? and in the future will not a grey mist

of failure envelop the world, owing to the fact that we may see everywhere

struggling  athletes  and  tremendous  gestures,  but  nowhere  a  conqueror

crowned with the laurel, and rejoicing in his victory ? THE END Return to

First Page



                THE GAY SCIENCE (THE JOYFUL WISDOM)

                            Translated by Thomas Common

                                        BOOK ONE

  1

  The Teachers of the Object of Existence. - Whether I look with a good or

an evil eye upon men, I find them always at one problem, each and all of

them : to do that which conduces to the conservation of the human species.

And certainly not out of any sentiment of love for this species, but simply

because  nothing  in  them  is  older,  stronger,  more  inexorable  and  more

unconquerable than that instinct,- because it is precisely the essence of our

race and herd. Although we are accustomed readily enough, with our usual

short-sightedness,  to  separate  our  neighbours  precisely  into  useful  and

hurtful, into good and evil men, yet when we make a general calculation, and

reflect longer on the whole question, we become distrustful of this defining

and separating, and finally leave it alone. Even the most hurtful man is still

perhaps, in respect to the conservation of the race, the most useful of all; for

he conserves in himself, or by his effect on others, impulses without which

mankind  might  long  ago  have  languished  or  decayed.  Hatred,  delight  inmischief, rapacity and ambition, and whatever else is called evil-belong to the

marvellous  economy  of  the  conservation  of  the  race;  to  be  sure  a  costly,

lavish, and on the whole very foolish economy:-which has, however, until

now preserved our race, as is demonstrated to us. I no longer know, my dear

fellow-man and neighbour, if you canst at all live to the disadvantage of the

race,  and  therefore,  "  unreasonably"  and  "badly";  that  which  could  have

injured  the  race  has  perhaps  died  out  many  millenniums  ago,  and  now

belongs to the things which are no longer possible even to God. Indulge your

best or your worst desires, and above all, go to wreck!-in either case you are

still probably the furtherer and benefactor of mankind in some way or other,

and  in  that  respect  you  may  have  your  panegyrists-and  similarly  your

mockers! But you will never find him who would be quite qualified to mock

at you, the individual, at your best, who could bring home to your conscience

its limitless, buzzing and croaking wretchedness so as to be in accord with

truth! To laugh at oneself as one would have to laugh in order to laugh out of

the veriest truth,-to do this, the best have not until now had enough of the

sense of truth, and the most endowed have had far too little genius! There is

perhaps still a future even for laughter! When the maxim, " The race is all,

the  individual  is  nothing,"-has  incorporated  itself  in  humanity,  and  when

access stands open to everyone at all times to this ultimate emancipation and

irresponsibility.-Perhaps then laughter will have united with wisdom, perhaps

then there will be only "joyful wisdom." Meanwhile, however, it is quite

otherwise,  meanwhile  the  comedy  of  existence  has  not  yet  "  become

conscious " of itself, meanwhile it is still the period of tragedy, the period of

morals  and  religions.  What  does  the  ever  new  appearing  of  founders  of

morals  and  religions,  of  instigators  of  struggles  for  moral  valuations,  of

teachers of remorse of conscience and religious war, imply? What do these

heroes on this stage imply ? For they have until now been the heroes of it,

and all else, though solely visible for the time being, and too close to one, has

served  only  as  preparation  for  these  heroes,  whether  as  machinery  and

coulisse, or in the r61e of confidants and valets. (The poets, for example,

have always been the valets of some morality or other.)-It is obvious of itself

that these tragedians also work in the interest of the race, though they may

believe that they work in the interest of God, and as emissaries of God. They

also further the life of the species, in that they further the belief in life. " It is

worthwhile  to  live"  -  each  of  them  calls  out,-"  there  is  something  of

importance in this life; life has something behind it and under it; take care!"That  impulse,  which  rules  equally  in  the  noblest  and  the  ignoblest,  the

impulse to the conservation of the species, breaks forth from time to time as

reason and passion of spirit; it has then a brilliant train of motives about it,

and tries with all its power to make us forget that fundamentally it is just

impulse, instinct, folly and baselessness. Life should be loved, for . . . ! Man

should benefit himself and his neighbour, for . . . ! And whatever all these

shoulds and fors imply, and may imply in future! In order that that which

necessarily and always happens of itself and without design, may henceforth

appear to be done by design, and may appeal to men as reason and ultimate

command,-for that purpose the ethi-culturist comes forward as the teacher of

design  in  existence  ;  for  that  purpose  he  devises  a  second  and  different

existence, and by means of this new mechanism he lifts the old common

existence off its old common hinges. No! he does not at all want us to laugh

at existence, nor even at ourselves -nor at himself; to him an individual is

always an individual, something first and last and immense, to him there are

no  species,  no  sums,  no  noughts.  However  foolish  and  fanatical  his

inventions and valuations may be, however much he may misunderstand the

course of nature and deny its conditions-and all systems of ethics until now

have been foolish and anti-natural to such a degree that mankind would have

been ruined by anyone of them had it got the upper hand,-at any rate, every

time that " the hero" came upon the stage something new was attained: the

frightful  counterpart  of  laughter,  the  profound  convulsion  of  many

individuals at the thought, " Yes, it is worthwhile to live! yes, I am worthy to

live!"-life,  and  you,  and  I,  and  all  of  us  together  became  for  a  while

interesting  to  ourselves  once  more.-It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  until  now

laughter and reason and nature have in the long run got the upper hand of all

the great teachers of design: in the end the short tragedy always passed over

once  more  into  the  eternal  comedy  of  existence;  and  the  "  waves  of

innumerable laughter"-to use the expression of Aeschylus-must also in the

end  beat  over  the  greatest  of  these  tragedies.  But  with  all  this  corrective

laughter,  human  nature  has  on  the  whole  been  changed  by  the  ever  new

appearance of those teachers of the design of existence,-human nature has

now  an  additional  requirement,  the  very  requirement  of  the  ever  new

appearance of such teachers and doctrines of " design." Man has gradually

become a visionary animal, who has to fulfil one more condition of existence

than the other animals : man must from time to time believe that he knows

why he exists; his species cannot flourish without periodically confiding inlife! Without the belief in reason in life! And always from time to time will

the human race decree anew that "there is something which really may not be

laughed at." And the most clairvoyant philanthropist will add that" not only

laughing  and  joyful  wisdom,  but  also  the  tragic  with  all  its  sublime

irrationality, counts among the means and necessities for the conservation of

the  race!"-And  consequently!  Consequently  !  Consequently!  Do  you

understand me, oh my brothers? Do you understand this new law of ebb and

flow? We also shall have our time !

  2

  The  Intellectual  Conscience.-I  have  always  the  same  experience  over

again, and always make a new effort against it; for although it is evident to

me I do not want to believe it: in the greater number of men the intellectual

conscience is lacking; indeed, it would often seem to me that in demanding

such a thing, one is as solitary in the largest cities as in the desert. Everyone

looks  at  you  with  strange  eyes,  and  continues  to  make  use  of  his  scales,

calling this good and that bad ; and no one blushes for shame when you

remark that these weights are not the full amount,-there is also no indignation

against you ; perhaps they laugh at your doubt. I mean to say that the greater

number of people do not find it contemptible to believe this or that, and live

according to it, without having been previously aware of the ultimate and

surest reasons for and against it, and without even giving themselves any

trouble about such reasons afterwards,-the most gifted men and the noblest

women still belong to this " greater number." But what is kind-heartedness,

refinement and genius to me, if he who has these virtues harbours indolent

sentiments in belief and judgment, if the longing for certainty does not rule in

him, as his innermost desire and profoundest need-as that which separates

higher from lower men! In certain pious people I have found a hatred of

reason,  and  have  been  favourably  disposed  to  them  for  it:  their  bad

intellectual conscience at least still betrayed itself, in this manner! But to

stand in the midst of this rerum concordia discors and all the marvellous

uncertainty and ambiguity of existence, and not to question, not to tremble

with  desire  and  delight  in  questioning,  not  even  to  hate  the  questioner-

perhaps even to make merry over him to the extent of weariness- that is what

I regard as contemptible, and it is this sentiment which I first of all search for

in every one:-some folly or other always persuades me anew that every man

has this sentiment, as man. This is my special kind of unrighteousness.

  3  Noble  and  Ignoble.-To  ignoble  natures  all  noble,  magnanimous

sentiments  appear  inexpedient,  and  on  that  account  first  and  foremost,  as

incredible: they blink with their eyes when they hear of such matters, and

seem inclined to say, " there will, no doubt, be some advantage from that, one

cannot see through all walls;"-they are jealous of the noble person, as if he

sought  advantage  by  back-stair  methods.  When  they  are  all  too  plainly

convinced of the absence of selfish intentions and emoluments, the noble

person  is  regarded  by  them  as  a  kind  of  fool:  they  despise  him  in  his

gladness, and laugh at the lustre of his eye. " How can a person rejoice at

being at a disadvantage, how can a person with open eyes want to meet with

disadvantage  !  It  must  be  a  disease  of  the  reason  with  which  the  noble

affection is associated " ;-so they think, and they look depreciatingly thereon ;

just as they depreciate the joy which the lunatic derives from his fixed idea.

The ignoble nature is distinguished by the fact that it keeps its advantage

steadily  in  view,  and  that  this  thought  of  the  end  and  advantage  is  even

stronger than its strongest impulse: not to be tempted to inexpedient activities

by its impulses-that is its wisdom and inspiration. In comparison with the

ignoble  nature  the  higher  nature  is  more  irrational:  -  for  the  noble,

magnanimous, and self-sacrificing person succumbs in fact to his impulses,

and in his best moments his reason lapses altogether. An animal, which at the

risk of life protects its young, or in the pairing season follows the female

where it meets with death, does not think of the risk and the death; its reason

pauses likewise, because its delight in its young, or in the female, and the fear

of  being  deprived  of  this  delight,  dominate  it  exclusively  ;  it  becomes

stupider than at other times, like the noble and magnanimous person. He

possesses feelings of pleasure and pain of such intensity that the intellect

must either be silent before them, or yield itself to their service: his heart then

goes into his head, and one henceforth speaks of " passions." (Here and there

to be sure, the antithesis to this, and as it were the " reverse of passion,"

presents itself; for example in Fontenelle, to whom someone once laid the

hand on the heart with the words, " What you have there, my dearest friend,

is brain also.") It is the unreason, or perverse reason of passion, which the

ignoble man despises in the noble individual, especially when it concentrates

upon  objects  whose  value  appears  to  him  to  be  altogether  fantastic  and

arbitrary. He is offended at him who succumbs to the passion of the belly, but

he understands the allurement which here plays the tyrant; but he does not

understand, for example, how a person out of love of knowledge can stake hishealth and honour on the game. The taste of the higher nature devotes itself to

exceptional matters, to things which usually do not affect people, and seem to

have no sweetness ; the higher nature has a singular standard of value. Yet it

is  mostly  of  the  belief  that  it  has  not  a  singular  standard  of  value  in  its

idiosyncrasies  of  taste;  it  rather  sets  up  its  values  and  non-values  as  the

generally valid values and non-values, and thus becomes incomprehensible

and impracticable. It is very rarely that a higher nature has so much reason

over and above as to understand and deal with everyday men as such; for the

most part it believes in its passion as if it were the concealed passion of every

one, and precisely in this belief it is full of ardour and eloquence. If then such

exceptional men do not perceive themselves as exceptions, how can they ever

understand the ignoble natures and estimate average men fairly! Thus it is

that they also speak of the folly, inexpediency and fantasy of mankind, full of

astonishment at the madness of the world, and that it will not recognise the

"one  thing  needful  for  it."-This  is  the  eternal  unrighteousness  of  noble

natures.

  4

  That  which  Preserves  the  Species.-The  strongest  and  most  evil  spirits

have  until  now  advanced  mankind  the  most:  they  always  rekindled  the

sleeping passions-all orderly arranged society lulls the passions to sleep;. they

always reawakened the sense of comparison, of contradiction, of delight in

the new, the adventurous, the untried; they compelled men to set opinion

against opinion, ideal plan against ideal plan. By means of arms, by upsetting

boundary-stones, by violations of piety most of all: but also by new religions

and  morals  !  The  same  kind  of  "  wickedness  "  is  in  every  teacher  and

preacher  of  the  new-which  makes  a  conqueror  infamous,  although  it

expresses itself more refined, and does not immediately set the muscles in

motion (and just on that account does not make so infamous !). The new,

however, is under all circumstances the evil, as that which wants to conquer,

which tries to upset the old boundary-stones and the old piety; only the old is

the good! The good men of every age are those who go to the roots of the old

thoughts and bear fruit with them, the agriculturists of the spirit. But every

soil  becomes  finally  exhausted,  and  the  ploughshare  of  evil  must  always

come once more.-There is at present a fundamentally erroneous theory of

morals which is much celebrated, especially in England: according to it the

judgments "good" and "evil" are the accumulation of the experiences of that

which is " expedient" and " inexpedient" ; according to this theory, that whichis called good is conservative of the species, what is called evil, however, is

detrimental to it. But in reality the evil impulses are just in as high a degree

expedient, indispensable, and conservative of the species as the good :-only,

their function is different.

  5

    Unconditional  Duties.-All  men  who  feel  that  they  need  the  strongest

words and intonations, the most eloquent gestures and attitudes, in order to

operate  at  all-revolutionary  politicians,  socialists,  preachers  of  repentance

with or without Christianity, with all of whom there must be no mere half-

success, -all these speak of " duties," and indeed, always of duties, which

have the character of being unconditional-without such they would have no

right  to  their  excessive  pathos:  they  know  that  right  well!  They  grasp,

therefore, at philosophies of morality which preach some kind of categorical

imperative,  or  they  assimilate  a  good  lump  of  religion,  as,  for  example,

Mazzini did. Because they want to be trusted unconditionally, it is first of all

necessary for them to trust themselves unconditionally, on the basis of some

ultimate,  undebate-able  command,  sublime  in  itself,  as  the  ministers  and

instruments of which, they would gladly feel and announce themselves. Here

we have the most natural, and for the most part, very influential opponents of

moral enlightenment and scepticism : but they are rare. On the other hand,

there is always a very numerous class of those opponents wherever interest

teaches subjection, while repute and honour seem to forbid it. He who feels

himself dishonoured at the thought of being the instrument of a prince, or of a

party and sect, or even of wealthy power (for example, as the descendant of a

proud, ancient family), but wishes just to be this instrument, or must be so

before himself and before the public - such a person has need of pathetic

principles  which  can  at  all  times  be  appealed  to  :-principles  of  an

unconditional ought, to which a person can subject himself without shame,

and can show himself subjected. All more refined servility holds fast to the

categorical imperative, and is the mortal enemy of those who want to take

away the unconditional character of duty: propriety demands this from them,

and not only propriety.

  6

  Loss  of  Dignity.-Meditation  has  lost  all  its  dignity  of  form;  the

ceremonial and solemn bearing of the meditative person have been made a

mockery, and one would no longer endure a wise man of the old style. We

think  too  hastily  and  on  the  way  and  while  walking  and  in  the  midst  ofbusiness of all kinds, even when we think on the most serious matters; we

require little preparation, even little quiet:-it is as if each of us carried about

an unceasingly revolving machine in his head, which still works, even under

the most unfavourable circumstances. Formerly it was perceived in a person

that on some occasion he wanted to think-it was perhaps the exception !-that

he now wanted to become wiser and collected his mind on a thought: he put

on a long face for it, as for a prayer, and arrested his step-nay, stood still for

hours on the street when the thought " came"-on one or on two legs. It was

thus " worthy of the affair "!

  7

  Something for the Laborious.-He who at present wants to make moral

questions a subject of study has an immense field of labour before him. All

kinds  of  passions  must  be  thought  about  singly,  and  followed  singly

throughout  periods,  peoples,  great  and  insignificant  individuals  ;  all  their

rationality, all their valuations and elucidations of things, ought to come to

light! Until now all that has given colour to existence has lacked a history:

where would one find a history of love, of avarice, of envy, of conscience, of

piety, of cruelty ? Even a comparative history of law, as also of punishment,

has until now been completely lacking. Have the different divisions of the

day, the consequences of a regular appointment of the times for labour, feast,

and repose, ever been made the object of investigation ? Do we know the

moral effects of the alimentary substances ? Is there a philosophy of nutrition

? (The ever-recurring outcry for and against vegetarianism proves that as yet

there is no such philosophy!) Have the experiences with regard to communal

living,  for  example,  in  monasteries,  been  collected  ?  Has  the  dialectic  of

marriage and friendship been set forth? The customs of the learned, of trades-

people, of artists, and of mechanics-have they already found their thinkers ?

There  is  so  much  to  think  of  thereon  !  All  that  up  till  now  has  been

considered as the "conditions of existence," of human beings, and all reason,

passion and superstition in this consideration-have they been investigated to

the  end  ?  The  observation  alone  of  the  different  degrees  of  development

which the human impulses have attained, and could yet attain, according to

the  different  moral  climates,  would  furnish  too  much  work  for  the  most

laborious;  whole  generations,  and  regular  co-operating  generations  of  the

learned,  would  be  needed  in  order  to  exhaust  the  points  of  view  and  the

material here furnished. The same is true of the determining of the reasons for

the differences of the moral climates ("on what account does this sun of afundamental moral judgment and standard of highest value shine here-and

that sun there ? "). And there is again a new labour which points out the

erroneousness of all these reasons, and determines the entire essence of the

moral  judgments  until  now  made.  Supposing  all  these  labours  to  be

accomplished, the most critical of all questions would then come into the

foreground  :  whether  science  is  in  a  position  to  furnish  goals  for  human

action, after it has proved that it can take them away and annihilate them-and

then would be the time for a process of experimenting, in which every kind of

heroism could satisfy itself, an experimenting for centuries, which would put

into the shade all the great labours and sacrifices of previous history. Science

has not until now built its Cyclopic structures; for that also the time will

come.

  8

    Unconscious Virtues.-All qualities in a man of which he is conscious-and

especially  when  he  presumes  that  they  are  visible  and  evident  to  his

environment also-are subject to quite other laws of development than those

qualities which are unknown to him, or imperfectly known, which by their

subtlety can also conceal themselves from the subtlest observer, and hide as it

were behind nothing,-as in the case of the delicate sculptures on the scales of

reptiles (it would be an error to suppose them an adornment or a defence-for

one  sees  them  only  with  the  microscope  ;  consequently,  with  an  eye

artificially  strengthened  to  an  extent  of  vision  which  similar  animals,  to

which  they  might  perhaps  have  meant  adornment  or  defence,  do  not

possess!).  Our  visible  moral  qualities,  and  especially  our  moral  qualities

believed to be visible, follow their own course,-and our invisible qualities of

similar name, which in relation to others neither serve for adornment nor

defence, also follow their own course: quite a different course probably, and

with  lines  and  refinements,  and  sculptures,  which  might  perhaps  give

pleasure  to  a  God  with  a  divine  microscope.  We  have,  for  example,  our

diligence, our ambition, our acuteness: all the world knows about them,-and

besides,  we  have  probably  once  more  our  diligence,  our  ambition,  our

acuteness ; but for these-our reptile scales-the microscope has not yet been

invented !-And here the adherents of instinctive morality will say, " Bravo!

He at least regards unconscious virtues as possible-that suffices us!"-Oh, you

unexacting creatures !

  9

  Our Eruptions. - Numberless things which humanity acquired in its earlierstages, but so weakly and embryonically that it could not be noticed that they

were acquired, are thrust suddenly into light long afterwards, perhaps after

the lapse of centuries: they have in the interval become strong and mature. In

some ages this or that talent, this or that virtue seems to be entirely lacking,

as  it  is  in  some  men;  but  let  us  wait  only  for  the  grandchildren  and

grandchildren's children, if we have time to wait,-they bring the interior of

their  grandfathers  into  the  sun,  that  interior  of  which  the  grandfathers

themselves were unconscious. The son, indeed, is often the betrayer of his

father; the latter understands himself better since he has got his son. We have

all hidden gardens and plantations in us; and by another simile, we are all

growing volcanoes, which will have their hours of eruption:-how near or how

distant this is, nobody of course knows, not even the good God.

  10

  A Species of Atavism.-I like best to think of the rare men of an age as

suddenly  emerging  after-shoots  of  past  cultures,  and  of  their  persistent

strength : like the atavism of a people and its civilisation :-there is thus still

something  in  them  to  think  of!  They  now  seem  strange,  rare,  and

extraordinary : and he who feels these forces in himself has to foster them in

face of a different, opposing world; he has to defend them, honour them, and

rear  them  to  maturity:  and  he  either  becomes  a  great  man  thereby,  or  a

deranged and eccentric person, if he does not altogether break down betimes.

Formerly these rare qualities were usual, and were consequently regarded as

common: they did not distinguish people. Perhaps they were demanded and

presupposed; it was impossible to become great with them, for indeed there

was  also  no  danger  of  becoming  insane  andsolitary  with  them.-  It  is

principally in the old-established families and castes of a people that such

after-effects of old impulses present themselves, while there is no probability

of such atavism where races, habits, and valuations change too rapidly. For

the tempo of the evolutional forces in peoples implies just as much as in

music; for our case an andante of evolution is absolutely necessary, as the

tempo of a passionate and slow spirit:-and the spirit of conserving families is

certainly of that sort.

  11

    Consciousness. - Consciousness is the last and latest development of the

organic, and consequently also the most unfinished and least powerful of

these  developments.  Innumerable  mistakes  originate  out  of  consciousness,

which," in spite of fate," as Homer says, cause an animal or a man to breakdown earlier than might be necessary. If the conserving bond of the instincts

were  not  very  much  more  powerful,  it  would  not  generally  serve  as  a

regulator: by perverse judging and dreaming with open eyes, by superficiality

and  credulity,  in  short,  just  by  consciousness,  mankind  would  necessarily

have broken down: or rather, without the former there would long ago have

been  nothing  more  of  the  latter!  Before  a  function  is  fully  formed  and

matured, it is a danger to the organism: all the better if it be then thoroughly

tyrannised over! Consciousness is thus thoroughly tyrannised over - and not

least by the pride in it! It is thought that here is the quintessence of man ; that

which is enduring, eternal, ultimate, and most original in him! Consciousness

is regarded as a fixed, given magnitude! Its growth and intermittences are

denied!  It  is  accepted  as  the  "  unity  of  the  organism  "!-This  ludicrous

overvaluation and misconception of consciousness has as its result the great

utility that a too rapid maturing of it has thereby been hindered. Because men

believed  that  they  already  possessed  consciousness,  they  gave  themselves

very little trouble to acquire it-and even now it is not otherwise! It is still an

entirely new problem just dawning on the human eye, and hardly yet plainly

recognisable : to embody knowledge in ourselves and make it instinctive,-a

problem which is only seen by those who have grasped the fact that until now

our errors alone have been embodied in us, and that all our consciousness is

relative to errors !

  12

  The Goal of Science.-What ? The ultimate goal of science is to create the

most  pleasure  possible  to  man,  and  the  least  possible  pain  ?  But  what  if

pleasure  and  pain  should  be  so  closely  connected  that  he  who  wants  the

greatest  possible  amount  of  the  one  must  also  have  the  greatest  possible

amount of the other,-that he who wants to experience the "heavenly high

jubilation," * must also be ready to be "sorrowful unto death"?* And it is so,

perhaps! The Stoics at least believed it was so, and they were consistent when

they wished to have the least possible pleasure, in order to have the least

possible pain from life. (When one uses the expression: " The virtuous man is

the happiest," it is as much the sign-board of the school for the masses, as a

casuistic subtlety for the subtle.) At present also you have still the choice:

either the least possible pain, in short painlessness-and after all, socialists and

politicians of all parties could not honourably promise more to their people,-

or  the  greatest  possible  amount  of  pain,  as  the  price  of  the  growth  of  a

fullness of refined delights and enjoyments rarely tasted until now! If youdecide for the former, if you therefore want to depress and minimise man's

capacity for pain, well, you must also depress and minimise his capacity for

enjoyment.  In  fact,  one  can  further  the  one  as  well  as  the  other  goal  by

science! Perhaps science is as yet best known by its capacity for depriving

man  of  enjoyment,  and  making  him  colder,  more  statuesque,  and  more

Stoical. But it might also turn out to be the great-pain-bringer !-And then,

perhaps,  its  counteracting  force  would  be  discovered  simultaneously,  its

immense capacity for making new sidereal worlds of enjoyment beam forth!

  13

  The Theory of the Sense of Power.-We exercise our power over others by

doing them good or by doing them ill-that is all we care for! Doing ill to

those  on  whom  we  have  to  make  our  power  felt;  for  pain  is  a  far  more

sensitive means for that purpose than pleasure:-pain always asks concerning

the  cause,  while  pleasure  is  inclined  to  keep  within  itself  and  not  look

backward. Doing good and being kind to those who are in any way already

dependent on us (that is, who are accustomed to think of us as their raison

d'etre); we want to increase their power, because we thus increase our own;

or we want to show them the advantage there is in being in our power,-they

thus  become  more  contented  with  their  position,  and  more  hostile  to  the

enemies of our power and readier to contend with them. If we make sacrifices

in  doing  good  or  in  doing  ill,  it  does  not  alter  the  ultimate  value  of  our

actions; even if we stake our life in the cause, as martyrs for the sake of our

church,  it  is  a  sacrifice  to  our  longing  for  power,  or  for  the  purpose  of

conserving our sense of power. He who under these circumstances feels that

he "is in possession of truth," how many possessions does he not let go, in

order to preserve this feeling! What does he not throw overboard, in order to

keep himself " up,"-that is to say, above the others who lack the " truth"!

Certainly the condition we are in when we do ill is seldom so pleasant, so

purely pleasant, as that in which we practise kindness,-it is an indication that

we still lack power, or it betrays ill-humour at this defect in us ; it brings with

it new dangers and uncertainties as to the power we already possess, and

clouds our horizon by the prospect of revenge, scorn, punishment and failure.

Perhaps only those most susceptible to the sense of power, and eager for it,

will prefer to impress the seal of power on the resisting individual,-those to

whom the sight of the already subjugated person as the object of benevolence

is a burden and a tedium. It is a question how a person is accustomed to

season his life; it is a matter of taste whether a person would rather have theslow or the sudden, the safe or the dangerous and daring increase of power,-

he seeks this or that seasoning always according to his temperament. An easy

booty is something contemptible to proud natures ; they have an agreeable

sensation only at the sight of men of unbroken spirit who could be enemies to

them, and similarly, also, at the sight of all not easily accessible possession;

they are often hard toward the sufferer, for he is not worthy of their effort or

their pride,-but they show themselves so much the more courteous towards

their  equals,  with  whom  strife  and  struggle  would  in  any  case  be  full  of

honour, if at any time an occasion for it should present itself. It is under the

agreeable feelings of this perspective that the members of the knightly caste

have habituated themselves to exquisite courtesy toward one another.-Pity is

the most pleasant feeling in those who have not much pride, and have no

prospect of great conquests: the easy booty-and that is what every sufferer is-

is for them an enchanting thing. Pity is said to be the virtue of the gay lady.

  14

  What  is  called  Love.-The  lust  of  property,  and  love:  what  different

associations each of these ideas evoke!-and yet it might be the same impulse

twice named: on the one occasion disparaged from the standpoint of those

already possessing (in whom the impulse has attained something of repose,-

who are now apprehensive for the safety of their " possession"); on the other

occasion  viewed  from  the  standpoint  of  the  unsatisfied  and  thirsty,  and

therefore glorified as "good." Our love of our neighbour,-is it not a striving

after new property ? And similarly our love of knowledge, of truth; and in

general all the striving after novelties? We gradually become satiated with the

old and securely possessed, and again stretch out our hands; even the finest

landscape in which we live for three months is no longer certain of our love,

and any kind of more distant coast excites our covetousness: the possession

for  the  most  part  becomes  smaller  through  possessing.  Our  pleasure  in

ourselves seeks to maintain itself by always transforming something new into

ourselves,-that is just possessing. To become satiated with a possession, that

is to become satiated with ourselves. (One can also suffer from excess,-even

the desire to cast away, to share out, may assume the honourable name of

"love.") When we see anyone suffering, we willingly utilise the opportunity

then afforded to take possession of him ; the beneficent and sympathetic man,

for example, does this ; he also calls the desire for new possession awakened

in  him,  by  the  name  of  "  love,"  and  has  enjoyment  in  it,  as  in  a  new

acquisition suggesting itself to him. The love of the sexes, however, betraysitself  most  plainly  as  the  striving  after  possession:  the  lover  wants  the

unconditioned, sole possession of the person longed for by him ; he wants

just as absolute power over her soul as over her body; he wants to be loved

solely, and to dwell and rule in the other soul as what is highest and most to

be desired. When one considers that this means precisely to exclude all the

world from a precious possession, a happiness, and an enjoyment; when one

considers that the lover has in view the impoverishment and privation of all

other rivals, and would like to become the dragon of his golden hoard, as the

most inconsiderate and selfish of all " conquerors " and exploiters; when one

considers finally that to the lover himself, the whole world besides appears

indifferent, colourless, and worthless, and that he is ready to make every

sacrifice, disturb every arrangement, and put every other interest behind his

own,-one is verily surprised that this ferocious lust of property and injustice

of sexual love should have been glorified and deified to such an extent at all

times ; yea, that out of this love the conception of love as the antithesis of

egoism  should  have  been  derived,  when  it  is  perhaps  precisely  the  most

unqualified expression of egoism. Here, evidently, the non-possessors and

desirers have determined the usage of language,-there were, of course, always

too many of them. Those who have been favoured with much possession and

satiety, have, to be sure, dropped a word now and then about the " raging

demon,"  as,  for  instance,  the  most  lovable  and  most  beloved  of  all  the

Athenians-Sophocles; but Eros always laughed at such revilers, - they were

always  his  greatest  favourites.-There  is,  of  course,  here  and  there  on  this

terrestrial sphere a kind of sequel to love, in which that envious longing of

two persons for one another has yielded to a new desire and covetousness, to

a common, higher thirst for a superior ideal standing above them : but who

knows this love? Who has experienced it? Its right name is friendship.

  15

  Out of the Distance.-This mountain makes the whole district which it

dominates charming in every way, and full of significance. After we have

said this to ourselves for the hundredth time, we are so irrationally and so

gratefully disposed towards it, as the giver of this charm, that we fancy it

must itself be the most charming thing in the district - and so we climb it, and

are undeceived. All of a sudden, both it and the landscape around us and

under  us,  are  as  it  were  disenchanted  ;  we  had  forgotten  that  many  a

greatness, like many a goodness, wants only to be seen at a certain distance,

and  entirely  from  below,  not  from  above,-it  is  thus  only  that  it  operates.Perhaps  you  know  men  in  your  neighbourhood  who  can  only  look  at

themselves from a certain distance to find themselves at all endurable, or

attractive and enlivening; they are to be dissuaded from self-knowledge.

  16

  Across the Plank.-One must be able to dissimulate in intercourse with

persons who are ashamed of their feelings ; they take a sudden aversion to

anyone who surprises them in a state of tenderness, or of enthusiastic and

high-running feeling, as if he had seen their secrets; If one wants to be kind to

them in such moments one should make them laugh, or say some kind of

cold, playful wickedness :-their feeling thereby congeals, and they are again

self-possessed. But I give the moral before the story.-We were once on a time

so near one another in the course of our lives, that nothing more seemed to

hinder  our  friendship  and  fraternity,  and  there  was  merely  a  small  plank

between us. While you were just about to step on it, I asked you: " Do you

want to come across the plank to me ? " But then you did not want to come

any  longer  ;  and  when  I  again  entreated,  you  were  silent.  Since  then

mountains and torrents, and whatever separates and alienates, have interposed

between us, and even if we wanted to come to one another, we could no

longer do so! When, however, you now remember that small plank, you have

no longer words,-but merely sobs and amazement.

  17

    Motivation of Poverty.-We cannot, to be sure, by any artifice make a rich

and richly-flowing virtue out of a poor one, but we can gracefully enough

reinterpret its poverty into necessity, so that its aspect no longer gives pain to

us, and we cease making reproachful faces at fate on account of it. It is thus

that the wise gardener does who puts the tiny streamlet of his garden into the

arms of a fountain-nymph, and thus motivates the poverty:- and who would

not like him need the nymphs !

  18

  Ancient Pride.-The ancient savour of nobility is lacking in us, because the

ancient slave is lacking in our sentiment. A Greek of noble descent found

such immense intermediate stages, and such a distance between his elevation

and that ultimate baseness, that he could hardly even see the slave plainly:

even Plato no longer saw him entirely. It is otherwise with us, accustomed as

we are to the doctrine of the equality of men, although not to the equality

itself.  A  being  who  has  not  the  free  disposal  of  himself  and  has  not  got

leisure, -that is not regarded by us as anything contemptible ; there is perhapstoo much of this kind of slavishness in each of us, in accordance with the

conditions of our social order and activity, which are fundamentally different

from those of the ancients.-The Greek philosopher went through life with the

secret feeling that there were many more slaves than people supposed - that is

to say, that everyone was a slave who was not a philosopher. His pride was

puffed up when he considered that even the mightiest of the earth were thus

to  be  looked  upon  as  slaves.  This  pride  is  also  unfamiliar  to  us,  and

impossible; the word " slave" has not its full force for us even as a metaphor.

  19

  Evil.-Test the life of the best and most productive men and nations, and

ask  yourselves  whether  a  tree  which  is  to  grow  proudly  heavenward  can

dispense with bad weather and tempests : whether disfavour and opposition

from without, whether every kind of hatred, jealousy, stubbornness, distrust,

severity, greed, and violence do not belong to the favouring circumstances

without which a great growth even in virtue is hardly possible ? The poison

by  which  the  weaker  nature  is  destroyed  is  strengthening  to  the  strong

individual-and he does not call it poison.

  20

  Dignity of Folly.-Several millenniums further on in the path of the last

century!-and  in  everything  that  man  does  the  highest  prudence  will  be

exhibited: but just thereby prudence will have lost all its dignity. It will then,

sure enough, be necessary to be prudent, but it will also be so usual and

common, that a more fastidious taste will feel this necessity as vulgarity. And

just as a tyranny of truth and science would be in a position to raise the value

of  falsehood,  a  tyranny  of  prudence  could  force  into  prominence  a  new

species  of  nobleness.  To  be  noble-that  might  then  mean,  perhaps,  to  be

capable of follies.

  21

  To the Teachers of Unselfishness.-The virtues of a man are called good,

not in respect to the results they have for himself, but in respect to the results

which we expect from that for ourselves and for society:-we have all along

had very little unselfishness, very little " non-egoism " in our praise of the

virtues ! For otherwise it could not but have been seen that the virtues (such

as diligence, obedience, chastity, piety, justice) are mostly injurious to their

possessors, as impulses which rule in them too vehemently and ardently, and

do not want to be kept in co-ordination with the other impulses by the reason.

If  you  have  a  virtue,  an  actual,  perfect  virtue  (and  not  merely  a  kind  ofimpulse towards virtue!)-you are its victim ! But your neighbour praises your

virtue  precisely  on  that  account!  One  praises  the  diligent  man  though  he

injures his sight, or the originality and freshness of his spirit, by his diligence;

the youth is honoured and regretted who has "worn himself out by work,"

because one passes the judgment that " for society as a whole the loss of the

best individual is only a small sacrifice! A pity that this sacrifice should be

necessary ! A much greater pity, it is true, if the individual should think

differently, and regard his preservation and development as more important

than his work in the service of society!" And so one regrets this youth, not on

his own account, but because a devoted instrument, regardless of self-a so-

called "good man," has been lost to society by his death. Perhaps one further

considers the question, whether it would not have been more advantageous

for the interests of society if he had laboured with less disregard of himself,

and had preserved himself longer,-indeed, one readily admits an advantage

from that, but one esteems the other advantage, namely, that a sacrifice has

been made, and that the disposition of the sacrificial animal has once more

been obviously endorsed-as higher and more enduring. It is accordingly, on

the one part, the instrumental character in the virtues which is praised when

the virtues are praised, and on the other part, the blind, ruling impulse in

every virtue, which refuses to let itself be kept within bounds by the general

advantage to the individual; in short, what is praised is the unreason in the

virtues,  in  consequence  of  which  the  individual  allows  himself  to  be

transformed into a function of the whole. The praise of the virtues is the

praise of something which is privately injurious to the individual; it is praise

of impulses which deprive man of his noblest self-love, and the power to take

the  best  care  of  himself.  To  be  sure,  for  the  teaching  and  embodying  of

virtuous  habits  a  series  of  effects  of  virtue  are  displayed,  which  make  it

appear that virtue and private advantage are closely related,-and there is in

fact such a relationship! Blindly furious diligence, for example, the typical

virtue of an instrument, is represented as the way to riches and honour, and as

the most beneficial antidote to tedium and passion : but people are silent

concerning its danger, its greatest dangerousness. Education proceeds in this

manner throughout: it endeavours, by a series of enticements and advantages,

to determine the individual to a certain mode of thinking and acting, which,

when it has become habit, impulse and passion, rules in him and over him, in

opposition to his ultimate advantage, but " for the general good." How often

do I see that blindly furious diligence does indeed create riches and honours,but at the same time deprives the organs of the refinement by virtue of which

alone an enjoyment of riches and honours is possible; so that really the main

expedient  for  combating  tedium  and  passion,  simultaneously  blunts  the

senses and makes the spirit refractory towards new stimuli! (The busiest of

all  ages-  our  age-does  not  know  how  to  make  anything  out  of  its  great

diligence and wealth, except always more and more wealth, and more and

more diligence; there is even more genius needed for laying out wealth than

for acquiring it!-Well, we shall have our " grandchildren " !) If the education

succeeds,  every  virtue  of  the  individual  is  a  public  utility,  and  a  private

disadvantage in respect to the highest private end,-probably some psycho-

aesthetic  stunting,  or  even  premature  dissolution.  One  should  consider

successively  from  the  same  standpoint  the  virtues  of  obedience,  chastity,

piety,  and  justice.  The  praise  of  the  unselfish,  self-sacrificing,  virtuous

person-he, consequently, who does not expend his whole energy and reason

for  his  own  conservation,  development,  elevation,  furtherance  and

augmentation  of  power,  but  lives  as  regards  himself  unassumingly  and

thoughtlessly, perhaps even indifferently or ironically,-this praise has in any

case not originated out of the spirit of unselfishness ! The " neighbour "

praises  unselfishness  because  he  profits  by  it!  If  the  neighbour  were  "

unselfishly" disposed himself, he would reject that destruction of power, that

injury for his advantage, he would thwart such inclinations in their origin,

and above all he would manifest his unselfishness just by not giving it a good

name! The fundamental contradiction in that morality which at present stands

in  high  honour  is  here  indicated:  the  motives  to  such  a  morality  are  in

antithesis to its principle ! That with which this morality wishes to prove

itself, refutes it out of its criterion of what is moral! The maxim, " You shall

renounce  yourself  and  offer  yourself  as  a  sacrifice,"  in  order  not  to  be

inconsistent with its own morality, could only be decreed by a being who

himself  renounced  his  own  advantage  thereby,  and  who  perhaps  in  the

required self-sacrifice of individuals brought about his own dissolution. As

soon,  however,  as  the  neighbour  (or  society)  recommended  altruism  on

account of its utility, the precisely antithetical proposition, " You shall seek

your advantage even at the expense of everybody else," was brought into use:

accordingly, " you shall," and " you shall not," are preached in one breath!

  22

  L'Ordre du Jour pour le Roi.-The day commences : let us begin to arrange

for this day the business and fetes of our most gracious lord, who at present isstill  pleased  to  repose.  His  Majesty  has  bad  weather  to-day:  we  shall  be

careful not to call it bad; we shall not speak of the weather,- but we shall go

through to-day's business somewhat more ceremoniously and make the fetes

somewhat more festive than would otherwise be necessary. His Majesty may

perhaps even be sick: we shall give the last good news of the evening at

breakfast, the arrival of M. Montaigne, who knows how to joke so pleasantly

about his sickness,-he suffers from stone. We shall receive several persons

(persons!- what would that old inflated frog, who will be among them, say, if

he heard this word! " I am no person," he would say, " but always the thing

itself")-and  the  reception  will  last  longer  than  is  pleasant  to  anybody;  a

sufficient reason for telling about the poet who wrote over his door, " He who

enters here will do me an honour; he who does not-a favour."-That is, indeed,

saying a discourteous thing in a courteous manner! And perhaps this poet is

quite justified on his part in being discourteous ; they say that his rhymes are

better  than  the  rhymester.  Well,  let  him  still  make  many  of  them,  and

withdraw himself as much as possible from the world: and that is doubtless

the significance of his well-bred rudeness! A prince, on the other hand, is

always of more value than his " verse," even when-but what are we about ?

We gossip, and the whole court believes that we have already been at work

and racked our brains : there is no light to be seen earlier than that which

burns in our window.-Hark ! Was that not the bell ? The devil! The day and

the  dance  commence,  and  we  do  not  know  our  rounds!  We  must  then

improvise,-all the world improvises its day. Today, let us for once do like all

the world!-And therewith vanished my wonderful morning dream, probably

owing to the violent strokes of the tower-clock, which just then announced

the fifth hour with all the importance which is peculiar to it. It seems to me

that on this occasion the God of dreams wanted to make merry over my

habits,- it is my habit to commence the day by arranging it properly, to make

it endurable for myself, and it is possible that I may often have done this too

formally, and too much like a prince.

  23The  Characteristics  of  Corruption.-Let  us  observe  the  following

characteristics in that condition of society from time to time necessary, which

is designated by the word " corruption." Immediately upon the appearance of

corruption anywhere, a motley superstition gets the upper hand, and the until

now  universal  belief  of  a  people  becomes  colourless  and  impotent  in

comparison with it; for superstition is freethinking of the second rank,-he

who gives himself over to it selects certain forms and formulae which appealto him, and permits himself a right of choice. The superstitious man is always

much  more  of  a  "  person,"  in  comparison  with  the  religious  man,  and  a

superstitious society will be one in which there are many individuals, and a

delight in individuality. Seen from this standpoint superstition always appears

as  a  progress  in  comparison  with  belief,  and  as  a  sign  that  the  intellect

becomes  more  independent  and  claims  to  have  its  rights.  Those  who

reverence  the  old  religion  and  the  religious  disposition  then  complain  of

corruption,- they have until now also determined the usage of language, and

have given a bad repute to superstition, even among the freest spirits. Let us

learn that it is a symptom of enlightenment.-Secondly, a society in which

corruption takes a hold is blamed for effeminacy: for the appreciation of war,

and  the  delight  in  war,  perceptibly  diminish  in  such  a  society,  and  the

conveniences of life are now just as eagerly sought after as were military and

gymnastic honours formerly. But one is accustomed to overlook the fact that

the old national energy and national passion, which acquired a magnificent

splendour  in  war  and  in  the  tourney,  has  now  transferred  itself  into

innumerable private passions, and has merely become less visible; indeed in

periods of " corruption " the quantity and quality of the expended energy of a

people is probably greater than ever, and the individual spends it lavishly, to

such an extent as could not be done formerly-he was not then rich enough to

do so! And thus it is precisely in times of " effeminacy" that tragedy runs at

large in and out of doors, it is then that ardent love and ardent hatred are

born, and the flame of knowledge flashes heavenward in full blaze.-Thirdly,

as  if  in  amends  for  the  reproach  of  superstition  and  effeminacy,  it  is

customary to say of such periods of corruption that they are milder, and that

cruelty  has  then  greatly  diminished  in  comparison  with  the  older,  more

credulous, and stronger period. But to this praise I am just as little able to

assent as to that reproach: I only grant so much-namely, that cruelty now

becomes more refined, and its older forms are henceforth counter to the taste

;  but  the  wounding  and  torturing  by  word  and  look  reaches  its  highest

development in times of corruption,-it is now only that wickedness is created,

and the delight in wickedness. The men of the period of corruption are witty

and calumnious; they know that there are yet other ways of murdering than

by the dagger and the ambush-they know also that all that is well said is

believed in.-Fourthly, it is when " morals decay " that those beings who one

calls  tyrants  first  make  their  appearance;  they  are  the  forerunners  of  the

individual, and as it were early matured firstlings. Yet a little while, and thisfruit of fruits hangs ripe and yellow on the tree of a people,-and only for the

sake of such fruit did this tree exist! When the decay has reached' its worst,

and likewise the conflict of all sorts of tyrants, there always arises the Caesar,

the final tyrant, who puts an end to the exhausted struggle for sovereignty, by

making the exhaustedness work for him. In his time the individual is usually

most mature, and consequently the "culture" is highest and most fruitful, but

not on his account nor through him : although the men of highest culture love

to flatter their Caesar by pretending that they are his creation. The truth,

however,  is  that  they  need  quietness  externally,  because  they  have

disquietude and labour internally. In these times bribery and treason are at

their height: for the love of the ego, then first discovered, is much more

powerful than the love of the old, used-up, hackneyed "fatherland"; and the

need to be secure in one way or other against the frightful fluctuations of

fortune, opens even the nobler hands, as soon as a richer and more powerful

person shows himself ready to put gold into them. There is then, so little

certainty with regard to the future; people live only for the day : a psychical

condition  which  enables  every  deceiver  to  play  an  easy  game,-people  of

course  only  let  themselves  be  misled  and  bribed  "  for  the  present,"  and

reserve for themselves futurity and virtue. The individuals, as is well known,

the men who only live for themselves, provide for the moment more than do

their opposites, the gregarious men, because they consider themselves just as

incalculable as the future; and similarly they attach themselves willingly to

despots, because they believe themselves capable of activities and expedients,

which  can  neither  reckon  on  being  understood  by  the  multitude,  nor  on

rending favour with them,- but the tyrant or the Caesar understands the rights

of the individual even in his excesses, and has an interest in speaking on

behalf of a bolder private morality, and even in giving his hand to it. For he

thinks of himself, and wishes people to think of him what Napoleon once

uttered in his classical style-" I have the right to answer by an eternal ' thus I

am' to everything about which complaint is brought against me. I am apart

from all the world, I accept conditions from nobody. I wish people also to

submit to my fancies, and to take it quite as a simple matter, if I should

indulge in this or that diversion." Thus spoke Napoleon once to his wife,

when she had reasons for calling in question the fidelity of her husband.-The

times of corruption are the seasons when the apples fall from the tree: I mean

the  individuals,  the  seed-bearers  of  the  future,  the  pioneers  of  spiritual

colonisation,  and  of  a  new  construction  of  national  and  social  unions.Corruption is only an abusive term for the harvest time of a people.

  24

  Different Dissatisfactions.-The feeble and as it were feminine dissatisfied

people,  have  ingenuity  for  beautifying  and  deepening  life;  the  strong

dissatisfied  people-the  masculine  persons  among  them,  to  continue  the

metaphor-have ingenuity for improving and safeguarding life. The former

show their weakness and feminine character by willingly letting themselves

be temporarily deceived, and perhaps even by putting up with a little ecstasy

and enthusiasm on a time, but on the whole they are never to be satisfied, and

suffer from the incurability of their dissatisfaction ; moreover they are the

patrons of all those who manage to concoct opiate and narcotic comforts, and

on that account are averse to those who value the physician higher than the

priest,-they thereby encourage the continuance of actual distress! If there had

not been a surplus of dissatisfied persons of this kind in Europe since the time

of  the  Middle  Ages,  the  remarkable  capacity  of  Europeans  for  constant

transformation would perhaps not have originated at all; for the claims of the

strong dissatisfied persons are too gross, and really too modest to resist being

finally  quieted  down.  China  is  an  instance  of  a  country  in  which

dissatisfaction on a grand scale and the capacity for transformation have died

out for many centuries ; and the Socialists and state-idolaters of Europe could

easily bring things to Chinese conditions and to a Chinese "happiness," with

their measures for the amelioration and security of life, provided that they

could first of all root out the sicklier, tenderer, more feminine dissatisfaction

and  Romanticism  which  are  still  very  abundant  among  us.  Europe  is  an

invalid  who  owes  her  best  thanks  to  her  incurability  and  the  eternal

transformations  of  her  sufferings  ;  these  constant  new  situations,  these

equally constant new dangers, pains, and make-shifts, have at last generated

an intellectual sensitiveness which is almost equal to genius, and is in any

case the mother of all genius.

  25

  Not Pre-ordained to Knowledge.-There is a blind humility not at all rare,

and when a person is afflicted with it, he is once for all disqualified for being

a disciple of knowledge. It is this in fact: the moment a man of this kind

perceives  anything  striking,  he  turns  as  it  were  on  his  heel,  and  says  to

himself:  "You  have  deceived  yourself!  Where  have  your  wits  been!  This

cannot be the truth!"-and then, instead of looking at it and listening to it with

more attention, he runs out of the way of the striking object as if intimidated,and seeks to get it out of his head as quickly as possible. For his fundamental

rule runs thus : " I want to see nothing that contradicts the usual opinion

concerning things ! Am / created for the purpose of discovering new truths ?

There are already too many of the old ones."

  26

  What  is  Living!-Living-that  is  to  continually  eliminate  from  ourselves

what is about to die; Living-that is to be cruel and inexorable towards all that

becomes weak and old in ourselves, and not only in ourselves. Living-that

means, therefore, to be without piety toward the dying, the wretched and the

old ? To be continually a murderer ?-And yet old Moses said : " You shall not

kill!"

  27

  The Self-Renouncer. - What does the self-renouncer do? He strives after a

higher world, he wants to fly longer and further and higher than all men of

affirmation-he throws away many things that would impede his flight, and

several things among them that are not valueless, that are not unpleasant to

him : he sacrifices them to his desire for elevation. Now this sacrificing, this

casting away, is the very thing which becomes visible in him: on that account

one calls him a self-renouncer, and as such he stands before us, enveloped in

his cowl, and as the soul of a hair-shirt. With this effect, however, which he

makes upon us he is well content: he wants to keep concealed from us his

desire, his pride, his intention of flying above us.-Yes! He is wiser than we

thought, and so courteous towards us- this affirmer! For that is what he is,

like us, even in his self-renunciation.

  28

  Injuring with one's best Qualities.-Our strong points sometimes drive us

so far forward that we cannot any longer endure our weaknesses, and we

perish by them: we also perhaps see this result beforehand, but nevertheless

do not want it to be otherwise. We then become hard towards that which

would gladly be spared in us, and our pitiless-ness is also our greatness. Such

an experience, which must in the end cost us our life, is a symbol of the

collective effect of great men upon others and upon their epoch:-it is just with

their best abilities, with that which only they can do, that they destroy much

that  is  weak,  uncertain,  evolving,  and  willing,  and  are  thereby  injurious.

Indeed, the case may happen in which, taken on the whole, they only do

injury, because their best is accepted and drunk up as it were solely by those

who  lose  their  understanding  and  their  egoism  by  it,  as  by  too  strong  abeverage; they become so intoxicated that they go breaking their limbs on all

the wrong roads where their drunkenness drives them.

  29

    Adventitious Liars. - When people began to combat the unity of Aristotle

in France, and consequently also to defend it, there was once more to be seen

that which has been seen so often, but seen so unwillingly:-people imposed

false reasons on themselves on account of which those laws ought to exist,

merely  for  the  sake  of  not  acknowledging  to  themselves  that  they  had

accustomed themselves to the authority of those laws, and did not want any

longer  to  have  things  otherwise.  And  people  do  so  in  every  prevailing

morality and religion, and have always done so: the reasons and intentions

behind the habit, are only added surreptitiously when people begin to combat

the  habit,  and  ask  for  reasons  and  intentions.  It  is  here  that  the  great

dishonesty of the conservatives of all times hides : -they are adventitious

liars.

  30

  The Comedy of Celebrated Men.-Celebrated men who need their fame,

as, for instance, all politicians, no longer select their associates and friends

without fore-thought: from the one they want a portion of the splendour and

reflection of his virtues; from the other they want the fear-inspiring power of

certain dubious qualities in him, of which everybody is aware; from another

they steal his reputation for idleness and basking in the sun, because it is

advantageous for their own ends to be regarded temporarily as heedless and

lazy:-it conceals the fact that they lie in ambush; they now use the visionaries,

now the experts, now the brooders, now the pedants in their neighbourhood,

as their actual selves for the time; but very soon they do not need them any

longer! And thus while their environment and outside die off continually,

everything seems to crowd into this environment, and wants to become a "

character"  of  it;  they  are  like  great  cities  in  this  respect.  Their  repute  is

continually in process of mutation, like their character, for their changing

methods require this change, and they show and exhibit sometimes this and

sometimes  that  actual  or  fictitious  quality  on  the  stage;  their  friends  and

associates, as we have said, belong to these stage properties. On the other

hand, that which they aim at must remain so much the more steadfast, and

burnished and resplendent in the distance,-and this also sometimes needs its

comedy and its stage-play.

  31    Commerce  and  Nobility.  -  Buying  and  selling  is  now  regarded  as

something  ordinary,  like  the  art  of  reading  and  writing;  everyone  is  now

trained to it even when he is not a tradesman exercising himself daily in the

art; precisely as formerly in the period of uncivilised humanity, everyone was

a hunter and exercised himself day by day in the art of hunting. Hunting was

then something common : but just as this finally became a privilege of the

powerful and noble, and thereby lost the character of the commonplace and

the ordinary- by ceasing to be necessary and by becoming an affair of fancy

and luxury,-so it might become the same someday with buying and selling.

Conditions of society are imaginable in which there will be no selling and

buying, and in which the necessity for this art will become quite lost; perhaps

it may then happen that individuals who are less subjected to the law of the

prevailing condition of things will indulge in buying and selling as a luxury

of sentiment. ' It is then only that commerce would acquire nobility, and the

noble would then perhaps occupy themselves just as readily with commerce

as they have done until now with war and politics: while on the other hand

the  valuation  of  politics  might  then  have  entirely  altered.  Already  even

politics ceases to be the business of a gentleman ; and it is possible that one

day it may be found to be so vulgar as to be brought, like all party literature

and daily literature, under the rubric : " Prostitution of the intellect."

  32

    Undesirable Disciples.-What shall I do with these two youths! called out

a philosopher dejectedly, who " corrupted " youths, as Socrates had once

corrupted them,-they are unwelcome disciples to me. One of them cannot say

" Nay," and the other says " Half and half" to everything. Provided they

grasped my doctrine, the former would suffer too much, for my mode of

thinking requires a martial soul, willingness to cause pain, delight in denying,

and a hard skin,-he would succumb by open wounds and internal injuries.

And the other will choose the mediocre in everything he represents, and thus

make a mediocrity of the whole,-I should like my enemy to have such a

disciple.

  33

  Outside the Lecture-room.-" In order to prove that man after all belongs

to the good-natured animals, I would remind you how credulous he has been

for so long a time. It is now only, quite late, and after an immense self-

conquest, that he has become a distrustful animal,-yes! man is now more

wicked than ever."-I do not understand this ; why should man now be more