phenomenal form of a Something otherwise absolutely

  -2-

    indecipherable. If therefore we must acquiesce in the rigid necessity of

getting  nowhere  beyond  the  conceptions  we  can  nevertheless  again

distinguish two main species within their realm. The one species manifest

themselves to us as pleasure-and-displeasure-sensations and accompany all

other conceptions as a never-lacking fundamental basis. This most general

manifestation, out of which and by which alone we understand all Becoming

and all Willing and for which we will retain the name " Will," has now too in

language  its  own  symbolic  sphere:  and  in  truth  this  sphere  is  equally

fundamental to the language, as that manifestation is fundamental to all other

conceptions. All degrees of pleasure and displeasure -- expressions of one

primal cause unfathomable to us -- symbolize themselves in the tone of the

speaker:  whereas  all  the  other  conceptions  are  indicated  by  the  gesture-

symbolism of the speaker. In so far as that primal cause is the same in all

men, the tonal subsoil is also the common one, comprehensible beyond the

difference of language. Out of it now develops the more arbitrary gesture-

symbolism which is not wholly adequate for its basis : and with which begins

the diversity of languages, whose multiplicity we are permitted to consider-to

use  a  simile-as  a  strophic  text  to  that  primal  melody  of  the  pleasure-and

displeasure-language.  The  whole  realm  of  the  consonantal  and  vocal  we

believe  we  may  reckon  only  under  gesture-symbolism:  consonants  and

vowels without that fundamental tone which is necessary above all else, are

nothing but positions of the organs of speech, in short, gestures-; as soon as

we imagine the word proceeding out of the mouth of man, then first of all the

root of the word, and the basis of that gesture-symbolism, the tonal subsoil,

the echo of the pleasure-and-displeasure-sensations originate. As our whole

corporeality stands in relation to that original phenomenon, the " Will," so the

word built out of its consonants and vowels stands in relation to its tonal

basis.

  This original phenomenon, the " Will," with its scale of pleasure-and-

displeasure  sensations  attains  in  the  development  of  music  an  ever  more

adequate symbolic expression: and to this historical process the continuous

effort  of  lyric  poetry  runs  parallel,  the  effort  to  transcribe  music  into

metaphors:  exactly  as  this  double-phenomenon,  according  to  the  just

completed disquisition, lies typified in language.

  He  who  has  followed  us  into  these  difficult  contemplations  readily,attentively, and with some imagination -- and with kind indulgence where the

expression has been too scanty or too unconditional -- will now have the

advantage with us, of laying before himself more seriously and answering

more deeply than is usually the case some stirring points of controversy of

present-day  Esthetics  and  still  more  of  contemporary  artists.  Let  us  think

now, after all our assumptions, what an undertaking it must be, to set music

to a poem; ie., to illustrate a poem by music, in order to help music thereby to

obtain a language of ideas. What a perverted world! A task that appears to my

mind  like  that  of  a  son  wanting  to  create  his  father!  Music  can  create

metaphors  out  of  itself,  which  will  always  however  be  but  schemata,

instances as it were of her intrinsic general contents. But how should the

metaphor, the conception, create music out of itself! Much less could the

idea, or, as one has said, the " poetical idea " do this. As certainly as a bridge

leads out of the mysterious castle of the musician into the free land of the

metaphors - -and the lyric poet steps across it -- as certainly is it impossible to

go the contrary way, although some are said to exist who fancy they have

done so. One might people the air with the phantasy of a Raphael, one might

see St. Cecilia, as he does, listening enraptured to the harmonies of the choirs

of angels -- no tone issues from this world apparently lost in music: even if

we imagined

  -3-

  that  that  harmony  in  reality,  as  by  a  miracle,  began  to  sound  for  us,

whither would Cecilia, Paul and Magdalena disappear from us, whither even

the singing choir of angels! We should at once cease to be Raphael: and as in

that  picture  the  earthly  instruments  lie  shattered  on  the  ground,  so  our

painter's  vision,  defeated  by  the  higher,  would  fade  and  die  away.-How

nevertheless could the miracle happen? How should the Apollonian world of

the eye quite engrossed in contemplation be able to create out of itself the

tone,  which  on  the  contrary  symbolizes  a  sphere  which  is  excluded  and

conquered  just  by  that  very  Apollonian  absorption  in  Appearance?  The

delight  at  Appearance  cannot  raise  out  of  itself  the  pleasure  at  Non-

appearance; the delight of perceiving is delight only by the fact that nothing

reminds us of a sphere in which individuation is broken and abolished. If we

have  characterized  at  all  correctly  the  Apollonian  in  opposition  to  the

Dionysian, then the thought which attributes to the metaphor, the idea, the

appearance, in some way the power of producing out of itself the tone, must

appear to us strangely wrong. We will not be referred, in order to be refuted,to the musician who writes music to existing lyric poems; for after all that has

been said we shall be compelled to assert that the relationship between the

lyric  poem  and  its  setting  must  in  any  case  be  a  different  one  from  that

between a father and his child. Then what exactly?

  Here now we may be met on the ground of a favorite aesthetic notion

with the proposition, "It is not the poem which gives birth to the setting but

the sentiment created by the poem." I do not agree with that; the more subtle

or  powerful  stirring-up  of  that  pleasure-and-displeasure-subsoil  is  in  the

realm of productive art the element which is inartistic in itself; indeed only its

total  exclusion  makes  the  complete  self-absorption  and  disinterested

perception  of  the  artist  possible.  Here  perhaps  one  might  retaliate  that  I

myself just now predicated about the "Will," that in music "Will" came to an

ever  more  adequate  symbolic  expression.  My  answer,  condensed  into  an

aesthetic axiom, is this: the Will is the object of music but not the origin of it

,  that  is  the  Will  in  its  very  greatest  universality,  as  the  most  original

manifestation, under which is to be understood all Becoming. That, which we

call feeling, is with regard to this Will already permeated and saturated with

conscious and unconscious conceptions and is therefore no longer directly the

object of music; it is unthinkable then that these feelings should be able to

create music out of themselves. Take for instance the feelings of love, fear

and hope: music can no longer do anything with them in a direct way, every

one  of  them  is  already  so  filled  with  conceptions.  On  the  contrary  these

feelings can serve to symbolize music, as the lyric poet does who translates

for  himself  into  the  simile  world  of  feelings  that  conceptually  and

metaphorically  unapproachable  realm  of  the  Will,  the  proper  content  and

object of music. The lyric poet resembles all those hearers of music who are

conscious of an effect of music on their emotions; the distant and removed

power of music appeals, with them, to an intermediate realm which gives to

them  as  it  were  a  foretaste,  a  symbolic  preliminary  conception  of  music

proper, it appeals to the intermediate realm of the emotions. One might be

permitted to say about them, with respect to the Will, the only object of

music,  that  they  bear  the  same  relation  to  this  Will,  as  the  analogous

morning-dream  according  to  Schopenhauer's  theory,  bears  to  the  dream

proper. To all those, however, who are unable to get at music except with

their emotions, is to be said, that they will ever remain in the entrance-hall

and  will  never  have  access  to  the  sanctuary  of  music:  which,  as  I  said,

emotion cannot show but only symbolize.  -4-

  With regard however to the origin of music, I have already explained that

that can never lie in the Will, but must rather rest in the lap of that force,

which under the form of the " Will " creates out of itself a visionary world:

the origin of music lies beyond all individuation, a proposition, which after

our discussion on the Dionysian is self-evident. At this point I take the liberty

of  setting  forth  again  comprehensively  side  by  side  those  decisive

propositions which the antithesis of the Dionysian and Apollonian dealt with

has compelled us to enunciate:

  The "Will " as the most original manifestation, is the object of music: in

this sense music can be called imitation of Nature, but of Nature in its most

general form.--

  The  "Will"  itself  and  the  feelings-manifestations  of  the  Will  already

permeated with conceptions-are wholly incapable of creating music out of

themselves, just as on the other hand it is utterly denied to music to represent

feelings, or to have feelings as its object, while Will is its only object.--

  He who carries away feelings as effects of music has within them as it

were a symbolic intermediate realm, which can give him a foretaste of music,

but excludes him at the same time from her innermost sanctuaries.--

  The lyric poet interprets music to himself through the symbolic world of

emotions, whereas he himself, in the calm of the Apollonian contemplation,

is exempted from those emotions.--

  When,  therefore,  the  musician  writes  a  setting  to  a  lyric  poem  he  is

moved as musician neither through the images nor through the emotional

language in the text; but a musical inspiration coming from quite a different

sphere chooses for itself that songtext as allegorical expression. There cannot

therefore be any question as to a necessary relation between poem and music;

for  the  two  worlds  brought  here  into  connection  are  too  strange  to  one

another to enter into more than a superficial alliance; the song-text is just a

symbol and stands to music in the same relation as the Egyptian hieroglyph

of bravery did to the brave warrior himself. During the highest revelations of

music we even feel involuntarily the crudeness of every figurative effort and

of every emotion dragged in for purposes of analogy; for example, the last

quartets of Beethoven quite put to shame all illustration and the entire realm

of empiric reality. The symbol, in face of the god really revealing himself,

has  no  longer  any  meaning;  moreover  it  appears  as  an  offensive

superficiality.    [.............]

  Let us now approach, after these preparations, the discussion of the opera,

so as to be able to proceed afterwards from the opera to its counterpart in the

Greek tragedy. What we had to observe in the last movement of the Ninth,

ie., on the highest level of modern music-development, viz., that the word-

content goes down unheard in the general sea of sound, is nothing isolated

and peculiar, but the general and eternally valid norm in the vocal music of

all times, the norm which alone is adequate to the origin of lyric song. The

man in a state of Dionysian excitement has a listener just as little as the

orgiastic  crowd,  a  listener  to  whom  he  might  have  something  to

communicate,  a  listener  as  the  epic  narrator  and  generally  speaking  the

Apollonian artist, to be sure, presupposes. It is rather in the nature of the

Dionysian art, that it has no consideration for the listener: the inspired servant

of Dionysos is, as I said in a former place, understood only by his cornpeers. ,

But if we now imagine a listener at those endemic outbursts of Dionysian

excitement then we shall have to prophesy for him a fate similar to that

  -5-

  which Pentheus the discovered eavesdropper suffered, namely, to be torn

to pieces by the Maenads. The lyric musician sings "as the bird sings," alone,

out of innermost compulsion ; when the listener comes to him with a demand

he must become dumb. Therefore it would be altogether unnatural to ask

from the lyric musician that one should also understand the text-words of his

song, unnatural because here a demand is made by the listener, who has no

right at all during the lyric outburst to claim anything. Now with the poetry of

the  great  ancient  lyric  poets  in  your  hand,  put  the  question  honestly  to

yourself whether they can have even thought of making themselves clear to

the mass of the people standing around and listening, clear with their world

of metaphors and thoughts; answer this serious question with a look at Pindar

and the Aeschylian choir songs. These most daring and obscure intricacie's of

thought, this whirl of metaphors, ever impetuously reproducing itself, this

oracular tone of the whole, which we, without the diversion of music and

orchestration, so often cannot penetrate even with the closest attention -- was

this whole world of miracles transparent as glass to the Greek crowd, yea, a

metaphorical -- conceptual interpretation of music? And with such mysteries

of thought as are to be found in Pindar do you think the wonderful poet could

have wished to elucidate the music already strikingly distinct? Should we

here not be forced to an insight into the very nature of the lyricist -- theartistic man, who to himself must interpret music through the symbolism of

metaphors and emotions, but who has nothing to communicate to the listener;

an artist who, in complete aloofness, even forgets those who stand eagerly

listening near him. And as the lyricist his hymns, so the people sing the folk-

song, for themselves, out of inmost impulse, unconcerned whether the word

is comprehensible to him who does not join in the song. Let us think of our

own experiences in the realm of higher art-music: what did we understand of

the text of a Mass of Palestrina, of a Cantata of Bach, of an Oratorio of

Handel, if we ourselves perhaps did not join in singing? Only for him who

joins in singing do lyric poetry and vocal music exist; the listener stands

before it as before absolute music.

  But now the opera begins, according to the clearest testimonies, with the

demand of the listener to understand the word.

  What? The listener demands? The word is to be understood?

  But  to  bring  music  into  the  service  of  a  series  of  metaphors  and

conceptions,  to  use  it  as  a  means  to  an  end,  to  the  strengthening  and

elucidation of such conceptions and metaphors -- such a peculiar presumption

as is found in the concept of an "opera," reminds me of that ridiculous person

who endeavors to lift himself up into the air with his own arms; that which

this fool and which the opera according to that idea attempt are absolute

impossibilities. That idea of the opera does not demand perhaps an abuse

from music but -- as I said -- an impossibility. Music never can become a

means; one may push, screw, torture it; as tone, as roll of the drum, in its

crudest and simplest stages, it still defeats poetry and abases the latter to its

reflection. The opera as a species of art according to that concept is therefore

not only an aberration of music, but an erroneous conception of aesthetics. If

I herewith, after all, justify the nature of the opera for Aesthetics, I am of

course far from justifying at the same time bad opera music or bad opera-

verses. The worst music can still mean, as compared with the best poetry, the

Dionysian  world-subsoil,  and  the  worst  poetry  can  be  mirror,  image  and

reflection of this subsoil, if together with the best music: as certainly, namely,

as the single tone against the metaphor is already Dionysian, and the single

metaphor together with idea and word against music is already Apollonian.

Yea, even bad music together with bad poetry can still inform as to the nature

of music and poesy.          UNTIMELY MEDITATIONS/THOUGHTS OUT OF SEASON

                                Translated by A Ludovici

                          TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

  To the reader who knows Nietzsche, who has studied his Zarathustra and

understood it, and who, in addition, has digested the works entitled Beyond

Good and Evil, The Genealogy of Morals, The Twilight of the Idols, and The

Antichrist,-- to such a reader everything in this volume will be perfectly clear

and comprehensible. In the attack on Strauss he will immediately detect the

germ  of  the  whole  of  Nietzsche's  subsequent  attitude  towards  too  hasty

contentment and the foolish beatitude of the "easily pleased"; in the paper on

Wagner  he  will  recognise  Nietzsche  the  indefatigable  borer,  miner  and

underminer, seeking to define his ideals, striving after self-knowledge above

all, and availing himself of any contemporary approximation to his ideal man,

in order to press it forward as the incarnation of his thoughts. Wagner the

reformer of mankind! Wagner the dithyrambic dramatist!--The reader who

knows Nietzsche will not be misled by these expressions.

  To the uninitiated reader, however, some words of explanation are due,

not only in regard to the two papers before us, but in regard to Nietzsche

himself. So much in our time is learnt from hearsay concerning prominent

figures in science, art, religion, or philosophy, that it is hardly possible for

anybody to-day, however badly informed he may be, to begin the study of

any  great  writer  or  scientist  with  a  perfectly  open  mind.  It  were  well,

therefore, to begin the study of Nietzsche with some definite idea as to his

unaltered purpose, if he ever possessed such a thing; as to his lifelong ideal, if

he ever kept one so long; and as to the one direction in which he always

travelled, despite apparent deviations and windings. Had he such a purpose,

such an ideal, such a direction? We have no wish to open a controversy here,

neither do we think that in replying to this question in the affirmative we

shall give rise to one; for every careful student of Nietzsche, we know, will

uphold  us  in  our  view.  Nietzsche  had  one  very  definite  and  unaltered

purpose, ideal and direction, and this was "the elevation of the type man." He

tells us in The Will to Power: "All is truth to me that tends to elevate man!"

To this principle he was already pledged as a student at Leipzig; we owe

every line that he ever wrote to his devotion to it, and it is the key to all his

complexities, blasphemies, prolixities, and terrible earnestness. All was good

to Nietzsche that tended to elevate man; all was bad that kept man stationary

or sent him backwards. Hence he wrote David Strauss, the Confessor andWriter (1873).

  The Franco-German War had only just come to an end, and the keynote

of this polemical pamphlet is, "Beware of the intoxication of success." When

the whole of Germany was delirious with joy over her victory, at a time when

the unquestioned triumph of her arms tended rather to reflect unearned glory

upon every department of her social organisation, it required both courage

and discernment to raise the warning voice and to apply the wet blanket. But

Nietzsche did both, and with spirit, because his worst fears were aroused.

Smug content (erb�rmliches Behagen) was threatening to thwart his one

purpose--the  elevation  of  man;  smug  content  personified  in  the  German

scholar was giving itself airs of omniscience, omnipotence, and ubiquity, and

all the while it was a mere cover for hidden rottenness and jejune pedantry.

  Nietzsche's attack on Hegelian optimism alone (pp. 46, 53-54), in the first

paper, fully reveals the fundamental idea underlying this essay; and if the

personal attack on Strauss seems sometimes to throw the main theme into the

background, we must remember the author's own attitude towards this aspect

of  the  case.  Nietzsche,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  had  neither  the  spite  nor  the

meanness requisite for the purely personal attack. In his Ecce Homo, he tells

us most emphatically: "I have no desire to attack particular persons--I do but

use a personality as a magnifying glass; I place it over the subject to which I

wish to call attention, merely that the appeal may be stronger." David Strauss,

in a letter to a friend, soon after the publication of the first Thought out of

Season, expresses his utter astonishment that a total stranger should have

made such a dead set at him. The same problem may possibly face the reader

on every page of this fssay: if, however, we realise Nietzsche's purpose, if we

understand his struggle to be one against "Culture-Philistinism" in general, as

a stemming, stultifying and therefore degenerate factor, and regard David

Strauss--as the author himself did, that is to say, simply as a glass, focusing

the whole light of our understanding upon the main theme-- then the Strauss

paper is seen to be one of such enormous power, and its aim appears to us so

lofty, that, whatever our views may be concerning the nature of the person

assailed, we are forced to conclude that, to Nietzsche at least, he was but the

incarnation and concrete example of the evil and danger then threatening to

overtake his country, which it was the object of this essay to expose.

  When we read that at the time of Strauss's death (February 7th, 1874)

Nietzsche was greatly tormented by the fear that the old scholar might have

been hastened to his end by the use that had been made of his personality inthe first Unzeitgem�sse Betrachtung; when we remember that in the midst

of  this  torment  he  ejaculated,  "I  was  indeed  not  made  to  hate  and  have

enemies!"--we are then in a better position to judge of the motives which,

throughout  his  life,  led  him  to  engage  such  formidable  opponents  and  to

undertake such relentless attacks. It was merely his ruling principle that, all is

true and good that tends to elevate man; everything is bad and false that

keeps man stationary or sends him backwards.

  Those who may think that his attacks were often unwarrantable and ill-

judged will do well, therefore, to bear this in mind, that whatever his value or

merits  may  have  been  as  an  iconoclast,  at  least  the  aim  he  had  was

sufficiently lofty and honourable, and that he never shirked the duties which

he rightly or wrongly imagined would help him to

  Wagner  paper  (1875-1876)  we  are  faced  by  a  somewhat  different

problem.  Most  readers  who  will  have  heard  of  Nietzsche's  subsequent

denunciation  of  Wagner's  music  will  probably  stand  aghast  before  this

panegyric of him; those who, like Professor Saintsbury, will fail to discover

the internal evidence in this essay which points so infallibly to Nietzsche's

real but still subconscious opinion of his hero, may even be content to regard

his later attitude as the result of a complete volte-face, and at any rate a flat

contradiction of the one revealed in this paper. Let us, however, examine the

internal evidence we speak of, and let us also discuss the purpose and spirit of

the essay.

  We have said that Nietzsche was a man with a very fixed and powerful

ideal, and we have heard what this ideal was. Can we picture him, then,--a

young and enthusiastic scholar with a cultured love of music, and particularly

of Wagner's music, eagerly scanning all his circle, the whole city and country

in  which  he  lived--yea,  even  the  whole  continent  on  which  he  lived--for

something  or  some  one  that  would  set  his  doubts  at  rest  concerning  the

feasibility of his ideal? Can we now picture this young man coming face to

face with probably one of the greatest geniuses of his age--with a man whose

very presence must have been electric, whose every word or movement must

have imparted some power to his surroundings--with Richard Wagner?

  If  we  can  conceive  of  what  the  mere  attention,  even,  of  a  man  like

Wagner must have meant to Nietzsche in his twenties, if we can form any

idea  of  the  intoxicating  effect  produced  upon  him  when  this  attention

developed into friendship, we almost refuse to believe that Nietzsche could

have been critical at all at first. In Wagner, as was but natural, he soon beganto  see  the  ideal,  or  at  least  the  means  to  the  ideal,  which  was  his  one

obsession. All his hope for the future of Germany and Europe cleaved, as it

were, to this highest manifestation of their people's life, and gradually he

began to invest his already great friend with all the extra greatness which he

himself drew from the depths of his own soul.

  The friendship which grew between them was of that rare order in which

neither can tell who influences the other more. Wagner would often declare

that the beautiful music in the third act of Siegfried was to be ascribed to

Nietzsche's influence over him; he also adopted the young man's terminology

in  art  matters,  and  the  concepts  implied  by  the  words  "Dionysian"  and

"Apollonian" were borrowed by him from his friend's discourses. How much

Nietzsche owed to Wagner may perhaps never be definitely known; to those

who are sufficiently interested to undertake the investigation of this matter,

we would recommend Hans Belart's book, Nietzsche's Ethik; in it references

will be found which give some clue as to the probable sources from which

the  necessary  information  may  be  derived.  In  any  case,  however,  the

reciprocal effects of their conversations will never be exactly known; and

although it would be ridiculous to assume that Nietzsche was essentially the

same when he left as when he met him, what the real nature of the change

was it is now difficult to say.

  For some years their friendship continued firm, and grew ever more and

more intimate. The Birth Of Tragedy was one of the first public declarations

of it, and after its publication many were led to consider that Wagner's art

was a sort of resurrection of the Dionysian Grecian art. Enemies of Nietzsche

began to whisper that he was merely Wagner's "literary lackey"; many friends

frowned  upon  the  promising  young  philologist,  and  questioned  the

exaggerated importance he was beginning to ascribe to the art of music and to

art in general, in their influence upon the world; and all the while Nietzsche's

one thought and one aim was to help the cause and further the prospects of

the  man  who  he  earnestly  believed  was  destined  to  be  the  salvation  of

European culture.

  Every great ideal coined in his own brain he imagined to be the ideal of

his  hero;  all  his  sublimest  hopes  for  society  were  presented  gratis,  in  his

writings, to Wagner, as though products of the latter's own mind; and just as

the prophet of old never possessed the requisite assurance to suppose that his

noblest  ideas  were  his  own,  but  attributed  them  to  some  higher  and

supernatural  power,  whom  he  thereby  learnt  to  worship  for  its  fanciednobility of sentiment, so Nietzsche, still doubting his own powers, created a

fetich out of nis most distinguished friend, and was ultimately wounded and

well-nigh wrecked with disappointment when he found that the Wagner of

the Gotterdammerung and Parsifal was not the Wagner of his own mind.

  While writing Ecce Homo, he was so well aware of the extent to which he

had gone in idealising his friend, that he even felt able to say: "Wagner in

Bayreuth is a vision of my own future.... Now that I can look back upon this

work, I would not like to deny that, at bottom, it speaks only of myself" (p.

74). And on another page of the same book we read: "... What I heard, as a

young man, in Wagnerian music, had absolutely nothing to do with Wagner:

when I described Dionysian music, I only described what I had heard, and I

thus translated and transfigured all that I bore in my own soul into the spirit

of the new art. The strongest proof of this is my essay, Wagner in Bayreuth:

in all decidedly psychological passages of this book the reader may simply

read my name, or the name 'Zarathustra,' wherever the text contains the name

'Wagner'" (p. 68).

  As  we  have  already  hinted,  there  are  evidences  of  his  having

subconsciously  discerned  the  REAL  Wagner,  even  in  the  heyday  of  their

friendship, behind the ideal he had formed of him; for his eyes were too

intelligent to be deceived, even though his understanding refused at first to

heed the messages they sent it: both the Birth of Tragedy and Wagner in

Bayreuth are with us to prove this, and not merely when we read these works

between the lines, but when we take such passages as those found on pp. 115,

149, 150, 151, 156, 158, 159 of this book quite literally.

  Nietzsche's infatuation we have explained; the consequent idealisation of

the object of his infatuation he himself has confessed; we have also pointed

certain  passages  which  we  believe  show  beyond  a  doubt  that  almost

everything to be found in The Case of Wagner and Nietzsche contra Wagner

was already subconscious in our author, long before he had begun to feel

even a coolness towards his hero: let those who think our interpretation of the

said passages is either strained or unjustified turn to the literature to which we

have  referred  and  judge  for  themselves.  It  seems  to  us  that  those

distinguished critics who complain of Nietzsche's complete volte-face and his

uncontrollable  recantations  and  revulsions  of  feeling  have  completely

overlooked this aspect of the question.

  It were well for us to bear in mind that we are not altogether free to

dispose  of  Nietzsche's  attitude  to  Wagner,  at  any  given  period  in  theirrelationship, with a single sentence of praise or of blame. After all, we are

faced by a problem which no objectivity or dispassionate detachment on our

parts  can  solve.  Nietzsche  endowed  both  Schopenhauer  and  Wagner  with

qualities and aspirations so utterly foreign to them both, that neither of them

would have recognised himself in the images he painted of them. His love for

them was unusual; perhaps it can only be fully understood emotionally by us:

like all men who are capable of very great love, Nietzsche lent the objects of

his affection anything they might happen to lack in the way of greatness, and

when at last his eyes were opened, genuine pain, not malice, was the motive

of even the most bitter of his diatribes.

  Finally, we should just like to give one more passage from Ecce Homo

bearing upon the subject under discussion. It is particularly interesting from

an  autobiographical  standpoint,  and  will  perhaps  afford  the  best  possible

conclusion to this preface.

  Nietzsche is writing about Wagner's music, and he says: "The world must

indeed  be  empty  for  him  who  has  never  been  unhealthy  enough  for  this

'infernal voluptuousness'; it is allowable and yet almost forbidden to use a

mystical expression in this behalf. I suppose I know better than any one the

prodigies  Wagner  was  capable  of,  the  fifty  worlds  of  strange  raptures  to

which no one save him could soar; and as I stand to-day--strong enough to

convert even the most suspicious and dangerous phenomenon to my own use

and be the stronger for it--I declare Wagner to be the great benefactor of my

life. Something will always keep our names associated in the minds of men,

and that is, that we are two who have suffered more excruciatingly--even at

each other's hands--than most men are able to suffer nowadays. And just as

Wagner is merely a misunderstanding among Germans, so am I and ever will

be. You lack two centuries of psychological and artistic discipline, my dear

countrymen!... But it will be impossible for you ever to recover the time now

lost" (p. 43).

    ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.

          DAVID STRAUSS, THE CONFESSOR AND THE WRITER.

  I.

  Public opinion in Germany seems strictly to forbid any allusion to the evil

and dangeious consequences of a war, more particularly when the war in

question  has  been  a  victorious  one.  Those  writers,  therefore,  command  a

more ready attention who, regarding this public opinion as final, proceed to

vie with each other in their jubilant praise of the war, and of the powerfulinfluences it has brought to bear upon morality, culture, and art. Yet it must

be confessed that a gieat victory is a great danger. Human nature bears a

triumph less easily than a defeat; indeed, it might even be urged that it is

simpler to gain a victory of this sort than to turn it to such account that it may

not ultimately proxe a seiious rout.

  But  of  all  evil  results  due  to  the  last  contest  with  France,  the  most

deplorable, peihaps, is that widespread and even universal error of public

opinion  and  of  all  who  think  publicly,  that  German  culture  was  also

victorious in the struggle, and that it should now, therefore, be decked with

garlands, as a fit recognition of such extraordinary events and successes. This

error is in the highest degree pernicious: not because it is an error,--for there

are illusions which are both salutary and blessed,--but because it threatens to

convert our victory into a signal defeat. A defeat? --I should say rather, into

the uprooting of the "German Mind" for the benefit of the "German Empire."

  Even supposing that the fight had been between the two cultures, the

standard for the value of the victor would still be a very relative one, and, in

any  case,  would  certainly  not  justify  such  exaggerated  triumph  or  self-

glorification. For, in the first place, it would be necessary to ascertain the

worth of the conquered culture. This might be very little; in which case, even

if the victory had involved the most glorious display of arms, it would still

offer no warrant for inordinate rapture.

  Even so, however, there can be no question, in our case, of the victory of

German culture; and for the simple reason, that French culture remains as

heretofore, and that we depend upon it as heretofore. It did not even help

towards the success of our arms. Severe military discipline, natural bravery

and sustaining power, the superior generalship, unity and obedience in the

rank and file--in short, factors which have nothing to do with culture, were

instrumental in making us conquer an opponent in whom the most essential

of these factors were absent. The only wonder is, that precisely what is now

called  "culture"  in  Germany  did  not  prove  an  obstacle  to  the  military

operations  which  seemed  vitally  necessary  to  a  great  victory.  Perhaps,

though, this was only owing to the fact that this "thing" which dubs itself

"culture" saw its advantage, for once, in keeping in the background.

  If however, it be permitted to grow and to spread, if it be spoilt by the

flattering and nonsensical assurance that it has been victorious,--then, as I

have said, it will have the power to extirpate German mind, and, when that is

done, who knows whether there will still be anything to be made out of thesurviving German body!

    Provided it were possible to direct that calm and tenacious bravery which

the German opposed to the pathetic and spontaneous fury of the Frenchman,

against the inward enemy, against the highly suspicious and, at all events,

unnative  "cultivation"  which,  owing  to  a  dangerous  misunderstanding,  is

called  "culture"  in  Germany,  then  all  hope  of  a  really  genuine  German

"culture"--the reverse of that "cultivation"--would not be entirely lost. For the

Germans  have  never  known  any  lack  of  clear-sighted  and  heroic  leaders,

though these, often enough, probably, have lacked Germans. But whether it

be possible to turn German bravery into a new direction seems to me to

become ever more and more doubtful; for I realise how fully convinced every

one is that such a struggle and such bravery are no longer requisite; on the

contrary, that most things are regulated as satisactorily as they possibly can

be--or, at all events, that everything of moment has long ago been discovered

and  accomplished:  in  a  word,  that  the  seed  of  culture  is  already  sown

everywhere, and is now either shooting up its fresh green blades, or, here and

there, even bursting forth into luxuriant blossom. In this sphere, not only

happiness but ecstasy reigns supreme. I am conscious of this ecstasy and

happiness,  in  the  ineffable,  truculent  assurance  of  German  journalists  and

manufacturers of novels, tragedies, poems, and histories (for it must be clear

that these people belong to one category), who seem to have conspired to

improve  the  leisure  and  ruminative  hours--that  is  to  say,  "the  intellectual

lapses"--of the modern man, by bewildering him with their printed paper.

Since the war, all is gladness, dignity, and self-consciousness in this merry

throng. After the startling successes of German culture, it regards itself, not

only as approved and sanctioned, but almost as sanctified. It therefore speaks

with gravity, affects to apostrophise the German People, and issues complete

works, after the manner of the classics; nor does it shrink from proclaiming in

those journals which are open to it some few of its adherents as new German

classical writers and model authors. It might be supposed that the dangers of

such an abuse of success would be recognised by the more thoughtful and

enlightened among cultivated Germans; or, at least, that these would feel how

painful is the comedy that is being enacted around them: for what in truth

could more readily inspire pity than the sight of a cripple strutting like a cock

before a mirror, and exchanging complacent glances with his reflection! But

the "scholar" caste willingly allow things to remain as they are, and re too

much concerned with their own affairs to busy themselves with the care ofthe  German  mind.  Moreover,  the  units  of  this  caste  are  too  thoroughly

convinced that their own scholarship is the ripest and most perfect fruit of the

age--in fact, of all ages--to see any necessity for a care of German culture in

general; since, in so far as they and the legion of their brethren are concerned,

preoccupations of this order have everywhere been, so to speak, surpassed.

The  more  conscientious  observer,  more  particularly  if  he  be  a  foreigner,

cannot help noticing withal that no great disparity exists between that which

the German scholar regards as his culture and that other triumphant culture of

the  new  German  classics,  save  in  respect  of  the  quantum  of  knowledge.

Everywhere, where knowledge and not ability, where information and not art,

hold the first rank,--everywhere, therefore, where life bears testimony to the

kind of culture extant, there is now only one specific German culture--and

this is the culture that is supposed to have conquered France?

  The contention appears to be altogether too preposterous. It was solely to

the more extensive knowledge of German officers, to the superior training of

their soldiers, and to their more scientific military strategy, that all impartial

Judges, and even the French nation, in the end, ascribed the victory. Hence, if

it be intended to regard German erudition as a thing apart, in what sense can

German culture be said to have conquered? In none whatsoever; for the moral

qualities  of  severe  discipline,  of  more  placid  obedience,  have  nothing  in

common with culture: these were characteristic of the Macedonian army, for

instance,  despite  the  fact  that  the  Greek  soldiers  were  infinitely  more

cultivated. To speak of German scholarship and culture as having conquered,

therefore, can only be the outcome of a misapprehension, probably resulting

from the circumstance that every precise notion of culture has now vanished

from Germany.

  Culture is, before all things, the unity of artistic style, in every expression

of the life of a people. Abundant knowledge and learning, however, are not

essential to it, nor are they a sign of its existence; and, at a pinch, they might

coexist  much  more  harmoniously  with  the  very  opposite  of  culture--with

barbarity:  that  is  to  say,  with  a  complete  lack  of  style,  or  with  a  riotous

jumble  of  all  styles.  But  it  is  precisely  amid  this  riotous  jumble  that  the

German of to-day subsists; and the serious problem to be solved is: how, with

all his learning, he can possibly avoid noticing it; how, into the bargain, he

can  rejoice  with  all  his  heart  in  his  present  "culture"?  For  everything

conduces to open his eyes for him--every glance he casts at his clothes, his

room, his house; every walk he takes through the streets of his town; everyvisit he pays to his art-dealers and to his trader in the articles of fashion. In

his  social  intercourse  he  ought  to  realise  the  origin  of  his  manners  and

movements; in the heart of our art-institutions, the pleasures of our concerts,

theatres, and museums, he ought to become apprised of the super- and juxta-

position  of  all  imaginable  styles.  The  German  heaps  up  around  him  the

forms, colours, products, and curiosities of all ages and zones, and thereby

succeeds in producing that garish newness, as of a country fair, which his

scholars then proceed to contemplate and to define as "Modernism per se";

and there he remains, squatting peacefully, in the midst of this conflict of

styles. But with this kind of culture, which is, at bottom, nothing more nor

less than a phlegmatic insensibility to real culture, men cannot vanquish an

enemy, least of all an enemy like the French, who, whatever their worth may

be, do actually possess a genuine and productive culture, and whom, up to the

present,  we  have  systematically  copied,  though  in  the  majority  of  cases

without skill.

  Even supposing we had really ceased copying them, it would still not

mean that we had overcome them, but merely that we had lifted their yoke

from our necks. Not before we have succeeded in forcing an original German

culture  upon  them  can  there  be  any  question  of  the  triumph  of  German

culture. Meanwhile, let us not forget that in all matters of form we are, and

must be, just as dependent upon Paris now as we were before the war; for up

to the present there has been no such thing as a original German culture.

  We all ought to have become aware of this, of our own accord. Besides,

one of the few who had he right to speak to Germans in terms of reproach

Publicly drew attention to the fact. "We Germans are of yesterday," Goethe

once said to Eckermann. "True, for the last hundred years we have diligently

cultivated ourselves, but a few centuries may yet have to run their course

before  our  fellow-countrymen  become  permeated  with  sufficient

intellectuality and higher culture to have it said of them, it is a long time since

they were barbarians."

  II.

  If, however, our public and private life is so manifestly devoid of all signs

of a productive and characteristic culture; if, moreover, our great artists, with

that earnest vehemence and honesty which is peculiar to greatness admit, and

have admitted, this monstrous fact--so very humiliating to a gifted nation;

how can it still be possible for contentment to reign to such an astonishing

extent among German scholars? And since the last war this complacent spirithas seemed ever more and morerready to break forth into exultant cries and

demonstrations of triumph. At all events, the belief seems to be rife that we

are in possession of a genuine culture, and the enormous incongruity of this

triumphant satisfaction in the face of the inferiority which should be patent to

all, seems only to be noticed by the few and the select. For all those who

think with the public mind have blindfolded their eyes and closed their ears.

The incongruity is not even acknowledged to exist. How is this possible?

What power is sufficiently influential to deny this existence? What species of

men must have attained to supremacy in Germany that feelings which are so

strong and simple should he denied or prevented from obtaining expression?

This  power,  this  species  of  men,  I  will  name--they  are  the  Philistines  of

Culture.

  As  every  one  knows,  the  word  "Philistine"  is  borrowed  from  the

vernacular  of  student-life,  and,  in  its  widest  and  most  popular  sense,  it

signifies the reverse of a son of the Muses, of an artist, and of the genuine

man of culture. The Philistine of culture, however, the study of whose type

and  the  hearing  of  whose  confessions  (when  he  makes  them)  have  now

become tiresome duties, distinguishes himself from the general notion of the

order "Philistine" by means of a superstition: he fancies that he is himself a

son of the Muses and a man of culture. This incomprehensible error clearly

shows that he does not even know the difference between a Philistine and his

opposite. We must not be surprised, therefore, if we find him, for the most

part, solemnly protesting that he is no Philistine. Owing to this lack of self-

knowledge,  he  is  convinced  that  his  "culture"  is  the  consummate

manifestation of real German culture; and, since he everywhere meets with

scholars  of  his  own  type,  since  all  public  institutions,  whether  schools,

universities, or academies, are so organised as to be in complete harmony

with  his  education  and  needs,  wherever  he  goes  he  bears  with  him  the

triumphant  feeling  that  he  is  the  worthy  champion  of  prevailing  German

culture, and he frames his pretensions and claims accordingly.

  If, however, real culture takes unity of style for granted (and even an

inferior  and  degenerate  culture  cannot  be  imagined  in  which  a  certain

coalescence of the profusion of forms has not taken place), it is just possible

that the confusion underlying the Culture-Philistine's error may arise from the

fact that, since he comes into contact everywhere with creatures cast in the

same  mould  as  himself,  he  concludes  that  this  uniformity  among  all

"scholars" must point to a certain uniformity in German education--hence toculture. All round him, he sees only needs and views similar to his own;

wherever he goes, he finds himself embraced by a ring of tacit conventions

concerning almost everything, but more especially matters of religion and art.

This imposing sameness, this tutti unisono which, though it responds to no

word of command, is yet ever ready to burst forth, cozens him into the belief

that  here  a  culture  must  be  established  and  flourishing.  But  Philistinism,

despite its systematic organisation and power, does not constitute a culture by

virtue of its system alone; it does not even constitute an inferior culture, but

invariably  the  reverse--namely,  firmly  established  barbarity.  For  the

uniformity of character which is so apparent in the German scholars of to-day

is only the result of a conscious or unconscious exclusion and negation of all

the artistically productive forms and requirements of a genuine style. The

mind  of  the  cultured  Philistine  must  have  become  sadly  unhinged;  for

precisely what culture repudiates he regards as culture itself; and, since he

proceeds  logically,  he  succeeds  in  creating  a  connected  group  of  these

repudiations--a system of non-culture, to which one might at a pinch grant a

certain "unity of style," provided of course it were Ot nonsense to attribute

style to barbarity. If he have to choose between a stylish act and its opposite,

he will invariably adopt the latter, and, since this rule holds good throughout,

every one of his acts bears the same negative stamp. Now, it is by means of

this stamp that he is able to identify the character of the "German culture,"

which  is  his  own  patent;  and  all  things  that  do  not  bear  it  are  so  many

enemies and obstacles drawn up against him. In the presence of these arrayed

forces the Culture-Philistine either does no more than ward off the blows, or

else he denies, holds his tongue, stops his ears, and refuses to face facts. He is

a negative creature--even in his hatred and animosity. Nobody, however, is

more disliked by him than the man who regards him as a Philistine, and tells

him  what  he  is--namely,  the  barrier  in  the  way  of  all  powerful  men  and

creators, the labyrinth for all who doubt and go astray, the swamp for all the

weak and the weary, the fetters of those who would run towards lofty goals,

the poisonous mist that chokes all germinating hopes, the scorching sand to

all those German thinkers who seek for, and thirst after, a new life. For the

mind of Germany is seeking; and ye hate it because it is seeking, and because

it will not accept your word, when ye declare that ye have found what it is

seeking. How could it have been possible for a type like that of the Culture-

Philistine to develop? and even granting its development, how was it able to

rise to the powerful Position of supreme judge concerning all questions ofGerman culture? How could this have been possible, seeing that a whole

procession of grand and heroic figures has already filed past us, whose every

movement, the expression of whose every feature, whose questioning voice

and burning eye betrayed the one fact, that they were seekers, and that they

sought that which the Culture-Philistine had long fancied he had found--to

wit, a genuine original German culture? Is there a soil--thus they seemed to

ask--a  soil  that  is  pure  enough,  unhandselled  enough,  of  sufficient  virgin

sanctity,  to  allow  the  mind  of  Germany  to  build  its  house  upon  it?

Questioning thus, they wandered through the wilderness, and the woods of

wretched ages and narrow conditions, and as seekers they disappeared from

our vision; one of them, at an advanced age, was even able to say, in the

name of all: "For half a century my life has been hard and bitter enough; I

have allowed myself no rest, but have ever striven, sought and done, to the

best and to the utmost of my ability."

  What does our Culture-Philistinism say of these seekers? It regards them

simply as discoverers, and seems to forget that they themselves only claimed

to  be  seekers.  We  have  our  culture,  say  her  sons;  for  have  we  not  our

"classics"? Not only is the foundation there, but the building already stands

upon it--we ourselves constitute that building. And, so saying, the Philistine

raises his hand to his brow.

  But, in order to be able thus to misjudge, and thus to grant left-handed

veneration  to  our  classics,  people  must  have  ceased  to  know  them.  This,

generally speaking, is precisely what has happened. For, otherwise, one ought

to know that there is only one way of honouring them, and that is to continue

seeking with the same spirit and with the same courage, and not to weary of

the search. But to foist the doubtful title of "classics" upon them, and to

"edify" oneself from time to time by reading their works, means to yield to

those feeble and selfish emotions which all the paying public may purchase at

concert-halls and theatres. Even the raising of monuments to their memory,

and the christening of feasts and societies with their names--all these things

are  but  so  many  ringing  cash  payments  by  means  of  which  the  Culture-

Philistine discharges his indebtedness to them, so that in all other respects he

may be rid of them, and, above all, not bound to follow in their wake and

prosecute his search further. For henceforth inquiry is to cease: that is the

Philistine watchword.

  This watchword once had some meaning. In Germany, during the first

decade  of  the  nineteenth  century,  for  instance,  when  the  heyday  andconfusion of seeking, experimenting, destroying, promising, surmising, and

hoping  was  sweeping  in  currents  and  cross-currents  over  the  land,  the

thinking middle-classes were right in their concern for their own security. It

was then quite right of them to dismiss from their minds with a shrug of their

shoulders  the  omnium  gatherum  of  fantastic  and  language-maiming

philosophies, and of rabid special-pleading historical studies, the carnival of

all  gods  and  myths,  and  the  poetical  affectations  and  fooleries  which  a

drunken spirit may be responsible for. In this respect they were quite right;

for the Philistine has not even the privilege of licence. With the cunning

proper to base natures, however, he availed himself of the opportunity, in

order to throw suspicion even upon the seeking spirit, and to invite people to

join in the more comfortable pastime of finding. His eye opened to the joy of

Philistinism; he saved himself from wild experimenting by clinging to the

idyllic, and opposed the restless creative spirit that animates the artist, by

means  of  a  certain  smug  ease--the  ease  of  self-conscious  narrowness,

tranquillity,  and  self-sufficiency.  His  tapering  finger  pointed,  without  any

affectation of modesty, to all the hidden and intimate incidents of his life, to

the many touching and ingenuous joys which sprang into existence in the

wretched  depths  of  his  uncultivated  existence,  and  which  modestly

blossomed forth on the bog-land of Philistinism.

  There were, naturally, a few gifted narrators who, with a nice touch, drew

vivid pictures of the happiness, the prosaic simplicity, the bucolic robustness,

and all the well-being which floods the quarters of children, scholars, and

peasants. With picture-books of this class in their hands, these smug ones

now once and for all sought to escape from the yoke of these dubious classics

and the command which they contained--to seek further and to find. They

only  started  the  notion  of  an  epigone-age  in  order  to  secure  peace  for

themselves, and to be able to reject all the efforts of disturbing innovators

summarily as the work of epigones. With the view of ensuring their own

tranquillity,  these  smug  ones  even  appropriated  history,  and  sought  to

transform  all  sciences  that  threatened  to  disturb  their  wretched  ease  into

branches  of  history--more  particularly  philosophy  and  classical  philology.

Through historical consciousness, they saved themselves from enthusiasm;

for, in opposition to Goethe, it was maintained that history would no longer

kindle  enthusiasm.  No,  in  their  desire  to  acquire  an  historical  grasp  of

everything, stultification became the sole aim of these philosophical admirers

of  "nil  admirari."  While  professing  to  hate  every  form  of  fanaticism  andintolerance, what they really hated, at bottom, was the dominating genius and

the tyranny of the real claims of culture. They therefore concentrated and

utilised  all  their  forces  in  those  quarters  where  a  fresh  and  vigorous

movement was to be expected, and then paralysed, stupefied, and tore it to

shreds. In this way, a philosophy which veiled the Philistine confessions of

its founder beneath neat twists and flourishes of language proceeded further

to discover a formula for the canonisation of the commonplace. It expatiated

upon the rationalism of all reality, and thus ingratiated itself with the Culture-

Philistine,  who  also  loves  neat  twists  and  flourishes,  and  who,  above  all,

considers himself real, and regards his reality as the standard of reason for the

world.  From  this  time  forward  he  began  to  allow  every  one,  and  even

himself, to reflect, to investigate, to astheticise, and, more particularly, to

make poetry, rnusic, and even pictures--not to mention systems philosophy;

provided, of course, that everything were done according to the old pattern,

and that no assault were made upon the "reasonable" and the "real"--that is to

say, upon the Philistine. The latter really does not at all mind giving himself

up, from time to time, to the delightful and daring transgressions of art or of

sceptical historical studies, and he does not underestimate the charm of such

recreations and entertainments; but he strictly separates "the earnestness of

life" (under which term he understands his calling, his business, and his wife

and child) from such trivialities, and among the latter he includes all things

which have any relation to culture. Therefore, woe to the art that takes itself

seriously, that has a notion of what it may exact, and that dares to endanger

his income, his business, and his habits! Upon such an art he turns his back,

as  though  it  were  something  dissolute;  and,  affecting  the  attitude  of  a.

guardian of chastity, he cautions every unprotected virtue on no account to

look.

  Being such an adept at cautioning people, he is always grateful to any

artist who heeds him and listens to caution. He then assures his protege that

things are to be made more easy for him; that, as a kindred spirit, he will no

longer be expected to make sublime masterpieces, but that his work must be

one  of  two  kinds--either  the  imitation  of  reality  to  the  point  of  simian

mimicry, in idylls or gentle and humorous satires, or the free copying of the

best-known  and  most  famous  classical  works,  albeit  with  shamefast

concessions to the taste of the age. For, although he may only be able to

appreciate  slavish  copying  or  accurate  portraiture  of  the  present,  still  he

knows that the latter will but glorify him, and increase the well-being of"reality"; while the former, far from doing him any harm, rather helps to

establish his reputation as a classical judge of taste, and is not otherwise

troublesome; for he has, once and for all, come to terms with the classics.

Finally,  he  discovers  the  general  and  effective  formula  "Health"  for  his

habits, methods of observation, judgments, and the objects of his patronage;

while he dismisses the importunate disturber of the peace with the epithets

"hysterical" and "morbid." It is thus that David Strauss--a genuine example of

the satisfait in regard to our scholastic institutions, and a typical Philistine--it

is  thus  that  he  speaks  of  "the  philosophy  of  Schopenhauer"  as  being

"thoroughly intellectual, yet often unhealthy and unprofitable." It is indeed a

deplorable fact that intellect should show such a decided preference for the

"unhealthy" and the "unprofitable"; and even the Philistine, if he be true to

himself, will admit that, in regard to the philosophies which men of his stamp

produce, he is conscious of a frequent lack of intellectuality, although of

course they are always thoroughly healthy and profitable.

  Now and again, the Philistines, provided they are by themselves, indulge

in a bottle of wine, and then they grow reminiscent, and speak of the great

deeds  of  the  war,  honestly  and  ingenuously.  On  such  occasions  it  often

happens that a great deal comes to light which would otherwise have been

most stead-fastly concealed, and one of them may even be heard to blurt out

the most precious secrets of the whole brotherhood. Indeed, a lapse of this

sort occurred but a short while ago, to a well-known aesthete of the Hegelian

school  of  reasoning.  It  must,  however,  be  admitted  that  the  provocation

thereto was of an unusual character. A company of Philistines were feasting

together, in celebration of the memory of a genuine anti-Philistine--one who,

moreover,  had  been,  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  words,  wrecked  by

Philistinism. This man was Holderlin, and the afore-mentioned aesthete was

therefore justified, under the circumstances, in speaking of the tragic souls

who  had  foundered  on  "reality"--reality  being  understood,  here,  to  mean

Philistine  reason.  But  the  "reality"  is  now  different,  and  it  might  well  be

asked whether Holderlin would be able to find his way at all in the present

great age. "I doubt," says Dr. Vischer, "whether his delicate soul could have

borne all the roughness which is inseparable from war, and whether it had

survived  the  amount  of  perversity  which,  since  the  war,  we  now  see

flourishing in every quarter. Perhaps he would have succumbed to despair.

His was one of the unarmed souls; he was the Werther of Greece, a hopeless

lover; his life was full of softness and yearning, but there was strength andsubstance in his will, and in his style, greatness, riches and life; here and

there  it  is  even  reminiscent  of  AEschylus.  His  spirit,  however,  lacked

hardness. He lacked the weapon humour; he could not grant that one may be

a Philistine and still be no barbarian." Not the sugary condolence of the post-

prandial speaker, but this last sentence concerns us. Yes, it is admitted that

one is a Philistine; but, a barbarian?--No, not at any price! Unfortunately,

poor Holderlin could not make such flne distinctions. If one reads the reverse

of  civilisation,  or  perhaps  sea-pirating,  or  cannibalism,  into  the  word

"barbarian," then the distinction is justifiable enough. But what the aesthete

obviously wishes to prove to us is, that we may be Philistines and at the same

time men of culture. Therein lies the humour which poor Holderlin lacked

and the need of which ultimately wrecked him.[7]*

    [Footnote  *  :  Nietzsche's  allusion  to  Holderlin  here  is  full  of  tragic

significance; for, like Holderlin, he too was ultimately wrecked and driven

insane by the Philistinism of his age. --Translator's note.]

  On this occasion a second admission was made by the speaker: "It is not

always  strength  of  will,  but  weakness,  which  makes  us  superior  to  those

tragic souls which are so passionately responsive to the attractions of beauty,"

or words to this effect. And this was said in the name of the assembled "We";

that  is  to  say,  the  "superiors,"  the  "superiors  through  weakness."  Let  us

content  ourselves  with  these  admissions.  We  are  now  in  possession  of

information concerning two matters from one of the initiated: first, that these

"We" stand beyond the passion for beauty; secondly, that their position was

reached by means of weakness. In less confidential moments, however, it was

just this weakness which masqueraded in the guise of a much more beautiful

name: it was the famous "healthiness" of the Culture-Philistine. In view of

this very recent restatement of the case, however, it would be as well not to

speak of them any longer as the "healthy ones," but as the "weakly," or, still

better, as the "feeble." Oh, if only these feeble ones were not in power! How

is it that they concern themselves at all about what we call them! They are the

rulers, and he is a poor ruler who cannot endure to be called by a nickname.

Yes, if one only have power, one soon learns to poke fun--even at oneself. It

cannot matter so very much, therefore, even if one do give oneself away; for

what could not the purple mantle of triumph conceal? The strength of the

Culture-Philistine steps into the broad light of day when he acknowledges his

weakness;  and  the  more  he  acknowledges  it--  the  more  cynically  he

acknowledges it--the more completely he betrays his consciousness of hisown  importance  and  superiority.  We  are  living  in  a  period  of  cynical

Philistine confessions. Just as Friedrich Vischer gave us his in a word, so has

David Strauss handed us his in a book; and both that word and that book are

cynical.

  III.

    Concerning  Culture-Philistinism,  David  Strauss  makes  a  double

confession, by word and by deed; that is to say, by the word of the confessor,

and the act of the writer. His book entitled The Old Faith and the New is, first

in regard to its contents, and secondly in regard to its being a book and a

literary production, an uninterrupted confession; while, in the very fact that

he allows himself to write confessions at all about his faith, there already lies

a confession. Presumably, every one seems to have the right to compile an

autobiography after his fortieth year; for the humblest amongst us may have

experienced things, and may have seen them at such close quarters, that the

recording of them may prove of use and value to the thinker. But to write a

confession of one's faith cannot but be regarded as a thousand times more

pretentious, since it takes for granted that the writer attaches worth, not only

to the experiences and investigations of his life, but also to his beliefs. Now,

what the nice thinker will require to know, above all else, is the kind of faith

which happens to be compatible with natures of the Straussian order, and

what it is they have "half dreamily conjured up" (p. 10) concerning matters of

which those alone have the right to speak who are acquainted with them at

first hand. Whoever would have desired to possess the confessions, say, of a

Ranke or a Mommsen? And these men were scholars and historians of a very

different stamp from David Strauss. If, however, they had ever ventured to

interest us in their faith instead of in their scientific investigations, we should

have felt that they were overstepping their limits in a most irritating fashion.

Yet Strauss does this when he discusses his faith. Nobody wants to know

anything about it, save, perhaps, a few bigoted opponents of the Straussian

doctrines,  who,  suspecting,  as  they  do,  a  substratum  of  satanic  principles

beneath these doctrines, hope that he may compromise his learned utterances

by  revealing  the  nature  of  those  principles.  These  clumsy  creatures  may,

perhaps, have found what they sought in the last book; but we, who had no

occasion to suspect a satanic substratum, discovered nothing of the sort, and

would have felt rather pleased than not had we been able to discern even a

dash of the diabolical in any part of the volume. But surely no evil spirit

could speak as Strauss speaks of his new faith. In fact, spirit in general seemsto be altogether foreign to the book-- more particularly the spirit of genius.

Only those whom Strauss designates as his "We," speak as he does, and then,

when they expatiate upon their faith to us, they bore us even more than when

they  relate  their  dreams;  be  they  "scholars,  artists,  military  men,  civil

employes, merchants, or landed proprietors; come they in their thousands,

and not the worst people in the land either!" If they do not wish to remain the

peaceful ones in town or county, but threaten to wax noisy, then let not the

din of their unisono deceive us concerning the poverty and vulgarity of the

melody  they  sing.  How  can  it  dispose  us  more  favourably  towards  a

profession of faith to hear that it is approved by a crowd, when it is of such

an order that if any individual of that crowd attempted to make it known to

us, we should not only fail to hear him out, but should interrupt him with a

yawn? If thou sharest such a belief, we should say unto him, in Heaven's

name, keep it to thyself! Maybe, in the past, some few harmless types looked

for the thinker in David Strauss; now they have discovered the "believer" in

him, and are disappointed. Had he kept silent, he would have remained, for

these, at least, the philosopher; whereas, now, no one regards him as such. He

no longer craved the honours of the thinker, however; all he wanted to be was

a  new  believer,  and  he  is  proud  of  his  new  belief.  In  making  a  written

declaration  of  it,  he  fancied  he  was  writing  the  catechism  of  "modern

thought," and building the "broad highway of the world's future." Indeed, our

Philistines have ceased to be faint-hearted and bashful, and have acquired

almost  cynical  assurance.  There  was  a  time,  long,  long  ago,  when  the

Philistine  was  only  tolerated  as  something  that  did  not  speak,  and  about

which no one spoke; then a period ensued during which his roughness was

smoothed, during which he was found amusing, and people talked about him.

Under this treatment he gradually became a prig, rejoiced with all his heart

over  his  rough  places  and  his  wrongheaded  and  candid  singularities,  and

began to talk, on his own account, after the style of Riehl's music for the

home.

  "But what do I see? Is it a shadow? Is it reality? How long and broad my

poodle grows!"

  For  now  he  is  already  rolling  like  a  hippopotamus  along  "the  broad

highway of the world's future," and his growling and barking have become

transformed into the proud incantations of a religious founder. And is it your

own sweet wish, Great Master, to found the religion of the future? "The times

seem to us not yet ripe (p. 7). It does not occur to us to wish to destroy achurch." But why not, Great Master? One but needs the ability. Besides, to

speak quite openly in the latter, you yourself are convinced that you Possess

this ability. Look at the last page of your book. There you actually state,

forsooth, that your new way "alone is the future highway of the world, which

now only requires partial completion, and especially general use, in order

also to become easy and pleasant."

  Make no further denials, then. The religious founder is unmasked, the

convenient and agreeable highway leading to the Straussian Paradise is built.

It is only the coach in which you wish to convey us that does not altogether

satisfy you, unpretentious man that you are! You tell us in your concluding

remarks: "Nor will I pretend that the coach to which my esteemed readers

have been obliged to trust themselves with me fulfils every requirement,... all

through  one  is  much  jolted"  (p.  438).  Ah!  you  are  casting  about  for  a

compliment, you gallant old religious founder! But let us be straightforward

with you. If your reader so regulates the perusal of the 368 pages of your

religious catechism as to read only one page a day--that is to say, if he take it

in the smallest possible doses-then, perhaps, we should be able to believe that

he might suffer some evil effect from the book--if only as the outcome of his

vexation when the results he expected fail to make themselves felt. Gulped

down more heartily, however, and as much as possible being taken at each

draught, according to the prescription to be recommended in the case of all

modern books, the drink can work no mischief; and, after taking it, the reader

will not necessarily be either out of sorts or out of temper, but rather merry

and well-disposed, as though nothing had happened; as though no religion

had been assailed, no world's highway been built, and no profession of faith

been made. And I do indeed call this a result! The doctor, the drug, and the

disease--everything  forgotten!  And  the  joyous  laughter!  The  continual

provocation to hilarity! You are to be envied, Sir; for you have founded the

most attractive of all religions --one whose followers do honour to its founder

by laughing at him.

  IV.

  The Philistine as founder of the religion of the future--that is the new

belief  in  its  most  emphatic  form  of  expression.  The  Philistine  becomes  a

dreamer--that is the unheard-of occurrence which distinguishes the German

nation of to-day. But for the present, in any case, let us maintain an attitude

of  caution  towards  this  fantastic  exaltation.  For  does  not  David  Strauss

himself advise us to exercise such caution, in the following profound passage,the general tone of which leads us to think of the Founder of Christianity

rather than of our particular author? (p. 92): "We know there have been noble

enthusiasts--enthusiasts of genius; the influence of an enthusiast can rouse,

exalt, and produce prolonged historic effects; but we do not wish to choose

him as the guide of our life. He will be sure to mislead us, if we do not

subject his influence to the control of reason." But we know something more:

we know that there are enthusiasts who are not intellectual, who do not rouse

or exalt, and who, nevertheless, not only expect to be the guides of our lives,

but, as such, to exercise a very lasting historical influence into the bargain,

and  to  rule  the  future;--all  the  more  reason  why  we  should  place  their

influence  under  the  control  of  reason.  Lichtenberg  even  said:  "There  are

enthusiasts quite devoid of ability, and these are really dangerous people." In

the first place, as regards the above-mentioned control of reason, we should

like to have candid answers to the three following questions: First, how does

the new believer picture his heaven? Secondly, how far does the courage lent

him by the new faith extend? And, thirdly, how does he write his books?

Strauss the Confessor must answer the first and second questions; Strauss the

Writer must answer the third.

  The heaven of the new believer must, perforce, be a heaven upon earth;

for the Christian "prospect of an immortal life in heaven," together with the

other  consolations,  "must  irretrievably  vanish"  for  him  who  has  but  "one

foot" on the Straussian platform. The way in which a religion represents its

heaven  is  significant,  and  if  it  be  true  that  Christianity  knows  no  other

heavenly occupations than singing and making music, the prospect of the

Philistine, � la Strauss, is truly not a very comforting one. In the book of

confessions,  however,  there  is  a  page  which  treats  of  Paradise  (p.  342).

Happiest of Philistines, unroll this parchment scroll before anything else, and

the whole of heaven will seem to clamber down to thee! "We would but

indicate  how  we  act,  how  we  have  acted  these  many  years.  Besides  our

profession--for we are members of the most various professions, and by no

means exclusively consist of scholars or artists, but of military men and civil

employes, of merchants and landed proprietors;... and again, as I have said

already, there are not a few of us, but many thousands, and not the worst

people in the country;--besides our profession, then, I say, we are eagerly

accessible  to  all  the  higher  interests  of  humanity;  we  have  taken  a  vivid

interest, during late years, and each after his manner has participated in the

great national war, and the reconstruction of the German State; and we havebeen  profoundly  exalted  by  the  turn  events  have  taken,  as  unexpected  as

glorious, for our much tried nation. To the end of forming just conclusions in

these things, we study history, which has now been made easy, even to the

unlearned, by a series of attractively and popularly written works; at the same

time, we endeavour to enlarge our knowledge of the natural sciences, where

also there is no lack of sources of information; and lastly, in the writings of

our  great  poets,  in  the  performances  of  our  great  musicians,  we  find  a

stimulus for the intellect and heart, for wit and imagination, which leaves

nothing to be desired. Thus we live, and hold on our way in joy."

  "Here is our man!" cries the Philistine exultingly, who reads this: "for this

is exactly how we live; it is indeed our daily life."[8]* And how perfectly he

understands the euphemism! When, for example, he refers to the historical

studies by means of which we help ourselves in forming just conclusions

regarding the political situation, what can he be thinking of, if it be not our

newspaper-reading?  When  he  speaks  of  the  active  part  we  take  in  the

reconstruction of the German State, he surely has only our daily visits to the

beer-garden in his mind; and is not a walk in the Zoological Gardens implied

by 'the sources of information through which we endeavour to enlarge our

knowledge of the natural sciences'? Finally, the theatres and concert-halls are

referred  to  as  places  from  which  we  take  home  'a  stimulus  for  wit  and

imagination which leaves nothing to be desired.'--With what dignity and wit

he describes even the most suspicious of our doings! Here indeed is our man;

for his heaven is our heaven!"

    [Footnote * : This alludes to a German student-song.]

  Thus cries the Philistine; and if we are not quite so satisfied as he, it is

merely owing to the fact that we wanted to know more. Scaliger used to say:

"What does it matter to us whether Montaigne drank red or white wine?" But,

in  this  more  important  case,  how  greatly  ought  we  to  value  definite

particulars of this sort! If we could but learn how many pipes the Philistine

smokes daily, according to the prescriptions of the new faith, and whether it

is the Spener or the National Gazette that appeals to him over his coffee! But

our curiosity is not satisfied. With regard to one point only do we receive

more exhaustive information, and fortunately this point relates to the heaven

in heaven--the private little art-rooms which will be consecrated to the use of

great  poets  and  musicians,  and  to  which  the  Philistine  will  go  to  edify

himself; in which, moreover, according to his own showing, he will even get

"all his stains removed and wiped away" (p. 433); so that we are led to regardthese  private  little  art-rooms  as  a  kind  of  bath-rooms.  "But  this  is  only

effected for some fleeting moments; it happens and counts only in the realms

of phantasy; as soon as we return to rude reality, and the cramping confines

of actual life, we are again on all sides assailed by the old cares,"--thus our

Master sighs. Let us, however, avail ourselves of the fleeting moments during

which we remain in those little rooms; there is just sufficient time to get a

glimpse  of  the  apotheosis  of  the  Philistine--  that  is  to  say,  the  Philistine

whose  stains  have  been  removed  and  wiped  away,  and  who  is  now  an

absolutely pure sample of his type. In truth, the opportunity we have here

may prove instructive: let no one who happens to have fallen a victim to the

confession-book lay it aside before having read the two appendices, "Of our

Great Poets" and "Of our Great Musicians." Here the rainbow of the new

brotherhood is set, and he who can find no pleasure in it "for such an one

there is no help," as Strauss says on another occasion; and, as he might well

say here, "he is not yet ripe for our point of view." For are we not in the

heaven of heavens? The enthusiastic explorer undertakes to lead us about,

and begs us to excuse him if, in the excess of his joy at all the beauties to be

seen, he should by any chance be tempted to talk too much. "If I should,

perhaps, become more garrulous than may seem warranted in this place, let

the reader be indulgent to me; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth

speaketh. Let him only be assured that what he is now about to read does not

consist of older materials, which I take the opportunity of inserting here, but

that these remarks have been written for their present place and purpose" (pp.

345-46). This confession surprises us somewhat for the moment. What can it

matter to us whether or not the little chapters were freshly written? As if it

were a matter of writing! Between ourselves, I should have been glad if they

had been written a quarter of a century earlier; then, at least, I should have

understood why the thoughts seem to be so bleached, and why they are so

redolent of resuscitated antiquities. But that a thing should have been written

in 1872 and already smell of decay in 1872 strikes me as suspicious. Let us

imagine some one's falling asleep while reading these chapters--what would

he  most  probably  dream  about?  A  friend  answered  this  question  for  me,

because he happened to have had the experience himself. He dreamt of a

wax-work show. The classical writers stood there, elegantly represented in

wax and beads. Their arms and eyes moved, and a screw inside them creaked

an accompaniment to their movements. He saw something gruesome among

them--a  misshapen  figure,  decked  with  tapes  and  jaundiced  paper,  out  ofwhose mouth a ticket hung, on which "Lessing" was written. My friend went

close up to it and learned the worst: it was the Homeric Chimera; in front it

was Strauss, behind it was Gervinus, and in the middle Chimera. The tout-

ensemble was Lessing. This discovery caused him to shriek with terror: he

waked, and read no more. In sooth, Great Master, why have you written such

fusty little chapters?

  We  do,  indeed,  learn  something  new  from  them;  for  instance,  that

Gervinus made it known to the world how and why Goethe was no dramatic

genius; that, in the second part of Faust, he had only produced a world of

phantoms and of symbols; that Wallenstein is a Macbeth as well as a Hamlet;

that the Straussian reader extracts the short stories out of the Wanderjahre

"much as naughty children pick the raisins and almonds out of a tough plum-

cake";  that  no  complete  effect  can  be  produced  on  the  stage  without  the

forcible element, and that Schiller emerged from Kant as from a cold-water

cure. All this is certainly new and striking; but, even so, it does not strike us

with wonder, and so sure as it is new, it will never grow old, for it never was

young; it was senile at birth. What extraordinary ideas seem to occur to these

Blessed Ones, after the New Style, in their aesthetic heaven! And why can

they not manage to forget a few of them, more particularly when they are of

that unaesthetic, earthly, and ephemeral order to which the scholarly thoughts

of Gervinus belong, and when they so obviously bear the stamp of puerility?

But it almost seems as though the modest greatness of a Strauss and the vain

insignificance of a Gervinus were only too well able to harmonise: then long

live  all  those  Blessed  Ones!  may  we,  the  rejected,  also  live  long,  if  this

unchallenged  judge  of  art  continues  any  longer  to  teach  his  borrowed

enthusiasm, and the gallop of that hired steed of which the honest Grillparzer

speaks with such delightful clearness, until the whole of heaven rings beneath

the hoof of that galumphing enthusiasm. Then, at least, things will be livelier

and noisier than they are at the present moment, in which the carpet-slippered

rapture of our heavenly leader and the lukewarm eloquence of his lips only

succeed in the end in making us sick and tired. I should like to know how a

Hallelujah sung by Strauss would sound: I believe one would have to listen

very carefully, lest it should seem no more than a courteous apology or a

lisped  compliment.  Apropos  of  this,  I  might  adduce  an  instructive  and

somewhat forbidding example. Strauss strongly resented the action of one of

his  opponents  who  happened  to  refer  to  his  reverence  for  Lessing.  The

unfortunate man had misunderstood;--true, Strauss did declare that one mustbe of a very obtuse mind not to recognise that the simple words of paragraph

86 come from the writer's heart. Now, I do not question this warmth in the

very least; on the contrary, the fact that Strauss fosters these feelings towards

Lessing has always excited my suspicion; I find the same warmth for Lessing

raised almost to heat in Gervinus--yea, on the whole, no great German writer

is so popular among little German writers as Lessing is; but for all that, they

deserve no thanks for their predilection; for what is it, in sooth, that they

praise in Lessing? At one moment it is his catholicity-- the fact that he was

critic  and  poet,  archaeologist  and  philosopher,  dramatist  and  theologian.

Anon, "it is the unity in him of the writer and the man, of the head and the

heart." The last quality, as a rule, is just as characteristic of the great writer as

of the little one; as a rule, a narrow head agrees only too fatally with a narrow

heart. And as to the catholicity; this is no distinction, more especially when,

as in Lessing's case, it was a dire necessity. What astonishes one in regard to

Lessing-enthusiasts is rather that they have no conception of the devouring

necessity which drove him on through life and to this catholicity; no feeling

for the fact that such a man is too prone to consume himself rapidly, like a

flame;  nor  any  indignation  at  the  thought  that  the  vulgar  narrowness  and

pusillanimity  of  his  whole  environment,  especially  of  his  learned

contemporaries, so saddened, tormented, and stifled the tender and ardent

creature that he was, that the very universality for which he is praised should

give rise to feelings of the deepest compassion. "Have pity on the exceptional

man!" Goethe cries to us; "for it was his lot to live in such a wretched age

that  his  life  was  one  long  polemical  effort."  How  can  ye,  my  worthy

Philistines, think of Lessing without shame? He who was ruined precisely on

account of your stupidity, while struggling with your ludicrous fetiches and

idols,  with  the  defects  of  your  theatres,  scholars,  and  theologists,  without

once daring to attempt that eternal flight for which he had been born. And

what are your feelings when ye think of Winckelman, who, in order to turn

his eyes from your grotesque puerilities, went begging to the Jesuits for help,

and whose ignominious conversion dishonours not him, but you? Dare ye

mention  Schiller's  name  without  blushing?  Look  at  his  portrait.  See  the

flashing eyes that glance contemptuously over your heads, the deadly red

cheek--do  these  things  mean  nothing  to  you?  In  him  ye  had  such  a

magnificent and divine toy that ye shattered it. Suppose, for a moment, it had

been possible to deprive this harassed and hunted life of Goethe's friendship,

ye would then have been reponsible for its still earlier end. Ye have had nofinger in any one of the life-works of your great geniuses, and yet ye would

make a dogma to the effect that no one is to be helped in the future. But for

every  one  of  them,  ye  were  "the  resistance  of  the  obtuse  world,"  which

Goethe calls by its name in his epilogue to the Bell; for all of them ye were

the grumbling imbeciles, or the envious bigots, or the malicious egoists: in

spite of you each of them created his works, against you each directed his

attacks, and thanks to you each prematurely sank, while his work was still

unfinished, broken and bewildered by the stress of the battle. And now ye

presume that ye are going to be permitted, tamquam re bene gesta, to praise

such men! and with words which leave no one in any doubt as to whom ye

have in your minds when ye utter your encomiums, which therefore "spring

forth with such hearty warmth" that one must be blind not to see to whom ye

are really bowing. Even Goethe in his day had to cry: "Upon my honour, we

are in need of a Lessing, and woe unto all vain masters and to the whole

aesthetic kingdom of heaven, when the young tiger, whose restless strength

will be visible in his every distended muscle and his every glance, shall sally

forth to seek his prey!"

  V.

  How clever it was of my friend to read no further, once he had been

enlightened  (thanks  to  that  chimerical  vision)  concerning  the  Straussian

Lessing and Strauss himself. We, however, read on further, and even craved

admission of the Doorkeeper of the New Faith to the sanctum of music. The

Master  threw  the  door  open  for  us,  accompanied  us,  and  began  quoting

certain names, until, at last, overcome with mistrust, we stood still and looked

at him. Was it possible that we were the victims of the same hallucination as

that to which our friend had been subjected in his dream? The musicians to

whom Strauss referred seemed to us to be wrongly designated as long as he

spoke about them, and we began to think that the talk must certainly be about

somebody else, even admitting that it did not relate to incongruous phantoms.

When, for instance, he mentioned Haydn with that same warmth which made

us so suspicious when he praised Lessing, and when he posed as the epopt

and priest of a mysterious Haydn cult; when, in a discussion upon quartette-

music, if you please, he even likened Haydn to a "good unpretending soup"

and Beethoven to "sweetmeats" (p. 432); then, to our minds, one thing, and

one thing alone, became certain--namely, that his Sweetmeat-Beethoven is

not our Beethoven, and his Soup-Haydn is not our Haydn. The Master was

moreover of the opinion that our orchestra is too good to perform Haydn, andthat only the most unpretentious amateurs can do justice to that music--a

further proof that he was referring to some other artist and some other work,

possibly to Riehl's music for the home.

  But whoever can this Sweetmeat-Beethoven of Strauss's be? He is said to

have  composed  nine  symphonies,  of  which  the  Pastoral  is  "the  least

remarkable"; we are told that "each time in composing the third, he seemed

impelled to exceed his bounds, and depart on an adventurous quest," from

which  we  might  infer  that  we  are  here  concerned  with  a  sort  of  double

monster, half horse and half cavalier. With regard to a certain Eroica, this

Centaur is very hard pressed, because he did not succeed in making it clear

"whether it is a question of a conflict on the open field or in the deep heart of

man." In the Pastoral there is said to be "a furiously raging storm," for which

it is "almost too insignificant" to interrupt a dance of country-folk, and which,

owing  to  "its  arbitrary  connection  with  a  trivial  motive,"  as  Strauss  so

adroitly and correctly puts it, renders this symphony "the least remarkable."

A more drastic expression appears to have occurred to the Master; but he

prefers to speak here, as he says, "with becoming modesty." But no, for once

our Master is wrong; in this case he is really a little too modest. Who, indeed,

will  enlighten  us  concerning  this  Sweetmeat-Beethoven,  if  not  Strauss

himself--the  only  person  who  seems  to  know  anything  about  him?  But,

immediately  below,  a  strong  judgment  is  uttered  with  becoming  non-

modesty,  and  precisely  in  regard  to  the  Ninth  Symphony.  It  is  said,  for

instance, that this symphony "is naturally the favourite of a prevalent taste,

which in art, and music especially, mistakes the grotesque for the genial, and

the formless for the sublime" (p. 428). It is true that a critic as severe as

Gervinus  was  gave  this  work  a  hearty  welcome,  because  it  happened  to

confirm  one  of  his  doctrines;  but  Strauss  is  "far  from  going  to  these

problematic productions" in search of the merits of his Beethoven. "It is a

pity," cries our Master, with a convulsive sigh, "that one is compelled, by

such  reservations,  to  mar  one's  enjoyment  of  Beethoven,  as  well  as  the

admiration  gladly  accorded  to  him."  For  our  Master  is  a  favourite  of  the

Graces, and these have informed him that they only accompanied Beethoven

part of the way, and that he then lost sight of them. "This is a defect," he

cries, "but can you believe that it may also appear as an advantage?" "He who

is painfully and breathlessly rolling the musical idea along will seem to be

moving the weightier one, and thus appear to be the stronger" (pp. 423-24).

This is a confession, and not necessarily one concerning Beethoven alone, butconcerning "the classical prose-writer" himself. He, the celebrated author, is

not abandoned by the Graces. From the play of airy jests--that is to say,

Straussian  jests--  to  the  heights  of  solemn  earnestness--that  is  to  say,

Straussian earnestness--they remain stolidly at his elbow. He, the classical

prose-writer, slides his burden along playfully and with a light heart, whereas

Beethoven rolls his painfully and breathlessly. He seems merely to dandle his

load; this is indeed an advantage. But would anybody believe that it might

equally be a sign of something wanting? In any case, only those could believe

this  who  mistake  the  grotesque  for  the  genial,  and  the  formless  for  the

sublime--is not that so, you dandling favourite of the Graces? We envy no

one the edifying moments he may have, either in the stillness of his little

private  room  or  in  a  new  heaven  specially  fitted  out  for  him;  but  of  all

possible pleasures of this order, that of Strauss's is surely one of the most

wonderful, for he is even edified by a little holocaust. He calmly throws the

sublimest works of the German nation into the flames, in order to cense his

idols with their smoke. Suppose, for a moment, that by some accident, the

Eroica, the Pastoral, and the Ninth Symphony had fallen into the hands of our

priest  of  the  Graces,  and  that  it  had  been  in  his  power  to  suppress  such

problematic productions, in order to keep the image of the Master pure, who

doubts but what he would have burned them? And it is precisely in this way

that the Strausses of our time demean themselves: they only wish to know so

much of an artist as is compatible with the service of their rooms; they know

only the extremes-- censing or burning. To all this they are heartily welcome;

the one surprising feature of the whole case is that public opinion, in matters

artistic, should be so feeble, vacillating, and corruptible as contentedly to

allow these exhibitions of indigent Philistinism to go by without raising an

objection; yea, that it does not even possess sufficient sense of humour to feel

tickled at the sight of an unaesthetic little master's sitting in judgment upon

Beethoven. As to Mozart, what Aristotle says of Plato ought really to be

applied here: "Insignificant people ought not to be permitted even to praise

him." In this respect, however, all shame has vanished--from the public as

well as from the Master's mind: he is allowed, not merely to cross himself

before the greatest and purest creations of German genius, as though he had

perceived  something  godless  and  immoral  in  them,  but  people  actually

rejoice over his candid confessions and admission of sins--more particularly

as he makes no mention of his own, but only of those which great men are

said to have committed. Oh, if only our Master be in the right! his readerssometimes  think,  when  attacked  by  a  paroxysm  of  doubt;  he  himself,

however,  stands  there,  smiling  and  convinced,  perorating,  condemning,

blessing, raising his hat to himself, and is at any minute capable of saying

what the Duchesse Delaforte said to Madame de Sta�l, to wit: "My dear, I

must confess that I find no one but myself invariably right."

  VI.

  A corpse is a pleasant thought for a worm, and a worm is a dreadful

thought for every living creature. Worms fancy their kingdom of heaven in a

fat  body;  professors  of  philosophy  seek  theirs  in  rummaging  among

Schopenhauer's entrails, and as long as rodents exist, there will exist a heaven

for rodents. In this, we have the answer to our first question: How does the

believer  in  the  new  faith  picture  his  heaven?  The  Straussian  Philistine

harbours in the works of our great poets and musicians like a parasitic worm

whose life is destruction, whose admiration is devouring, and whose worship

is digesting.

  Now, however, our second question must be answered: How far does the

courage lent to its adherents by this new faith extend? Even this question

would already have been answered, if courage and pretentiousness had been

one; for then Strauss would not be lacking even in the just and veritable

courage of a Mameluke. At all events, the "becoming modesty" of which

Strauss  speaks  in  the  above-mentioned  passage,  where  he  is  referring  to

Beethoven, can only be a stylistic and not a moral manner of speech. Strauss

has his full share of the temerity to which every successful hero assumes the

right: all flowers grow only for him--the conqueror; and he praises the sun

because it shines in at his window just at the right time. He does not even

spare the venerable old universe in his eulogies--as though it were only now

and  henceforward  sufficiently  sanctified  by  praise  to  revolve  around  the

central monad David Strauss. The universe, he is happy to inform us, is, it is

true,  a  machine  with  jagged  iron  wheels,  stamping  and  hammering

ponderously, but: "We do not only find the revolution of pitiless wheels in

our  world-machine,  but  also  the  shedding  of  soothing  oil"  (p.  435).  The

universe, provided it submit to Strauss's encomiums, is not likely to overflow

with gratitude towards this master of weird metaphors, who was unable to

discover better similes in its praise. But what is the oil called which trickles

down  upon  the  hammers  and  stampers?  And  how  would  it  console  a

workman who chanced to get one of his limbs caught in the mechanism to

know that this oil was trickling over him? Passing over this simile as bad, letus  turn  our  attention  to  another  of  Strauss's  artifices,  whereby  he  tries  to

ascertain  how  he  feels  disposed  towards  the  universe;  this  question  of

Marguerite's, "He loves me--loves me not--loves me?" hanging on his lips the

while. Now, although Strauss is not telling flower-petals or the buttons on his

waistcoat, still what he does is not less harmless, despite the fact that it needs

perhaps a little more courage. Strauss wishes to make certain whether his

feeling for the "All" is either paralysed or withered, and he pricks himself; for

he  knows  that  one  can  prick  a  limb  that  is  either  paralysed  or  withered

without  causing  any  pain.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  does  not  really  prick

himself, but selects another more violent method, which he describes thus:

"We open Schopenhauer, who takes every occasion of slapping our idea in

the face" (p. 167). Now, as an idea--even that of Strauss's concerning the

universe--has no face, if there be any face in the question at all it must be that

of  the  idealist,  and  the  procedure  may  be  subdivided  into  the  following

separate  actions:--Strauss,  in  any  case,  throws  Schopenhauer  open,

whereupon the latter slaps Strauss in the face. Strauss then reacts religiously;

that is to say, he again begins to belabour Schopenhauer, to abuse him, to

speak  of  absurdities,  blasphemies,  dissipations,  and  even  to  allege  that

Schopenhauer could not have been in his right senses. Result of the dispute:

"We demand the same piety for our Cosmos that the devout of old demanded

for his God"; or, briefly, "He loves me." Our favourite of the Graces makes

his life a hard one, but he is as brave as a Mameluke, and fears neither the

Devil  nor  Schopenhauer.  How  much  "soothing  oil"  must  he  use  if  such

incidents are of frequent occurrence!

  On  the  other  hand,  we  readily  understand  Strauss's  gratitude  to  this

tickling,  pricking,  and  slapping  Schopenhauer;  hence  we  are  not  so  very

much surprised when we find him expressing himself in the following kind

way about him: "We need only turn over the leaves of Arthur Schopenhauer's

works (although we shall on many other accounts do well not only to glance

over but to study them), etc." (p. 166). Now, to whom does this captain of

Philistines address these words? To him who has clearly never even studied

Schopenhauer, the latter might well have retorted, "This is an author who

does not even deserve to be scanned, much less to be studied." Obviously, he

gulped Schopenhauer down "the wrong way," and this hoarse coughing is

merely his attempt to clear his throat. But, in order to fill the measure of his

ingenuous  encomiums,  Strauss  even  arrogates  to  himself  the  right  of

commending  old  Kant:  he  speaks  of  the  latter's  General  History  of  theHeavens of the Year 1755 as of "a work which has always appeared to me not

less  important  than  his  later  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  If  in  the  latter  we

admire  the  depth  of  insight,  the  breadth  of  observation  strikes  us  in  the

former. If in the latter we can trace the old man's anxiety to secure even a

limited possession of knowledge--so it be but on a firm basis--in the former

we  encounter  the  mature  man,  full  of  the  daring  of  the  discoverer  and

conqueror in the realm of thought." This judgment of Strauss's concerning

Kant  did  not  strike  me  as  being  more  modest  than  the  one  concerning

Schopenhauer. In the one case, we have the little captain, who is above all

anxious to express even the most insignificant opinion with certainty, and in

the  other  we  have  the  famous  prose-writer,  who,  with  all  the  courage  of

ignorance, exudes his eulogistic secretions over Kant. It is almost incredible

that Strauss availed himself of nothing in Kant's Critique of Pure Reason

while compiling his Testament of modern ideas, and that he knew only how

to appeal to the coarsest realistic taste must also be numbered among the

more striking characteristics of this new gospel, the which professes to be but

the result of the laborious and continuous study of history and science, and

therefore tacitly repudiates all connection with philosophy. For the Philistine

captain and his "We," Kantian philosophy does not exist. He does not dream

of the fundamental antinomy of idealism and of the highly relative sense of

all science and reason. And it is precisely reason that ought to tell him how

little it is possible to know of things in themselves. It is true, however, that

people of a certain age cannot possibly understand Kant, especially when, in

their youth, they understood or fancied they understood that "gigantic mind,"

Hegel,  as  Strauss  did;  and  had  moreover  concerned  themselves  with

Schleiermacher,  who,  according  to  Strauss,  "was  gifted  with  perhaps  too

much acumen." It will sound odd to our author when I tell him that, even

now, he stands absolutely dependent upon Hegel and Schleiermacher, and

that  his  teaching  of  the  Cosmos,  his  way  of  regarding  things  sub  specie

biennii, his salaams to the state of affairs now existing in Germany, and,

above all, his shameless Philistine optimism, can only be explained by an

appeal to certain impressions of youth, early habits, and disorders; for he who

has once sickened on Hegel and Schleiermacher never completely recovers.

  There  is  one  passage  in  the  confession-book  where  the  incurable

optimism referred to above bursts forth with the full joyousness of holiday

spirits (pp. 166-67). "If the universe is a thing which had better not have

existed,"  says  Strauss,  "then  surely  the  speculation  of  the  philosopher,  asforming  part  of  this  universe,  is  a  speculation  which  had  better  not  have

speculated. The pessimist philosopher fails to perceive that he, above all,

declares his own thought, which declares the world to be bad, as bad also; but

if the thought which declares the world to be bad is a bad thought, then it

follows naturally that the world is good. As a rule, optimism may take things

too easily. Schopenhauer's references to the colossal part which sorrow and

evil play in the world are quite in their right place as a counterpoise; but

every true philosophy is necessarily optimistic, as otherwise she hews down

the branch on which she herself is sitting." If this refutation of Schopenhauer

is  not  the  same  as  that  to  which  Strauss  refers  somewhere  else  as  "the

refutation loudly and jubilantly acclaimed in higher spheres," then I quite fail

to understand the dramatic phraseology used by him elsewhere to strike an

opponent. Here optimism has for once intentionally simplified her task. But

the master-stroke lay in thus pretending that the refutation of Schopenhauer

was not such a very difficult task after all, and in playfully wielding the

burden  in  such  a  manner  that  the  three  Graces  attendant  on  the  dandling

optimist might constantly be delighted by his methods. The whole purpose of

the deed was to demonstrate this one truth, that it is quite unnecessary to take

a pessimist seriously; the most vapid sophisms become justified, provided

they show that, in regard to a philosophy as "unhealthy and unprofitable" as

Schopenhauer's, not proofs but quips and sallies alone are suitable. While

perusing  such  passages,  the  reader  will  grasp  the  full  meaning  of

Schopenhauer's solemn utterance to the effect that, where optimism is not

merely the idle prattle of those beneath whose flat brows words and only

words are stored, it seemed to him not merely an absurd but a vicious attitude

of mind, and one full of scornful irony towards the indescribable sufferings of

humanity. When a philosopher like Strauss is able to frame it into a system, it

becomes more than a vicious attitude of mind--it is then an imbecile gospel of

comfort for the "I" or for the "We," and can only provoke indignation.

  Who could read the following psychological avowal, for instance, without

indignation,  seeing  that  it  is  obviously  but  an  offshoot  from  this  vicious

gospel  of  comfort?--"Beethoven  remarked  that  he  could  never  have

composed a text like Figaro or Don Juan. Life had not been so profuse of its

snubs to him that he could treat it so gaily, or deal so lightly with the foibles

of men" (p. 430). In order, however, to adduce the most striking instance of

this  dissolute  vulgarity  of  sentiment,  let  it  suffice,  here,  to  observe  that

Strauss knows no other means of accounting for the terribly serious negativeinstinct and the movement of ascetic sanctification which characterised the

first  century  of  the  Christian  era,  than  by  supposing  the  existence  of  a

previous period of surfeit in the matter of all kinds of sexual indulgence,

which of itself brought about a state of revulsion and disgust.

  "The Persians call it bidamag buden, The Germans say 'Katzenjammer.'"

[9]*

    [Footnote  *  :  Remorse  for  the  previous  night's  excesses.--Translator's

note.]

  Strauss quotes this himself, and is not ashamed. As for us, we turn aside

for a moment, that we may overcome our loathing.

  VII.

  As a matter of fact, our Philistine captain is brave, even audacious, in

words;  particularly  when  he  hopes  by  such  bravery  to  delight  his  noble

colleagues--the "We," as he calls them. So the asceticism and self-denial of

the ancient anchorite and saint was merely a form of Katzenjammer? Jesus

may  be  described  as  an  enthusiast  who  nowadays  would  scarcely  have

escaped the madhouse, and the story of the Resurrection may be termed a

"world-wide deception." For once we will allow these views to pass without

raising any objection, seeing that they may help us to gauge the amount of

courage which our "classical Philistine" Strauss is capable of. Let us first hear

his confession: "It is certainly an unpleasant and a thankless task to tell the

world those truths which it is least desirous of hearing. It prefers, in fact, to

manage  its  affairs  on  a  profuse  scale,  receiving  and  spending  after  the

magnificent fashion of the great, as long as there is anything left; should any

person, however, add up the various items of its liabilities, and anxiously call

its attention to the sum-total, he is certain to be regarded as an importunate

meddler. And yet this has always been the bent of my moral and intellectual

nature."  A  moral  and  intellectual  nature  of  this  sort  might  possibly  be

regarded as courageous; but what still remains to be proved is, whether this

courage  is  natural  and  inborn,  or  whether  it  is  not  rather  acquired  and

artificial. Perhaps Strauss only accustomed himself by degrees to the r�le of

an  importunate  meddler,  until  he  gradually  acquired  the  courage  of  his

calling. Innate cowardice, which is the Philistine's birthright, would not be

incompatible  with  this  mode  of  development,  and  it  is  precisely  this

cowardice which is perceptible in the want of logic of those sentences of

Strauss's which it needed courage to pronounce. They sound like thunder, but

they do not clear the air. No aggressive action is performed: aggressive wordsalone are used, and these he selects from among the most insulting he can

find. He moreover exhausts all his accumulated strength and energy in coarse

and noisy expression, and when once his utterances have died away he is

more of a coward even than he who has always held his tongue. The very

shadow of his deeds--his morality--shows us that he is a word-hero, and that

he avoids everything which might induce him to transfer his energies from

mere  verbosity  to  really  serious  things.  With  admirable  frankness,  he

announces that he is no longer a Christian, but disclaims all idea of wishing

to disturb the contentment of any one: he seems to recognise a contradiction

in the notion of abolishing one society by instituting another--whereas there

is nothing contradictory in it at all. With a certain rude self-satisfaction, he

swathes himself in the hirsute garment of our Simian genealogists, and extols

Darwin as one of mankind's greatest benefactors; but our perplexity is great

when we find him constructing his ethics quite independently of the question,

"What  is  our  conception  of  the  universe?"  In  this  department  he  had  an

opportunity of exhibiting native pluck; for he ought to have turned his back

on  his  "We,"  and  have  established  a  moral  code  for  life  out  of  bellum

omnium contra omnes and the privileges of the strong. But it is to be feared

that such a code could only have emanated from a bold spirit like that of

Hobbes', and must have taken its root in a love of truth quite different from

that which was only able to vent itself in explosive outbursts against parsons,

miracles, and the "world-wide humbug" of the Resurrection. For, whereas the

Philistine remained on Strauss's side in regard to these explosive outbursts, he

would have been against him had he been confronted with a genuine and

seriously constructed ethical system, based upon Darwin's teaching.

  Says  Strauss:  "I  should  say  that  all  moral  action  arises  from  the

individual's acting in consonance with the idea of kind" (p. 274). Put quite

clearly and comprehensively, this means: "Live as a man, and not as an ape

or a seal." Unfortunately, this imperative is both useless and feeble; for in the

class Man what a multitude of different types are included--to mention only

the Patagonian and the Master, Strauss; and no one would ever dare to say

with any right, "Live like a Patagonian," and "Live like the Master Strauss"!

Should any one, however, make it his rule to live like a genius--that is to say,

like the ideal type of the genus Man--and should he perchance at the same

time be either a Patagonian or Strauss himself, what should we then not have

to suffer from the importunities of genius-mad eccentrics (concerning whose

mushroom growth in Germany even Lichtenberg had already spoken), whowith savage cries would compel us to listen to the confession of their most

recent belief! Strauss has not yet learned that no "idea" can ever make man

better or more moral, and that the preaching of a morality is as easy as the

establishment of it is difficult. His business ought rather to have been, to take

the  phenomena  of  human  goodness,  such--for  instance--as  pity,  love,  and

self-abnegation, which are already to hand, and seriously to explain them and

show their relation to his Darwinian first principle. But no; he preferred to

soar into the imperative, and thus escape the task of explaining. But even in

his flight he was irresponsible enough to soar beyond the very first principles

of which we speak.

  "Ever remember," says Strauss, "that thou art human, not merely a natural

production;  ever  remember  that  all  others  are  human  also,  and,  with  all

individual differences, the same as thou, having the same needs and claims as

thyself: this is the sum and the substance of morality" (p. 277). But where

does this imperative hail from? How can it be intuitive in man, seeing that,

according to Darwin, man is indeed a creature of nature, and that his ascent to

his  present  stage  of  development  has  been  conditioned  by  quite  different

laws--by the very fact that be was continually forgetting that others were

constituted like him and shared the same rights with him; by the very fact that

he  regarded  himself  as  the  stronger,  and  thus  brought  about  the  gradual

suppression of weaker types. Though Strauss is bound to admit that no two

creatures have ever been quite alike, and that the ascent of man from the

lowest  species  of  animals  to  the  exalted  height  of  the  Culture--Philistine

depended upon the law of individual distinctness, he still sees no difficulty in

declaring exactly the reverse in his law: "Behave thyself as though there were

no  such  things  as  individual  distinctions."  Where  is  the  Strauss-Darwin

morality here? Whither, above all, has the courage gone?

  In the very next paragraph we find further evidence tending to show us

the  point  at  which  this  courage  veers  round  to  its  opposite;  for  Strauss

continues: "Ever remember that thou, and all that thou beholdest within and

around thee, all that befalls thee and others, is no disjointed fragment, no wild

chaos of atoms or casualties, but that, following eternal law, it springs from

the one primal source of all life, all reason, and all good: this is the essence of

religion" (pp. 277-78). Out of that "one primal source," however, all ruin and

irrationality, all evil flows as well, and its name, according to Strauss, is

Cosmos.

  Now,  how  can  this  Cosmos,  with  all  the  contradictions  and  the  self-annihilating  characteristics  which  Strauss  gives  it,  be  worthy  of  religious

veneration and be addressed by the name "God," as Strauss addresses it?--

"Our God does not, indeed, take us into His arms from the outside (here one

expects, as an antithesis, a somewhat miraculous process of being "taken into

His arms from the inside"), but He unseals the well-springs of consolation

within our own bosoms. He shows us that although Chance would be an

unreasonable ruler, yet necessity, or the enchainment of causes in the world,

is Reason itself." (A misapprehension of which only the "We" can fail to

perceive the folly; because they were brought up in the Hegelian worship of

Reality as the Reasonable--that is to say, in the canonisation of success.) "He

teaches us to perceive that to demand an exception in the accomplishment of

a single natural law would be to demand the destruction of the universe" (pp.

435-36). On the contrary, Great Master: an honest natural scientist believes in

the unconditional rule of natural laws in the world, without, however, taking

up any position in regard to the ethical or intellectual value of these laws.

Wherever  neutrality  is  abandoned  in  this  respect,  it  is  owing  to  an

anthropomorphic attitude of mind which allows reason to exceed its proper

bounds.  But  it  is  just  at  the  point  where  the  natural  scientist  resigns  that

Strauss,  to  put  it  in  his  own  words,  "reacts  religiously,"  and  leaves  the

scientific and scholarly standpoint in order to proceed along less honest lines

of  his  own.  Without  any  further  warrant,  he  assumes  that  all  that  has

happened  possesses  the  highest  intellectual  value;  that  it  was  therefore

absolutely  reasonably  and  intentionally  so  arranged,  and  that  it  even

contained a revelation of eternal goodness. He therefore has to appeal to a

complete cosmodicy, and finds himself at a disadvantage in regard to him

who is contented with a theodicy, and who, for instance, regards the whole of

man's existence as a punishment for sin or a process of purification. At this

stage, and in this embarrassing position, Strauss even suggests a metaphysical

hypothesis--the driest and most palsied ever conceived--and, in reality, but an

unconscious parody of one of Lessing's sayings. We read on page 255: "And

that other saying of Lessing's-- 'If God, holding truth in His right hand, and in

His left only the ever-living desire for it, although on condition of perpetual

error, left him the choice of the two, he would, considering that truth belongs

to God alone, humbly seize His left hand, and beg its contents for Himself'--

this  saying  of  Lessing's  has  always  been  accounted  one  of  the  most

magnificent which he has left us. It has been found to contain the general

expression of his restless love of inquiry and activity. The saying has alwaysmade a special impression upon me; because, behind its subjective meaning, I

still seemed to hear the faint ring of an objective one of infinite import. For

does  it  not  contain  the  best  possible  answer  to  the  rude  speech  of

Schopenhauer, respecting the ill-advised God who had nothing better to do

than  to  transform  Himself  into  this  miserable  world?  if,  for  example,  the

Creator Himself had shared Lessing's conviction of the superiority of struggle

to tranquil possession?" What!--a God who would choose perpetual error,

together with a striving after truth, and who would, perhaps, fall humbly at

Strauss's feet and cry to him,"Take thou all Truth, it is thine!"? If ever a God

and a man were ill-advised, they are this Straussian God, whose hobby is to

err and to fail, and this Straussian man, who must atone for this erring and

failing. Here, indeed, one hears "a faint ring of infinite import"; here flows

Strauss's cosmic soothing oil; here one has a notion of the rationale of all

becoming and all natural laws. Really? Is not our universe rather the work of

an inferior being, as Lichtenberg suggests?--of an inferior being who did not

quite  understand  his  business;  therefore  an  experiment,  an  attempt,  upon

which work is still proceeding? Strauss himself, then, would be compelled to

admit that our universe is by no means the theatre of reason, but of error, and

that no conformity to law can contain anything consoling, since all laws have

been promulgated by an erratic God who even finds pleasure in blundering. It

really  is  a  most  amusing  spectacle  to  watch  Strauss  as  a  metaphysical

architect,  building  castles  in  the  air.  But  for  whose  benefit  is  this

entertainment given? For the smug and noble "We," that they may not lose

conceit with themselves: they may possibly have taken sudden fright, in the

midst of the inflexible and pitiless wheel-works of the world-machine, and

are  tremulously  imploring  their  leader  to  come  to  their  aid.  That  is  why

Strauss pours forth the "soothing oil," that is why he leads forth on a leash a

God whose passion it is to err; it is for the same reason, too, that he assumes

for once the utterly unsuitable r�le of a metaphysical architect. He does all

this, because the noble souls already referred to are frightened, and because

he is too. And it is here that we reach the limit of his courage, even in the

presence of his "We." He does not dare to be honest, and to tell them, for

instance: "I have liberated you from a helping and pitiful God: the Cosmos is

no more than an inflexible machine; beware of its wheels, that they do not

crush you." He dare not do this. Consequently, he must enlist the help of a

witch, and he turns to metaphysics. To the Philistine, however, even Strauss's

metaphysics is preferable to Christianity's, and the notion of an erratic Godmore  congenial  than  that  of  one  who  works  miracles.  For  the  Philistine

himself errs, but has never yet performed a miracle. Hence his hatred of the

genius;  for  the  latter  is  justly  famous  for  the  working  of  miracles.  It  is

therefore highly instructive to ascertain why Strauss, in one passage alone,

suddenly takes up the cudgels for genius and the aristocracy of intellect in

general. Whatever does he do it for? He does it out of fear--fear of the social

democrat. He refers to Bismarck and Moltke, "whose greatness is the less

open to controversy as it manifests itself in the domain of tangible external

facts. No help for it, therefore; even the most stiff-necked and obdurate of

these fellows must condescend to look up a little, if only to get a sight, be it

no farther than the knees, of those august figures" (p.327). Do you, Master

Metaphysician, perhaps intend to instruct the social democrats in the art of

getting kicks? The willingness to bestow them may be met with everywhere,

and you are perfectly justified in promising to those who happen to be kicked

a sight of those sublime beings as far as the knee. "Also in the domain of art

and science," Strauss continues, "there will never be a dearth of kings whose

architectural undertakings will find employment for a multitude of carters."

Granted; but what if the carters should begin building? It does happen at

times, Great Master, as you know, and then the kings must grin and bear it.

  As a matter of fact, this union of impudence and weakness, of daring

words  and  cowardly  concessions,  this  cautious  deliberation  as  to  which

sentences will or will not impress the Philistine or smooth him down the right

way, this lack of character and power masquerading as character and power,

this meagre wisdom in the guise of omniscience,--these are the features in

this book which I detest. If I could conceive of young men having patience to

read it and to value it, I should sorrowfully renounce all hope for their future.

And  is  this  confession  of  wretched,  hopeless,  and  really  despicable

Philistinism supposed to be the expression of the thousands constituting the

"We" of whom Strauss speaks, and who are to be the fathers of the coming

generation? Unto him who would fain help this coming generation to acquire

what the present one does not yet possess, namely, a genuine German culture,

the prospect is a horrible one. To such a man, the ground seems strewn with

ashes, and all stars are obscured; while every withered tree and field laid

waste  seems  to  cry  to  him:  Barren!  Forsaken!  Springtime  is  no  longer

possible here! He must feel as young Goethe felt when he first peered into the

melancholy atheistic twilight of the Syst�me de la Nature; to him this book

seemed so grey, so Cimmerian and deadly, that he could only endure itspresence with difficulty, and shuddered at it as one shudders at a spectre.

  VIII.

  We ought now to be sufficiently informed concerning the heaven and the

courage of our new believer to be able to turn to the last question: How does

he write his books? and of what order are his religious documents?

  He who can answer this question uprightly and without prejudice will be

confronted by yet another serious problem, and that is: How this Straussian

pocket-oracle of the German Philistine was able to pass through six editions?

And  he  will  grow  more  than  ever  suspicious  when  he  hears  that  it  was

actually welcomed as a pocket-oracle, not only in scholastic circles, but even

in German universities as well. Students are said to have greeted it as a canon

for  strong  intellects,  and,  from  all  accounts,  the  professors  raised  no

objections to this view; while here and there people have declared it to be a

religions book for scholars. Strauss himself gave out that he did not intend his

profession of faith to be merely a reference-book for learned and cultured

people; but here let us abide by the fact that it was first and foremost a work

appealing to his colleagues, and was ostensibly a mirror in which they were

to see their own way of living faithfully reflected. For therein lay the feat.

The Master feigned to have presented us with a new ideal conception of the

universe, and now adulation is being paid him out of every mouth; because

each is in a position to suppose that he too regards the universe and life in the

same way. Thus Strauss has seen fulfilled in each of his readers what he only

demanded of the future. In this way, the extraordinary success of his book is

partly explained: "Thus we live and hold on our way in joy," the scholar cries

in his book, and delights to see others rejoicing over the announcement. If the

reader happen to think differently from the Master in regard to Darwin or to

capital punishment, it is of very little consequence; for he is too conscious

throughout of breathing an atmosphere that is familiar to him, and of hearing

but the echoes of his own voice and wants. However painfully this unanimity

may strike the true friend of German culture, it is his duty to be unrelenting in

his explanation of it as a phenomenon, and not to shrink from making this

explanation public.

  We all know the peculiar methods adopted in our own time of cultivating

the sciences: we all know them, because they form a part of our lives. And,

for this very reason, scarcely anybody seems to ask himself what the result of

such  a  cultivation  of  the  sciences  will  mean  to  culture  in  general,  even

supposing that everywhere the highest abilities and the most earnest will beavailable for the promotion of culture. In the heart of the average scientific

type (quite irrespective of the examples thereof with which we meet to-day)

there lies a pure paradox: he behaves like the veriest idler of independent

means, to whom life is not a dreadful and serious business, but a sound piece

of property, settled upon him for all eternity; and it seems to him justifiable to

spend his whole life in answering questions which, after all is said and done,

can  only  be  of  interest  to  that  person  who  believes  in  eternal  life  as  an

absolute certainty. The heir of but a few hours, he sees himself encompassed

by yawning abysses, terrible to behold; and every step he takes should recall

the questions, Wherefore? Whither? and Whence? to his mind. But his soul

rather warms to his work, and, be this the counting of a floweret's petals or

the breaking of stones by the roadside, he spends his whole fund of interest,

pleasure, strength, and aspirations upon it. This paradox--the scientific man--

has lately dashed ahead at such a frantic speed in Germany, that one would

almost  think  the  scientific  world  were  a  factory,  in  which  every  minute

wasted meant a fine. To-day the man of science works as arduously as the

fourth  or  slave  caste:  his  study  has  ceased  to  be  an  occupation,  it  is  a

necessity; he looks neither to the right nor to the left, but rushes through all

things--even through the serious matters which life bears in its train--with

that  semi-listlessness  and  repulsive  need  of  rest  so  characteristic  of  the

exhausted labourer. This is also his attitude towards culture. He behaves as if

life to him were not only otium but sine dignitate: even in his sleep he does

not throw off the yoke, but like an emancipated slave still dreams of his

misery,  his  forced  haste  and  his  floggings.  Our  scholars  can  scarcely  be

distinguished--and,  even  then,  not  to  their  advantage--from  agricultural

labourers, who in order to increase a small patrimony, assiduously strive, day

and night, to cultivate their fields, drive their ploughs, and urge on their oxen.

Now, Pascal suggests that men only endeavour to work hard at their business

and sciences with the view of escaping those questions of greatest import

which  every  moment  of  loneliness  or  leisure  presses  upon  them--the

questions  relating  to  the  wherefore,  the  whence,  and  the  whither  of  life.

Curiously enough, our scholars never think of the most vital question of all--

the wherefore of their work, their haste, and their painful ecstasies. Surely

their object is not the earning of bread or the acquiring of posts of honour?

No, certainly not. But ye take as much pains as the famishing and breadless;

and,  with  that  eagerness  and  lack  of  discernment  which  characterises  the

starving,  ye  even  snatch  the  dishes  from  the  sideboard  of  science.  If,however, as scientific men, ye proceed with science as the labourers with the

tasks which the exigencies of life impose upon them, what will become of a

culture which must await the hour of its birth and its salvation in the very

midst of all this agitated and breathless running to and fro--this sprawling

scientifically?

  For it no one has time--and yet for what shall science have time if not for

culture?  Answer  us  here,  then,  at  least:  whence,  whither,  wherefore  all

science, if it do not lead to culture? Belike to barbarity? And in this direction

we already see the scholar caste ominously advanced, if we are to believe that

such  superficial  books  as  this  one  of  Strauss's  meet  the  demand  of  their

present degree of culture. For precisely in him do we find that repulsive need

of rest and that incidental semi-listless attention to, and coming to terms with,

philosophy, culture, and every serious thing on earth. It will be remembered

that, at the meetings held by scholars, as soon as each individual has had his

say in his own particular department of knowledge, signs of fatigue, of a

desire  for  distraction  at  any  price,  of  waning  memory,  and  of  incoherent

experiences  of  life,  begin  to  be  noticeable.  While  listening  to  Strauss

discussing  any  worldly  question,  be  it  marriage,  the  war,  or  capital

punishment, we are startled by his complete lack of anything like first-hand

experience, or of any original thought on human nature. All his judgments are

so redolent of books, yea even of newspapers. Literary reminiscences do duty

for  genuine  ideas  and  views,  and  the  assumption  of  a  moderate  and

grandfatherly  tone  take  the  place  of  wisdom  and  mature  thought.  How

perfectly in keeping all this is with the fulsome spirit animating the holders of

the highest places in German science in large cities! How thoroughly this

spirit must appeal to that other! for it is precisely in those quarters that culture

is in the saddest plight; it is precisely there that its fresh growth is made

impossible--so boisterous are the preparations made by science, so sheepishly

are  favourite  subjects  of  knowledge  allowed  to  oust  questions  of  much

greater import. What kind of lantern would be needed here, in order to find

men capable of a complete surrender to genius, and of an intimate knowledge

of its depths--men possessed of sufficient courage and strength to exorcise

the  demons  that  have  forsaken  our  age?  Viewed  from  the  outside,  such

quarters certainly do appear to possess the whole pomp of culture; with their

imposing apparatus they resemble great arsenals fitted with huge guns and

other  machinery  of  war;  we  see  preparations  in  progress  and  the  most

strenuous activity, as though the heavens themselves were to be stormed, andtruth were to be drawn out of the deepest of all wells; and yet, in war, the

largest  machines  are  the  most  unwieldy.  Genuine  culture  therefore  leaves

such places as these religiously alone, for its best instincts warn it that in their

midst it has nothing to hope for, and very much to fear. For the only kind of

culture with which the inflamed eye and obtuse brain of the scholar working-

classes concern themselves is of that Philistine order of which Strauss has

announced the gospel. If we consider for a moment the fundamental causes

underlying the sympathy which binds the learned working-classes to Culture-

Philistinism, we shall discover the road leading to Strauss the Writer, who

has been acknowledged classical, and tihence to our last and principal theme.

  To begin with, that culture has contentment written in its every feature,

and will allow of no important changes being introduced into the present state

of  German  education.  It  is  above  all  convinced  of  the  originality  of  all

German  educational  institutions,  more  particularly  the  public  schools  and

universities; it does not cease recommending these to foreigners, and never

doubts  that  if  the  Germans  have  become  the  most  cultivated  and

discriminating  people  on  earth,  it  is  owing  to  such  institutions.  Culture-

Philistinism believes in itself, consequently it also believes in the methods

and means at its disposal. Secondly, however, it leaves the highest judgment

concerning all questions of taste and culture to the scholar, and even regards

itself as the ever-increasing compendium of scholarly opinions regarding art,

literature, and philosophy. Its first care is to urge the scholar to express his

opinions;  these  it  proceeds  to  mix,  dilute,  and  systematise,  and  then  it

administers them to the German people in the form of a bottle of medicine.

What conies to life outside this circle is either not heard or attended at all, or

if heard, is heeded half-heartedly; until, at last, a voice (it does not matter

whose, provided it belong to some one who is strictly typical of the scholar

tribe) is heard to issue from the temple in which traditional infallibility of

taste is said to reside; and from that time forward public opinion has one

conviction more, which it echoes and re-echoes hundreds and hundreds of

times. As a matter of fact, though, the aesthetic infallibility of any utterance

emanating from the temple is the more doubtful, seeing that the lack of taste,

thought, and artistic feeling in any scholar can be taken for granted, unless it

has previously been proved that, in his particular case, the reverse is true.

And only a few can prove this. For how many who have had a share in the

breathless and unending scurry of modern science have preserved that quiet

and courageous gaze of the struggling man of culture--if they ever possessedit--that gaze which condemns even the scurry we speak of as a barbarous

state  of  affairs?  That  is  why  these  few  are  forced  to  live  in  an  almost

perpetual contradiction. What could they do against the uniform belief of the

thousands who have enlisted public opinion in their cause, and who mutually

defend  each  other  in  this  belief?  What  purpose  can  it  serve  when  one

individual  openly  declares  war  against  Strauss,  seeing  that  a  crowd  have

decided in his favour, and that the masses led by this crowd have learned to

ask six consecutive times for the Master's Philistine sleeping-mixture?

  If, without further ado, we here assumed that the Straussian confession-

book  had  triumphed  over  public  opinion  and  had  been  acclaimed  and

welcomed as conqueror, its author might call our attention to the fact that the

multitudinous criticisms of his work in the various public organs are not of an

altogether unanimous or even favourable character, and that he therefore felt

it incumbent upon him to defend himself against some of the more malicious,

impudent,  and  provoking  of  these  newspaper  pugilists  by  means  of  a

postscript. How can there be a public opinion concerning my book, he cries

to us, if every journalist is to regard me as an outlaw, and to mishandle me as

much  as  he  likes?  This  contradiction  is  easily  explained,  as  soon  as  one

considers  the  two  aspects  of  the  Straussian  book--the  theological  and  the

literary, and it is only the latter that has anything to do with German culture.

Thanks to its theological colouring, it stands beyond the pale of our German

culture, and provokes the animosity of the various theological groups--yea,

even of every individual German, in so far as he is a theological sectarian

from birth, and only invents his own peculiar private belief in order to be able

to dissent from every other form of belief. But when the question arises of

talking  about  Strauss  THE  WRITER,  pray  listen  to  what  the  theological

sectarians have to say about him. As soon as his literary side comes under

notice, all theological objections immediately subside, and the dictum comes

plain and clear, as if from the lips of one congregation: In spite of it all, he is

still a classical writer!

    Everybody--even the most bigoted, orthodox Churchman--pays the writer

the most gratifying compliments, while there is always a word or two thrown

in as a tribute to his almost Lessingesque language, his delicacy of touch, or

the beauty and accuracy of his aesthetic views. As a book, therefore, the

Straussian performance appears to meet all the demands of an ideal example

of its kind. The theological opponents, despite the fact that their voices were

the loudest of all, nevertheless constitute but an infinitesimal portion of thegreat public; and even with regard to them, Strauss still maintains that he is

right when he says: "Compared with my thousands of readers, a few dozen

public cavillers form but an insignificant minority, and they can hardly prove

that they are their faithful interpreters. It was obviously in the nature of things

that opposition should be clamorous and assent tacit." Thus, apart from the

angry bitterness which Strauss's profession of faith may have provoked here

and there, even the most fanatical of his opponents, to whom his voice seems

to rise out of an abyss, like the voice of a beast, are agreed as to his merits as

a writer; and that is why the treatment which Strauss has received at the

hands of the literary lackeys of the theological groups proves nothing against

our contention that Culture-Philistinism celebrated its triumph in this book. It

must be admitted that the average educated Philistine is a degree less honest

than Strauss, or is at least more reserved in his public utterances. But this fact

only tends to increase his admiration for honesty in another. At home, or in

the company of his equals, he may applaud with wild enthusiasm, but takes

care not to put on paper how entirely Strauss's words are in harmony with his

own innermost feelings. For, as we have already maintained, our Culture-

Philistine is somewhat of a coward, even in his strongest sympathies; hence

Strauss, who can boast of a trifle more courage than he, becomes his leader,

notwithstanding  the  fact  that  even  Straussian  pluck  has  its  very  definite

limits. If he overstepped these limits, as Schopenhauer does in almost every

sentence, he would then forfeit his position at the head of the Philistines, and

everybody would flee from him as precipitately as they are now following in

his wake. He who would regard this artful if not sagacious moderation and

this mediocre valour as an Aristotelian virtue, would certainly be wrong; for

the valour in question is not the golden mean between two faults, but between

a virtue and a fault--and in this mean, between virtue and fault, all Philistine

qualities are to be found.

  IX.

  "In spite of it all, he is still a classical writer." Well, let us see! Perhaps

we may now be allowed to discuss Strauss the stylist and master of language;

but in the first place let us inquire whether, as a literary man, he is equal to

the  task  of  building  his  house,  and  whether  he  really  understands  the

architecture  of  a  book.  From  this  inquiry  we  shall  be  able  to  conclude

whether he is a respectable, thoughtful, and experienced author; and even

should we be forced to answer "No" to these questions, he may still, as a last

shift, take refuge in his fame as a classical prose-writer. This last-mentionedtalent  alone,  it  is  true,  would  not  suffice  to  class  him  with  the  classical

authors, but at most with the classical improvisers and virtuosos of style,

who, however, in regard to power of expression and the whole planning and

framing of the work, reveal the awkward hand and the embarrassed eye of the

bungler. We therefore put the question, whether Strauss really possesses the

artistic strength necessary for the purpose of presenting us with a thing that is

a whole, totum ponere?

  As a rule, it ought to be possible to tell from the first rough sketch of a

work whether the author conceived the thing as a whole, and whether, in

view  of  this  original  conception,  he  has  discovered  the  correct  way  of

proceeding  with  his  task  and  of  fixing  its  proportions.  Should  this  most

important Part of the problem be solved, and should the framework of the

building have been given its most favourable proportions, even then there

remains enough to be done: how many smaller faults have to be corrected,

how many gaps require filling in! Here and there a temporary partition or

floor was found to answer the requirements; everywhere dust and fragments

litter the ground, and no matter where we look, we see the signs of work done

and work still to be done. The house, as a whole, is still uninhabitable and

gloomy, its walls are bare, and the wind blows in through the open windows.

Now, whether this remaining, necessary, and very irksome work has been

satisfactorily accomplished by Strauss does not concern us at present; our

question is, whether the building itself has been conceived as a whole, and

whether its proportions are good? The reverse of this, of course, would be a

compilation of fragments--a method generally adopted by scholars. They rely

upon it that these fragments are related among themselves, and thus confound

the logical and the artistic relation between them. Now, the relation between

the  four  questions  which  provide  the  chapter-headings  of  Strauss's  book

cannot  be  called  a  logical  one.  Are  we  still  Christians?  Have  we  still  a

religion? What is our conception of the universe? What is our rule of life?

And it is by no means contended that the relation is illogical simply because

the third question has nothing to do with the second, nor the fourth with the

third, nor all three with the first. The natural scientist who puts the third

question, for instance, shows his unsullied love of truth by the simple fact

that he tacitly passes over the second. And with regard to the subject of the

fourth  chapter--marriage,  republicanism,  and  capital  punishment--Strauss

himself seems to have been aware that they could only have been muddled

and obscured by being associated with the Darwinian theory expounded inthe third chapter; for he carefully avoids all reference to this theory when

discussing them. But the question, "Are we still Christians?" destroys the

freedom  of  the  philosophical  standpoint  at  one  stroke,  by  lending  it  an

unpleasant theological colouring. Moreover, in this matter, he quite forgot

that the majority of men to-day are not Christians at all, but Buddhists. Why

should one, without further ceremony, immediately think of Christianity at

the sound of the words "old faith"? Is this a sign that Strauss has never ceased

to be a Christian theologian, and that he has therefore never learned to be a

philosopher? For we find still greater cause for surprise in the fact that he

quite  fails  to  distinguish  between  belief  and  knowledge,  and  continually

mentions his "new belief" and the still newer science in one breath. Or is

"new belief" merely an ironical concession to ordinary parlance? This almost

seems to be the case; for here and there he actually allows "new belief" and

"newer  science"  to  be  interchangeable  terms,  as  for  instance  on  page  II,

where he asks on which side, whether on that of the ancient orthodoxy or of

modern  science,  "exist  more  of  the  obscurities  and  insufficiencies

unavoidable in human speculation."

    Moreover, according to the scheme laid down in the Introduction, his

desire  is  to  disclose  those  proofs  upon  which  the  modern  view  of  life  is

based;  but  he  derives  all  these  proofs  from  science,  and  in  this  respect

assumes far more the attitude of a scientist than of a believer.

  At bottom, therefore, the religion is not a new belief, but, being of a piece

with modern science, it has nothing to do with religion at all. If Strauss,

however, persists in his claims to be religious, the grounds for these claims

must be beyond the pale of recent science. Only the smallest portion of the

Straussian book--that is to say, but a few isolated pages--refer to what Strauss

in all justice might call a belief, namely, that feeling for the "All" for which

he demands the piety that the old believer demanded for his God. On the

pages in question, however, he cannot claim to be altogether scientific; but if

only  he  could  lay  claim  to  being  a  little  stronger,  more  natural,  more

outspoken, more pious, we should be content. Indeed, what perhaps strikes us

most forcibly about him is the multitude of artificial procedures of which he

avails himself before he ultimately gets the feeling that he still possesses a

belief and a religion; he reaches it by means of stings and blows, as we have

already seen. How indigently and feebly this emergency-belief presents itself

to us! We shiver at the sight of it.

    Although Strauss, in the plan laid down in his Introduction, promises tocompare the two faiths, the old and the new, and to show that the latter will

answer the same purpose as the former, even he begins to feel, in the end,

that  he  has  promised  too  much.  For  the  question  whether  the  new  belief

answers the same purpose as the old, or is better or worse, is disposed of

incidentally, so to speak, and with uncomfortable haste, in two or three pages

(p. 436 et seq.-), and is actually bolstered up by the following subterfuge: "He

who cannot help himself in this matter is beyond help, is not yet ripe for our

standpoint" (p. 436). How differently, and with what intensity of conviction,

did the ancient Stoic believe in the All and the rationality of the All! And,

viewed in this light, how does Strauss's claim to originality appear? But, as

we have already observed, it would be a matter of indifference to us whether

it were new, old, original, or imitated, so that it were only more powerful,

more healthy, and more natural. Even Strauss himself leaves this double-

distilled emergency-belief to take care of itself as often as he can do so, in

order  to  protect  himself  and  us  from  danger,  and  to  present  his  recently

acquired biological knowledge to his "We" with a clear conscience. The more

embarrassed he may happen to be when he speaks of faith, the rounder and

fuller his mouth becomes when he quotes the greatest benefactor to modern

men-Darwin. Then he not only exacts belief for the new Messiah, but also for

himself--the  new  apostle.  For  instance,  while  discussing  one  of  the  most

intricate questions in natural history, he declares with true ancient pride: "I

shall be told that I am here speaking of things about which I understand

nothing. Very well; but others will come who will understand them, and who

will also have understood me" (p. 241).

    According to this, it would almost seem as though the famous "We" were

not  only  in  duty  bound  to  believe  in  the  "All,"  but  also  in  the  naturalist

Strauss; in this case we can only hope that in order to acquire the feeling for

this last belief, other processes are requisite than the painful and cruel ones

demanded by the first belief. Or is it perhaps sufficient in this case that the

subject of belief himself be tormented and stabbed with the view of bringing

the believers to that "religious reaction" which is the distinguishing sign of

the "new faith." What merit should we then discover in the piety of those

whom Strauss calls "We"?

    Otherwise,  it  is  almost  to  be  feared  that  modern  men  will  pass  on  in

pursuit of their business without troubling themselves overmuch concerning

the new furniture of faith offered them by the apostle: just as they have done

heretofore, without the doctrine of the rationality of the All. The whole ofmodern  biological  and  historical  research  has  nothing  to  do  with  the

Straussian belief in the All, and the fact that the modern Philistine does not

require the belief is proved by the description of his life given by Strauss in

the chapter,"What is our Rule of Life?" He is therefore quite right in doubting

whether the coach to which his esteemed readers have been obliged to trust

themselves "with him, fulfils every requirement." It certainly does not; for the

modern man makes more rapid progress when he does not take his place in

the Straussian coach, or rather, he got ahead much more quickly long before

the  Straussian  coach  ever  existed.  Now,  if  it  be  true  that  the  famous

"minority"  which  is  "not  to  be  overlooked,"  and  of  which,  and  in  whose

name, Strauss speaks, "attaches great importance to consistency," it must be

just as dissatisfied with Strauss the Coachbuilder as we are with Strauss the

Logician.

  Let us, however, drop the question of the logician. Perhaps, from the

artistic point of view, the book really is an example of a. well-conceived plan,

and does, after all, answer to the requirements of the laws of beauty, despite

the fact that it fails to meet with the demands of a well-conducted argument.

And now, having shown that he is neither a scientist nor a strictly correct and

systematic scholar, for the first time we approach the question: Is Strauss a

capable writer? Perhaps the task he set himself was not so much to scare

people away from the old faith as to captivate them by a picturesque and

graceful  description  of  what  life  would  be  with  the  new.  If  he  regarded

scholars and educated men as his most probable audience, experience ought

certainly to have told him that whereas one can shoot such men down with

the heavy guns of scientific proof, but cannot make them surrender, they may

be got to capitulate all the more quickly before "lightly equipped" measures

of seduction. "Lightly equipped," and "intentionally so," thus Strauss himself

speaks of his own book. Nor do his public eulogisers refrain from using the

same expression in reference to the work, as the following passage, quoted

from  one  of  the  least  remarkable  among  them,  and  in  which  the  same

expression is merely paraphrased, will go to prove:--

  "The discourse flows on with delightful harmony: wherever it directs its

criticism against old ideas it wields the art of demonstration, almost playfully;

and it is with some spirit that it prepares the new ideas it brings so enticingly,

and  presents  them  to  the  simple  as  well  as  to  the  fastidious  taste.  The

arrangement of such diverse and conflicting material is well thought out for

every  portion  of  it  required  to  be  touched  upon,  without  being  made  tooprominent; at times the transitions leading from one subject to another are

artistically managed, and one hardly knows what to admire most--the skill

with which unpleasant questions are shelved, or the discretion with which

they are hushed up."

  The spirit of such eulogies, as the above clearly shows, is not quite so

subtle in regard to judging of what an author is able to do as in regard to what

he  wishes.  What  Strauss  wishes,  however,  is  best  revealed  by  his  own

emphatic  and  not  quite  harmless  commendation  of  Voltaire's  charms,  in

whose service he might have learned precisely those "lightly equipped" arts

of which his admirer speaks--granting, of course, that virtue may be acquired

and a pedagogue can ever be a dancer.

  Who could help having a suspicion or two, when reading the following

passage, for instance, in which Strauss says of Voltaire, "As a philosopher

[he] is certainly not original, but in the main a mere exponent of English

investigations: in this respect, however, he shows himself to be completely

master  of  his  subject,  which  he  presents  with  incomparable  skill,  in  all

possible lights and from all possible sides, and is able withal to meet the

demands  of  thoroughness,  without,  however,  being  over-severe  in  his

method"? Now, all the negative traits mentioned in this passage might be

applied to Strauss. No one would contend, I suppose, that Strauss is original,

or that he is over-severe in his method; but the question is whether we can

regard him as "master of his subject," and grant him "incomparable skill"?

The  confession  to  the  effect  that  the  treatise  was  intentionally  "lightly

equipped" leads us to think that it at least aimed at incomparable skill.

  It was not the dream of our architect to build a temple, nor yet a house,

but  a  sort  of  summer-pavilion,  surrounded  by  everything  that  the  art  of

gardening can provide. Yea, it even seems as if that mysterious feeling for the

All were only calculated to produce an aesthetic effect, to be, so to speak, a

view  of  an  irrational  element,  such  as  the  sea,  looked  at  from  the  most

charming and rational of terraces. The walk through the first chapters-- that is

to say, through the theological catacombs with all their gloominess and their

involved and baroque embellishments--was also no more than an aesthetic

expedient  in  order  to  throw  into  greater  relief  the  purity,  clearness,  and

common sense of the chapter "What is our Conception of the Universe?" For,

immediately after that walk in the gloaming and that peep into the wilderness

of Irrationalism, we step into a hall with a skylight to it. Soberly and limpidly

it  welcomes  us:  its  mural  decorations  consist  of  astronomical  charts  andmathematical figures; it is filled with scientific apparatus, and its cupboards

contain skeletons, stuffed apes, and anatomical specimens. But now, really

rejoicing for the first time, we direct our steps into the innermost chamber of

bliss belonging to our pavilion-dwellers; there we find them with their wives,

children,  and  newspapers,  occupied  in  the  commonplace  discussion  of

politics; we listen for a moment to their conversation on marriage, universal

suffrage,  capital  punishment,  and  workmen's  strikes,  and  we  can  scarcely

believe it to be possible that the rosary of public opinions can be told off so

quickly. At length an attempt is made to convince us of the classical taste of

the inmates. A moment's halt in the library, and the music-room suffices to

show us what we had expected all along, namely, that the best books lay on

the  shelves,  and  that  the  most  famous  musical  compositions  were  in  the

music-cabinets. Some one actually played something to us, and even if it

were Haydn's music, Haydn could not be blamed because it sounded like

Riehl's  music  for  the  home.  Meanwhile  the  host  had  found  occasion  to

announce to us his complete agreement with Lessing and Goethe, although

with the latter only up to the second part of Faust. At last our pavilion-owner

began to praise himself, and assured us that he who could not be happy under

his roof was beyond help and could not be ripe for his standpoint, whereupon

he offered us his coach, but with the polite reservation that he could not assert

that it would fulfil every requirement, and that, owing to the stones on his

road having been newly laid down, we were not to mind if we were very

much  jolted.  Our  Epicurean  garden-god  then  took  leave  of  us  with  the

incomparable skill which he praised in Voltaire.

  Who could now persist in doubting the existence of this incomparable

skill? The complete master of his subject is revealed; the lightly equipped

artist-gardener is exposed, and still we hear the voice of the classical author

saying, "As a writer I shall for once cease to be a Philistine: I will not be one;

I refuse to be one! But a Voltaire--the German Voltaire--or at least the French

Lessing."

  With this we have betrayed a secret. Our Master does not always know

which he prefers to be--Voltaire or Lessing; but on no account will he be a

Philistine. At a pinch he would not object to being both Lessing and Voltaire-

-that the word might be fulfilled that is written, "He had no character, but

when he wished to appear as if he had, he assumed one."

  X.

  If  we  have  understood  Strauss  the  Confessor  correctly,  he  must  be  agenuine Philistine, with a narrow, parched soul and scholarly and common-

place needs; albeit no one would be more indignant at the title than David

Strauss the Writer. He would be quite happy to be regarded as mischievous,

bold, malicious, daring; but his ideal of bliss would consist in finding himself

compared  with  either  Lessing  or  Voltaire--because  these  men  were

undoubtedly anything but Philistines. In striving after this state of bliss, he

often seems to waver between two alternatives--either to mimic the brave and

dialectical petulance of Lessing, or to affect the manner of the faun-like and

free-spirited man of antiquity that Voltaire was. When taking up his pen to

write, he seems to be continually posing for his portrait; and whereas at times

his features are drawn to look like Lessing's, anon they are made to assume

the  Voltairean  mould.  While  reading  his  praise  of  Voltaire's  manner,  we

almost seem to see him abjuring the consciences of his contemporaries for

not having learned long ago what the modern Voltaire had to offer them.

"Even  his  excellences  are  wonderfully  uniform,"  he  says:  "simple

naturalness,  transparent  clearness,  vivacious  mobility,  seductive  charm.

Warmth  and  emphasis  are  also  not  wanting  where  they  are  needed,  and

Voltaire's  innermost  nature  always  revolted  against  stiltedness  and

affectation;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  if  at  times  wantonness  or  passion

descend to an unpleasantly low level, the fault does not rest so much with the

stylist as with the man." According to this, Strauss seems only too well aware

of the importance of simplicity in style; it is ever the sign of genius, which

alone  has  the  privilege  to  express  itself  naturally  and  guilelessly.  When,

therefore,  an  author  selects  a  simple  mode  of  expression,  this  is  no  sign

whatever of vulgar ambition; for although many are aware of what such an

author would fain be taken for, they are yet kind enough to take him precisely

for that. The genial writer, however, not only reveals his true nature in the

plain and unmistakable form of his utterance, but his super-abundant strength

actually dallies with the material he treats, even when it is dangerous and

difficult. Nobody treads stiffly along unknown paths, especially when these

are broken throughout their course by thousands of crevices and furrows; but

the  genius  speeds  nimbly  over  them,  and,  leaping  with  grace  and  daring,

scorns the wistful and timorous step of caution.

  Even  Strauss  knows  that  the  problems  he  prances  over  are  dreadfully

serious, and have ever been regarded as such by the philosophers who have

grappled  with  them;  yet  he  calls  his  book  lightly  equipped!  But  of  this

dreadfulness  and  of  the  usual  dark  nature  of  our  meditations  whenconsidering such questions as the worth of existence and the duties of man,

we entirely cease to be conscious when the genial Master plays his antics

before us, "lightly equipped, and intentionally so." Yes, even more lightly

equipped than his Rousseau, of whom he tells us it was said that he stripped

himself below and adorned himself on top, whereas Goethe did precisely the

reverse. Perfectly guileless geniuses do not, it appears, adorn themselves at

all; possibly the words "lightly equipped" may simply be a euphemism for

"naked." The few who happen to have seen the Goddess of Truth declare that

she is naked, and perhaps, in the minds of those who have never seen her, but

who implicitly believe those few, nakedness or light equipment is actually a

proof, or at least a feature, of truthi Even this vulgar superstition turns to the

advantage of the author's ambition. Some one sees something naked, and he

exclaims: "What if this were the truth!" Whereupon he grows more solemn

than is his wont. By this means, however, the author scores a tremendous

advantage; for he compels his reader to approach him with greater solemnity

than  another  and  perhaps  more  heavily  equipped  writer.  This  is

unquestionably  the  best  way  to  become  a  classical  author;  hence  Strauss

himself is able to tell us: "I even enjoy the unsought honour of being, in the

opinion of many, a classical writer of prose. "He has therefore achieved his

aim. Strauss the Genius goes gadding about the streets in the garb of lightly

equipped  goddesses  as  a  classic,  while  Strauss  the  Philistine,  to  use  an

original expression of this genius's, must, at all costs, be "declared to be on

the decline," or "irrevocably dismissed."

  But,  alas!  in  spite  of  all  declarations  of  decline  and  dismissal,  the

Philistine still returns, and all too frequently. Those features, contorted to

resemble Lessing and Voltaire, must relax from time to time to resume their

old and original shape. The mask of genius falls from them too often, and the

Master's expression is never more sour and his movements never stiffer than

when he has just attempted to take the leap, or to glance with the fiery eye, of

a genius. Precisely owing to the fact that he is too lightly equipped for our

zone, he runs the risk of catching cold more often and more severely than

another. It may seem a terrible hardship to him that every one should notice

this; but if he wishes to be cured, the following diagnosis of his case ought to

be publicly presented to him:-- Once upon a time there lived a Strauss, a

brave, severe, and stoutly equipped scholar, with whom we sympathised as

wholly as with all those in Germany who seek to serve truth with earnestness

and energy, and to rule within the limits of their powers. He, however, who isnow publicly famous as David Strauss, is another person. The theologians

may be to blame for this metamorphosis; but, at any rate, his present toying

with the mask of genius inspires us with as much hatred and scorn as his

former earnestness commanded respect and sympathy. When, for instance, he

tells us, "it would also argue ingratitude towards my genius if I were not to

rejoice that to the faculty of an incisive, analytical criticism was added the

innocent pleasure in artistic production," it may astonish him to hear that, in

spite of this self-praise, there are still men who maintain exactly the reverse,

and  who  say,  not  only  that  he  has  never  possessed  the  gift  of  artistic

production, but that the "innocent" pleasure he mentions is of all things the

least  innocent,  seeing  that  it  succeeded  in  gradually  undermining  and

ultimately destroying a nature as strongly and deeply scholarly and critical as

Strauss's--in  fact,  the  real  Straussian  Genius.  In  a  moment  of  unlimited

frankness, Strauss himself indeed adds: "Merck was always in my thoughts,

calling out, 'Don't produce such child's play again; others can do that too!'"

That was the voice of the real Straussian genius, which also asked him what

the worth of his newest, innocent, and lightly equipped modern Philistine's

testament was. Others can do that too! And many could do it better. And even

they who could have done it best, i.e. those thinkers who are more widely

endowed than Strauss, could still only have made nonsense of it.

  I take it that you are now beginning to understand the value I set on

Strauss  the  Writer.  You  are  beginning  to  realise  that  I  regard  him  as  a

mummer who would parade as an artless genius and classical writer. When

Lichtenberg said, "A simple manner of writing is to be recommended, if only

in view of the fact that no honest man trims and twists his expressions," he

was very far from wishing to imply that a simple style is a proof of literary

integrity. I, for my part, only wish that Strauss the Writer had been more

upright, for then he would have written more becomingly and have been less

famous. Or, if he would be a mummer at all costs, how much more would he

not have pleased me if he had been a better mummer--one more able to ape

the guileless genius and classical author! For it yet remains to be said that

Strauss was not only an inferior actor but a very worthless stylist as well.

  XI.

  Of course, the blame attaching to Strauss for being a bad writer is greatly

mitigated by the fact that it is extremely difficult in Germany to become even

a passable or moderately good writer, and that it is more the exception than

not, to be a really good one. In this respect the natural soil is wanting, as arealso artistic values and the proper method of treating and cultivating oratory.

This latter accomplishment, as the various branches of it, i.e. drawing-room,

ecclesiastical and Parliamentary parlance, show, has not yet reached the level

of a national style; indeed, it has not yet shown even a tendency to attain to a

style at all, and all forms of language in Germany do not yet seem to have

passed a certain experimental stage. In view of these facts, the writer of to-

day,  to  some  extent,  lacks  an  authoritative  standard,  and  he  is  in  some

measure excused if, in the matter of language, he attempts to go ahead of his

own accord. As to the probable result which the present dilapidated condition

of the German language will bring about, Schopenhauer, perhaps, has spoken

most forcibly. "If the existing state of affairs continues," he says, "in the year

1900 German classics will cease to be understood, for the simple reason that

no  other  language  will  be  known,  save  the  trumpery  jargon  of  the  noble

present, the chief characteristic of which is impotence." And, in truth, if one

turn  to  the  latest  periodicals,  one  will  find  German  philologists  and

grammarians already giving expression to the view that our classics can no

longer serve us as examples of style, owing to the fact that they constantly

use  words,  modes  of  speech,  and  syntactic  arrangements  which  are  fast

dropping  out  of  currency.  Hence  the  need  of  collecting  specimens  of  the

finest  prose  that  has  been  produced  by  our  best  modern  writers,  and  of

offering them as examples to be followed, after the style of Sander's pocket

dictionary  of  bad  language.  In  this  book,  that  repulsive  monster  of  style

Gutzkow appears as a classic, and, according to its injunctions, we seem to be

called upon to accustom ourselves to quite a new and wondrous crowd of

classical authors, among which the first, or one of the first, is David Strauss:

he whom we cannot describe more aptly than we have already--that is to say,

as a worthless stylist. Now, the notion which the Culture-Philistine has of a

classic and standard author speaks eloquently for his pseudo-culture--he who

only shows his strength by opposing a really artistic and severe style, and

who, thanks to the persistence of his opposition, finally arrives at a certain

uniformity  of  expression,  which  again  almost  appears  to  possess  unity  of

genuine style. In view, therefore, of the right which is granted to every one to

experiment with the language, how is it possible at all for individual authors

to discover a generally agreeable tone? What is so generally interesting in

them? In the first place, a negative quality--the total lack of offensiveness:

but every really productive thing is offensive. The greater part of a German's

daily reading matter is undoubtedly sought either in the pages of newspapers,periodicals, or reviews. The language of these journals gradually stamps itself

on his brain, by means of its steady drip, drip, drip of similar phrases and

similar words. And, since he generally devotes to reading those hours of the

day during which his exhausted brain is in any case not inclined to offer

resistance, his ear for his native tongue so slowly but surely accustoms itself

to this everyday German that it ultimately cannot endure its absence without

pain. But the manufacturers of these newspapers are, by virtue of their trade,

most thoroughly inured to the effluvia of this journalistic jargon; they have

literally lost all taste, and their palate is rather gratified than not by the most

corrupt and arbitrary innovations. Hence the tutti unisono with which, despite

the general lethargy and sickliness, every fresh solecism is greeted; it is with

such  impudent  corruptions  of  the  language  that  her  hirelings  are  avenged

against her for the incredible boredom she imposes ever more and more upon

them. I remember having read "an appeal to the German nation," by Berthold

Auerbach, in which every sentence was un-German, distorted and false, and

which, as a whole, resembled a soulless mosaic of words cemented together

with  international  syntax.  As  to  the  disgracefully  slipshod  German  with

which Edward Devrient solemnised the death of Mendelssohn, I do not even

wish to do more than refer to it. A grammatical error--and this is the most

extraordinary feature of the case--does not therefore seem an offence in any

sense  to  our  Philistine,  but  a  most  delightful  restorative  in  the  barren

wilderness  of  everyday  German.  He  still,  however,  considers  all  really

productive  things  to  be  offensive.  The  wholly  bombastic,  distorted,  and

threadbare  syntax  of  the  modern  standard  author--yea,  even  his  ludicrous

neologisms--are  not  only  tolerated,  but  placed  to  his  credit  as  the  spicy

element in his works. But woe to the stylist with character, who seeks as

earnestly and perseveringly to avoid the trite phrases of everyday parlance, as

the "yester-night monster blooms of modern ink-flingers," as Schopenhauer

says! When platitudes, hackneyed, feeble, and vulgar phrases are the rule,

and the bad and the corrupt become refreshing exceptions, then all that is

strong, distinguished, and beautiful perforce acquires an evil odour. From

which it follows that, in Germany, the well-known experience which befell

the normally built traveller in the land of hunchbacks is constantly being

repeated. It will be remembered that he was so shamefully insulted there,

owing to his quaint figure and lack of dorsal convexity, that a priest at last

had to harangue the people on his behalf as follows: "My brethren, rather pity

this  poor  stranger,  and  present  thank-offerings  unto  the  gods,  that  ye  areblessed with such attractive gibbosities."

  If  any  one  attempted  to  compose  a  positive  grammar  out  of  the

international German style of to-day, and wished to trace the unwritten and

unspoken laws followed by every one, he would get the most extraordinary

notions of style and rhetoric. He would meet with laws which are probably

nothing  more  than  reminiscences  of  bygone  schooldays,  vestiges  of

impositions  for  Latin  prose,  and  results  perhaps  of  choice  readings  from

French novelists, over whose incredible crudeness every decently educated

Frenchman would have the right to laugh. But no conscientious native of

Germany seems to have given a thought to these extraordinary notions under

the yoke of which almost every German lives and writes.

  As an example of what I say, we may find an injunction to the effect that

a metaphor or a simile must be introduced from time to time, and that it must

be  new;  but,  since  to  the  mind  of  the  shallow-pated  writer  newness  and

modernity are identical, he proceeds forthwith to rack his brain for metaphors

in the technical vocabularies of the railway, the telegraph, the steamship, and

the Stock Exchange, and is proudly convinced that such metaphors must be

new because they are modern. In Strauss's confession-book we find liberal

tribute paid to modern metaphor. He treats us to a simile, covering a page and

a half, drawn from modern road-improvement work; a few pages farther back

he likens the world to a machine, with its wheels, stampers, hammers, and

"soothing  oil"  (p.  432);  "A  repast  that  begins  with  champagne"  (p.  384);

"Kant is a cold-water cure" (p. 309); "The Swiss constitution is to that of

England as a watermill is to a steam-engine, as a waltz-tune or a song to a

fugue or symphony" (p. 301); "In every appeal, the sequence of procedure

must  be  observed.  Now  the  mean  tribunal  between  the  individual  and

humanity is the nation" (p. 165); "If we would know whether there be still

any life in an organism which appears dead to us, we are wont to test it by a

powerful,  even  painful  stimulus,  as  for  example  a  stab"  (p.  161);  "The

religious domain in the human soul resembles the domain of the Red Indian

in America" (p. 160); "Virtuosos in piety, in convents"(p. 107); "And place

the sum-total of the foregoing in round numbers under the account" (p. 205);

"Darwin's theory resembles a railway track that is just marked out... where

the flags are fluttering joyfully in the breeze." In this really highly modern

way, Strauss has met the Philistine injunction to the effect that a new simile

must be introduced from time to time.

  Another  rhetorical  rule  is  also  very  widespread,  namely,  that  didacticpassages should be composed in long periods, and should be drawn out into

lengthy abstractions, while all persuasive passages should consist of short

sentences followed by striking contrasts. On page 154 in Strauss's book we

find a standard example of the didactic and scholarly style--a passage blown

out after the genuine Schleiermacher manner, and made to stumble along at a

true tortoise pace: "The reason why, in the earlier stages of religion, there

appear many instead of this single Whereon, a plurality of gods instead of the

one, is explained in this deduction of religion, from the fact that the various

forces of nature, or relations of life, which inspire man with the sentiment of

unqualified dependence, still act upon him in the commencement with the

full force of their distinctive characteristics; that he has not as yet become

conscious how, in regard to his unmitigated dependence upon them, there is

no  distinction  between  them,  and  that  therefore  the  Whereon  of  this

dependence, or the Being to which it conducts in the last instance, can only

be one."

  On pages 7 and 8 we find an example of the other kind of style, that of

the short sentences containing that affected liveliness which so excited certain

readers that they cannot mention Strauss any more without coupling his name

with  Lessing's.  "I  am  well  aware  that  what  I  propose  to  delineate  in  the

following pages is known to multitudes as well as to myself, to some even

much better. A few have already spoken out on the subject. Am I therefore to

keep silence? I think not. For do we not all supply each other's deficiencies?

If another is better informed as regards some things, I may perhaps be so as

regards others; while yet others are known and viewed by me in a different

light.  Out  with  it,  then!  let  my  colours  be  displayed  that  it  may  be  seen

whether they are genuine or not.'"

  It is true that Strauss's style generally maintains a happy medium between

this sort of merry quick-march and the other funereal and indolent pace; but

between two vices one does not invariably find a virtue; more often rather

only weakness, helpless paralysis, and impotence. As a matter of fact, I was

very disappointed when I glanced through Strauss's book in search of fine

and  witty  passages;  for,  not  having  found  anything  praiseworthy  in  the

Confessor, I had actually set out with the express purpose of meeting here

and there with at least some opportunities of praising Strauss the Writer. I

sought  and  sought,  but  my  purpose  remained  unfulfilled.  Meanwhile,

however, another duty seemed to press itself strongly on my mind--that of

enumerating the solecisms, the strained metaphors, the obscure abbreviations,the instances of bad taste, and the distortions which I encountered; and these

were of such a nature that I dare do no more than select a few examples of

them from among a collection which is too bulky to be given in full. By

means of these examples I may succeed in showing what it is that inspires, in

the hearts of modern Germans, such faith in this great and seductive stylist

Strauss: I refer to his eccentricities of expression, which, in the barren waste

and dryness of his whole book, jump out at one, not perhaps as pleasant but

as painfully stimulating, surprises. When perusing such passages, we are at

least assured, to use a Straussian metaphor, that we are not quite dead, but

still respond to the test of a stab. For the rest of the book is entirely lacking in

offensiveness --that quality which alone, as we have seen, is productive, and

which our classical author has himself reckoned among the positive virtues.

When the educated masses meet with exaggerated dulness and dryness, when

they are in the presence of really vapid commonplaces, they now seem to

believe that such things are the signs of health; and in this respect the words

of the author of the dialogus de oratoribus are very much to the point: "illam

ipsam quam jactant sanitatem non firmitate sed jejunio consequuntur." That is

why they so unanimously hate every firmitas, because it bears testimony to a

kind  of  health  quite  different  from  theirs;  hence  their  one  wish  to  throw

suspicion  upon  all  austerity  and  terseness,  upon  all  fiery  and  energetic

movement,  and  upon  every  full  and  delicate  play  of  muscles.  They  have

conspired to twist nature and the names of things completely round, and for

the future to speak of health only there where we see weakness, and to speak

of illness and excitability where for our part we see genuine vigour. From

which it follows that David Strauss is to them a classical author.

  If only this dulness were of a severely logical order! but simplicity and

austerity in thought are precisely what these weaklings have lost, and in their

hands even our language has become illogically tangled. As a proof of this,

let any one try to translate Strauss's style into Latin: in the case of Kant, be it

remembered, this is possible, while with Schopenhauer it even becomes an

agreeable exercise. The reason why this test fails with Strauss's German is not

owing  to  the  fact  that  it  is  more  Teutonic  than  theirs,  but  because  his  is

distorted and illogical, whereas theirs is lofty and simple. Moreover, he who

knows how the ancients exerted themselves in order to learn to write and

speak  correctly,  and  how  the  moderns  omit  to  do  so,  must  feel,  as

Schopenhauer says, a positive relief when he can turn from a German book

like the one under our notice, to dive into those other works, those ancientworks which seem to him still to be written in a new language. "For in these

books,"  says  Schopenhauer,  "I  find  a  regular  and  fixed  language  which,

throughout, faithfully follows the laws of grammar and orthography, so that I

can give up my thoughts completely to their matter; whereas in German I am

constantly  being  disturbed  by  the  author's  impudence  and  his  continual

attempts to establish his own orthographical freaks and absurd ideas-- the

swaggering foolery of which disgusts me. It is really a painful sight to see a

fine old language, possessed of classical literature, being botched by asses

and ignoramuses!"

  Thus Schopenhauer's holy anger cries out to us, and you cannot say that

you have not been warned. He who turns a deaf ear to such warnings, and

who absolutely refuses to relinquish his faith in Strauss the classical author,

can only be given this last word of advice--to imitate his hero. In any case, try

it at your own risk; but you will repent it, not only in your style but in your

head, that it may be fulfilled which was spoken by the Indian prophet, saying,

"He who gnaweth a cow's horn gnaweth in vain and shorteneth his life; for he

grindeth away his teeth, yet his belly is empty."

  XII.

  By way of concluding, we shall proceed to give our classical prose-writer

the promised examples of his style which we have collected. Schopenhauer

would probably have classed the whole lot as "new documents serving to

swell the trumpery jargon of the present day"; for David Strauss may be

comforted to hear (if what follows can be regarded as a comfort at all) that

everybody now writes as he does; some, of course, worse, and that among the

blind the one-eyed is king. Indeed, we allow him too much when we grant

him one eye; but we do this willingly, because Strauss does not write so

badly as the most infamous of all corrupters of German--the Hegelians and

their crippled offspring. Strauss at least wishes to extricate himself from the

mire, and he is already partly out of it; still, he is very far from being on dry

land, and he still shows signs of having stammered Hegel's prose in youth. In

those days, possibly, something was sprained in him, some muscle must have

been overstrained. His ear, perhaps, like that of a boy brought up amid the

beating  of  drums,  grew  dull,  and  became  incapable  of  detecting  those

artistically subtle and yet mighty laws of sound, under the guidance of which

every writer is content to remain who has been strictly trained in the study of

good  models.  But  in  this  way,  as  a  stylist,  he  has  lost  his  most  valuable

possessions, and stands condemned to remain reclining, his life long, on thedangerous and barren shifting sand of newspaper style--that is, if he do not

wish to fall back into the Hegelian mire. Nevertheless, he has succeeded in

making himself famous for a couple of hours in our time, and perhaps in

another couple of hours people will remember that he was once famous; then,

however, night will come, and with her oblivion; and already at this moment,

while  we  are  entering  his  sins  against  style  in  the  black  book,  the  sable

mantle of twilight is falling upon his fame. For he who has sinned against the

German  language  has  desecrated  the  mystery  of  all  our  Germanity.

Throughout all the confusion and the changes of races and of customs, the

German language alone, as though possessed of some supernatural charm,

has saved herself; and with her own salvation she has wrought that of the

spirit of Germany. She alone holds the warrant for this spirit in future ages,

provided she be not destroyed at the sacrilegious hands of the modern world.

"But  Di  meliora!  Avaunt,  ye  pachyderms,  avaunt!  This  is  the  German

language, by means of which men express themselves, and in which great

poets have sung and great thinkers have written. Hands off!" [10]*

    [Footnote * : Translator's note.--Nietzsche here proceeds to quote those

passages  he  has  culled  from  The  Old  and  the  New  Faith  with  which  he

undertakes  to  substantiate  all  he  has  said  relative  to  Strauss's  style;  as,

however, these passages, with his comments upon them, lose most of their

point  when  rendered  into  English,  it  was  thought  best  to  omit  them

altogether.]

  To put it in plain words, what we have seen have been feet of clay, and

what appeared to be of the colour of healthy flesh was only applied paint. Of

course, Culture-Philistinism in Germany will be very angry when it hears its

one living God referred to as a series of painted idols. He, however, who

dares  to  overthrow  its  idols  will  not  shrink,  despite  all  indignation,  from

telling it to its face that it has forgotten how to distinguish between the quick

and the dead, the genuine and the counterfeit, the original and the imitation,

between a God and a host of idols; that it has completely lost the healthy and

manly instinct for what is real and right. It alone deserves to be destroyed;

and already the manifestations of its power are sinking; already are its purple

honours  falling  from  it;  but  when  the  purple  falls,  its  royal  wearer  soon

follows.

  Here I come to the end of my confession of faith. This is the confession

of an individual; and what can such an one do against a whole world, even

supposing his voice were heard everywhere! In order for the last time to use aprecious Straussism, his judgment only possesses "that amount of subjective

truth which is compatible with a complete lack of objective demonstration"--

is not that so, my dear friends? Meanwhile, be of good cheer. For the time

being let the matter rest at this "amount which is compatible with a complete

lack"! For the time being! That is to say, for as long as that is held to be out

of season which in reality is always in season, and is now more than ever

pressing; I refer to...speaking the truth.[11]*

    [Footnote * : Translator's note.--All quotations from The Old Faith and

the New which appear in the above translation have either been taken bodily

out of Mathilde Blind's translation (Asher and Co., 1873), or are adaptations

from that translation.]

                        RICHARD WAGNER IN BAYREUTH.

  I.

  FOR an event to be great, two things must be united--the lofty sentiment

of those who accomplish it, and the lofty sentiment of those who witness it.

No event is great in itself, even though it be the disappearance of whole

constellations, the destruction of several nations, the establishment of vast

empires,  or  the  prosecution  of  wars  at  the  cost  of  enormous  forces:  over

things of this sort the breath of history blows as if they were flocks of wool.

But it often happens, too, that a man of might strikes a blow which falls

without effect upon a stubborn stone; a short, sharp report is heard, and all is

over. History is able to record little or nothing of such abortive efforts. Hence

the anxiety which every one must feel who, observing the approach of an

event, wonders whether those about to witness it will be worthy of it. This

reciprocity  between  an  act  and  its  reception  is  always  taken  into  account

when anything great or small is to be accomplished; and he who would give

anything away must see to it that he find recipients who will do justice to the

meaning  of  his  gift.  This  is  why  even  the  work  of  a  great  man  is  not

necessarily great when it is short, abortive, or fruitless; for at the moment

when  he  performed  it  he  must  have  failed  to  perceive  that  it  was  really

necessary; he must have been careless in his aim, and he cannot have chosen

and  fixed  upon  the  time  with  sufficient  caution.  Chance  thus  became  his

master; for there is a very intimate relation between greatness and the instinct

which discerns the proper moment at which to act.

  We therefore leave it to those who doubt Wagner's power of discerning

the proper time for action, to be concerned and anxious as to whether what is

now taking place in Bayreuth is really opportune and necessary. To us whoare more confident, it is clear that he believes as strongly in the greatness of

his feat as in the greatness of feeling in those who are to witness it. Be their

number great or small, therefore, all those who inspire this faith in Wagner

should feel extremely honoured; for that it was not inspired by everybody, or

by the whole age, or even by the whole German people, as they are now

constituted, he himself told us in his dedicatory address of the 22nd of May

1872, and not one amongst us could, with any show of conviction, assure him

of the contrary. "I had only you to turn to," he said, "when I sought those who

I  thought  would  be  in  sympathy  with  my  plans,--  you  who  are  the  most

personal friends of my own particular art, my work and activity: only you

could I invite to help me in my work, that it might be presented pure and

whole to those who manifest a genuine interest in my art, despite the fact that

it has hitherto made its appeal to them only in a disfigured and adulterated

form."

  It  is  certain  that  in  Bayreuth  even  the  spectator  is  a  spectacle  worth

seeing. If the spirit of some observant sage were to return, after the absence

of a century, and were to compare the most remarkable movements in the

present world of culture, he would find much to interest him there. Like one

swimming in a lake, who encounters a current of warm water issuing from a

hot spring, in Bayreuth he would certainly feel as though he had suddenly

plunged into a more temperate element, and would tell himself that this must

rise out of a distant and deeper source: the surrounding mass of water, which

at all events is more common in origin, does not account for it. In this way,

all those who assist at the Bayreuth festival will seem like men out of season;

their raison-d'etre and the forces which would seem to account for them are

elsewhere, and their home is not in the present age. I realise ever more clearly

that the scholar, in so far as he is entirely the man of his own day, can only be

accessible to all that Wagner does and thinks by means of parody,--and since

everything  is  parodied  nowadays,  he  will  even  get  the  event  of  Bayreuth

reproduced for him, through the very un-magic lanterns of our facetious art-

critics. And one ought to be thankful if they stop at parody; for by means of it

a spirit of aloofness and animosity finds a vent which might otherwise hit

upon a less desirable mode of expression. Now, the observant sage already

mentioned could not remain blind to this unusual sharpness and tension of

contrasts. They who hold by gradual development as a kind of moral law

must be somewhat shocked at the sight of one who, in the course of a single

lifetime, succeeds in producing something absolutely new. Being dawdlersthemselves,  and  insisting  upon  slowness  as  a  principle,  they  are  very

naturally vexed by one who strides rapidly ahead, and they wonder how on

earth  he  does  it.  No  omens,  no  periods  of  transition,  and  no  concessions

preceded the enterprise at Bayreuth; no one except Wagner knew either the

goal or the long road that was to lead to it. In the realm of art it signifies, so

to speak, the first circumnavigation of the world, and by this voyage not only

was there discovered an apparently new art, but Art itself. In view of this, all

modern arts, as arts of luxury which have degenerated through having been

insulated,  have  become  almost  worthless.  And  the  same  applies  to  the

nebulous  and  inconsistent  reminiscences  of  a  genuine  art,  which  we  as

modern Europeans derive from the Greeks; let them rest in peace, unless they

are now able to shine of their own accord in the light of a new interpretation.

The last hour has come for a good many things; this new art is a clairvoyante

that sees ruin approaching--not for art alone. Her warning voice must strike

the whole of our prevailing civilisation with terror the instant the laughter

which its parodies have provoked subsides. Let it laugh and enjoy itself for

yet a while longer!

  And as for us, the disciples of this revived art, we shall have time and

inclination for thoughtfulness, deep thoughtfulness. All the talk and noise

about  art  which  has  been  made  by  civilisation  hitherto  must  seem  like

shameless  obtrusiveness;  everything  makes  silence  a  duty  with  us--the

quinquennial silence of the Pythagoreans. Which of us has not soiled his

hands and heart in the disgusting idolatry of modern culture? Which of us can

exist without the waters of purification? Who does not hear the voice which

cries, "Be silent and cleansed"? Be silent and cleansed! Only the merit of

being included among those who give ear to this voice will grant even us the

lofty look necessary to view the event at Bayreuth; and only upon this look

depends the great future of the event.

  When on that dismal and cloudy day in May 1872, after the foundation

stone had been laid on the height of Bayreuth, amid torrents of rain, and

while Wagner was driving back to the town with a small party of us, he was

exceptionally silent, and there was that indescribable look in his eyes as of

one who has turned his gaze deeply inwards. The day happened to be the first

of  his  sixtieth  year,  and  his  whole  past  now  appeared  as  but  a  long

preparation for this great moment. It is almost a recognised fact that in times

of exceptional danger, or at all decisive and culminating points in their lives,

men see the remotest and most recent events of their career with singularvividness, and in one rapid inward glance obtain a sort of panorama of a

whole span of years in which every event is faithfully depicted. What, for

instance, must Alexander the Great have seen in that instant when he caused

Asia and Europe to be drunk out of the same goblet? But what went through

Wagner's mind on that day--how he became what he is, and what he will be--

we only can imagine who are nearest to him, and can follow him, up to a

certain point, in his self-examination; but through his eyes alone is it possible

for us to understand his grand work, and by the help of this understanding

vouch for its fruitfulness.

  II.

  It were strange if what a man did best and most liked to do could not be

traced in the general outline of his life, and in the case of those who are

remarkably endowed there is all the more reason for supposing that their life

will present not only the counterpart of their character, as in the case of every

one else, but that it will present above all the counterpart of their intellect and

their most individual tastes. The life of the epic poet will have a dash of the

Epos  in  it--as  from  all  accounts  was  the  case  with  Goethe,  whom  the

Germans very wrongly regarded only as a lyrist--and the life of the dramatist

will probably be dramatic.

  The dramatic element in Wagner's development cannot be ignored, from

the time when his ruling passion became self-conscious and took possession

of his whole being. From that time forward there is an end to all groping,

straying, and sprouting of offshoots, and over his most tortuous deviations

and excursions, over the often eccentric disposition of his plans, a single law

and will are seen to rule, in which we have the explanation of his actions,

however  strange  this  explanation  may  sometimes  appear.  There  was,

however, an ante-dramatic period in Wagner's life--his childhood and youth--

which  it  is  impossible  to  approach  without  discovering  innumerable

problems. At this period there seems to be no promise yet of himself, and

what  one  might  now,  in  a  retrospect,  regard  as  a  pledge  for  his  future

greatness, amounts to no more than a juxtaposition of traits which inspire

more dismay than hope; a restless and excitable spirit, nervously eager to

undertake a hundred things at the same time, passionately fond of almost

morbidly exalted states of mind, and ready at any moment to veer completely

round from calm and profound meditation to a state of violence and uproar.

In his case there were no hereditary or family influences at work to constrain

him to the sedulous study of one particular art. Painting, versifying, acting,and music were just as much within his reach as the learning and the career of

a scholar; and the superficial inquirer into this stage of his life might even

conclude that he was born to be a dilettante. The small world within the

bounds of which he grew up was not of the kind we should choose to be the

home  of  an  artist.  He  ran  the  constant  risk  of  becoming  infected  by  that

dangerously  dissipated  attitude  of  mind  in  which  a  person  will  taste  of

everything,  as  also  by  that  condition  of  slackness  resulting  from  the

fragmentary knowledge of all things, which is so characteristic of University

towns.  His  feelings  were  easily  roused  and  but  indifferently  satisfied;

wherever the boy turned he found himself surrounded by a wonderful and

would-be learned activity, to which the garish theatres presented a ridiculous

contrast, and the entrancing strains of music a perplexing one. Now, to the

observer who sees things relatively, it must seem strange that the modern

man who happens to be gifted with exceptional talent should as a child and a

youth so seldom be blessed with the quality of ingenuousness and of simple

individuality, that he is so little able to have these qualities at all. As a matter

of fact, men of rare talent, like Goethe and Wagner, much more often attain

to ingenuousness in manhood than during the more tender years of childhood

and youth. And this is especially so with the artist, who, being born with a

more than usual capacity for imitating, succumbs to the morbid multiformity

of modern life as to a virulent disease of infancy. As a child he will more

closely resemble an old man. The wonderfully accurate and original picture

of youth which Wagner gives us in the Siegfried of the Nibelungen Ring

could only have been conceived by a man, and by one who had discovered

his youthfulness but late in life. Wagner's maturity, like his adolesence, was

also late in making its appearance, and he is thus, in this respect alone, the

very reverse of the precocious type.

  The appearance of his moral and intellectual strength was the prelude to

the drama of his soul. And how different it then became! His nature seems to

have been simplified at one terrible stroke, and divided against itself into two

instincts or spheres. From its innermost depths there gushes forth a passionate

will which, like a rapid mountain torrent, endeavours to make its way through

all paths, ravines, and crevices, in search of light and power. Only a force

completely free and pure was strong enough to guide this will to all that is

good and beneficial. Had it been combined with a narrow intelligence, a will

with such a tyrannical and boundless desire might have become fatal; in any

case, an exit into the open had to be found for it as quickly as possible,whereby it could rush into pure air and sunshine. Lofty aspirations, which

continually  meet  with  failure,  ultimately  turn  to  evil.  The  inadequacy  of

means for obtaining success may, in certain circumstances, be the result of an

inexorable fate, and not necessarily of a lack of strength; but he who under

such circumstances cannot abandon his aspirations, despite the inadequacy of

his  means,  will  only  become  embittered,  and  consequently  irritable  and

intolerant. He may possibly seek the cause of his failure in other people; he

may even, in a fit of passion, hold the whole world guilty; or he may turn

defiantly down secret byways and secluded lanes, or resort to violence. In

this way, noble natures, on their road to the most high, may turn savage. Even

among those who seek but their own personal moral purity, among monks

and  anchorites,  men  are  to  be  found  who,  undermined  and  devoured  by

failure, have become barbarous and hopelessly morbid. There was a spirit full

of love and calm belief, full of goodness and infinite tenderness, hostile to all

violence and self-deterioration, and abhorring the sight of a soul in bondage.

And it was this spirit which manifested itself to Wagner. It hovered over him

as a consoling angel, it covered him with its wings, and showed him the true

path. At this stage we bring the other side of Wagner's nature into view: but

how shall we describe this other side?

  The  characters  an  artist  creates  are  not  himself,  but  the  succession  of

these characters, to which it is clear he is greatly attached, must at all events

reveal  something  of  his  nature.  Now  try  and  recall  Rienzi,  the  Flying

Dutchman and Senta, Tannhauser and Elizabeth, Lohengrin and Elsa, Tristan

and  Marke,  Hans  Sachs,  Woden  and  Brunhilda,--all  these  characters  are

correlated by a secret current of ennobling and broadening morality which

flows through them and becomes ever purer and clearer as it progresses. And

at this point we enter with respectful reserve into the presence of the most

hidden development in Wagner's own soul. In what other artist do we meet

with the like of this, in the same proportion? Schiller's characters, from the

Robbers to Wallenstein and Tell, do indeed pursue an ennobling course, and

likewise reveal something of their author's development; but in Wagner the

standard  is  higher  and  the  distance  covered  is  much  greater.  In  the

Nibelungen Ring, for instance, where Brunhilda is awakened by Siegfried, I

perceive the most moral music I have ever heard. Here Wagner attains to

such a high level of sacred feeling that our mind unconsciously wanders to

the glistening ice-and snow-peaks of the Alps, to find a likeness there;-- so

pure, isolated, inaccessible, chaste, and bathed in love-beams does Naturehere  display  herself,  that  clouds  and  tempests--yea,  and  even  the  sublime

itself--seem to lie beneath her. Now, looking down from this height upon

Tannhauser and the Flying Dutchman, we begin to perceive how the man in

Wagner  was  evolved:  how  restlessly  and  darkly  he  began;  how

tempestuously he strove to gratify his desires, to acquire power and to taste

those rapturous delights from which he often fled in disgust; how he wished

to throw off a yoke, to forget, to be negative, and to renounce everything. The

whole torrent plunged, now into this valley, now into that, and flooded the

most secluded chinks and crannies. In the night of these semi-subterranean

convulsions a star appeared and glowed high above him with melancholy

vehemence;  as  soon  as  he  recognised  it,  he  named  it  Fidelity--unselfish

fidelity. Why did this star seem to him the brightest and purest of all? What

secret meaning had the word "fidelity" to his whole being? For he has graven

its image and problems upon all his thoughts and compositions. His works

contain almost a complete series of the rarest and most beautiful examples of

fidelity: that of brother to sister, of friend to friend, of servant to master; of

Elizabeth to Tannhauser, of Senta to the Dutchman, of Elsa to Lohengrin, of

Isolde, Kurvenal, and Marke to Tristan, of Brunhilda to the most secret vows

of  Woden--and  many  others.  It  is  Wagner's  most  personal  and  most

individual experience, which he reveres like a religious mystery, and which

he calls Fidelity; he never wearies of breathing it into hundreds of different

characters,  and  of  endowing  it  with  the  sublimest  that  in  him  lies,  so

overflowing is his gratitude. It is, in short, the recognition of the fact that the

two sides of his nature remained faithful to each other, that out of free and

unselfish love, the creative, ingenuous, and brilliant side kept loyally abreast

of the dark, the intractable, and the tyrannical side.

  III.

  The relation of the two constituent forces to each other, and the yielding

of  the  one  to  the  other,  was  the  great  requisite  by  which  alone  he  could

remain wholly and truly himself. At the same time, this was the only thing he

could not control, and over which he could only keep a watch, while the

temptations  to  infidelity  and  its  threatening  dangers  beset  him  more  and

more.  The  uncertainty  derived  therefrom  is  an  overflowing  source  of

suffering for those in process of development. Each of his instincts made

constant efforts to attain to unmeasured heights, and each of the capacities he

possessed  for  enjoying  life  seemed  to  long  to  tear  itself  away  from  its

companions in order to seek satisfaction alone; the greater their exuberancethe more terrific was the tumult, and the more bitter the competition between

them. In addition, accident and life fired the desire for power and splendour

in him; but he was more often tormented by the cruel necessity of having to

live at all, while all around him lay obstacles and snares. How is it possible

for any one to remain faithful here, to be completely steadfast? This doubt

often depressed him, and he expresses it, as an artist expressed his doubt, in

artistic  forms.  Elizabeth,  for  instance,  can  only  suffer,  pray,  and  die;  she

saves the fickle and intemperate man by her loyalty, though not for this life.

In the path of every true artist, whose lot is cast in these modern days, despair

and danger are strewn. He has many means whereby he can attain to honour

and might; peace and plenty persistently offer themselves to him, but only in

that form recognised by the modern man, which to the straightforward artist

is no better than choke-damp. In this temptation, and in the act of resisting it,

lie  the  dangers  that  threaten  him--dangers  arising  from  his  disgust  at  the

means modernity offers him of acquiring pleasure and esteem, and from the

indignation  provoked  by  the  selfish  ease  of  modern  society.  Imagine

Wagner's filling an official position, as for instance that of bandmaster at

public and court theatres, both of which positions he has held: think how he,

a serious artist, must have struggled in order to enforce seriousness in those

very places which, to meet the demands of modern conventions, are designed

with almost systematic frivolity to appeal only to the frivolous. Think how he

must  have  partially  succeeded,  though  only  to  fail  on  the  whole.  How

constantly disgust must have been at his heels despite his repeated attempts to

flee it, how he failed to find the haven to which he might have repaired, and

how he had ever to return to the Bohemians and outlaws of our society, as

one of them. If he himself broke loose from any post or position, he rarely

found a better one in its stead, while more than once distress was all that his

unrest brought him. Thus Wagner changed his associates, his dwelling-place

and country, and when we come to comprehend the nature of the circles into

which he gravitated, we can hardly realise how he was able to tolerate them

for any length of time. The greater half of his past seems to be shrouded in

heavy mist; for a long time he appears to have had no general hopes, but only

hopes for the morrow, and thus, although he reposed no faith in the future, he

was not driven to despair. He must have felt like a nocturnal traveller, broken

with fatigue, exasperated from want of sleep, and tramping wearily along

beneath a heavy burden, who, far from fearing the sudden approach of death,

rather longs for it as something exquisitely charming. His burden, the roadand the night--all would disappear! The thought was a temptation to him.

Again and again, buoyed up by his temporary hopes, he plunged anew into

the turmoil of life, and left all apparatus behind him. But his method of doing

this, his lack of moderation in the doing, betrayed what a feeble hold his

hopes had upon him; how they were only stimulants to which he had recourse

in an extremity. The conflict between his aspirations and his partial or total

inability to realise them, tormented him like a thorn in the flesh. Infuriated by

constant privations, his imagination lapsed into the dissipated, whenever the

state  of  want  was  momentarily  relieved.  Life  grew  ever  more  and  more

complicated for him; but the means and artifices that he discovered in his art

as a dramatist became evermore resourceful and daring. Albeit, these were

little  more  than  palpable  dramatic  makeshifts  and  expedients,  which

deceived, and were invented, only for the moment. In a flash such means

occurred  to  his  mind  and  were  used  up.  Examined  closely  and  without

prepossession,  Wagner's  life,  to  recall  one  of  Schopenhauer's  expressions,

might be said to consist largely of comedy, not to mention burlesque. And

what the artist's feelings must have been, conscious as he was, during whole

periods of his life, of this undignified element in it,--he who more than any

one else, perhaps, breathed freely only in sublime and more than sublime

spheres,-- the thinker alone can form any idea.

  In  the  midst  of  this  mode  of  life,  a  detailed  description  of  which  is

necessary in order to inspire the amount of pity, awe, and admiration which

are its due, he developed a talent for acquiring knowledge, which even in a

German--a  son  of  the  nation  learned  above  all  others--was  really

extraordinary. And with this talent yet another danger threatened Wagner--a

danger more formidable than that involved in a life which was apparently

without either a stay or a rule, borne hither and thither by disturbing illusions.

From  a  novice  trying  his  strength,  Wagner  became  a  thorough  master  of

music  and  of  the  theatre,  as  also  a  prolific  inventor  in  the  preliminary

technical conditions for the execution of art. No one will any longer deny him

the glory of having given us the supreme model for lofty artistic execution on

a large scale. But he became more than this, and in order so to develop, he,

no less than any one else in like circumstances, had to reach the highest

degree of culture by virtue of his studies. And wonderfully he achieved this

end! It is delightful to follow his progress. From all sides material seemed to

come unto him and into him, and the larger and heavier the resulting structure

became,  the  more  rigid  was  the  arch  of  the  ruling  and  ordering  thoughtsupporting it. And yet access to the sciences and arts has seldom been made

more difficult for any man than for Wagner; so much so that he had almost to

break his own road through to them. The reviver of the simple drama, the

discoverer  of  the  position  due  to  art  in  true  human  society,  the  poetic

interpreter of bygone views of life, the philosopher, the historian, the aesthete

and the critic, the master of languages, the mythologist and the myth poet,

who was the first to include all these wonderful and beautiful products of

primitive times in a single Ring, upon which he engraved the runic characters

of his thoughts-- what a wealth of knowledge must Wagner have accumulated

and  commanded,  in  order  to  have  become  all  that!  And  yet  this  mass  of

material was just as powerless to impede the action of his will as a matter of

detail--however attractive--was to draw his purpose from its path. For the

exceptional character of such conduct to be appreciated fully, it should be

compared  with  that  of  Goethe,--  he  who,  as  a  student  and  as  a  sage,

resembled nothing so much as a huge river-basin, which does not pour all its

water into the sea, but spends as much of it on its way there, and at its various

twists and turns, as it ultimately disgorges at its mouth. True, a nature like

Goethe's not only has, but also engenders, more pleasure than any other; there

is more mildness and noble profligacy in it; whereas the tenor and tempo of

Wagner's power at times provoke both fear and flight. But let him fear who

will, we shall only be the more courageous, in that we shall be permitted to

come face to face with a hero who, in regard to modern culture, "has never

learned the meaning of fear."

  But neither has he learned to look for repose in history and philosophy,

nor to derive those subtle influences from their study which tend to paralyse

action or to soften a man unduly. Neither the creative nor the militant artist in

him was ever diverted from his purpose by learning and culture. The moment

his  constructive  powers  direct  him,  history  becomes  yielding  clay  in  his

hands. His attitude towards it then differs from that of every scholar, and

more nearly resembles the relation of the ancient Greek to his myths; that is

to say, his subject is something he may fashion, and about which he may

write  verses.  He  will  naturally  do  this  with  love  and  a  certain  becoming

reverence, but with the sovereign right of the creator notwithstanding. And

precisely because history is more supple and more variable than a dream to

him, he can invest the most individual case with the characteristics of a whole

age, and thus attain to a vividness of narrative of which historians are quite

incapable. In what work of art, of any kind, has the body and soul of theMiddle Ages ever been so thoroughly depicted as in Lohengrin? And will not

the Meistersingers continue to acquaint men, even in the remotest ages to

come,  with  the  nature  of  Germany's  soul?  Will  they  not  do  more  than

acquaint men of it? Will they not represent its very ripest fruit--the fruit of

that spirit which ever wishes to reform and not to overthrow, and which,

despite the broad couch of comfort on which it lies, has not forgotten how to

endure  the  noblest  discomfort  when  a  worthy  and  novel  deed  has  to  be

accomplished?

  And it is just to this kind of discomfort that Wagner always felt himself

drawn by his study of history and philosophy: in them he not only found arms

and  coats  of  mail,  but  what  he  felt  in  their  presence  above  all  was  the

inspiring  breath  which  is  wafted  from  the  graves  of  all  great  fighters,

sufferers, and thinkers. Nothing distinguishes a man more from the general

pattern  of  the  age  than  the  use  he  makes  of  history  and  philosophy.

According to present views, the former seems to have been allotted the duty

of  giving  modern  man  breathing-time,  in  the  midst  of  his  panting  and

strenuous scurry towards his goal, so that he may, for a space, imagine he has

slipped his leash. What Montaigne was as an individual amid the turmoil of

the Reformation--that is to say, a creature inwardly coming to peace with

himself, serenely secluded in himself and taking breath, as his best reader,

Shakespeare, understood him, --this is what history is to the modern spirit

today.  The  fact  that  the  Germans,  for  a  whole  century,  have  devoted

themselves more particularly to the study of history, only tends to prove that

they  are  the  stemming,  retarding,  and  becalming  force  in  the  activity  of

modern society--a circumstance which some, of course, will place to their

credit. On the whole, however, it is a dangerous symptom when the mind of a

nation turns with preference to the study of the past. It is a sign of flagging

strength, of decline and degeneration; it denotes that its people are perilously

near  to  falling  victims  to  the  first  fever  that  may  happen  to  be  rife  --the

political fever among others. Now, in the history of modern thought, our

scholars  are  an  example  of  this  condition  of  weakness  as  opposed  to  all

reformative and revolutionary activity. The mission they have chosen is not

of the noblest; they have rather been content to secure smug happiness for

their kind, and little more. Every independent and manly step leaves them

halting in the background, although it by no means outstrips history. For the

latter is possessed of vastly different powers, which only natures like Wagner

have any notion of; but it requires to be written in a much more earnest andsevere spirit, by much more vigorous students, and with much less optimism

than  has  been  the  case  hitherto.  In  fact,  it  requires  to  be  treated  quite

differently from the way German scholars have treated it until now. In all

their  works  there  is  a  continual  desire  to  embellish,  to  submit  and  to  be

content,  while  the  course  of  events  invariably  seems  to  have  their

approbation. It is rather the exception for one of them to imply that he is

satisfied only because things might have turned out worse; for most of them

believe, almost as a matter of course, that everything has been for the best

simply  because  it  has  only  happened  once.  Were  history  not  always  a

disguised Christian theodicy, were it written with more justice and fervent

feeling, it would be the very last thing on earth to be made to serve the

purpose  it  now  serves,  namely,  that  of  an  opiate  against  everything

subversive  and  novel.  And  philosophy  is  in  the  same  plight:  all  that  the

majority demand of it is, that it may teach them to understand approximate

facts--very approximate facts--in order that they may then become adapted to

them.  And  even  its  noblest  exponents  press  its  soporific  and  comforting

powers so strongly to the fore, that all lovers of sleep and of loafing must

think that their aim and the aim of philosophy are one. For my part, the most

important question philosophy has to decide seems to be, how far things have

acquired an unalterable stamp and form, and, once this question has been

answered, I think it the duty of philosophy unhesitatingly and courageously

to proceed with the task of improving that part of the world which has been

recognised as still susceptible to change. But genuine philosophers do, as a

matter  of  fact,  teach  this  doctrine  themselves,  inasmuch  as  they  work  at

endeavouring to alter the very changeable views of men, and do not keep

their opinions to themselves. Genuine disciples of genuine philosophies also

teach this doctrine; for, like Wagner, they understand the art of deriving a

more decisive and inflexible will from their master's teaching, rather than an

opiate or a sleeping draught. Wagner is most philosophical where he is most

powerfully active and heroic. It was as a philosopher that he went, not only

through  the  fire  of  various  philosophical  systems  without  fear,  but  also

through the vapours of science and scholarship, while remaining ever true to

his highest self. And it was this highest self which exacted from his versatile

spirit works as complete as his were, which bade him suffer and learn, that he

might accomplish such works.

  IV.

  The history of the development of culture since the time of the Greeks isshort enough, when we take into consideration the actual ground it covers,

and  ignore  the  periods  during  which  man  stood  still,  went  backwards,

hesitated or strayed. The Hellenising of the world--and to make this possible,

the Orientalising of Hellenism--that double mission of Alexander the Great,

still remains the most important event: the old question whether a foreign

civilisation  may  be  transplanted  is  still  the  problem  that  the  peoples  of

modern times are vainly endeavouring to solve. The rhythmic play of those

two factors against each other is the force that has determined the course of

history heretofore. Thus Christianity appears, for instance, as a product of

Oriental  antiquity,  which  was  thought  out  and  pursued  to  its  ultimate

conclusions by men, with almost intemperate thoroughness. As its influence

began to decay, the power of Hellenic culture was revived, and we are now

experiencing  phenomena  so  strange  that  they  would  hang  in  the  air  as

unsolved problems, if it were not possible, by spanning an enormous gulf of

time, to show their relation to analogous phenomena in Hellenistic culture.

Thus,  between  Kant  and  the  Eleatics,  Schopenhauer  and  Empedocles,

AEschylus and Wagner, there is so much relationship, so many things in

common, that one is vividly impressed with the very relative nature of all

notions of time. It would even seem as if a whole diversity of things were

really all of a piece, and that time is only a cloud which makes it hard for our

eyes to perceive the oneness of them. In the history of the exact sciences we

are perhaps most impressed by the close bond uniting us with the days of

Alexander and ancient Greece. The pendulum of history seems merely to

have swung back to that point from which it started when it plunged forth

into unknown and mysterious distance. The picture represented by our own

times is by no means a new one: to the student of history it must always seem

as though he were merely in the presence of an old familiar face, the features

of which he recognises. In our time the spirit of Greek culture is scattered

broadcast. While forces of all kinds are pressing one upon the other, and the

fruits  of  modern  art  and  science  are  offering  themselves  as  a  means  of

exchange, the pale outline of Hellenism is beginning to dawn faintly in the

distance. The earth which, up to the present, has been more than adequately

Orientalised, begins to yearn once more for Hellenism. He who wishes to

help her in this respect will certainly need to be gifted for speedy action and

to have wings on his heels, in order to synthetise the multitudinous and still

undiscovered facts of science and the many conflicting divisions of talent so

as to reconnoitre and rule the whole enormous field. It is now necessary that ageneration  of  anti-Alexanders  should  arise,  endowed  with  the  supreme

strength  necessary  for  gathering  up,  binding  together,  and  joining  the

individual threads of the fabric, so as to prevent their being scattered to the

four winds. The object is not to cut the Gordian knot of Greek culture after

the manner adopted by Alexander, and then to leave its frayed ends fluttering

in all directions; it is rather to bind it after it has been loosed. That is our task

to-day. In the person of Wagner I recognise one of these anti-Alexanders: he

rivets and locks together all that is isolated, weak, or in any way defective; if

I may be allowed to use a medical expression, he has an astringent power.

And in this respect he is one of the greatest civilising forces of his age. He

dominates art, religion, and folklore, yet he is the reverse of a polyhistor or of

a mere collecting and classifying spirit; for he constructs with the collected

material, and breathes life into it, and is a Simplifier of the Universe. We

must not be led away from this idea by comparing the general mission which

his genius imposed upon him with the much narrower and more immediate

one which we are at present in the habit of associating with the name of

Wagner. He is expected to effect a reform in the theatre world; but even

supposing he should succeed in doing this, what would then have been done

towards the accomplishment of that higher, more distant mission?

  But even with this lesser theatrical reform, modern man would also be

altered and reformed; for everything is so intimately related in this world, that

he who removes even so small a thing as a rivet from the framework shatters

and  destroys  the  whole  edifice.  And  what  we  here  assert,  with  perhaps

seeming exaggeration, of Wagner's activity would hold equally good of any

other genuine reform. It is quite impossible to reinstate the art of drama in its

purest and highest form without effecting changes everywhere in the customs

of the people, in the State, in education, and in social intercourse. When love

and justice have become powerful in one department of life, namely in art,

they  must,  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  their  inner  being,  spread  their

influence around them, and can no more return to the stiff stillness of their

former pupal condition. In order even to realise how far the attitude of the

arts towards life is a sign of their decline, and how far our theatres are a

disgrace to those who build and visit them, everything must be learnt over

again,  and  that  which  is  usual  and  commonplace  should  be  regarded  as

something unusual and complicated. An extraordinary lack of clear judgment,

a  badly-concealed  lust  of  pleasure,  of  entertainment  at  any  cost,  learned

scruples, assumed airs of importance, and trifling with the seriousness of arton  the  part  of  those  who  represent  it;  brutality  of  appetite  and  money-

grubbing  on  the  part  of  promoters;  the  empty-mindedness  and

thoughtlessness of society, which only thinks of the people in so far as these

serve or thwart its purpose, and which attends theatres and concerts without

giving  a  thought  to  its  duties,--all  these  things  constitute  the  stifling  and

deleterious atmosphere of our modern art conditions: when, however, people

like our men of culture have grown accustomed to it, they imagine that it is a

condition of their healthy existence, and would immediately feel unwell if,

for any reason, they were compelled to dispense with it for a while. In point

of fact, there is but one speedy way of convincing oneself of the vulgarity,

weirdness, and confusion of our theatrical institutions, and that is to compare

them with those which once flourished in ancient Greece. If we knew nothing

about  the  Greeks,  it  would  perhaps  be  impossible  to  assail  our  present

conditions at all, and objections made on the large scale conceived for the

first time by Wagner would have been regarded as the dreams of people who

could only be at home in outlandish places. "For men as we now find them,"

people would have retorted, "art of this modern kind answers the purpose and

is  fitting--  and  men  have  never  been  different."  But  they  have  been  very

different, and even now there are men who are far from satisfied with the

existing state of affairs--the fact of Bayreuth alone demonstrates this point.

Here you will find prepared and initiated spectators, and the emotion of men

conscious of being at the very zenith of their happiness, who concentrate their

whole being on that happiness in order to strengthen themselves for a higher

and  more  far-reaching  purpose.  Here  you  will  find  the  most  noble  self-

abnegation on the part of the artist, and the finest of all spectacles --that of a

triumphant creator of works which are in themselves an overflowing treasury

of artistic triumphs. Does it not seem almost like a fairy tale, to be able to

come face to face with such a personality? Must not they who take any part

whatsoever, active or passive, in the proceedings at Bayreuth, already feel

altered  and  rejuvenated,  and  ready  to  introduce  reforms  and  to  effect

renovations  in  other  spheres  of  life?  Has  not  a  haven  been  found  for  all

wanderers on high and desert seas, and has not peace settled over the face of

the waters? Must not he who leaves these spheres of ruling profundity and

loneliness for the very differently ordered world with its plains and lower

levels, cry continually like Isolde: "Oh, how could I bear it? How can I still

bear it?" And should he be unable to endure his joy and his sorrow, or to keep

them egotistically to himself, he will avail himself from that time forward ofevery opportunity of making them known to all. "Where are they who are

suffering under the yoke of modern institutions?" he will inquire. "Where are

my natural allies, with whom I may struggle against the ever waxing and ever

more oppressive pretensions of modern erudition? For at present, at least, we

have but one enemy--at present!--and it is that band of aesthetes, to whom the

word Bayreuth means the completest rout--they have taken no share in the

arrangements,  they  were  rather  indignant  at  the  whole  movement,  or  else

availed themselves effectively of the deaf-ear policy, which has now become

the trusty weapon of all very superior opposition. But this proves that their

animosity and knavery were ineffectual in destroying Wagner's spirit or in

hindering the accomplishment of his plans; it proves even more, for it betrays

their weakness and the fact that all those who are at present in possession of

power will not be able to withstand many more attacks. The time is at hand

for those who would conquer and triumph; the vastest empires lie at their

mercy, a note of interrogation hangs to the name of all present possessors of

power,  so  far  as  possession  may  be  said  to  exist  in  this  respect.  Thus

educational institutions are said to be decaying, and everywhere individuals

are to be found who have secretly deserted them. If only it were possible to

invite  those  to  open  rebellion  and  public  utterances,  who  even  now  are

thoroughly dissatisfied with the state of affairs in this quarter! If only it were

possible  to  deprive  them  of  their  faint  heart  and  lukewarmness!  I  am

convinced that the whole spirit of modern culture would receive its deadliest

blow if the tacit support which these natures give it could in any way be

cancelled. Among scholars, only those would remain loyal to the old order of

things who had been infected with the political mania or who were literary

hacks in any form whatever. The repulsive organisation which derives its

strength from the violence and injustice upon which it relies--that is to say,

from the State and Society--and which sees its advantage in making the latter

ever more evil and unscrupulous,--this structure which without such support

would be something feeble and effete, only needs to be despised in order to

perish. He who is struggling to spread justice and love among mankind must

regard this organisation as the least significant of the obstacles in his way; for

he will only encounter his real opponents once he has successfully stormed

and conquered modern culture, which is nothing more than their outworks.

  For  us,  Bayreuth  is  the  consecration  of  the  dawn  of  the  combat.  No

greater injustice could be done to us than to suppose that we are concerned

with art alone, as though it were merely a means of healing or stupefying us,which we make use of in order to rid our consciousness of all the misery that

still remains in our midst. In the image of this tragic art work at Bayreuth, we

see,  rather,  the  struggle  of  individuals  against  everything  which  seems  to

oppose them with invincible necessity, with power, law, tradition, conduct,

and the whole order of things established. Individuals cannot choose a better

life than that of holding themselves ready to sacrifice themselves and to die in

their fight for love and justice. The gaze which the mysterious eye of tragedy

vouchsafes us neither lulls nor paralyses. Nevertheless, it demands silence of

us as long as it keeps us in view; for art does not serve the purposes of war,

but is merely with us to improve our hours of respite, before and during the

course of the contest,--to improve those few moments when, looking back,

yet dreaming of the future, we seem to understand the symbolical, and are

carried away into a refreshing reverie when fatigue overtakes us. Day and

battle dawn together, the sacred shadows vanish, and Art is once more far

away from us; but the comfort she dispenses is with men from the earliest

hour of day, and never leaves them. Wherever he turns, the individual realises

only  too  clearly  his  own  shortcomings,  his  insufficiency  and  his

incompetence;  what  courage  would  he  have  left  were  he  not  previously

rendered  impersonal  by  this  consecration!  The  greatest  of  all  torments

harassing  him,  the  conflicting  beliefs  and  opinions  among  men,  the

unreliability of these beliefs and opinions, and the unequal character of men's

abilities--all these things make him hanker after art. We cannot be happy so

long as everything about us suffers and causes suffering; we cannot be moral

so long as the course of human events is determined by violence, treachery,

and injustice; we cannot even be wise, so long as the whole of mankind does

not compete for wisdom, and does not lead the individual to the most sober

and reasonable form of life and knowledge. How, then, would it be possible

to  endure  this  feeling  of  threefold  insufficiency  if  one  were  not  able  to

recognise something sublime and valuable in one's struggles, strivings, and

defeats, if one did not learn from tragedy how to delight in the rhythm of the

great passions, and in their victim? Art is certainly no teacher or educator of

practical conduct: the artist is never in this sense an instructor or adviser; the

things  after  which  a  tragic  hero  strives  are  not  necessarily  worth  striving

after. As in a dream so in art, the valuation of things only holds good while

we are under its spell. What we, for the time being, regard as so worthy of

effort, and what makes us sympathise with the tragic hero when he prefers

death to renouncing the object of his desire, this can seldom retain the samevalue and energy when transferred to everyday life: that is why art is the

business of the man who is recreating himself. The strife it reveals to us is a

simplification  of  life's  struggle;  its  problems  are  abbreviations  of  the

infinitely complicated phenomena of man's actions and volitions. But from

this very fact--that it is the reflection, so to speak, of a simpler world, a more

rapid  solution  of  the  riddle  of  life--art  derives  its  greatness  and

indispensability. No one who suffers from life can do without this reflection,

just  as  no  one  can  exist  without  sleep.  The  more  difficult  the  science  of

natural  laws  becomes,  the  more  fervently  we  yearn  for  the  image  of  this

simplification, if only for an instant; and the greater becomes the tension

between each man's general knowledge of things and his moral and spiritual

faculties. Art is with us to prevent the bow from snapping.

  The individual must be consecrated to something impersonal--that is the

aim of tragedy: he must forget the terrible anxiety which death and time tend

to create in him; for at any moment of his life, at any fraction of time in the

whole of his span of years, something sacred may cross his path which will

amply  compensate  him  for  all  his  struggles  and  privations.  This  means

having a sense for the tragic. And if all mankind must perish some day--and

who could question this! --it has been given its highest aim for the future,

namely, to increase and to live in such unity that it may confront its final

extermination as a whole, with one spirit-with a common sense of the tragic:

in this one aim all the ennobling influences of man lie locked; its complete

repudiation by humanity would be the saddest blow which the soul of the

philanthropist could receive. That is how I feel in the matter! There is but one

hope and guarantee for the future of man, and that is that his sense for the

tragic may not die out. If he ever completely lost it, an agonised cry, the like

of which has never been heard, would have to be raised all over the world;

for there is no more blessed joy than that which consists in knowing what we

know--how tragic thought was born again on earth. For this joy is thoroughly

impersonal and general: it is the wild rejoicing of humanity, anent the hidden

relationship and progress of all that is human.

  V.

  Wagner  concentrated  upon  life,  past  and  present,  the  light  of  an

intelligence strong enough to embrace the most distant regions in its rays.

That is why he is a simplifier of the universe; for the simplification of the

universe  is  only  possible  to  him  whose  eye  has  been  able  to  master  the

immensity and wildness of an apparent chaos, and to relate and unite thosethings  which  before  had  lain  hopelessly  asunder.  Wagner  did  this  by

discovering a connection between two objects which seemed to exist apart

from each other as though in separate spheres--that between music and life,

and similarly between music and the drama. Not that he invented or was the

first to create this relationship, for they must always have existed and have

been noticeable to all; but, as is usually the case with a great problem, it is

like a precious stone which thousands stumble over before one finally picks it

up. Wagner asked himself the meaning of the fact that an art such as music

should have become so very important a feature of the lives of modern men.

It is not necessary to think meanly of life in order to suspect a riddle behind

this question. On the contrary, when all the great forces of existence are duly

considered, and struggling life is regarded as striving mightily after conscious

freedom and independence of thought, only then does music seem to be a

riddle in this world. Should one not answer: Music could not have been born

in our time? What then does its presence amongst us signify? An accident? A

single great artist might certainly be an accident, but the appearance of a

whole group of them, such as the history of modern music has to show, a

group only once before equalled on earth, that is to say in the time of the

Greeks,--a circumstance of this sort leads one to think that perhaps necessity

rather than accident is at the root of the whole phenomenon. The meaning of

this necessity is the riddle which Wagner answers.

  He was the first to recognise an evil which is as widespread as civilisation

itself among men; language is everywhere diseased, and the burden of this

terrible  disease  weighs  heavily  upon  the  whole  of  man's  development.

Inasmuch  as  language  has  retreated  ever  more  and  more  from  its  true

province--the expression of strong feelings, which it was once able to convey

in  all  their  simplicity--and  has  always  had  to  strain  after  the  practically

impossible achievement of communicating the reverse of feeling, that is to

say thought, its strength has become so exhausted by this excessive extension

of its duties during the comparatively short period of modern civilisation, that

it is no longer able to perform even that function which alone justifies its

existence, to wit, the assisting of those who suffer, in communicating with

each other concerning the sorrows of existence. Man can no longer make his

misery  known  unto  others  by  means  of  language;  hence  he  cannot  really

express  himself  any  longer.  And  under  these  conditions,  which  are  only

vaguely felt at present, language has gradually become a force in itself which

with spectral arms coerces and drives humanity where it least wants to go. Assoon as they would fain understand one another and unite for a common

cause, the craziness of general concepts, and even of the ring of modern

words, lays hold of them. The result of this inability to communicate with one

another is that every product of their co-operative action bears the stamp of

discord, not only because it fails to meet their real needs, but because of the

very emptiness of those all-powerful words and notions already mentioned.

To the misery already at hand, man thus adds the curse of convention--that is

to  say,  the  agreement  between  words  and  actions  without  an  agreement

between  the  feelings.  Just  as,  during  the  decline  of  every  art,  a  point  is

reached when the morbid accumulation of its means and forms attains to such

tyrannical proportions that it oppresses the tender souls of artists and converts

these into slaves, so now, in the period of the decline of language, men have

become the slaves of words. Under this yoke no one is able to show himself

as he is, or to express himself artlessly, while only few are able to preserve

their individuality in their fight against a culture which thinks to manifest its

success, not by the fact that it approaches definite sensations and desires with

the view of educating them, but by the fact that it involves the individual in

the snare of "definite notions," and teaches him to think correctly: as if there

were any value in making a correctly thinking and reasoning being out of

man, before one has succeeded in making him a creature that feels correctly.

If  now  the  strains  of  our  German  masters'  music  burst  upon  a  mass  of

mankind sick to this extent, what is really the meaning of these strains? Only

correct feeling, the enemy of all convention, of all artificial estrangement and

misunderstandings between man and man: this music signifies a return to

nature, and at the same time a purification and remodelling of it; for the need

of such a return took shape in the souls of the most loving of men, and,

through their art, nature transformed into love makes its voice heard.

  Let us regard this as one of Wagner's answers to the question, What does

music mean in our time? for he has a second. The relation between music and

life is not merely that existing between one kind of language and another; it

is, besides, the relation between the perfect world of sound and that of sight.

Regarded  merely  as  a  spectacle,  and  compared  with  other  and  earlier

manifestations of human life, the existence of modern man is characterised by

indescribable indigence and exhaustion, despite the unspeakable garishness at

which only the superficial observer rejoices. If one examines a little more

closely the impression which this vehement and kaleidoscopic play of colours

makes upon one, does not the whole seem to blaze with the shimmer andsparkle of innumerable little stones borrowed from former civilisations? Is

not everything one sees merely a complex of inharmonious bombast, aped

gesticulations, arrogant superficiality?--a ragged suit of motley for the naked

and the shivering? A seeming dance of joy enjoined upon a sufferer? Airs of

overbearing pride assumed by one who is sick to the backbone? And the

whole  moving  with  such  rapidity  and  confusion  that  it  is  disguised  and

masked-- sordid impotence, devouring dissension, assiduous ennui, dishonest

distress!  The  appearance  of  present-day  humanity  is  all  appearance,  and

nothing else: in what he now represents man himself has become obscured

and concealed; and the vestiges of the creative faculty in art, which still cling

to such countries as France and Italy, are all concentrated upon this one task

of  concealing.  Wherever  form  is  still  in  demand  in  society,  conversation,

literary style, or the relations between governments, men have unconsciously

grown  to  believe  that  it  is  adequately  met  by  a  kind  of  agreeable

dissimulation, quite the reverse of genuine form conceived as a necessary

relation between the proportions of a figure, having no concern whatever

with the notions "agreeable" or "disagreeable," simply because it is necessary

and not optional. But even where form is not openly exacted by civilised

people, there is no greater evidence of this requisite relation of proportions; a

striving  after  the  agreeable  dissimulation,  already  referred  to,  is  on  the

contrary noticeable, though it is never so successful even if it be more eager

than in the first instance. How far this dissimulation is agreeable at times, and

why it must please everybody to see how modern men at least endeavour to

dissemble, every one is in a position to judge, according to, the extent to

which he himself may happen to be modern. "Only galley slaves know each

other," says Tasso, "and if we mistake others, it is only out of courtesy, and

with the hope that they, in their turn, should mistake us."

  Now,  in  this  world  of  forms  and  intentional  misunderstandings,  what

purpose is served by the appearance of souls overflowing with music? They

pursue the course of grand and unrestrained rhythm with noble candour--with

a passion more than personal; they glow with the mighty and peaceful fire of

music, which wells up to the light of day from their unexhausted depths--and

all this to what purpose?

  By means of these souls music gives expression to the longing that it feels

for the company of its natural ally, gymnastics--that is to say, its necessary

form in the order of visible phenomena. In its search and craving for this ally,

it becomes the arbiter of the whole visible world and the world of mere lyingappearance  of  the  present  day.  This  is  Wagner's  second  answer  to  the

question, What is the meaning of music in our times? "Help me," he cries to

all who have ears to hear, "help me to discover that culture of which my

music, as the rediscovered language of correct feeling, seems to foretell the

existence. Bear in mind that the soul of music now wishes to acquire a body,

that, by means of you all, it would find its way to visibleness in movements,

deeds, institutions, and customs!" There are some men who understand this

summons, and their number will increase; they have also understood, for the

first time, what it means to found the State upon music. It is something that

the ancient Hellenes not only understood but actually insisted upon; and these

enlightened creatures would just as soon have sentenced the modern State to

death as modern men now condemn the Church. The road to such a new

though  not  unprecedented  goal  would  lead  to  this:  that  we  should  be

compelled to acknowledge where the worst faults of our educational system

lie, and why it has failed hitherto to elevate us out of barbarity: in reality, it

lacks  the  stirring  and  creative  soul  of  music;  its  requirements  and

arrangements are moreover the product of a period in which the music, to

which We seem to attach so much importance, had not yet been born. Our

education is the most antiquated factor of our present conditions, and it is so

more precisely in regard to the one new educational force by which it makes

men of to-day in advance of those of bygone centuries, or by which it would

make them in advance of their remote ancestors, provided only they did not

persist so rashly in hurrying forward in meek response to the scourge of the

moment. Through not having allowed the soul of music to lodge within them,

they have no notion of gymnastics in the Greek and Wagnerian sense; and

that is why their creative artists are condemned to despair, as long as they

wish to dispense with music as a guide in a new world of visible phenomena.

Talent may develop as much as may be desired: it either comes too late or too

soon, and at all events out of season; for it is in the main superfluous and

abortive, just as even the most perfect and the highest products of earlier

times which serve modern artists as models are superfluous and abortive, and

add not a stone to the edifice already begun. If their innermost consciousness

can perceive no new forms, but only the old ones belonging to the past, they

may certainly achieve something for history, but not for life; for they are

already dead before having expired. He, however, who feels genuine and

fruitful life in him, which at present can only be described by the one term

"Music," could he allow himself to be deceived for one moment into nursingsolid hopes by this something which exhausts all its energy in producing

figures, forms, and styles? He stands above all such vanities, and as little

expects to meet with artistic wonders outside his ideal world of sound as with

great writers bred on our effete and discoloured language. Rather than lend an

ear to illusive consolations, he prefers to turn his unsatisfied gaze stoically

upon our modern world, and if his heart be not warm enough to feel pity, let

it at least feel bitterness and hate! It were better for him to show anger and

scorn than to take cover in spurious contentment or steadily to drug himself,

as our "friends of art" are wont to do. But if he can do more than condemn

and despise, if he is capable of loving, sympathising, and assisting in the

general  work  of  construction,  he  must  still  condemn,  notwithstanding,  in

order to prepare the road for his willing soul. In order that music may one day

exhort many men to greater piety and make them privy to her highest aims,

an  end  must  first  be  made  to  the  whole  of  the  pleasure-seeking  relations

which men now enjoy with such a sacred art. Behind all our artistic pastimes-

- theatres, museums, concerts, and the like--that aforementioned "friend of

art" is to be found, and he it is who must be suppressed: the favour he now

finds  at  the  hands  of  the  State  must  be  changed  into  oppression;  public

opinion, which lays such particular stress upon the training of this love of art,

must be routed by better judgment. Meanwhile we must reckon the declared

enemy of art as our best and most useful ally; for the object of his animosity

is precisely art as understood by the "friend of art,"--he knows of no other

kind!  Let  him  be  allowed  to  call  our  "friend  of  art"  to  account  for  the

nonsensical waste of money occasioned by the building of his theatres and

public monuments, the engagement of his celebrated singers and actors, and

the support of his utterly useless schools of art and picture-galleries--to say

nothing of all the energy, time, and money which every family squanders in

pretended "artistic interests." Neither hunger nor satiety is to be noticed here,

but a dead-and-alive game is played--with the semblance of each, a game

invented by the idle desire to produce an effect and to deceive others. Or,

worse still, art is taken more or less seriously, and then it is itself expected to

provoke  a  kind  of  hunger  and  craving,  and  to  fulfil  its  mission  in  this

artificially  induced  excitement.  It  is  as  if  people  were  afraid  of  sinking

beneath  the  weight  of  their  loathing  and  dulness,  and  invoked  every

conceivable evil spirit to scare them and drive them about like wild cattle.

Men hanker after pain, anger, hate, the flush of passion, sudden flight, and

breathless  suspense,  and  they  appeal  to  the  artist  as  the  conjurer  of  thisdemoniacal  host.  In  the  spiritual  economy  of  our  cultured  classes  art  has

become a spurious or ignominious and undignified need--a nonentity or a

something evil. The superior and more uncommon artist must be in the throes

of a bewildering nightmare in order to be blind to all this, and like a ghost,

diffidently and in a quavering voice, he goes on repeating beautiful words

which he declares descend to him from higher spheres, but whose sound he

can  hear  only  very  indistinctly.  The  artist  who  happens  to  be  moulded

according to the modern pattern, however, regards the dreamy gropings and

hesitating speech of his nobler colleague with contempt, and leads forth the

whole brawling mob of assembled passions on a leash in order to let them

loose upon modern men as he may think fit. For these modern creatures wish

rather to be hunted down, wounded, and torn to shreds, than to live alone

with themselves in solitary calm. Alone with oneself!--this thought terrifies

the modern soul; it is his one anxiety, his one ghastly fear.

  When I watch the throngs that move and linger about the streets of a very

populous town, and notice no other expression in their faces than one of

hunted stupor, I can never help commenting to myself upon the misery of

their  condition.  For  them  all,  art  exists  only  that  they  may  be  still  more

wretched,  torpid,  insensible,  or  even  more  flurried  and  covetous.  For

incorrect feeling governs and drills them unremittingly, and does not even

give them time to become aware of their misery. Should they wish to speak,

convention whispers their cue to them, and this makes them forget what they

originally intended to say; should they desire to understand one another, their

comprehension is maimed as though by a spell: they declare that to be their

joy which in reality is but their doom, and they proceed to collaborate in

wilfully  bringing  about  their  own  damnation.  Thus  they  have  become

transformed into perfectly and absolutely different creatures, and reduced to

the state of abject slaves of incorrect feeling.

  VI.

  I shall only give two instances showing how utterly the sentiment of our

time has been perverted, and how completely unconscious the present age is

of this perversion. Formerly financiers were looked down upon with honest

scorn,  even  though  they  were  recognised  as  needful;  for  it  was  generally

admitted that every society must have its viscera. Now, however, they are the

ruling power in the soul of modern humanity, for they constitute the most

covetous  portion  thereof.  In  former  times  people  were  warned  especially

against  taking  the  day  or  the  moment  too  seriously:  the  nil  admirari  wasrecommended and the care of things eternal. Now there is but one kind of

seriousness left in the modern mind, and it is limited to the news brought by

the newspaper and the telegraph. Improve each shining hour, turn it to some

account and judge it as quickly as possible!--one would think modern men

had  but  one  virtue  left--presence  of  mind.  Unfortunately,  it  much  more

closely resembles the omnipresence of disgusting and insatiable cupidity, and

spying inquisitiveness become universal. For the question is whether mind is

present at all to-day;--but we shall leave this problem for future judges to

solve; they, at least, are bound to pass modern men through a sieve. But that

this  age  is  vulgar,  even  we  can  see  now,  and  it  is  so  because  it  reveres

precisely what nobler ages contemned. If, therefore, it loots all the treasures

of bygone wit and wisdom, and struts about in this richest of rich garments, it

only proves its sinister consciousness of its own vulgarity in so doing; for it

does  not  don  this  garb  for  warmth,  but  merely  in  order  to  mystify  its

surroundings. The desire to dissemble and to conceal himself seems stronger

than the need of protection from the cold in modern man. Thus scholars and

philosophers of the age do not have recourse to Indian and Greek wisdom in

order to become wise and peaceful: the only purpose of their work seems to

be to earn them a fictitious reputation for learning in their own time. The

naturalists endeavour to classify the animal outbreaks of violence, ruse and

revenge,  in  the  present  relations  between  nations  and  individual  men,  as

immutable laws of nature. Historians are anxiously engaged in proving that

every age has its own particular right and special conditions,-- with the view

of preparing the groundwork of an apology for the day that is to come, when

our generation will be called to judgment. The science of government, of

race,  of  commerce,  and  of  jurisprudence,  all  have  that  preparatorily

apologetic character now; yea, it even seems as though the small amount of

intellect which still remains active to-day, and is not used up by the great

mechanism  of  gain  and  power,  has  as  its  sole  task  the  defending--and

excusing of the present

  Against what accusers? one asks, surprised.

  Against its own bad conscience.

  And at this point we plainly discern the task assigned to modern art--that

of stupefying or intoxicating, of lulling to sleep or bewildering. By hook or

by crook to make conscience unconscious! To assist the modern soul over the

sensation of guilt, not to lead it back to innocence! And this for the space of

moments only! To defend men against themselves, that their inmost heartmay be silenced, that they may turn a deaf ear to its voice! The souls of those

few  who  really  feel  the  utter  ignominy  of  this  mission  and  its  terrible

humiliation of art, must be filled to the brim with sorrow and pity, but also

with a new and overpowering yearning. He who would fain emancipate art,

and reinstall its sanctity, now desecrated, must first have freed himself from

all contact with modern souls; only as an innocent being himself can he hope

to  discover  the  innocence  of  art,  for  he  must  be  ready  to  perform  the

stupendous tasks of self-purification and self-consecration. If he succeeded, if

he were ever able to address men from out his enfranchised soul and by

means of his emancipated art, he would then find himself exposed to the

greatest  of  dangers  and  involved  in  the  most  appalling  of  struggles.  Man

would prefer to tear him and his art to pieces, rather than acknowledge that he

must  die  of  shame  in  presence  of  them.  It  is  just  possible  that  the

emancipation of art is the only ray of hope illuminating the future, an event

intended only for a few isolated souls, while the many remain satisfied to

gaze into the flickering and smoking flame of their art and can endure to do

so. For they do not want to be enlightened, but dazzled. They rather hate light

--more particularly when it is thrown on themselves.

  That is why they evade the new messenger of light; but he follows them--

the love which gave him birth compels him to follow them and to reduce

them to submission. "Ye must go through my mysteries," he cries to them;

"ye need to be purified and shaken by them. Dare to submit to this for your

own salvation, and abandon the gloomily lighted corner of life and nature

which alone seems familiar to you. I lead you into a kingdom which is also

real, and when I lead you out of my cell into your daylight, ye will be able to

judge which life is more real, which, in fact, is day and which night. Nature is

much  richer,  more  powerful,  more  blessed  and  more  terrible  below  the

surface;  ye  cannot  divine  this  from  the  way  in  which  ye  live.  O  that  ye

yourselves could learn to become natural again, and then suffer yourselves to

be transformed through nature, and into her, by the charm of my ardour and

love!"

  It is the voice of Wagner's art which thus appeals to men. And that we,

the children of a wretched age, should be the first to hear it, shows how

deserving of pity this age must be: it shows, moreover, that real music is of a

piece with fate and primitive law; for it is quite impossible to attribute its

presence amongst us precisely at the present time to empty and meaningless

chance. Had Wagner been an accident, he would certainly have been crushedby the superior strength of the other elements in the midst of which he was

placed, out in the coming of Wagner there seems to have been a necessity

which  both  justifies  it  and  makes  it  glorious.  Observed  from  its  earliest

beginnings,  the  development  of  his  art  constitutes  a  most  magnificent

spectacle, and--even though it was attended with great suffering--reason, law,

and  intention  mark  its  course  throughout.  Under  the  charm  of  such  a

spectacle  the  observer  will  be  led  to  take  pleasure  even  in  this  painful

development itself, and will regard it as fortunate. He will see how everything

necessarily  contributes  to  the  welfare  and  benefit  of  talent  and  a  nature

foreordained, however severe the trials may be through which it may have to

pass. He will realise how every danger gives it more heart, and every triumph

more prudence; how it partakes of poison and sorrow and thrives upon them.

The mockery and perversity of the surrounding world only goad and spur it

on the more. Should it happen to go astray, it but returns from its wanderings

and exile loaded with the most precious spoil; should it chance to slumber, "it

does but recoup its strength." It tempers the body itself and makes it tougher;

it  does  not  consume  life,  however  long  it  lives;  it  rules  over  man  like  a

pinioned passion, and allows him to fly just in the nick of time, when his foot

has grown weary in the sand or has been lacerated by the stones on his way.

It can do nought else but impart; every one must share in its work, and it is no

stinted giver. When it is repulsed it is but more prodigal in its gifts; ill used

by  those  it  favours,  it  does  but  reward  them  with  the  richest  treasures  it

possesses,--and,  according  to  the  oldest  and  most  recent  experience,  its

favoured ones have never been quite worthy of its gifts. That is why the

nature foreordained, through which music expresses itself to this world of

appearance, is one of the most mysterious things under the sun--an abyss in

which strength and goodness lie united, a bridge between self and non-self.

Who would undertake to name the object of its existence with any certainty?-

-even supposing the sort of purpose which it would be likely to have could be

divined at all. But a most blessed foreboding leads one to ask whether it is

possible for the grandest things to exist for the purpose of the meanest, the

greatest talent for the benefit of the smallest, the loftiest virtue and holiness

for the sake of the defective and faulty? Should real music make itself heard,

because mankind of all creatures least deserves to hear it, though it perhaps

need it most? If one ponder over the transcendental and wonderful character

of this possibility, and turn from these considerations to look back on life, a

light will then be seen to ascend, however dark and misty it may have seemeda moment before.

  VII.

  It is quite impossible otherwise: the observer who is confronted with a

nature such as Wagner's must, willy-nilly, turn his eyes from time to time

upon  himself,  upon  his  insignificance  and  frailty,  and  ask  himself,  What

concern is this of thine? Why, pray, art thou there at all? Maybe he will find

no answer to these questions, in which case he will remain estranged and

confounded, face to face with his own personality. Let it then suffice him that

he  has  experienced  this  feeling;  let  the  fact  that  he  has  felt  strange  and

embarrassed in the presence of his own soul be the answer to his question For

it  is  precisely  by  virtue  of  this  feeling  that  he  shows  the  most  powerful

manifestation  of  life  in  Wagner--the  very  kernel  of  his  strength--that

demoniacal  magnetism  and  gift  of  imparting  oneself  to  others,  which  is

peculiar to his nature, and by which it not only conveys itself to other beings,

but also absorbs other beings into itself; thus attaining to its greatness by

giving  and  by  taking.  As  the  observer  is  apparently  subject  to  Wagner's

exuberant and prodigally generous nature, he partakes of its strength, and

thereby becomes formidable through him and to him. And every one who

critically examines himself knows that a certain mysterious antagonism is

necessary to the process of mutual study. Should his art lead us to experience

all that falls to the lot of a soul engaged upon a journey, i.e. feeling sympathy

with others and sharing their fate, and seeing the world through hundreds of

different eyes, we are then able, from such a distance, and under such strange

influences, to contemplate him, once we have lived his life. We then feel with

the utmost certainty that in Wagner the whole visible world desires to be

spiritualised, absorbed, and lost in the world of sounds. In Wagner, too, the

world of sounds seeks to manifest itself as a phenomenon for the sight; it

seeks, as it were, to incarnate itself. His art always leads him into two distinct

directions, from the world of the play of sound to the mysterious and yet

related world of visible things, and vice versa. He is continually forced--and

the observer with him--to re-translate the visible into spiritual and primeval

life,  and  likewise  to  perceive  the  most  hidden  interstices  of  the  soul  as

something concrete and to lend it a visible body. This constitutes the nature

of the dithyrambic dramatist, if the meaning given to the term includes also

the actor, the poet, and the musician; a conception necessarily borrowed from

�schylus and the contemporary Greek artists--the only perfect examples of

the dithyrambic dramatist before Wagner. If attempts have been made to tracethe most wonderful developments to inner obstacles or deficiencies, if, for

instance, in Goethe's case, poetry was merely the refuge of a foiled talent for

painting;  if  one  may  speak  of  Schiller's  dramas  as  of  vulgar  eloquence

directed into uncommon channels; if Wagner himself tries to account for the

development of music among the Germans by showing that, inasmuch as

they are devoid of the entrancing stimulus of a natural gift for singing, they

were  compelled  to  take  up  instrumental  music  with  the  same  profound

seriousness as that with which their reformers took up Christianity,--if, on the

same principle, it were sought to associate Wagner's development with an

inner barrier of the same kind, it would then be necessary to recognise in him

a primitive dramatic talent, which had to renounce all possibility of satisfying

its needs by the quickest and most methods, and which found its salvation

and its means of expression in drawing all arts to it for one great dramatic

display.  But  then  one  would  also  have  to  assume  that  the  most  powerful

musician, owing to his despair at having to appeal to people who were either

only semi-musical or not musical at all, violently opened a road for himself to

the other arts, in order to acquire that capacity for diversely communicating

himself to others, by which he compelled them to understand him, by which

he compelled the masses to understand him. However the development of the

born dramatist may be pictured, in his ultimate expression he is a being free

from all inner barriers and voids: the real, emancipated artist cannot help

himself, he must think in the spirit of all the arts at once, as the mediator and

intercessor between apparently separated spheres, the one who reinstalls the

unity  and  wholeness  of  the  artistic  faculty,  which  cannot  be  divined  or

reasoned out, but can only be revealed by deeds themselves. But he in whose

presence  this  deed  is  performed  will  be  overcome  by  its  gruesome  and

seductive charm: in a flash he will be confronted with a power which cancels

both resistance and reason, and makes every detail of life appear irrational

and incomprehensible. Carried away from himself, he seems to be suspended

in a mysterious fiery element; he ceases to understand himself, the standard

of everything has fallen from his hands; everything stereotyped and fixed

begins to totter; every object seems to acquire a strange colour and to tell us

its tale by means of new symbols;--one would need to be a Plato in order to

discover, amid this confusion of delight and fear, how he accomplishes the

feat, and to say to the dramatist: "Should a man come into our midst who

possessed sufficient knowledge to simulate or imitate anything, we would

honour him as something wonderful and holy; we would even anoint him andadorn his brow with a sacred diadem; but we would urge him to leave our

circle for another, notwithstanding." It may be that a member of the Platonic

community would have been able to chasten himself to such conduct: we,

however, who live in a very different community, long for, and earnestly

desire, the charmer to come to us, although we may fear him already,--and we

only desire his presence in order that our society and the mischievous reason

and might of which it is the incarnation may be confuted. A state of human

civilisation,  of  human  society,  morality,  order,  and  general  organisation

which would be able to dispense with the services of an imitative artist or

mimic, is not perhaps so utterly inconceivable; but this Perhaps is probably

the most daring that has ever been posited, and is equivalent to the gravest

expression of doubt. The only man who ought to be at liberty to speak of

such a possibility is he who could beget, and have the presentiment of, the

highest phase of all that is to come, and who then, like Faust, would either be

obliged to turn blind, or be permitted to become so. For we have no right to

this blindness; whereas Plato, after he had cast that one glance into the ideal

Hellenic, had the right to be blind to all Hellenism. For this reason, we others

are in much greater need of art; because it was in the presence of the realistic

that our eyes began to see, and we require the complete dramatist in order

that he may relieve us, if only for an hour or so, of the insufferable tension

arising from our knowledge of the chasm which lies between our capabilities

and  the  duties  we  have  to  perform.  With  him  we  ascend  to  the  highest

pinnacle of feeling, and only then do we fancy we have returned to nature's

unbounded freedom, to the actual realm of liberty. From this point of vantage

we can see ourselves and our fellows emerge as something sublime from an

immense  mirage,  and  we  see  the  deep  meaning  in  our  struggles,  in  our

victories and defeats; we begin to find pleasure in the rhythm of passion and

in its victim in the hero's every footfall we distinguish the hollow echo of

death,  and  in  its  proximity  we  realise  the  greatest  charm  of  life:  thus

transformed into tragic men, we return again to life with comfort in our souls.

We are conscious of a new feeling of security, as if we had found a road

leading  out  of  the  greatest  dangers,  excesses,  and  ecstasies,  back  to  the

limited and the familiar: there where our relations with our fellows seem to

partake of a superior benevolence, and are at all events more noble than they

were. For here, everything seemingly serious and needful, which appears to

lead to a definite goal, resembles only detached fragments when compared

with the path we ourselves have trodden, even in our dreams,-- detachedfragments of that complete and grand experience whereof we cannot even

think without a thrill. Yes, we shall even fall into danger and be tempted to

take life too easily, simply because in art we were in such deadly earnest

concerning it, as Wagner says somewhere anent certain incidents in his own

life. For if we who are but the spectators and not the creators of this display

of dithyrambic dramatic art, can almost imagine a dream to be more real than

the actual experiences of our wakeful hours, how much more keenly must the

creator realise this contrast! There he stands amid all the clamorous appeals

and importunities of the day, and of the necessities of life; in the midst of

Society and State--and as what does he stand there? Maybe he is the only

wakeful  one,  the  only  being  really  and  truly  conscious,  among  a  host  of

confused and tormented sleepers, among a multitude of deluded and suffering

people.  He  may  even  feel  like  a  victim  of  chronic  insomnia,  and  fancy

himself obliged to bring his clear, sleepless, and conscious life into touch

with somnambulists and ghostly well-intentioned creatures. Thus everything

that others regard as commonplace strikes him as weird, and he is tempted to

meet the whole phenomenon with haughty mockery. But how peculiarly this

feeling is crossed, when another force happens to join his quivering pride, the

craving of the heights for the depths, the affectionate yearning for earth, for

happiness  and  for  fellowship--then,  when  he  thinks  of  all  he  misses  as  a

hermit-creator, he feels as though he ought to descend to the earth like a god,

and bear all that is weak, human, and lost, "in fiery arms up to heaven," so as

to obtain love and no longer worship only, and to be able to lose himself

completely  in  his  love.  But  it  is  just  this  contradiction  which  is  the

miraculous fact in the soul of the dithyrambic dramatist, and if his nature can

be understood at all, surely it must be here. For his creative moments in art

occur when the antagonism between his feelings is at its height and when his

proud astonishment and wonder at the world combine with the ardent desire

to approach that same world as a lover. The glances he then bends towards

the earth are always rays of sunlight which "draw up water," form mist, and

gather storm-clouds. Clear-sighted and prudent, loving and unselfish at the

same  time,  his  glance  is  projected  downwards;  and  all  things  that  are

illumined  by  this  double  ray  of  light,  nature  conjures  to  discharge  their

strength, to reveal their most hidden secret, and this through bashfulness. It is

more than a mere figure of speech to say that he surprised Nature with that

glance, that he caught her naked; that is why she would conceal her shame by

seeming precisely the reverse. What has hitherto been invisible, the inner life,seeks its salvation in the region of the visible; what has hitherto been only

visible, repairs to the dark ocean of sound: thus Nature, in trying to conceal

herself, unveils the character of her contradictions. In a dance, wild, rhythmic

and gliding, and with ecstatic movements, the born dramatist makes known

something of what is going on within him, of what is taking place in nature:

the  dithyrambic  quality  of  his  movements  speaks  just  as  eloquently  of

quivering comprehension and of powerful penetration as of the approach of

love  and  self-renunciation.  Intoxicated  speech  follows  the  course  of  this

rhythm;  melody  resounds  coupled  with  speech,  and  in  its  turn  melody

projects its sparks into the realm of images and ideas. A dream-apparition,

like  and  unlike  the  image  of  Nature  and  her  wooer,  hovers  forward;  it

condenses  into  more  human  shapes;  it  spreads  out  in  response  to  its

heroically triumphant will, and to a most delicious collapse and cessation of

will:--thus tragedy is born; thus life is presented with its grandest knowledge-

- that of tragic thought; thus, at last, the greatest charmer and benefactor

among mortals--the dithyrambic dramatist--is evolved.

  VIII.

    Wagner's  actual  life--that  is  to  say,  the  gradual  evolution  of  the

dithyrambic dramatist in him-- was at the same time an uninterrupted struggle

with himself, a struggle which never ceased until his evolution was complete.

His fight with the opposing world was grim and ghastly, only because it was

this same world--this alluring enemy--which he heard speaking out of his

own  heart,  and  because  he  nourished  a  violent  demon  in  his  breast--the

demon of resistance. When the ruling idea of his life gained ascendancy over

his mind--the idea that drama is, of all arts, the one that can exercise the

greatest  amount  of  influence  over  the  world--it  aroused  the  most  active

emotions in his whole being. It gave him no very clear or luminous decision,

at first, as to what was to be done and desired in the future; for the idea then

appeared merely as a form of temptation--that is to say, as the expression of

his gloomy, selfish, and insatiable will, eager for power and glory. Influence-

-the  greatest  amount  of  influence--how?  over  whom?--these  were

henceforward the questions and problems which did not cease to engage his

head and his heart. He wished to conquer and triumph as no other artist had

ever  done  before,  and,  if  possible,  to  reach  that  height  of  tyrannical

omnipotence at one stroke for which all his instincts secretly craved. With a

jealous  and  cautious  eye,  he  took  stock  of  everything  successful,  and

examined  with  special  care  all  that  upon  which  this  influence  might  bebrought to bear. With the magic sight of the dramatist, which scans souls as

easily as the most familiar book, he scrutinised the nature of the spectator and

the listener, and although he was often perturbed by the discoveries he made,

he very quickly found means wherewith he could enthral them. These means

were ever within his reach: everything that moved him deeply he desired and

could also produce; at every stage in his career he understood just as much of

his predecessors as he himself was able to create, and he never doubted that

he would be able to do what they had done. In this respect his nature is

perhaps more presumptuous even than Goethe's, despite the fact that the latter

said of himself: "I always thought I had mastered everything; and even had I

been  crowned  king,  I  should  have  regarded  the  honour  as  thoroughly

deserved." Wagner's ability. his taste and his aspirations--all of which have

ever been as closely related as key to lock--grew and attained to freedom

together; but there was a time when it was not so. What did he care about the

feeble  but  noble  and  egotistically  lonely  feeling  which  that  friend  of  art

fosters, who, blessed with a literary and aesthetic education, takes his stand

far from the common mob! But those violent spiritual tempests which are

created by the crowd when under the influence of certain climactic passages

of  dramatic  song,  that  sudden  bewildering  ecstasy  of  the  emotions,

thoroughly honest and selfless--they were but echoes of his own experiences

and sensations, and filled him with glowing hope for the greatest possible

power and effect. Thus he recognised grand opera as the means whereby he

might express his ruling thoughts; towards it his passions impelled him; his

eyes turned in the direction of its home. The larger portion of his life, his

most daring wanderings, and his plans, studies, sojourns, and acquaintances

are only to be explained by an appeal to these passions and the opposition of

the outside world, which the poor, restless, passionately ingenuous German

artist had to face. Another artist than he knew better how to become master of

this calling, and now that it has gradually become known by means of what

ingenious  artifices  of  all  kinds  Meyerbeer  succeeded  in  preparing  and

achieving  every  one  of  his  great  successes,  and  how  scrupulously  the

sequence of "effects" was taken into account in the opera itself, people will

begin to understand how bitterly Wagner was mortified when his eyes were

opened to the tricks of the metier which were indispensable to a great public

success. I doubt whether there has ever been another great artist in history

who  began  his  career  with  such  extraordinary  illusions  and  who  so

unsuspectingly and sincerely fell in with the most revolting form of artistictrickery. And yet the way in which he proceeded partook of greatness and

was  therefore  extraordinarily  fruitful.  For  when  he  perceived  his  error,

despair made him understand the meaning of modern success, of the modern

public, and the whole prevaricating spirit of modern art. And while becoming

the  critic  of  "effect,"  indications  of  his  own  purification  began  to  quiver

through him. It seems as if from that time forward the spirit of music spoke to

him with an unprecedented spiritual charm. As though he had just risen from

a long illness and had for the first time gone into the open, he scarcely trusted

his hand and his eye, and seemed to grope along his way. Thus it was an

almost delightful surprise to him to find that he was still a musician and an

artist, and perhaps then only for the first time.

  Every subsequent stage in Wagner's development may be distinguished

thus, that the two fundamental powers of his nature drew ever more closely

together: the aversion of the one to the other lessened, the higher self no

longer condescended to serve its more violent and baser brother; it loved him

and felt compelled to serve him. The tenderest and purest thing is ultimately--

that is to say, at the highest stage of its evolution-- always associated with the

mightiest;  the  storming  instincts  pursue  their  course  as  before,  but  along

different roads, in the direction of the higher self; and this in its turn descends

to earth and finds its likeness in everything earthly. If it were possible, on this

principle, to speak of the final aims and unravelments of that evolution, and

to remain intelligible, it might also be possible to discover the graphic terms

with which to describe the long interval preceding that last development; but

I doubt whether the first achievement is possible at all, and do not therefore

attempt the second. The limits of the interval separating the preceding and the

subsequent ages will be described historically in two sentences: Wagner was

the revolutionist of society; Wagner recognised the only artistic element that

ever existed hitherto--the poetry of the people. The ruling idea which in a

new form and mightier than it had ever been, obsessed Wagner, after he had

overcome his share of despair and repentance, led him to both conclusions.

Influence, the greatest possible amount of influence to be exercised by means

of  the  stage!  --but  over  whom?  He  shuddered  when  he  thought  of  those

whom  he  had,  until  then,  sought  to  influence.  His  experience  led  him  to

realise  the  utterly  ignoble  position  which  art  and  the  artist  adorn;  how  a

callous and hard-hearted community that calls itself the good, but which is

really the evil, reckons art and the artist among its slavish retinue, and keeps

them  both  in  order  to  minister  to  its  need  of  deception.  Modern  art  is  aluxury;  he  saw  this,  and  understood  that  it  must  stand  or  fall  with  the

luxurious society of which it forms but a part. This society had but one idea,

to  use  its  power  as  hard-heartedly  and  as  craftily  as  possible  in  order  to

render the impotent--the people--ever more and more serviceable, base and

unpopular, and to rear the modern workman out of them. It also robbed them

of the greatest and purest things which their deepest needs led them to create,

and through which they meekly expressed the genuine and unique art within

their soul: their myths, songs, dances, and their discoveries in the department

of language, in order to distil therefrom a voluptuous antidote against the

fatigue and boredom of its existence-- modern art. How this society came into

being, how it learned to draw new strength for itself from the seemingly

antagonistic spheres of power, and how, for instance, decaying Christianity

allowed itself to be used, under the cover of half measures and subterfuges, as

a  shield  against  the  masses  and  as  a  support  of  this  society  and  its

possessions, and finally how science and men of learning pliantly consented

to become its drudges--all this Wagner traced through the ages, only to be

convulsed with loathing at the end of his researches. Through his compassion

for the people, he became a revolutionist. From that time forward he loved

them and longed for them, as he longed for his art; for, alas! in them alone, in

this fast disappearing, scarcely recognisable body, artificially held aloof, he

now saw the only spectators and listeners worthy and fit for the power of his

masterpieces, as he pictured them. Thus his thoughts concentrated themselves

upon  the  question,  How  do  the  people  come  into  being?  How  are  they

resuscitated?

  He  always  found  but  one  answer:  if  a  large  number  of  people  were

afflicted with the sorrow that afflicted him, that number would constitute the

people, he said to himself. And where the same sorrow leads to the same

impulses and desires, similar satisfaction would necessarily be sought, and

the same pleasure found in this satisfaction. If he inquired into what it was

that most consoled him and revived his spirits in his sorrow, what it was that

succeeded best in counteracting his affliction, it was with joyful certainty that

he discovered this force only in music and myth, the latter of which he had

already recognised as the people's creation and their language of distress. It

seemed to him that the origin of music must be similar, though perhaps more

mysterious. In both of these elements he steeped and healed his soul; they

constituted his most urgent need:--in this way he was able to ascertain how

like his sorrow was to that of the people, when they came into being, and howthey must arise anew if many Wagners are going to appear. What part did

myth and music play in modern society, wherever they had not been actually

sacrificed to it? They shared very much the same fate, a fact which only tends

to prove their close relationship: myth had been sadly debased and usurped

by idle tales and stories; completely divested of its earnest and sacred virility,

it was transformed into the plaything and pleasing bauble of children and

women of the afflicted people. Music had kept itself alive among the poor,

the  simple,  and  the  isolated;  the  German  musician  had  not  succeeded  in

adapting himself to the luxurious traffic of the arts; he himself had become a

fairy tale full Of monsters and mysteries, full of the most touching omens and

auguries--a helpless questioner, something bewitched and in need of rescue.

Here the artist distinctly heard the command that concerned him alone--to

recast myth and make it virile, to break the spell lying over music and to

make music speak: he felt his strength for drama liberated at one stroke, and

the  foundation  of  his  sway  established  over  the  hitherto  undiscovered

province  lying  between  myth  and  music.  His  new  masterpiece,  which

included all the most powerful, effective, and entrancing forces that he knew,

he  now  laid  before  men  with  this  great  and  painfully  cutting  question:

"Where are ye all who suffer and think as I do? Where is that number of souls

that I wish to see become a people, that ye may share the same joys and

comforts with me? In your joy ye will reveal your misery to me." These were

his questions in Tannhauser and Lohengrin, in these operas he looked about

him for his equals --the anchorite yearned for the number.

  But what were his feelings withal? Nobody answered him. Nobody had

understood his question. Not that everybody remained silent: on the contrary,

answers were given to thousands of questions which he had never put; people

gossipped  about  the  new  masterpieces  as  though  they  had  only  been

composed for the express purpose of supplying subjects for conversation. The

whole mania of aesthetic scribbling and small talk overtook the Germans like

a pestilence, and ith that lack of modesty which characterises both German

scholars  and  German  journalists,  people  began  measuring,  and  generally

meddling with, these masterpieces, as well as with the person of the artist.

Wagner tried to help the comprehension of his question by writing about it;

but this only led to fresh confusion and more uproar, --for a musician who

writes and thinks was, at that time, a thing unknown. The cry arose: "He is a

theorist who wishes to remould art with his far-fetched notions--stone him!"

Wagner was stunned: his question was not understood, his need not felt; hismasterpieces seemed a message addressed only to the deaf and blind; his

people-- an hallucination. He staggered and vacillated. The feasibility of a

complete upheaval of all things then suggested itself to him, and he no longer

shrank from the thought: possibly, beyond this revolution and dissolution,

there might be a chance of a new hope; on the other hand, there might not.

But, in any case, would not complete annihilation be better than the wretched

existing state of affairs? Not very long afterwards, he was a political exile in

dire distress.

  And then only, with this terrible change in his environment and in his

soul, there begins that period of the great man's life over which as a golden

reflection there is stretched the splendour of highest mastery. Now at last the

genius of dithyrambic drama doffs its last disguise. He is isolated; the age

seems empty to him; he ceases to hope; and his all-embracing glance descend

once more into the deep, and finds the bottom, there he sees suffering in the

nature  of  things,  and  henceforward,  having  become  more  impersonal,  he

accepts his portion of sorrow more calmly. The desire for great power which

was but the inheritance of earlier conditions is now directed wholly into the

channel of creative art; through his art he now speaks only to himself, and no

longer to a public or to a people, and strives to lend this intimate conversation

all the distinction and other qualities in keeping with such a mighty dialogue.

During the preceding period things had been different with his art; then he

had  concerned  himself,  too,  albeit  with  refinement  and  subtlety,  with

immediate effects: that artistic production was also meant as a question, and

it ought to have called forth an immediate reply. And how often did Wagner

not try to make his meaning clearer to those he questioned! In view of their

inexperience in having questions put to them, he tried to meet them half way

and to conform with older artistic notions and means of expression. When he

feared  that  arguments  couched  in  his  own  terms  would  only  meet  with

failure, he had tried to persuade and to put his question in a language half

strange to himself though familiar to his listeners. Now there was nothing to

induce him to continue this indulgence: all he desired now was to come to

terms with himself, to think of the nature of the world in dramatic actions,

and to philosophise in music; what desires he still possessed turned in the

direction of the latest philosophical views. He who is worthy of knowing

what took place in him at that time or what questions were thrashed out in the

darkest holy of holies in his soul--and not many are worthy of knowing all

this--must hear, observe, and experience Tristan and Isolde, the real opusmetaphysicum of all art, a work upon which rests the broken look of a dying

man with his insatiable and sweet craving for the secrets of night and death,

far away from life which throws a horribly spectral morning light, sharply,

upon all that is evil, delusive, and sundering: moreover, a drama austere in

the severity of its form, overpowering in its simple grandeur, and in harmony

with the secret of which it treats--lying dead in the midst of life, being one in

two. And yet there is something still more wonderful than this work, and that

is the artist himself, the man who, shortly after he had accomplished it, was

able to create a picture of life so full of clashing colours as the Meistersingers

of Nurnberg, and who in both of these compositions seems merely to have

refreshed and equipped himself for the task of completing at his ease that

gigantic edifice in four parts which he had long ago planned and begun--the

ultimate  result  of  all  his  meditations  and  poetical  flights  for  over  twenty

years, his Bayreuth masterpiece, the Ring of the Nibelung! He who marvels

at the rapid succession of the two operas, Tristan and the Meistersingers, has

failed to understand one important side of the life and nature of all great

Germans: he does not know the peculiar soil out of which that essentially

German  gaiety,  which  characterised  Luther,  Beethoven,  and  Wagner,  can

grow, the gaiety which other nations quite fail to understand and which even

seems  to  be  missing  in  the  Germans  of  to-day--that  clear  golden  and

thoroughly  fermented  mixture  of  simplicity,  deeply  discriminating  love,

observation,  and  roguishness  which  Wagner  has  dispensed,  as  the  most

precious of drinks, to all those who have suffered deeply through life, but

who nevertheless return to it with the smile of convalescents. And, as he also

turned upon the world the eyes of one reconciled, he was more filled with

rage and disgust than with sorrow, and more prone to renounce the love of

power than to shrink in awe from it. As he thus silently furthered his greatest

work and gradually laid score upon score, something happened which caused

him  to  stop  and  listen:  friends  were  coming,  a  kind  of  subterranean

movement of many souls approached with a message for him--it was still far

from being the people that constituted this movement and which wished to

bear him news, but it may have been the nucleus and first living source of a

really  human  community  which  would  reach  perfection  in  some  age  still

remote. For the present they only brought him the warrant that his great work

could be entrusted to the care and charge of faithful men, men who would

watch and be worthy to watch over this most magnificent of all legacies to

posterity.  In  the  love  of  friends  his  outlook  began  to  glow  with  brightercolours; his noblest care--the care that his work should be accomplished and

should  find  a  refuge  before  the  evening  of  his  life--was  not  his  only

preoccupation.  something  occurred  which  he  could  only  understand  as  a

symbol: it was as much as a new comfort and a new token of happiness to

him. A great German war caused him to open his eyes, and he observed that

those very Germans whom he considered so thoroughly degenerate and so

inferior to the high standard of real Teutonism, of which he had formed an

ideal both from self-knowledge and the conscientious study of other great

Germans in history; he observed that those very Germans were, in the midst

of terrible circumstances, exhibiting two virtues of the highest order--simple

bravery and prudence; and with his heart bounding with delight he conceived

the hope that he might not be the last German, and that some day a greater

power would perhaps stand by his works than that devoted yet meagre one

consisting of his little band of friends--a power able to guard it during that

long  period  preceding  its  future  glory,  as  the  masterpiece  of  this  future.

Perhaps it was not possible to steel this belief permanently against doubt,

more particularly when it sought to rise to hopes of immediate results: suffice

it that he derived a tremendous spur from his environment, which constantly

reminded him of a lofty duty ever to be fulfilled.

  His work would not have been complete had he handed it to the world

only in the form of silent manuscript. He must make known to the world what

it could not guess in regard to his productions, what was his alone to reveal--

the new style for the execution and presentation of his works, so that he

might set that example which nobody else could set, and thus establish a

tradition  of  style,  not  on  paper,  not  by  means  of  signs,  but  through

impressions made upon the very souls of men. This duty had become all the

more pressing with him, seeing that precisely in regard to the style of their

execution his other works had meanwhile succumbed to the most insufferable

and absurd of fates: they were famous and admired, yet no one manifested

the slightest sign of indignation when they were mishandled. For, strange to

say, whereas he renounced ever more and more the hope of success among

his contemporaries, owing to his all too thorough knowledge of them, and

disclaimed all desire for power, both "success" and "power" came to him, or

at least everybody told him so. It was in vain that he made repeated attempts

to expose, with the utmost clearness, how worthless and humiliating such

successes were to him: people were so unused to seeing an artist able to

differentiate at all between the effects of his works that even his most solemnprotests were never entirely trusted. Once he had perceived the relationship

existing between our system of theatres and their success, and the men of his

time, his soul ceased to be attracted by the stage at all. He had no further

concern with aesthetic ecstasies and the exultation of excited crowds, and he

must even have felt angry to see his art being gulped down indiscriminately

by the yawning abyss of boredom and the insatiable love of distraction. How

flat  and  pointless  every  effect  proved  under  these  circumstances--  more

especially as it was much more a case of having to minister to one quite

insatiable than of cloying the hunger of a starving man-- Wagner began to

perceive  from  the  following  repeated  experience:  everybody,  even  the

performers and promoters, regarded his art as nothing more nor less than any

other kind of stage-music, and quite in keeping with the repulsive style of

traditional opera; thanks to the efforts of cultivated conductors, his works

were even cut and hacked about, until, after they had been bereft of all their

spirit, they were held to be nearer the professional singer's plane. But when

people tried to follow Wagner's instructions to the letter, they proceeded so

clumsily  and  timidly  that  they  were  not  incapable  of  representing  the

midnight riot in the second act of the Meistersingers by a group of ballet-

dancers. They seemed to do all this, however, in perfectly good faith--without

the smallest evil intention. Wagner's devoted efforts to show, by means of his

own example, the correct and complete way of performing his works, and his

attempts at training individual singers in the new style, were foiled time after

time,  owing  only  to  the  thoughtlessness  and  iron  tradition  that  ruled  all

around him. Moreover, he was always induced to concern himself with that

class of theatricals which he most thoroughly loathed. Had not even Goethe,

m his time, once grown tired of attending the rehearsals of his Iphigenia? "I

suffer unspeakably," he explained, "when I have to tumble about Wlth these

spectres,  which  never  seem  to  act  as  they  should."  Meanwhile  Wagner's

"success" in the kind of drama which he most disliked steadily increased; so

much so, indeed, that the largest theatres began to subsist almost entirely

upon the receipts which Wagner's art, in the guise of operas, brought into

them.  This  growing  passion  on  the  part  of  the  theatre-going  public

bewildered even some of Wagner's friends; but this man who had endured so

much, had still to endure the bitterest pain of all--he had to see his friends

intoxicated  with  his  "successes"  and  "triumphs"  everywhere  where  his

highest ideal was openly belied and shattered. It seemed almost as though a

people otherwise earnest and reflecting had decided to maintain an attitude ofsystematic levity only towards its most serious artist, and to make him the

privileged  recipient  of  all  the  vulgarity,  thoughtlessness,  clumsiness,  and

malice of which the German nature is capable. When, therefore, during the

German War, a current of greater magnanimity and freedom seemed to run

through every one, Wagner remembered the duty to which he had pledged

himself,  namely,  to  rescue  his  greatest  work  from  those  successes  and

affronts which were so largely due to misunderstandings, and to present it in

his most personal rhythm as an example for all times. Thus he conceived the

idea of Bayreuth. In the wake of that current of better feeling already referred

to, he expected to notice an enhanced sense of duty even among those with

whom he wished to entrust his most precious possession. Out of this two-fold

duty,  that  event  took  shape  which,  like  a  glow  of  strange  sunlight,  will

illumine the few years that lie behind and before us, and was designed to

bless that distant and problematic future which to our time and to the men of

our time can be little more than a riddle or a horror, but which to the fevv

who are allowed to assist in its realisation is a foretaste of coming joy, a

foretaste of love in a higher sphere, through which they know themselves to

be blessed, blessing and fruitful, far beyond their span of years; and which to

Wagner himself is but a cloud of distress, care, meditation, and grief, a fresh

passionate outbreak of antagonistic elements, but all bathed in the starlight of

selfless fidelity, and changed by this light into indescribable joy.

  It scarcely need be said that it is the breath of tragedy that fills the lungs

of the world. And every one whose innermost soul has a presentiment of this,

every one unto whom the yoke of tragic deception concerning the aim of life,

the  distortion  and  shattering  of  intentions,  renunciation  and  purification

through  love,  are  not  unknown  things,  must  be  conscious  of  a  vague

reminiscence of Wagner's own heroic life, in the masterpieces with which the

great man now presents us. We shall feel as though Siegfried from some

place far away were relating his deeds to us: the most blissful of touching

recollections are always draped in the deep mourning of waning summer,

when all nature lies still in the sable twilight.

  IX.

  All those to whom the thought of Wagner's development as a man may

have caused pain will find it both restful and healing to reflect upon what he

was as an artist, and to observe how his ability and daring attained to such a

high degree of independence. If art mean only the faculty of communicating

to others what one has oneself experienced, and if every work of art confutesitself  which  does  not  succeed  in  making  itself  understood,  then  Wagner's

greatness as an artist would certainly lie in the almost demoniacal power of

his nature to communicate with others, to express itself in all languages at

once, and to make known its most intimate and personal experience with the

greatest amount of distinctness possible. His appearance in the history of art

resembles  nothing  so  much  as  a  volcanic  eruption  of  the  united  artistic

faculties of Nature herself, after mankind had grown to regard the practice of

a  special  art  as  a  necessary  rule.  It  is  therefore  a  somewhat  moot  point

whether he ought to be classified as a poet, a painter, or a musician, even

using each these words in its widest sense, or whether a new word ought not

to be invented in order to describe him.

    Wagner's poetic ability is shown by his thinking in visible and actual

facts, and not in ideas; that is to say, he thinks mythically, as the people have

always  done.  No  particular  thought  lies  at  the  bottom  of  a  myth,  as  the

children of an artificial ulture would have us believe; but it is in itself a

thought: it conveys an idea of the world, but through the medium of a chain

of events, actions, and pains. The Ring of the Nihelung is a huge system of

thought without the usual abstractness of the latter. It were perhaps possible

for a philosopher to present us with its exact equivalent in pure thought, and

to purge it of all pictures drawn from life, and of all living actions, in which

case  we  should  be  in  possession  of  the  same  thing  portrayed  in  two

completely different forms--the one for the people, and the other for the very

reverse of the people; that is to say, men of theory. But Wagner makes no

appeal to this last class, for the man of theory can know as little of poetry or

myth as the deaf man can know of music; both of them being conscious only

of movements which seem meaningless to them. It is impossible to appreciate

either one of these completely different forms from the standpoint of the

other: as long as the poet's spell is upon one, one thinks with him just as

though  one  were  merely  a  feeling,  seeing,  and  hearing  creature;  the

conclusions  thus  reached  are  merely  the  result  of  the  association  of  the

phenomena one sees, and are therefore not logical but actual causalities.

  If, therefore, the heroes and gods of mythical dramas, as understood by

Wagner,  were  to  express  themselves  plainly  in  words,  there  would  be  a

danger  (inasmuch  as  the  language  of  words  might  tend  to  awaken  the

theoretical side in us) of our finding ourselves transported from the world of

myth to the world of ideas, and the result would be not only that we should

fail  to  understand  with  greater  ease,  but  that  we  should  probably  notunderstand at all. Wagner thus forced language back to a more primeval stage

in its development a stage at which it was almost free of the abstract element,

and  was  still  poetry,  imagery,  and  feeling;  the  fearlessness  with  which

Wagner undertook this formidable mission shows how imperatively he was

led  by  the  spirit  of  poetry,  as  one  who  must  follow  whithersoever  his

phantom leader may direct him. Every word in these dramas ought to allow

of being sung, and gods and heroes should make them their own--that was the

task  which  Wagner  set  his  literary  faculty.  Any  other  person  in  like

circumstances would have given up all hope; for our language seems almost

too old and decrepit to allow of one's exacting what Wagner exacted from it;

and  yet,  when  he  smote  the  rock,  he  brought  forth  an  abundant  flow.

Precisely owing to the fact that he loved his language and exacted a great deal

from it, Wagner suffered more than any other German through its decay and

enfeeblement,  from  its  manifold  losses  and  mutilations  of  form,  from  its

unwieldy particles and clumsy construction, and from its unmusical auxiliary

verbs. All these are things which have entered the language through sin and

depravity. On the other hand, he was exceedingly proud to record the number

of primitive and vigorous factors still extant in the current speech; and in the

tonic  strength  of  its  roots  he  recognised  quite  a  wonderful  affinity  and

relation to real music, a quality which distinguished it from the highly volved

and artificially rhetorical Latin languages. Wagner's poetry is eloquent of his

affection for the German language, and there is a heartiness and candour in

his treatment of it which are scarcely to be met with in any other German

writer, save perhaps Goethe. Forcibleness of diction, daring brevity, power

and variety in rhythm, a remarkable wealth of strong and striking words,

simplicity in construction, an almost unique inventive faculty in regard to

fluctuations of feeling and presentiment, and therewithal a perfectly pure and

overflowing stream of colloquialisms--these are the qualities that have to be

enumerated, and even then the greatest and most wonderful of all is omitted.

Whoever  reads  two  such  poems  as  Tristan  and  the  Meistersingers

consecutively  will  be  just  as  astonished  and  doubtful  in  regard  to  the

language as to the music; for he will wonder how it could have been possible

for a creative spirit to dominate so perfectly two worlds as different in form,

colour, and arrangement, as in soul. This is the most wonderful achievement

of Wagner's talent; for the ability to give every work its own linguistic stamp

and to find a fresh body and a new sound for every thought is a task which

only the great master can successfully accomplish. Where this rarest of allpowers manifests itself, adverse criticism can be but petty and fruitless which

confines  itself  to  attacks  upon  certain  excesses  and  eccentricities  in  the

treatment, or upon the more frequent obscurities of expression and ambiguity

of thought. Moreover, what seemed to electrify and scandalise those who

were most bitter in their criticism was not so much the language as the spirit

of the Wagnerian operas--that is to say, his whole manner of feeling and

suffering. It were well to wait until these very critics have acquired another

spirit themselves; they will then also speak a different tongue, and, by that

time, it seems to me things will go better with the German language than they

do at present.

  In  the  first  place,  however,  no  one  who  studies  Wagner  the  poet  and

word-painter should forget that none of his dramas were meant to be read,

and that it would therefore be unjust to judge them from the same standpoint

as the spoken drama. The latter plays upon the feelings by means of words

and ideas, and in this respect it is under the dominion of the laws of rhetoric.

But in real life passion is seldom eloquent: in spoken drama it perforce must

be, in order to be able to express itself at all. When, however, the language of

a people is already in a state of decay and deterioration, the word-dramatist is

tempted to impart an undue proportion of new colour and form both to his

medium and to his thoughts; he would elevate the language in order to make

it a vehicle capable of conveying lofty feelings, and by so doing he runs the

risk  of  becoming  abstruse.  By  means  of  sublime  phrases  and  conceits  he

likewise  tries  to  invest  passion  with  some  nobility,  and  thereby  runs  yet

another risk, that of appearing false and artificial. For in real life passions do

not speak in sentences, and the poetical element often draws suspicion upon

their genuineness when it departs too palpably from reality. Now Wagner,

who was the first to detect the essential feeling in spoken drama, presents

every dramatic action threefold: in a word, in a gesture, and in a sound. For,

as a matter of fact, music succeeds in conveying the deepest emotions of the

dramatic performers direct to the spectators, and while these see the evidence

of the actors' states of soul in their bearing and movements, a third though

more  feeble  confirmation  of  these  states,  translated  into  conscious  will,

quickly follows in the form of the spoken word. All these effects fulfil their

purpose simultaneously, without disturbing one another in the least, and urge

the spectator to a completely new understanding and sympathy, just as if his

senses had suddenly grown more spiritual and his spirit more sensual, and as

if everything which seeks an outlet in him, and which makes him thirst forknowledge,  were  free  and  joyful  in  exultant  perception.  Because  every

essential factor in a Wagnerian drama is conveyed to the spectator with the

utmost  clearness,  illumined  and  permeated  throughout  by  music  as  by  an

internal  flame,  their  author  can  dispense  with  the  expedients  usually

employed by the writer of the spoken play in order to lend light and warmth

to  the  action.  The  whole  of  the  dramatist's  stock  in  trade  could  be  more

simple, and the architect's sense of rhythm could once more dare to manifest

itself in the general proportions of the edifice; for there was no more need of

"the deliberate confusion and involved variety of tyles, whereby the ordinary

playwright  strove  in  the  interests  of  his  work  to  produce  that  feeling  of

wonder  and  thrilling  suspense  which  he  ultimately  enhanced  to  one  of

delighted amazement. The impression of ideal distance and height was no

more to be induced by means of tricks and artifices. Language withdrew itself

from the length and breadth of rhetoric into the strong confines of the speech

of the feelings, and although the actor spoke much less about all he did and

felt  in  the  performance,  his  innermost  sentiments,  which  the  ordinary

playwright had hitherto ignored for fear of being undramatic, was now able to

drive  the  spectators  to  passionate  sympathy,  while  the  accompanying

language of gestures could be restricted to the most delicate modulations.

Now, when passions are rendered in song, they require rather more time than

when conveyed by speech; music prolongs, so to speak, the duration of the

feeling, from which it follows, as a rule, that the actor who is also a singer

must overcome the extremely unplastic animation from which spoken drama

suffers. He feels himself incited all the more to a certain nobility of bearing,

because music envelopes his feelings in a purer atmosphere, and thus brings

them closer to beauty.

  The  extraordinary  tasks  which  Wagner  set  his  actors  and  singers  will

provoke rivalry between them for ages to come, in the personification of each

of his heroes with the greatest possible amount of clearness, perfection, and

fidelity, according to that perfect incorporation already typified by the music

of drama. Following this leader, the eye of the plastic artist will ultimately

behold the marvels of another visible world, which, previous to him, was

seen for the first time only by the creator of such works as the Ring of the

Nibelung --that creator of highest rank, who, like AEschylus, points the way

to a coming art. Must not jealousy awaken the greatest talent, if the plastic

artist ever compares the effect of his productions with that of Wagnerian

music, in which there is so much pure and sunny happiness that he who hearsit feels as though all previous music had been but an alien, faltering, and

constrained language; as though in the past it had been but a thing to sport

with in the presence of those who were not deserving of serious treatment, or

a thing with which to train and instruct those who were not even deserving of

play? In the case of this earlier kind of music, the joy we always experience

while listening to Wagner's compositions is ours only for a short space of

time, and it would then seem as though it were overtaken by certain rare

moments of forgetfulness, during which it appears to be communing with its

inner self and directing its eyes upwards, like Raphael's Cecilia, away from

the  listeners  and  from  all  those  who  demand  distraction,  happiness,  or

instruction from it.

  In  general  it  may  be  said  of  Wagner  the  Musician,  that  he  endowed

everything in nature which hitherto had had no wish to speak with the power

of speech: he refuses to admit that anything must be dumb, and, resorting to

the dawn, the forest, the mist, the cliffs, the hills, the thrill of night and the

moonlight, he observes a desire common to them all--they too wish to sing

their own melody. If the philosopher says it is will that struggles for existence

in animate and inanimate nature, the musician adds: And this will wherever it

manifests itself, yearns for a melodious existence.

  Before Wagner's time, music for the most part moved in narrow limits: it

concerned itself with the permanent states of man, or with what the Greeks

call ethos. And only with Beethoven did it begin to find the language of

pathos, of passionate will, and of the dramatic occurrences in the souls of

men. Formerly, what people desired was to interpret a mood, a stolid, merry,

reverential, or penitential state of mind, by means of music; the object was,

by means of a certain striking uniformity of treatment and the prolonged

duration of this uniformity, to compel the listener to grasp the meaning of the

music and to impose its mood upon him. To all such interpretations of mood

or  atmosphere,  distinct  and  particular  forms  of  treatment  were  necessary:

others were established by convention. The question of length was left to the

discretion of the musician, whose aim was not only to put the listener into a

certain mood, but also to avoid rendering that mood monotonous by unduly

protracting  it.  A  further  stage  was  reached  when  the  interpretations  of

contrasted moods were made to follow one upon the other, and the charm of

light and shade was discovered; and yet another step was made when the

same  piece  of  music  was  allowed  to  contain  a  contrast  of  the  ethos--for

instance, the contest between a male and a female theme. All these, however,are  crude  and  primitive  stages  in  the  development  of  music.  The  fear  of

passion suggested the first rule, and the fear of monotony the second; all

depth of feeling and any excess thereof were regarded as "unethical." Once,

however, the art of the ethos had repeatedly been made to ring all the changes

on  the  moods  and  situations  which  convention  had  decreed  as  suitable,

despite the most astounding resourcefulness on the part of its masters, its

powers were exhausted. Beethoven was the first to make music speak a new

language--till  then  forbidden--the  language  of  passion;  but  as  his  art  was

based upon the laws and conventions of the ETHOS, and had to attempt to

justify  itself  in  regard  to  them,  his  artistic  development  was  beset  with

peculiar  difficulties  and  obscurities.  An  inner  dramatic  factor--and  every

passion pursues a dramatic course--struggled to obtain a new form, but the

traditional scheme of "mood music" stood in its way, and protested--almost

after the manner in which morality opposes innovations and immorality. It

almost seemed, therefore, as if Beethoven had set himself the contradictory

task  of  expressing  pathos  in  the  terms  of  the  ethos.  This  view  does  not,

however, apply to Beethoven's latest and greatest works; for he really did

succeed in discovering a novel method of expressing the grand and vaulting

arch of passion. He merely selected certain portions of its curve; imparted

these with the utmost clearness to his listeners, and then left it to them to

divine its whole span. Viewed superficially, the new form seemed rather like

an aggregation of several musical compositions, of which every one appeared

to represent a sustained situation, but was in reality but a momentary stage in

the dramatic course of a passion. The listener might think that he was hearing

the old "mood" music over again, except that he failed to grasp the relation of

the various parts to one another, and these no longer conformed with the

canon of the law. Even among minor musicians, there flourished a certain

contempt for the rule which enjoined harmony in the general construction of

a composition and the sequence of the parts in their works still remained

arbitrary. Then, owing to a misunderstanding, the discovery of the majestic

treatment of passion led back to the use of the single movement with an

optional setting, and the tension between the parts thus ceased completely.

That is why the symphony, as Beethoven understood it, is such a wonderfully

obscure production, more especially when, here and there, it makes faltering

attempts at rendering Beethoven's pathos. The means ill befit the intention,

and  the  intention  is,  on  the  whole,  not  sufficiently  clear  to  the  listener,

because it was never really clear, even in the mind of the composer. But thevery injunction that something definite must be imparted, and that this must

be done as distinctly as possible, becomes ever more and more essential, the

higher, more difficult, and more exacting the class of work happens to be.

  That is why all Wagner's efforts were concentrated upon the one object of

discovering those means which best served the purpose of distinctness, and to

this end it was above all necessary for him to emancipate himself from all the

prejudices and claims of the old "mood" music, and to give his compositions-

-the musical interpretations of feelings and passion--a perfectly unequivocal

mode of expression. If we now turn to what he has achieved, we see that his

services to music are practically equal in rank to those which that sculptor-

inventor rendered to sculpture who introduced "sculpture in the round." All

previous music seems stiff and uncertain when compared with Wagner's, just

as though it were ashamed and did not wish to be inspected from all sides.

With  the  most  consummate  skill  and  precision,  Wagner  avails  himself  of

every  degree  and  colour  in  the  realm  of  feeling;  without  the  slightest

hesitation or fear of its escaping him, he seizes upon the most delicate, rarest,

and mildest emotion, and holds it fast, as though it had hardened at his touch,

despite the fact that it may seem like the frailest butterfly to every one else.

His music is never vague or dreamy; everything that is allowed to speak

through it, whether it be of man or of nature, has a strictly individual passion;

storm and fire acquire the ruling power of a personal will in his hands. Over

all the clamouring characters and the clash of their passions, over the whole

torrent of contrasts, an almighty and symphonic understanding hovers with

perfect serenity, and continually produces concord out of war. Taken as a

whole, Wagner's music is a reflex of the world as it was understood by the

great Ephesian poet--that is to say, a harmony resulting from strife, as the

union of justice and enmity. I admire the ability which could describe the

grand line of universal passion out of a confusion of passions which all seem

to be striking out in different directions: the fact that this was a possible

achievement  I  find  demonstrated  in  every  individual  act  of  a  Wagnerian

drama, which describes the individual history of various characters side by

side with a general history of the whole company. Even at the very beginning

we know we are watching a host of cross currents dominated by one great

violent stream; and though at first this stream moves unsteadily over hidden

reefs, and the torrent seems to be torn asunder as if it were travelling towards

different  points,  gradually  we  perceive  the  central  and  general  movement

growing  stronger  and  more  rapid,  the  convulsive  fury  of  the  contendingwaters is converted into one broad, steady, and terrible flow in the direction

of an unknown goal; and suddenly, at the end, the whole flood in all its

breadth plunges into the depths, rejoicing demoniacally over the abyss and all

its uproar. Wagner is never more himself than when he is overwhelmed with

difficulties and can exercise power on a large scale with all the joy of a

lawgiver.  To  bring  restless  and  contending  masses  into  simple  rhythmic

movement, and to exercise one will over a bewildering host of claims and

desires--these  are  the  tasks  for  which  he  feels  he  was  born,  and  in  the

performance of which he finds freedom. And he never loses his breath withal,

nor does he ever reach his goal panting. He strove just as persistently to

impose the severest laws upon himself as to lighten the burden of others in

this respect. Life and art weigh heavily upon him when he cannot play wit

their  most  difficult  questions.  If  one  considers  the  relation  between  the

melody of song and that of speech, one will perceive how he sought to adopt

as his natural model the pitch, strength, and tempo of the passionate man's

voice in order to transform it into art; and if one further considers the task of

introducing this singing passion into the general symphonic order of music,

one gets some idea of the stupendous difficulties he had to overcome. In this

behalf, his inventiveness in small things as in great, his omniscience and

industry are such, that at the sight of one of Wagner's scores one is almost led

to believe that no real work or effort had ever existed before his time. It

seems almost as if he too could have said, in regard to the hardships of art,

that the real virtue of the dramatist lies in self-renunciation. But he would

probably have added, There is but one kind of hardship-- that of the artist

who is not yet free: virtue and goodness are trivial accomplishments.

  Viewing him generally as an artist, and calling to mind a more famous

type, we see that Wagner is not at all unlike Demosthenes: in him also we

have  the  terrible  earnestness  of  purpose  and  that  strong  prehensile  mind

which always obtains a complete grasp of a thing; in him, too, we have the

hand's quick clutch and the grip as of iron. Like Demosthenes, he conceals

his art or compels one to forget it by the peremptory way he calls attention to

the subject he treats; and yet, like his great predecessor, he is the last and

greatest of a whole line of artist-minds, and therefore has more to conceal

than  his  forerunners:  his  art  acts  like  nature,  like  nature  recovered  and

restored.  Unlike  all  previous  musicians,  there  is  nothing  bombastic  about

him; for the former did not mind playing at times with their art, and making

an exhibition of their virtuosity. One associates Wagner's art neither withinterest nor with diversion, nor with Wagner himself and art in general. All

one is conscious of is of the great necessity of it all. No one will ever be able

to  appreciate  what  severity  evenness  of  will,  and  self-control  the  artist

required during his development, in order, at his zenith, to be able to do the

necessary thing joyfully and freely. Let it suffice if we can appreciate how, in

some respects, his music, with a certain cruelty towards itself, determines to

subserve the course of the drama, which is as unrelenting as fate, whereas in

reality his art was ever thirsting for a free ramble in the open and over the

wilderness.

  X.

  An artist who has this empire over himself subjugates all other artists,

even though he may not particularly desire to do so. For him alone there lies

no danger or stemming-force in those he has subjugated--his friends and his

adherents; whereas the weaker natures who learn to rely on their friends pay

for  this  reliance  by  forfeiting  their  independence.  It  is  very  wonderful  to

observe how carefully, throughout his life, Wagner avoided anything in the

nature of heading a party, notwithstanding the fact that at the close of every

phase in his career a circle of adherents formed, presumably with the view of

holding him fast to his latest development He always succeeded, however, in

wringing himself free from them, and never allowed himself to be bound; for

not only was the ground he covered too vast for one alone to keep abreast of

him with any ease, but his way was so exceptionally steep that the most

devoted  would  have  lost  his  breath.  At  almost  every  stage  in  Wagner's

progress  his  friends  would  have  liked  to  preach  to  him,  and  his  enemies

would fain have done so too--but for other reasons. Had the purity of his

artist's  nature  been  one  degree  less  decided  than  it  was,  he  would  have

attained much earlier than he actually did to the leading position in the artistic

and musical world of his time. True, he has reached this now, but in a much

higher  sense,  seeing  that  every  performance  to  be  witnessed  in  any

department of art makes its obeisance, so to speak, before the judgment-stool

of his genius and of his artistic temperament. He has overcome the most

refractory of his contemporaries; there is not one gifted musician among them

but in his innermost heart would willingly listen to him, and find Wagner's

compositions  more  worth  listening  to  than  his  own  and  all  other  musical

productions taken together. Many who wish, by hook or by crook, to make

their  mark,  even  wrestle  with  Wagner's  secret  charm,  and  unconsciously

throw  in  their  lot  with  the  older  masters,  preferring  to  ascribe  their"independence" to Schubert or Handel rather than to Wagner. But in vain!

Thanks to their very efforts in contending against the dictates of their own

consciences, they become ever meaner and smaller artists; they ruin their own

natures by forcing themselves to tolerate undesirable allies and friends And in

spite of all these sacrifices, they still find perhaps in their dreams, that their

ear  turns  attentively  to  Wagner.  These  adversaries  are  to  be  pitied:  they

imagine they lose a great deal when they lose themselves, but here they are

mistaken.

  Albeit it is obviously all one to Wagner whether musicians compose in

his style, or whether they compose at all, he even does his utmost to dissipate

the belief that a school of composers should now necessarily follow in his

wake; though, in so far as he exercises a direct influence upon musicians, he

does indeed try to instruct them concerning the art of grand execution. In his

opinion,  the  evolution  of  art  seems  to  have  reached  that  stage  when  the

honest endeavour to become an able and masterly exponent or interpreter is

ever so much more worth talking about than the longing to be a creator at all

costs. For, at the present stage of art, universal creating has this fatal result,

that inasmuch as it encourages a much larger output, it tends to exhaust the

means and artifices of genius by everyday use, and thus to reduce the real

grandeur  of  its  effect.  Even  that  which  is  good  in  art  is  superfluous  and

detrimental when it proceeds from the imitation of what is best. Wagnerian

ends  and  means  are  of  one  piece:  to  perceive  this,  all  that  is  required  is

honesty in art matters, and it would be dishonest to adopt his means in order

to apply them to other and less significant ends.

  If, therefore, Wagner declines to live on amid a multitude of creative

musicians, he is only the more desirous of imposing upon all men of talent

the  new  duty  of  joining  him  in  seeking  the  law  of  style  for  dramatic

performances. He deeply feels the need of establishing a traditional style for

his art, by means of which his work may continue to live from one age to

another in a pure form, until it reaches that future which its creator ordained

for it.

  Wagner is impelled by an undaunted longing to make known everything

relating  to  that  foundation  of  a  style,  mentioned  above,  and,  accordingly,

everything  relating  to  the  continuance  of  his  art.  To  make  his  work--as

Schopenhauer would say-- a sacred depository and the real fruit of his life, as

well as the inheritance of mankind, and to store it for the benefit of a posterity

better able to appreciate it,--these were the supreme objects of his life, and forthese he bore that crown of thorns which, one day, will shoot forth leaves of

bay. Like the insect which, in its last form, concentrates all its energies upon

the one object of finding a safe depository for its eggs and of ensuring the

future welfare of its posthumous brood,--then only to die content, so Wagner

strove with equal determination to find a place of security for his works.

  This subject, which took precedence of all others with him, constantly

incited him to new discoveries; and these he sought ever more and more at

the spring of his demoniacal gift of communicability, the more distinctly he

saw himself in conflict with an age that was both perverse and unwilling to

lend him its ear. Gradually however, even this same age began to mark his

indefatigable efforts, to respond to his subtle advances, and to turn its ear to

him. Whenever a small or a great opportunity arose, however far away, which

suggested to Wagner a means wherewith to explain his thoughts, he availed

himself  of  it:  he  thought  his  thoughts  anew  into  every  fresh  set  of

circumstances, and would make them speak out of the most paltry bodily

form. Whenever a soul only half capable of comprehending him opened itself

to him, he never failed to implant his seed in it. He saw hope in things which

caused the average dispassionate observer merely to shrug his shoulders; and

he erred again and again, only so as to be able to carry his point against that

same observer. Just as the sage, in reality, mixes with living men only for the

purpose of increasing his store of knowledge, so the artist would almost seem

to be unable to associate with his contemporaries at all, unless they be such as

can help him towards making his work eternal. He cannot be loved otherwise

than with the love of this eternity, and thus he is conscious only of one kind

of  hatred  directed  at  him,  the  hatred  which  would  demolish  the  bridges

bearing  his  art  into  the  future.  The  pupils  Wagner  educated  for  his  own

purpose, the individual musicians and actors whom he advised and whose ear

he corrected and improved, the small and large orchestras he led, the towns

which witnessed him earnestly fulfilling the duties of ws calling, the princes

and ladies who half boastfully and half lovingly participated in the framing of

his plans, the various European countries to which he temporarily belonged

as the judge and evil conscience of their arts,--everything gradually became

the echo of his thought and of his indefatigable efforts to attain to fruitfulness

in the future. Although this echo often sounded so discordant as to confuse

him, still the tremendous power of his voice repeatedly crying out into the

world must in the end call forth reverberations, and it will soon be impossible

to be deaf to him or to misunderstand him. It is this reflected sound whicheven now causes the art-institutions of modern men to shake: every time the

breath of his spirit blew into these coverts, all that was overripe or withered

fell to the ground; but the general increase of scepticism in all directions

speaks more eloquently than all this trembling. Nobody any longer dares to

predict  where  Wagner's  influence  may  not  unexpectedly  break  out.  He  is

quite  unable  to  divorce  the  salvation  of  art  from  any  other  salvation  or

damnation:  wherever  modern  life  conceals  a  danger,  he,  with  the

discriminating  eye  of  mistrust,  perceives  a  danger  threatening  art.  In  his

imagination he pulls the edifice of modern civilisation to pieces, and allows

nothing rotten, no unsound timber-work to escape: if in the process he should

happen to encounter weather-tight walls or anything like solid foundations,

he immediately casts about for means wherewith he can convert them into

bulwarks and shelters for his art. He lives like a fugitive, whose will is not to

preserve his own life, but to keep a secret-- like an unhappy woman who does

not wish to save her own soul, but that of the child lying in her lap: in short,

he lives like Sieglinde, "for the sake of love."

  For life must indeed be full of pain and shame to one who can find neither

rest nor shelter in this world, and who must nevertheless appeal to it, exact

things  from  it,  contemn  it,  and  still  be  unable  to  dispense  with  the  thing

contemned,  --this  really  constitutes  the  wretchedness  of  the  artist  of  the

future, who, unlike the philosopher, cannot prosecute his work alone in the

seclusion of a study, but who requires human souls as messengers to this

future, public institutions as a guarantee of it, and, as it were, bridges between

now and hereafter. His art may not, like the philosopher's, be put aboard the

boat of written documents: art needs capable men, not letters and notes, to

transmit it. Over whole periods in Wagner's life rings a murmur of distress--

his distress at not being able to meet with these capable interpreters before

whom he longed to execute examples of his work, instead of being confined

to written symbols; before whom he yearned to practise his art, instead of

showing a pallid reflection of it to those who read books, and who, generally

speaking, therefore are not artists.

  In Wagner the man of letters we see the struggle of a brave fighter, whose

right hand has, as it were, been lopped off, and who has continued the contest

with his left. In his writings he is always the sufferer, because a temporary

and  insuperable  destiny  deprives  him  of  his  own  and  the  correct  way  of

conveying  his  thoughts--that  is  to  say,  in  the  form  of  apocalyptic  and

triumphant examples. His writings contain nothing canonical or severe: thecanons are to be found in his works as a whole. Their literary side represents

his attempts to understand the instinct which urged him to create his works

and to get a glimpse of himself through them. If he succeeded in transforming

his instincts into terms of knowledge, it was always with the hope that the

reverse process might take place in the souls of his readers--it was with this

intention  that  he  wrote.  Should  it  ultimately  be  proved  that,  in  so  doing,

Wagner attempted the impossible, he would still only share the lot of all

those who have meditated deeply on art; and even so he would be ahead of

most of them in this, namely, that the strongest instinct for all arts harboured

in him. I know of no written aesthetics that give more light than those of

Wagner; all that can possibly be learnt concerning the origin of a work of art

is to be found in them. He is one of the very great, who appeared amongst us

a witness, and who is continually improving his testimony and making it ever

clearer and freer; even when he stumbles as a scientist, sparks rise from the

ground. Such tracts as "Beethoven," "Concerning the Art of Conducting,"

"Concerning  Actors  and  Singers,"  "State  and  Religion,"  silence  all

contradiction,  and,  like  sacred  reliquaries,  impose  upon  all  who  approach

them a calm, earnest, and reverential regard. Others, more particularly the

earlier  ones,  including  "Opera  and  Drama,"  excite  and  agitate  one;  their

rhythm is so uneven that, as prose they are bewildering. Their dialectics is

constantly interrupted, and their course is more retarded than accelerated by

outbursts of feeling; a certain reluctance on the part of the writer seems to

hang over them like a pall, just as though the artist were somewhat ashamed

of speculative discussions. What the reader who is only imperfectly initiated

will probably find most oppressive is the general tone of authoritative dignity

which is peculiar to Wagner, and which is very difficult to describe: it always

strikes me as though Wagner were continually addressing enemies; for the

style of all these tracts more resembles that of the spoken than of the written

language, hence they will seem much more intelligible if heard read aloud, in

the presence of his enemies, with whom he cannot be on familiar terms, and

towards  whom  he  must  therefore  show  some  reserve  and  aloofness,  The

entrancing  passion  of  his  feelings,  however,  constantly  pierces  this

intentional  disguise,  and  then  the  stilted  and  heavy  periods,  swollen  with

accessary words, vanish, and his pen dashes off sentences, and even whole

pages, which belong to the best in German prose. But even admitting that

while he wrote such passages he was addressing friends, and that the shadow

of his enemies had been removed for a while, all the friends and enemies thatWagner,  as  a  man  of  letters,  has,  possess  one  factor  in  common,  which

differentiates them fundamentally from the "people" for whom he worked as

an artist. Owing to the refining and fruitless nature of their education, they

are quite devoid of the essential traits of the national character, and he who

would appeal to them must speak in a way which is not of the people--that is

to say, after the manner of our best prose-writers and Wagner himself; though

that he did violence to himself in writing thus is evident. But the strength of

that almost maternal instinct of prudence in him, which is ready to make any

sacrifice,  rather  tends  to  reinstall  him  among  the  scholars  and  men  of

learning, to whom as a creator he always longed to bid farewell. He submits

to the language of culture and all the laws governing its use, though he was

the first to recognise its profound insufficiency as a means of communication.

  For if there is anything that distinguishes his art from every other art of

modern times, it is that it no longer speaks the language of any particular

caste, and refuses to admit the distinctions "literate" and "illiterate." It thus

stands as a contrast to every culture of the Renaissance, which to this day still

bathes us modern men in its light and shade. Inasmuch as Wagner's art bears

us, from time to time, beyond itself, we are enabled to get a general view of

its uniform character: we see Goethe and Leopardi as the last great stragglers

of the Italian philologist-poets, Faust as the incarnation of a most unpopular

problem, in the form of a man of theory thirsting for life; even Goethe's song

is an imitation of the song of the people rather than a standard set before them

to which they are expected to attain, and the poet knew very well how truly

he spoke when he seriously assured his adherents: "My compositions cannot

become popular; he who hopes and strives to make them so is mistaken."

  That an art could arise which would be so clear and warm as to flood the

base and the poor in spirit with its light, as well as to melt the haughtiness of

the learned--such a phenomenon had to be experienced though it could not be

guessed. But even in the mind of him who experiences it to-day it must upset

all preconceived notions concerning education and culture; to such an one the

veil will seem to have been rent in twain that conceals a future in which no

highest good or highest joys exist that are not the common property of all.

The odium attaching to the word "common" will then be abolished.

  If presentiment venture thus into the remote future, the discerning eye of

all will recognise the dreadful social insanity of our present age, and will no

longer blind itself to the dangers besetting an art which seems to have roots

only  in  the  remote  and  distant  future,  and  which  allows  its  burgeoningbranches to spread before our gaze when it has not yet revealed the ground

from which it draws its sap. How can we protect this homeless art through the

ages until that remote future is reached? How can we so dam the flood of a

revolution seemingly inevitable everywhere, that the blessed prospect and

guarantee of a better future--of a freer human life--shall not also be washed

away with all that is destined to perish and deserves to perish?

  He  who  asks  himself  this  question  shares  Wagner's  care:  he  will  feel

himself impelled with Wagner to seek those established powers that have the

goodwill  to  protect  the  noblest  passions  of  man  during  the  period  of

earthquakes and upheavals. In this sense alone Wagner questions the learned

through  his  writings,  whether  they  intend  storing  his  legacy  to  them--the

precious Ring of his art--among their other treasures. And even the wonderful

confidence which he reposes in the German mind and the aims of German

politics seems to me to arise from the fact that he grants the people of the

Reformation that strength, mildness, and bravery which is necessary in order

to divert "the torrent of revolution into the tranquil river-bed of a calmly

flowing stream of humanity": and I could almost believe that this and only

this is what he meant to express by means of the symbol of his Imperial

march.

  As a rule, though, the generous impulses of the creative artist and the

extent of his philanthropy are too great for his gaze to be confined within the

limits of a single nation. His thoughts, like those of every good and great

German, are more than German, and the language of his art does not appeal

to particular races but to mankind in general.

  But to the men of the future.

  This  is  the  belief  that  is  proper  to  him;  this  is  his  torment  and  his

distinction. No artist, of what past soever, has yet received such a remarkable

portion  of  genius;  no  one,  save  him,  has  ever  been  obliged  to  mix  this

bitterest of ingredients with the drink of nectar to which enthusiasm helped

him. It is not as one might expect, the misunderstood and mishandled artist,

the fugitive of his age, who adopted this faith in self-defence: success or

failure at the hands of his contemporaries was unable either to create or to

destroy  it  Whether  it  glorified  or  reviled  him,  he  did  not  belong  to  this

generation: that was the conclusion to which his instincts led him. And the

possibility of any generation's ever belonging to him is something which he

who  disbelieves  in  Wagner  can  never  be  made  to  admit.  But  even  this

unbeliever  may  at  least  ask,  what  kind  of  generation  it  will  be  in  whichWagner will recognise his "people," and in which he will see the type of all

those who suffer a common distress, and who wish to escape from it by

means of an art common to them all. Schiller was certainly more hopeful and

sanguine; he did not ask what a future must be like if the instinct of the artist

that predicts it prove true; his command to every artist was rather--

  Soar aloft in daring flight Out of sight of thine own years! In thy mirror,

gleaming bright, Glimpse of distant dawn appears.

  XI.

  May blessed reason preserve us from ever thinking that mankind will at

any time discover a final and ideal order of things, and that happiness will

then and ever after beam down upon us uniformly, like the rays of the sun in

the tropics. Wagner has nothing to do with such a hope; he is no Utopian. If

he was unable to dispense with the belief in a future, it only meant that he

observed  certain  properties  in  modern  men  which  he  did  not  hold  to  be

essential to their nature, and which did not seem to him to form any necessary

part of their constitution; in fact, which were changeable and transient; and

that precisely owing to these properties art would find no home among them,

and he himself had to be the precursor and prophet of another epoch. No

golden  age,  no  cloudless  sky  will  fall  to  the  portion  of  those  future

generations, which his instinct led him to expect, and whose approximate

characteristics may be gleaned from the cryptic characters of his art, in so far

as it is possible to draw conclusions concerning the nature of any pain from

the kind of relief it seeks. Nor will superhuman goodness and justice stretch

like  an  everlasting  rainbow  over  this  future  land.  Belike  this  coming

generation will, on the whole, seem more evil than the present one--for in

good as in evil it will be more straightforward. It is even possible, if its soul

were ever able to speak out in full and unembarrassed tones, that it might

convulse and terrify us, as though the voice of some hitherto concealed and

evil spirit had suddenly cried out in our midst. Or how do the following

propositions  strike  our  ears?--That  passion  is  better  than  stocism  or

hypocrisy; that straightforwardness, even in evil, is better than losing oneself

in trying to observe traditional morality; that the free man is just as able to be

good as evil, but that the unemancipated man is a disgrace to nature, and has

no share in heavenly or earthly bliss; finally, that all who wish to be free must

become so through themselves, and that freedom falls to nobody's lot as a gift

from Heaven. However harsh and strange these propositions may sound, they

are nevertheless reverberations from that future world, which is verily in needof art, and which expects genuine pleasure from its presence; they are the

language of nature--reinstated even in mankind; they stand for what I have

already termed correct feeling as opposed to the incorrect feeling that reigns

to-day.

  But real relief or salvation exists only for nature not for that which is

contrary to nature or which arises out of incorrect feeling. When all that is

unnatural  becomes  self-conscious,  it  desires  but  one  thing--nonentity;  the

natural thing, on the other hand, yearns to be transfigured through love: the

former would fain not be, the latter would fain be otherwise. Let him who has

understood  this  recall,  in  the  stillness  of  his  soul,  the  simple  themes  of

Wagner's art, in order to be able to ask himself whether it were nature or

nature's opposite which sought by means of them to achieve the aims just

described.

  The  desperate  vagabond  finds  deliverance  from  his  distress  in  the

compassionate love of a woman who would rather die than be unfaithful to

him:  the  theme  of  the  Flying  Dutchman.  The  sweet-heart,  renouncing  all

personal happiness, owing to a divine transformation of Love into Charity,

becomes  a  saint,  and  saves  the  soul  of  her  loved  one:  the  theme  of

Tannhauser. The sublimest and highest thing descends a suppliant among

men, and will not be questioned whence it came; when, however, the fatal

question  is  put,  it  sorrowfully  returns  to  its  higher  life:  the  theme  of

Lohengrin.  The  loving  soul  of  a  wife,  and  the  people  besides,  joyfully

welcome the new benevolent genius, although the retainers of tradition and

custom reject and revile him: the theme of the Meistersingers. Of two lovers,

that do not know they are loved, who believe rather that they are deeply

wounded and contemned, each demands of the other that he or she should

drink a cup of deadly poison, to all intents and purposes as an expiation of the

insult; in reality, however, as the result of an impulse which neither of them

understands: through death they wish to escape all possibility of separation or

deceit.  The  supposed  approach  of  death  loosens  their  fettered  souls  and

allows them a short moment of thrilling happiness, just as though they had

actually escaped from the present, from illusions and from life: the theme of

Tristan and Isolde.

  In the Ring of the Nibelung the tragic hero is a god whose heart yearns

for power, and who, since he travels along all roads in search of it, finally

binds himself to too many undertakings, loses his freedom, and is ultimately

cursed by the curse inseparable from power. He becomes aware of his loss offreedom owing to the fact that he no longer has the means to take possession

of the golden Ring--that symbol of all earthly power, and also of the greatest

dangers to himself as long as it lies in the hands of his enemies. The fear of

the end and the twilight of all gods overcomes him, as also the despair at

being able only to await the end without opposing it. He is in need of the free

and fearless man who, without his advice or assistance--even in a struggle

against gods--can accomplish single-handed what is denied to the powers of a

god. He fails to see him, and just as a new hope finds shape within him, he

must obey the conditions to which he is bound: with his own hand he must

murder the thing he most loves, and purest pity must be punished by his

sorrow. Then he begins to loathe power, which bears evil and bondage in its

lap;  his  will  is  broken,  and  he  himself  begins  to  hanker  for  the  end  that

threatens him from afar off. At this juncture something happens which had

long been the subject of his most ardent desire: the free and fearless man

appears, he rises in opposition to everything accepted and established, his

parents atone for having been united by a tie which was antagonistic to the

order of nature and usage; they perish, but Siegfried survives. And at the

sight of his magnificent development and bloom, the loathing leaves otan's

soul,  and  he  follows  the  hero's  history  with  the  eye  of  fatherly  love  and

anxiety. How he forges his sword, kills the dragon, gets possession of the

ring, escapes the craftiest ruse, awakens Brunhilda; how the curse abiding in

the ring gradually overtakes him; how, faithful in faithfulness, he wounds the

thing he most loves, out of love; becomes enveloped in the shadow and cloud

of guilt, and, rising out of it more brilliantly than the sun, ultimately goes

down, firing the whole heavens with his burning glow and purging the world

of the curse,--all this is seen by the god whose sovereign spear was broken in

the  contest  with  the  freest  man,  and  who  lost  his  power  through  him,

rejoicing greatly over his own defeat: full of sympathy for the triumph and

pain of his victor, his eye burning with aching joy looks back upon the last

events; he has become free through love, free from himself.

  And now ask yourselves, ye generation of to-day, Was all this composed

for you? Have ye the courage to point up to the stars of the whole of this

heavenly  dome  of  beauty  and  goodness  and  to  say,  This  is  our  life,  that

Wagner has transferred to a place beneath the stars?

  Where are the men among you who are able to interpret the divine image

of Wotan in the light of their own lives, and who can become ever greater

while, like him, ye retreat? Who among you would renounce power, knowingand having learned that power is evil? Where are they who like Brunhilda

abandon their knowledge to love, and finally rob their lives of the highest

wisdom, "afflicted love, deepest sorrow, opened my eyes"? and where are the

free and fearless, developing and blossoming in innocent egoism? and where

are the Siegfrieds, among you?

  He who questions thus and does so in vain, will find himself compelled to

look around him for signs of the future; and should his eye, on reaching an

unknown distance, espy just that "people" which his own generation can read

out of the signs contained in Wagnerian art, he will then also understand what

Wagner will mean to this people--something that he cannot be to all of us,

namely, not the prophet of the future, as perhaps he would fain appear to us,

but the interpreter and clarifier of the past.

                THE USE AND ABUSE OF HISTORY FOR LIFE

                              Translated by Adrian Collins

  "I  HATE  everything  that  merely  instructs  me  without  increasing  or

directly  quickening  my  activity."  These  words  of  Goethe,  like  a  sincere

ceterum censeo may well stand at the head of my thoughts on the worth and

the worthlessness of history. I will show in them why instruction that does

not  "quicken,"  knowledge  that  slackens  the  rein  of  activity,  why  in  fact

history,  in  Goethe's  phrase,  must  be  seriously  "hated,"  as  a  costly  and

superfluous  luxury  of  the  understanding:  for  we  are  still  in  want  of  the

necessaries of life, and the superfluous is an enemy to the necessary. We do

need  history,  but  quite  differently  from  the  jaded  idlers  in  the  garden  of

knowledge,  however  grandly  they  may  look  down  on  our  rude  and

unpicturesque requirements. In other words, we need it for life and action, not

as a convenient way to avoid life and action, or to excuse a selfish life and a

cowardly or base action. We would serve history only so far as it serves life;

but to value its study beyond a certain point mutilates and degrades life: and

this is a fact that certain marked symptoms of our time make it as necessary

as it may be painful to bring to the test of experience. I have tried to describe

a  feeling  that  has  often  troubled  me:  I  revenge  myself  on  it  by  giving  it

publicity. This may lead some one to explain to me that he has also had the

feeling, but that I do not feel it purely and elementally enough, and cannot

express it with the ripe certainty of experience. A few may say so; but most

people will tell me that it is a perverted, unnatural, horrible, and altogether

unlawful  feeling  to  have,  and  that  I  show  myself  unworthy  of  the  great

historical movement which is especially strong among the German people forthe last two generations. I am at all costs going to venture on a description of

my feelings; which will be decidedly in the interests of propriety, as I shall

give plenty of opportunity for paying compliments to such a "movement."

And  I  gain  an  advantage  for  myself  that  is  more  valuable  to  me  than

propriety-the attainment of a correct point of view, through my critics, with

regard to our age. These thoughts are "out of season," because I am trying to

represent something of which the age is rightly proud-its historical culture-as

a fault and a defect in our time, believing as I do that we are all suffering

from a malignant historical fever and should at least recognise the fact. But

even if it be a virtue, Goethe may be right in asserting that we cannot help

developing our faults at the same time as our virtues; and an excess of virtue

can obviously bring a nation to ruin, as well as an excess of vice. In any case

I may be allowed my say. But I will first relieve my mind by the confession

that the experiences which produced those disturbing feelings were mostly

drawn from myself, -and from other sources only for the sake of comparison;

and that I have only reached such "unseasonable" experience, so far as I am

the nursling of older ages like the Greek, and less a child of this age. I must

admit so much in virtue of my profession as a classical scholar: for I do not

know what meaning classical scholarship may have for our time except in its

being "unseasonable," that is, contrary to our time, and yet with an influence

on it for the benefit, it may be hoped, of a future time.

  CONSIDER  the  herds  that  are  feeding  yonder:  they  know  not  the

meaning of yesterday or to-day; they graze and ruminate, move or rest, from

morning to night, from day to day, taken up with their little loves and hates,

at the mercy of the moment, feeling neither melancholy nor satiety. Man

cannot see them without regret, for even in the pride of his humanity he looks

enviously on the beast's happiness. He wishes simply to live without satiety

or pain, like the beast; yet it is all in vain, for he will not change places with

it. He may ask the beast-"Why do you look at me and not speak to me of your

happiness?"  The  beast  wants  to  answer-"Because  I  always  forget  what  I

wished to say": but he forgets this answer too, and is silent; and the man is

left to wonder. He wonders also about himself, that he cannot learn to forget,

but hangs on the past: however far or fast he run, that chain runs with him. It

is matter for wonder: the moment, that is here and gone, that was nothing

before and nothing after, returns like a spectre to trouble the quiet of a later

moment.  A  leaf  is  continually  dropping  out  of  the  volume  of  time  and

fluttering away and suddenly it flutters back into the man's lap. Then he says,"I remember . . . ," and envies the beast, that forgets at once, and sees every

moment really die, sink into night and mist, extinguished for ever. The beast

lives unhistorically; for it "goes into" the present, like a number, without

leaving any curious remainder. It cannot dissimulate, it conceals nothing; at

every moment it seems what it actually is, and thus can be nothing that is not

honest.  But  man  is  always  resisting  the  great  and  continually  increasing

weight of the past; it presses him down, and bows his shoulders; he travels

with a dark invisible burden that he can plausibly disown, and is only too

glad to disown in converse with his fellows-in order to excite their envy. And

so it hurts him, like the thought of a lost Paradise, to see a herd grazing, or,

nearer still, a child, that has nothing yet of the past to disown, and plays in a

happy blindness between the walls of the past and the future. And yet its play

must be disturbed, and only too soon will it be summoned from its little

kingdom of oblivion. Then it learns to understand the words "once upon a

time,"  the  "open  sesame"  that  lets  in  battle,  suffering  and  weariness  on

mankind, and reminds them what their existence really is, an imperfect tense

that  never  becomes  a  present.  And  when  death  brings  at  last  the  desired

forgetfulness, it abolishes life and being together, and sets the seal on the

knowledge that "being" is merely a continual "has been," a thing that lives by

denying and destroying and contradicting itself. If happiness and the chase

for new happiness keep alive in any sense the will to live, no philosophy has

perhaps more truth than the cynic's: for the beast's happiness, like that of the

perfect  cynic,  is  the  visible  proof  of  the  truth  of  cynicism.  The  smallest

pleasure, if it be only continuous and make one happy, is incomparably a

greater happiness than the more intense pleasure that comes as an episode, a

wild freak, a mad interval between ennui, desire, and privation. But in the

smallest  and  greatest  happiness  there  is  always  one  thing  that  makes  it

happiness: the power of forgetting, or, in more learned phrase, the capacity of

feeling  "unhistorically"  throughout  its  duration.  One  who  cannot  leave

himself  behind  on  the  threshold  of  the  moment  and  forget  the  past,  who

cannot stand on a single point, like a goddess of victory, without fear or

giddiness, will never know what happiness is; and, worse still, will never do

anything to make others happy. The extreme case would be the man without

any power to forget, who is condemned to see "becoming" everywhere. Such

a man believes no more in himself or his own existence, he sees everything

fly past in an eternal succession, and loses himself in the stream of becoming.

At last, like the logical disciple of Heraclitus, he will hardly dare to raise hisfinger. Forgetfulness is a property of all action; just as not only light but

darkness is bound up with the life of every organism. One who wished to feel

everything historically, would be like a man forcing himself to refrain from

sleep, or a beast who had to live by chewing a continual cud. Thus even a

happy life is possible without remembrance, as the beast shows: but life in

any true sense is absolutely impossible without forgetfulness. Or, to put my

conclusion  better,  there  is  a  degree  of  sleeplessness,  of  rumination,  of

"historical sense," that injures and finally destroys the living thing, be it a

man or a people or a system of culture. To fix this degree and the limits to the

memory of the past, if it is not to become the graved igger of the present, we

must see clearly how great is the " plastic power " of a man or a community

or a culture; I mean the power of specifically growing out of one's self, of

making the past and the strange one body with the near and the present, of

healing wounds, replacing what is lost, repairing broken moulds. There are

men who have this power so slightly that a single sharp experience, a single

pain, often a little injustice, will lacerate their souls like the scratch of a

poisoned  knife.  There  are  others,  who  are  so  little  injured  by  the  worst

misfortunes,  and  even  by  their  own  spiteful  actions,  as  to  feel  tolerably

comfortable, with a fairly quiet conscience, in the midst of them,-or at any

rate shortly afterwards. The deeper the roots of a man's inner nature, the

better will he take the past into himself; and the greatest and most powerful

nature would be known by the absence of limits for the historical sense to

overgrow and work harm. It would assimilate and digest the past, however

foreign, and turn it to sap. Such a nature can forget what it cannot subdue;

there is no break in the horizon, and nothing to remind it that there are still

men, passions, theories and aims on the other side. This is a universal law; a

living  thing  can  only  be  healthy,  strong  and  productive  within  a  certain

horizon: if it be incapable of drawing one round itself, or too selfish to lose

its own view in another's, it will come to an untimely end. Cheerfulness, a

good  conscience,  belief  in  the  future,  the  joyful  deed,  all  depend,  in  the

individual as well as the nation, on there being a line that divides the visible

and clear from the vague and shadowy: we must know the right time to forget

as  well  as  the  right  time  to  remember;  and  instinctively  see  when  it  is

necessary to feel historically, and when unhistorically. This is the point that

the reader is asked to consider; that the unhistorical and the historical are

equally necessary to the health of an individual, a community, and a system

of culture.  Every one has noticed that a man's historical knowledge and range of

feeling  may  be  very  limited,  his  horizon  as  narrow  as  that  of  an  Alpine

valley, his judgments incorrect and his experience falsely supposed original,

and yet in spite of all the incorrectness and falsity he may stand forth in

unconquerable health and vigour, to the joy of all who see him; whereas

another man with far more judgment and learning will fail in comparison,

because the lines of his horizon are continually changing and shifting, and he

cannot  shake  himself  free  from  the  delicate  network  of  his  truth  and

righteousness for a downright act of will or desire. We saw that the beast,

absolutely " unhistorical," with the narrowest of horizons, has yet a certain

happiness, and lives at least without hypocrisy or ennui ; and so we may hold

the capacity of feeling (to a certain extent) unhistorically, to be the more

important and elemental, as providing the foundation of every sound and real

growth, everything that is truly great and human. The unhistorical is like the

surrounding atmosphere that can alone create life, and in whose annihilation

life  itself  disappears.  It  is  true  that  man  can  only  become  man  by  first

suppressing  this  unhistorical  element  in  his  thoughts,  comparisons,

distinctions, and conclusions, letting a clear sudden light break through these

misty clouds by his power of turning the past to the uses of the present. But

an  excess  of  history  makes  him  flag  again,  while  without  the  veil  of  the

unhistorical he would never have the courage to begin. What deeds could

man ever have done if he had not been enveloped in the dust-cloud of the

unhistorical? Or, to leave metaphors and take a concrete example, imagine a

man  swayed  and  driven  by  a  strong  passion,  whether  for  a  woman  or  a

theory. His world is quite altered. He is blind to everything behind him, new

sounds are muffled and meaningless; though his perceptions were never so

intimately felt in all their colour, light and music, and he seems to grasp them

with his five senses together. All his judgments of value are changed for the

worse; there is much he can no longer value, as he can scarcely feel it: he

wonders that he has so long been the sport of strange words and opinions,

that his recollections have run round in one unwearying circle and are yet too

weak and weary to make a single step away from it. His whole case is most

indefensible;  it  is  narrow,  ungrateful  to  the  past,  blind  to  danger,  deaf  to

warnings, a small living eddy in a dead sea of night and forgetfulness. And

yet this condition, unhistorical and antihistorical throughout, is the cradle not

only of unjust action, but of every just and justifiable action in the world. No

artist will paint his picture, no general win his victory, no nation gain itsfreedom,  without  having  striven  and  yearned  for  it  under  those  very

"unhistorical" conditions. If the man of action, in Goethe's phrase, is without

conscience, he is also without knowledge: he forgets most things in order to

do one, he is unjust to what is behind him, and only recognises one law, the

law of that which is to be. So he loves his work infinitely more, than it

deserves to be loved; and the best works are produced in such an ecstasy of

love  that  they  must  always  be  unworthy  of  it,  however  great  their  worth

otherwise. Should any one be able to dissolve the unhistorical atmosphere in

which  every  great  event  happens,  and  breathe  afterwards,  he  might  be

capable of rising to the "super-historical" standpoint of consciousness, that

Niebuhr has described as the possible result of historical research. "History,"

he says, "is useful for one purpose, if studied in detail: that men may know,

as the greatest and best spirits of our generation do not know, the accidental

nature of the forms in which they see and insist on others seeing,-insist, I say,

because their consciousness of them is exceptionally intense. Any one who

has not grasped this idea in its different applications will fall under the spell

of a more powerful spirit who reads a deeper emotion into the given form."

Such a standpoint might be called "super-historical," as one who took it could

feel no impulse from history to any further life or work, for he would have

recognised the blindness and injustice in the soul of the doer as a condition of

every deed: he would be cured henceforth of taking history too seriously, and

have learnt to answer the question how and why life should be lived, for all

men  and  all  circumstances,  Greeks  or  Turks,  the  first  century  or  the

nineteenth. Whoever asks his friends whether they would live the last ten or

twenty years over again, will easily see which of them is born for the "super-

historical standpoint": they will all answer no, but will give different reasons

for their answer. Some will say they have the consolation that the next twenty

will be better: they are the men referred to satirically by David Hume: "And

from the dregs of life hope to receive, What the first sprightly running could

not give."

  We will call them the "historical men." Their vision of the past turns them

towards the future, encourages them to persevere with life, and kindles the

hope that justice will yet come and happiness is behind the mountain they are

climbing.  They  believe  that  the  meaning  of  existence  will  become  ever

clearer in the course of its evolution, they only look backward at the process

to understand the present and stimulate their longing for the future. They do

not know how unhistorical their thoughts and actions are in spite of all theirhistory, and how their preoccupation with it is for the sake of life rather than

mere science. But that question to which we have heard the first answer, is

capable of another; also a "no," but on different grounds. It is the "no" of the

"super-historical"  man  who  sees  no  salvation  in  evolution,  for  whom  the

world is complete and fulfils its aim in every single moment. How could the

next ten years teach what the past ten were not able to teach? Whether the

aim  of  the  teaching  be  happiness  or  resignation,  virtue  or  penance,  these

super-historical men are not agreed; but as against all merely historical ways

of viewing the past, they are unanimous in the theory that the past and the

present  are  one  and  the  same,  typically  alike  in  all  their  diversity,  and

forming  together  a  picture  of  eternally  present  imperishable  types  of

unchangeable  value  and  significance.  Just  as  the  hundreds  of  different

languages correspond to the same constant and elemental needs of mankind,

and  one  who  understood  the  needs  could  learn  nothing  new  from  the

languages; so the "super-historical" philosopher sees all the history of nations

and individuals from within. He has a divine insight into the original meaning

of  the  hieroglyphs,  and  comes  even  to  be  weary  of  the  letters  that  are

continually unrolled before him. How should the endless rush of events not

bring satiety, surfeit, loathing ? So the boldest of us is ready perhaps at last to

say from his heart with Giacomo Leopardi: "Nothing lives that were worth

thy pains, and the earth deserves not a sigh. Our being is pain and weariness,

and the world is mud-nothing else. Be calm." But we will leave the super-

historical men to their loathings and their wisdom: we wish rather to-day to

be joyful in our unwisdom and have a pleasant life as active men who go

forward,  and  respect  the  course  of  the  world.  The  value  we  put  on  the

historical  may  be  merely  a  Western  prejudice:  let  us  at  least  go  forward

within this prejudice and not stand still. If we could only learn better to study

history as a means to life! We would gladly grant the super-historical people

their superior wisdom, so long as we are sure of having more life than they:

for in that case our unwisdom would have a greater future before it than their

wisdom. To make my opposition between life and wisdom clear, I will take

the usual road of the short summary. A historical phenomenon, completely

understood and reduced to an item of knowledge, is, in relation to the man

who knows it, dead: for he has found out its madness, its injustice, its blind

passion, and especially the earthly and darkened horizon that was the source

of  its  power  for  history.  This  power  has  now  become,  for  him  who  has

recognised  it,  powerless;  not  yet,  perhaps,  for  him  who  is  alive.  Historyregarded as pure knowledge and allowed to sway the intellect would mean

for men the final balancing of the ledger of life. Historical study is only

fruitful  for  the  future  if  it  follow  a  powerful  life-giving  influence,  for

example,  a  new  system  of  culture;  only,  therefore,  if  it  be  guided  and

dominated by a higher force, and do not itself guide and dominate. History,

so  far  as  it  serves  life,  serves  an  unhistorical  power,  and  thus  will  never

become a pure science like mathematics. The question how far life needs

such a service is one of the most serious questions affecting the well-being of

a man, a people and a culture. For by excess of history life becomes maimed

and degenerate, and is followed by the degeneration of history as well.

  The  fact  that  life  does  need  the  service  of  history  must  be  as  clearly

grasped as that an excess of history hurts it; this will be proved later. History

is necessary to the living man in three ways: in relation to his action and

struggle,  his  conservatism  and  reverence,  his  suffering  and  his  desire  for

deliverance. These three relations answer to the three kinds of history so far

as  they  can  be  distinguished  -the  monumental,  the  antiquarian,  and  the

critical. History is necessary above all to the man of action and power who

fights a great fight and needs examples, teachers and comforters; he cannot

find  them  among  his  contemporaries.  It  was  necessary  in  this  sense  to

Schiller; for our time is so evil, Goethe says, that the poet meets no nature

that will profit him, among living men. Polybius is thinking of the active man

when he calls political history the true preparation for governing a state; it is

the  great  teacher,  that  shows  us  how  to  bear  steadfastly  the  reverses  of

fortune, by reminding us of what others have suffered. Whoever has learned

to recognise this meaning in history must hate to see curious tourists and

laborious beetle-hunters climbing up the great pyramids of antiquity. He does

not wish to meet the idler who is rushing through the picture-galleries of the

past  for  a  new  distraction  or  sensation,  where  he  himself  is  looking  for

example  and  encouragement.  To  avoid  being  troubled  by  the  weak  and

hopeless  idlers,  and  those  whose  apparent  activity  is  merely  neurotic,  he

looks behind him and stays his course towards the goal in order to breathe.

His  goal  is  happiness,  not  perhaps  his  own,  but  often  the  nation's,  or

humanity's at large: he avoids quietism, and uses history as a weapon against

it. For the most part he has no hope of reward except fame, which means the

expectation of a niche in the temple of history, where he in his turn may be

the consoler and counsellor of posterity. For his orders are that what has once

been able to extend the conception "man" and give it a fairer content, mustever exist for the same office. The great moments in the individual battle

form a chain, a high road for humanity through the ages, and the highest

points of those vanished moments are yet great and living for men; and this is

the  fundamental  idea  of  the  belief  in  humanity,  that  finds  a  voice  in  the

demand for a " monumental " history. But the fiercest battle is fought round

the demand for greatness to be eternal. Every other living thing cries no.

"Away  with  the  monuments,"  is  the  watchword.  Dull  custom  fills  all  the

chambers of the world with its meanness, and rises in thick vapour round

anything that is great, barring its way to immortality, blinding and stifling it.

And the way passes through mortal brains! Through the brains of sick and

short-lived beasts that ever rise to the surface to breathe, and painfully keep

off annihilation for a little space. For they wish but one thing: to live at any

cost. Who would ever dream of any "monumental history" among them, the

hard torch-race that alone gives life to greatness? And yet there are always

men awakening, who are strengthened and made happy by gazing on past

greatness, as though man's life were a lordly thing, and the fairest fruit of this

bitter tree were the knowledge that there was once a man who walked sternly

and proudly through this world, another who had pity and loving-kindness,

another who lived in contemplation, but all leaving one truth behind them,

that  his  life  is  the  fairest  who  thinks  least  about  life.  The  common  man

snatches greedily at this little span, with tragic earnestness, but they, on their

way  to  monumental  history  and  immortality,  knew  how  to  greet  it  with

Olympic laughter, or at least with a lofty scorn; and they went down to their

graves in irony-for what had they to bury? Only what they had always treated

as  dross,  refuse,  and  vanity,  and  which  now  falls  into  its  true  home  of

oblivion, after being so long the sport of their contempt. One thing will live,

the sign-manual of their inmost being, the rare flash of light, the deed, the

creation; because posterity cannot do without it. In this spiritualised form

fame  is  something  more  than  the  sweetest  morsel  for  our  egoism,  in

Schopenhauer's phrase: it is the belief in the oneness and continuity of the

great in every age, and a protest against the change and decay of generations.

What is the use to the modern man of this "monumental " contemplation of

the past, this preoccupation with the rare and classic? It is the knowledge that

the great thing existed and was therefore possible, and so may be possible

again. He is heartened on his way; for his doubt in weaker moments, whether

his desire be not for the impossible, is struck aside. Suppose one believe that

no more than a hundred men, brought up in the new spirit, efficient andproductive,  were  needed  to  give  the  deathblow  to  the  present  fashion  of

education in Germany; he will gather strength from the remembrance that the

culture of the Renaissance was raised on the shoulders of such another band

of a hundred men. And yet if we really wish to learn something from an

example, how vague and elusive do we find the comparison! If it is to give us

strength, many of the differences must be neglected, the individuality of the

past forced into a general formula and all the sharp angles broken off for the

sake of correspondence. Ultimately, of course, what was once possible can

only become possible a second time on the Pythagorean theory, that when the

heavenly  bodies  are  in  the  same  position  again,  the  events  on  earth  are

reproduced to the smallest detail; so when the stars have a certain relation, a

Stoic  and  an  Epicurean  will  form  a  conspiracy  to  murder  Caesar,  and  a

different  conjunction  will  show  another  Columbus  discovering  America.

Only if the earth always began its drama again after the fifth act, and it were

certain that the same interaction of motives, the same deus ex machina the

same catastrophe would occur at particular intervals, could the man of action

venture to look for the whole archetypic truth in monumental history, to see

each fact fully set out in its uniqueness: it would not probably be before the

astronomers  became  astrologers  again.  Till  then  monumental  history  will

never be able to have complete truth; it will always bring together things that

are incompatible and generalise them into compatibility, will always weaken

the differences of motive and occasion. Its object is to depict effects at the

expense of the causes-"monumentally," that is, as examples for imitation: it

turns aside, as far as it may, from reasons, and might be called with far less

exaggeration a collection of "effects in themselves," than of events that will

have an effect on all ages. The events of war or religion cherished in our

popular celebrations are such "effects in themselves"; it is these that will not

let  ambition  sleep,  and  lie  like  amulets  on  the  bolder  hearts-not  the  real

historical nexus of cause and effect, which, rightly understood, would only

prove that nothing quite similar could ever be cast again from the dice-boxes

of fate and the future.

  As long as the soul of history is found in the great impulse that it gives to

a  powerful  spirit,  as  long  as  the  past  is  principally  used  as  a  model  for

imitation, it is always in danger of being a little altered and touched up, and

brought nearer to fiction. Sometimes there is no possible distinction between

a "monumental" past and a mythical romance, as the same motives for action

can be gathered from the one world as the other. If this monumental methodof surveying the past dominate the others,-the antiquarian and the critical,-the

past itself suffers wrong. Whole tracts of it are forgotten and despised; they

flow away like a dark unbroken river, with only a few gaily coloured islands

of fact rising above it. There is something beyond nature in the rare figures

that  become  visible,  like  the  golden  hips  that  his  disciples  attributed  to

Pythagoras. Monumental history lives by false analogy; it entices the brave to

rashness,  and  the  enthusiastic  to  fanaticism  by  its  tempting  comparisons.

Imagine  this  history  in  the  hands  -and  the  head-of  a  gifted  egoist  or  an

inspired scoundrel; kingdoms will be overthrown, princes murdered, war and

revolution  let  loose,  and  the  number  of  "effects  in  themselves"-in  other

words, effects without sufficient cause-increased. So much for the harm done

by monumental history to the powerful men of action, be they good or bad;

but what if the weak and the inactive take it as their servant-or their master!

Consider the simplest and commonest example, the inartistic or half artistic

natures whom a monumental history provides with sword and buckler. They

will  use  the  weapons  against  their  hereditary  enemies,  the  great  artistic

spirits, who alone can learn from that history the one real lesson, how to live,

and embody what they have learnt in noble action. Their way is obstructed,

their free air darkened by the idolatrous-and conscientious-dance round the

half understood monument of a great past. "See, that is the true and real art,"

we seem to hear: "of what use are these aspiring little people of to-day?" The

dancing crowd has apparently the monopoly of "good taste": for the creator is

always at a disadvantage compared with the mere looker-on, who never put a

hand to the work; just as the arm-chair politician has ever had more wisdom

and  foresight  than  the  actual  statesman.  But  if  the  custom  of  democratic

suffrage and numerical majorities be transferred to the realm of art, and the

artist put on his defence before the court of aesthetic dilettanti, you may take

your oath on his condemnation; although, or rather because, his judges had

proclaimed solemnly the canon of "monumental art," the art that has "had an

effect on all ages," according to the official definition. In their eyes no need

nor inclination nor historical authority is in favour of the art which is not yet

"monumental" because it is contemporary. Their instinct tells them that art

can be slain by art: the monumental will never be reproduced, and the weight

of  its  authority  is  invoked  from  the  past  to  make  it  sure.  They  are

connoisseurs of art, primarily because they wish to kill art; they pretend to be

physicians, when their real idea is to dabble in poisons. They develop their

tastes to a point of perversion, that they may be able to show a reason forcontinually rejecting all the nourishing artistic fare that is offered them. For

they do not want greatness, to arise: their method is to say, "See, the great

thing is already here!" In reality they care as little about the great thing that is

already here, as that which is about to arise: their lives are evidence of that.

Monumental history is the cloak under which their hatred of present power

and greatness masquerades as an extreme admiration of the past: the real

meaning of this way of viewing history is disguised as its opposite; whether

they wish it or no, they are acting as though their motto were, "let the dead

bury the-living." Each of "the three kinds of history will only flourish in one

ground and climate: otherwise it grows to a noxious weed. If the man who

will produce something great, have need of the past, he makes himself its

master by means of monumental history: the man who can rest content with

the traditional and venerable, uses the past as an "antiquarian historian": and

only he whose heart is oppressed by an instant need, and who will cast the

burden off at any price, feels the want of "critical history," the history that

judges  and  condemns.  There  is  much  harm  wrought  by  wrong  and

thoughtless planting: the critic without the need, the antiquary without piety,

the knower of the great deed who cannot be the doer of it, are plants that have

grown to weeds, they are torn from their native soil and therefore degenerate.

  Secondly, history is necessary to the man of conservative and reverent

nature, who looks back to the origins of his existence with love and trust;

through it, he gives thanks for life. He is careful to preserve what survives

from ancient days, and will reproduce the conditions of his own upbringing

for those who come after him; thus he does life a service. The possession of

his ancestors' furniture changes its meaning in his soul: for his soul is rather

possessed by it. All that is small and limited, mouldy and obsolete, gains a

worth and inviolability of its own from the conservative and reverent soul of

the antiquary migrating into it, and building a secret nest there. The history of

his town becomes the history of himself; he looks on the walls, the turreted

gate, the town council, the fair, as an illustrated diary of his youth, and sees

himself in it all-his strength, industry, desire, reason, faults and follies. "Here

one could live," he says, "as one can live here now-and will go on living; for

we are tough folk, and will not be uprooted in the night." And so, with his

"we,"  he  surveys  the  marvellous  individual  life  of  the  past  and  identifies

himself with the spirit of the house, the family and the city. He greets the soul

of his people from afar as his own, across the dim and troubled centuries: his

gifts and his virtues lie in such power of feeling and divination, his scent of ahalf-vanished trail, his instinctive correctness in reading the scribbled past,

and understanding at once its palimpsests-nay, its polypsests. Goethe stood

with such thoughts before the monument of Erwin von Steinbach: the storm

of his feeling rent the historical cloud-veil that hung between them, and he

saw  the  German  work  for  the  first  time  "coming  from  the  stern,  rough,

German  soul."  This  was  the  road  that  the  Italians  of  the  Renaissance

travelled, the spirit that reawakened the ancient Italic genius in their poets to

"a wondrous echo of the immemorial lyre," as Jacob Burckhardt says. But the

greatest  value  of  this  antiquarian  spirit  of  reverence  lies  in  the  simple

emotions of pleasure and content that it lends to the drab, rough, even painful

circumstances  of  a  nation's  or  individual's  life:  Niebuhr  confesses  that  he

could live happily on a moor among free peasants with a history, and would

never  feel  the  want  of  art.  How  could  history  serve  life  better  than  by

anchoring the less gifted races and peoples to the homes and customs of their

ancestors, and keeping them from ranging far afield in search of better, to

find only struggle and competition? The influence that ties men down to the

same companions and circumstances, to the daily round of toil, to their bare

mountain-side,-seems  to  be  selfish  and  unreasonable:  but  it  is  a  healthy

unreason and of profit to the community; as every one knows who has clearly

realised  the  terrible  consequences  of  mere  desire  for  migration  and

adventure,-perhaps in whole peoples,-or who watches the destiny of a nation

that  has  lost  confidence  in  its  earlier  days,  and  is  given  up  to  a  restless

cosmopolitanism and an unceasing desire for novelty. The feeling of the tree

that  clings  to  its  roots,  the  happiness  of  knowing  one's  growth  to  be  not

merely arbitrary and fortuitous, but the in- heritance, the fruit and blossom of

a past, that does not merely justify but crown the present-this is what we

nowadays prefer to call the real historical sense. These are not the conditions

most favourable to reducing the past to pure science: and we see here too, as

we saw in the case of monumental history, that the past itself suffers when

history serves life and is directed by its end. To vary the metaphor, the tree

feels its roots better than it can see them : the greatness of the feeling is

measured by the greatness and strength of the visible branches. The tree may

be wrong here; how far more wrong will it be in regard to the whole forest,

which it only knows and feels so far as it is hindered or helped by it, and not

otherwise! The antiquarian sense of a man, a city or a nation has always a

very limited field. Many things are not noticed at all; the others are seen in

isolation, as through a microscope. There is no measure: equal importance isgiven to everything, and therefore too much to anything. For the things of the

past are never viewed in their true perspective or receive their just value; but

value and perspective change with the individual or the nation that is looking

back on its past. There is always the danger here, that everything ancient will

be regarded as equally venerable, and, everything without this respect for

antiquity, like a new spirit, rejected as an enemy. The Greeks themselves

admitted the archaic style of plastic art by the side of the freer and greater

style; and later, did not merely tolerate the pointed nose and the cold mouth,

but made them even a canon of taste. If the judgment of a people harden in

this way, and history's service to the past life be to undermine a further and

higher life; if the historical sense no longer preserve life, but mummify it:

then the tree dies, unnaturally, from the top downwards, and at last the roots

themselves wither. Antiquarian history degenerates from the moment tha,t it

no longer gives a soul and inspiration to the fresh life of the present. The

spring  of  piety  is  dried  up,  but  the  learned  habit  persists  without  it  and

revolves complaisantly round its own centre. The horrid spectacle is seen of

the mad collector raking over all the dust-heaps of the past. He breathes a

mouldy air; the antiquarian habit may degrade a considerable talent, a real

spiritual need in him, to a mere insatiable curiosity for everything old: he

often sinks so low as to be satisfied with any food, and greedily devour all the

scraps that fall from the bibliographical table. Even if this degeneration do

not  take  place,  and  the  foundation  be  not  withered  on  which  antiquarian

history can alone take root with profit to life: yet there are dangers enough, if

it become too powerful and invade the territories of the other methods. It only

understands  how  to  preserve  life,  not  to  create  it;  and  thus  always

undervalues  the  present  growth,  having,  unlike  monumental  history,  no

certain instinct for it. Thus it hinders the mighty impulse to a new deed and

paralyses the doer, who must always, as doer, be grazing some piety or other.

The fact that has grown old carries with it a demand for its own immortality.

For when one considers the life-history of such an ancient fact, the amount of

reverence paid to it for generations-whether it be a custom, a religious creed,

or a political principle,-it seems presumptuous, even impious, to replace it by

a new fact, and the ancient congregation of pieties by a new piety. Here we

see clearly how necessary a third way of looking at the past is to man, beside

the other two. This is the "critical" way; which is also in the service of life.

Man must have the strength to break up the past; and apply it too, in order to

live.  He  must  bring  the  past  to  the  bar  of  judgment,  interrogate  itremorselessly, and finally condemn It. Every past is worth condemning: this

is the rule in mortal affairs, which always contain a large measure of human

power and human weakness. It is not justice that sits in judgment here; nor

mercy that proclaims the verdict; but only life, the dim, driving force that

insatiably desires-itself. Its sentence is always unmerciful, always unjust, as it

never flows from a pure fountain of knowledge: though it would generally

turn out the same, if Justice herself delivered it. "For everything that is born

is worthy of being destroyed: better were it then that nothing should be born."

It  requires  great  strength  to  be  able  to  live  and  forget  how  far  life  and

injustice are one. Luther himself once said that the world only arose by an

oversight of God; if he had ever dreamed of heavy ordnance, he would never

have created it. The same life that needs forgetfulness, needs sometimes its

destruction; for should the injustice of some- thing ever become obvious-a

monopoly, a caste, a dynasty for example-the thing deserves to fall. Its past is

critically examined, the knife put to its roots, and all the "pieties" are grimly

trodden under foot. The process is always dangerous, even for life; and the

men or the times that serve life in this way, by judging and annihilating the

past, are always dangerous to themselves and others. For as we are merely the

resultant of previous generations, we are also the resiftfanT of their errors,

passions, and crimes: it is impossible to shake off this chain. Though we

condemn the errors and think we have escaped them, we cannot escape the

fact that we spring from them. At best, it comes to a conflict between our

innate, inherited nature and our knowledge, between a stern, new discipline

and an ancient tradition; and we plant a new way of life, a new instinct, a

second nature, that withers the first. It is an attempt to gain a past a posteriori

from which we might spring, as against that from which we do spring; always

a dangerous attempt, as it is difficult to find a limit to the denial of the past,

and the second natures are generally weaker than the first. We stop too often

at knowing the good without doing it, because we also know the better but

cannot  do  it.  Here  and  there  the  victory  is  won,  which  gives  a  strange

consolation to the fighters, to those who use critical history for the sake of

life. The consolation is the knowledge that this "first nature" was once a

second, and that every conquering "second nature" becomes a first.

  This is how history can serve life. Every man and nation needs a certain

knowledge of the past, whether it be through monumental, antiquarian, or

critical history, according to his objects, powers, and necessities. The need is

not that of the mere thinkers who only look on at life, or the few who desireknowledge and can only be satisfied with knowledge; but it has always a

reference to the end of life, and is under its absolute rule and direction. This

is the natural relation of an age, a culture and a people to history; hunger is its

source,  necessity  its  norm,  the  inner  plastic  power  assigns  its  limits.  The

knowledge of the past is only desired for the service of the future and the

present, not to weaken the present or undermine a living future. All this is as

simple as truth itself, and quite convincing to any one who is not in the toils

of "historical deduction." And now to take a quick glance at our time! We fly

back in astonishment. The clearness, naturalness, and purity of the connection

between life and history has vanished; and in what a maze of exaggeration

and contradiction do we now see the problem! Is the guilt ours who see it, or

have life and history really altered their conjunction and an inauspicious star

risen between them? Others may prove we have seen falsely; I am merely

saying what we believe we see. There is such a star, a bright and lordly star,

and the conjunction is really altered-by science, and the demand for history to

be a science. Life is no more dominant, and knowledge of the past no longer

its thrall: boundary marks are overthrown and everything bursts its limits.

The perspective of events is blurred, and the blur extends through their whole

immeasurable course. No generation has seen such a panoramic comedy as is

shown by the "science of universal evolution," history; that shows it with the

dangerous audacity of its motto-"Fiat veritas, pereat vita."

  Let me give a picture of the spiritual events in the soul of the modern

man.  Historical  knowledge  streams  on  him  from  sources  that  are

inexhaustible,  strange  incoherencies  come  together,  memory  opens  all  its

gates and yet is never open wide enough, nature busies herself to receive all

the foreign guests, to honour them and put them in their places. But they are

at war with each other: violent measures seem necessary, in order to escape

destruction  one's  self.  It  becomes  second  nature  to  grow  gradually

accustomed to this irregular and stormy home-life, though this second nature

is  unquestionably  weaker,  more  restless,  more  radically  unsound  than  the

first. The modern man carries inside him an enormous heap of indigestible

knowledge-stones that occasionally rattle together in his body, as the fairy-

tale has it. And the rattle reveals the the most striking characteristic of these

modern  men,  the  opposition  of  something  inside  them  to  which  nothing

external corresponds; and the reverse. The ancient nations knew nothing of

this. Knowledge, taken in excess without hunger, even contrary to desire, has

no more the effect of transforming the external life; and remains hidden in achaotic inner world that the modern man has a curious pride in calling his

"real personality." He has the substance, he says, and only wants the form ;

but this is quite an unreal opposition in a living thing. Our modern culture is

for that reason not a living one, because it cannot be understood without that

opposition. In other words, it is not a real culture but a kind of knowledge

about  culture,  a  complex  of  various  thoughts  and  feelings  about  it,  from

which no decision as to its direction can come. Its real motive force that

issues in visible action is often no more than a mere convention, a wretched

imitation, or even a shameless caricature. The man probably feels like the

snake that has swallowed a rabbit whole and lies still in the sun, avoiding all

movement not absolutely necessary. The "inner life" is now the only thing

that matters to education, and all who see it hope that the education may not

fail by being too indigestible. Imagine a Greek meeting it; he would observe

that for modern men "education" and "historical education" seem to mean the

same thing, with the difference that the one phrase is longer. And if he spoke

of his own theory, that a man can be very well educated without any history

at all, people would shake their heads and think they had not heard aright.

The Greeks, the famous people of a past still near to us, had the "unhistorical

sense" strongly developed in the period of their greatest power. If a typical

child of his age were transported to that world by some enchantment, he

would  probably  find  the  Greeks  very  "uneducated."  And  that  discovery

would betray the closely guarded secret of modern culture to the laughter of

the world. For we moderns have nothing of our own. We only become worth

notice  by  filling  ourselves  to  overflowing  with  foreign  customs,  arts,

philosophies, religions and sciences: we are wandering encyclopaedias, as an

ancient Greek who had strayed into our time would probably call us. But the

only value of an encyclopaedia lies in the inside, in the contents, not in what

is written outside, in the binding or the wrapper. And so the whole of modern

culture is essentially internal; the bookbinder prints something like this on the

cover: "Manual of internal culture for external barbarians." The opposition of

inner  and  outer  makes  the  outer  side  still  more  barbarous,  as  it  would

naturally be, when the outward growth of a rude people merely developed its

primitive inner needs. For what means has nature of repressing too great a

luxuriance from without? Only one,-to be affected by it as little as possible,

to set it aside and stamp it out at the first opportunity. And so we have the

custom of no longer taking real things seriously, we get the feeble personality

on which the real and the permanent make so little impression. Men becomeat  last  more  careless  and  accommodating  in  external  matters,  and  the

considerable cleft between substance and form is widened; until they have no

longer any feeling for barbarism, if only their memories be kept continually

titillated, and there flow a constant stream of new things to be known, that

can be neatly packed up in the cupboards of their memory. The culture of a

people as against this barbarism, can be, I think, described with justice as the

"unity of artistic style in every outward expression of the people's life." This

must  not  be  misunderstood,  as  though  it  were  merely  a  question  of  the

opposition between barbarism and "fine style." The people that can be called

cultured, must be in a real sense a living unity, and not be miserably cleft

asunder into form and substance. If one wish to promote a people's culture,

let him try to promote this higher unity first, and work for the destruction of

the modern educative system for the sake of a true education. Let him dare to

consider how the health of a people that has been destroyed by history may

be restored, and how it may recover its instincts with its honour. I am only

speaking, directly, about the Germans of the present day, who have had to

suffer  more  than  other  people  from  the  feebleness  of  personality  and  the

opposition  of  substance  and  form.  "Form"  generally  implies  for  us  some

convention, disguise or hypocrisy, and if not hated, is at any rate not loved.

We have an extraordinary fear of both the word convention and the thing.

This fear drove the German from the French school; for he wished to become

more natural, and therefore more German. But he seems to have come to a

false conclusion with his "therefore." First he ran away from his school of

convention, and went by any road he liked: he has come ultimately to imitate

voluntarily  in  a  slovenly  fashion,  what  he  imitated  painfully  and  often

successfully before. So now the lazy fellow lives under French conventions

that are actually incorrect: his manner of walking shows it, his conversation

and  dress,  his  general  way  of  life.  In  the  belief  that  he  was  returning  to

Nature, he merely followed caprice and comfort, with the smallest possible

amount  of  self-control.  Go  through  any  German  town;  you  will  see

conventions  that  are  nothing  but  the  negative  aspect  of  the  national

characteristics of foreign states. Everything is colourless, worn out, shoddy

and ill-copied. Every one acts at his own sweet will-which is not a strong or

serious will-on laws dictated by the universal rush and the general desire for

comfort. A dress that made no head ache in its inventing and wasted no time

in  the  making,  borrowed  from  foreign  models  and  imperfectly  copied,  is

regarded as an important contribution to German fashion. The sense of formis ironically disclaimed by the people-for they have the "sense of substance":

they are famous for their cult of "inwardness." But there is also a famous

danger in their "inwardness": the internal substance cannot be seen from the

outside, and so may one day take the opportunity of vanishing, and no one

notice its absence, any more than its presence before. One may think the

German people to be very far from this danger: yet the foreigner will have

some  warrant  for  his  reproach  that  our  inward  life  is  too  weak  and  ill-

organised to provide a form and external expression for itself. It may in rare

cases show itself finely receptive, earnest and powerful, richer perhaps than

the inward life of other peoples: but, taken as a whole, it remains weak, as all

its fine threads are not tied together in one strong knot. The visible action is

not  the  self-manifestation  of  the  inward  life,  but  only  a  weak  and  crude

attempt of a single thread to make a show of representing the whole. And

thus the German is not to be judged on any one action, for the individual may

be as completely obscure after it as before. He must obviously be measured

by his thoughts and feelings, which are now expressed in his books; if only

the books did not, more than ever, raise the doubt whether the famous inward

life is still really sitting in its inaccessible shrine. It might one day vanish and

leave behind it only the external life,-with its vulgar pride and vain servility,-

to mark the German. Fearful thought!-as fearful as if the inward life still sat

there, painted and rouged and disguised, become a play-actress or something

worse; as his theatrical experience seems to have taught the quiet observer

Grillparzer,  standing  aside  as  he  did  from  the  main  press.  "We  feel  by

theory," he says. "We hardly know any more how our contemporaries give

expression to their feelings: we make them use gestures that are impossible

nowadays. Shakespeare has spoilt us moderns." This is a single example, its

general application perhaps too hastily assumed. But how terrible it would be

were that generalisation justified before our eyes! There would be then a note

of despair in the phrase, "We Germans feel by theory, we are all spoilt by

history;"-a phrase that would cut at the roots of any hope for a future national

culture. For every hope of that kind grows from the belief in the genuineness

and immediacy of German feeling, from the belief in an untarnished inward

life. Where is our hope or belief, when its spring is muddied, and the inward

quality has learned gestures and dances and the use of cosmetics, has learned

to express itself "with due reflection in abstract terms," and gradually to lose

itself? And how should a great productive spirit exist among a nation that is

not sure of its inward unity and is divided into educated men whose inner lifehas been drawn from the true path of education, and uneducated men whose

inner life cannot be approached at all? How should it exist, I say, when the

people has lost its own unity of feeling, and knows that the feeling of the part

calling  itself  the  educated  part  and  claiming  the  right  of  controlling  the

artistic spirit of the nation, is false and hypocritical ? Here and there the

judgment and taste of individuals may be higher and finer than the rest, but

that is no compensation: it tortures a man to have to speak only to one section

and be no longer in sympathy with his people. He would rather bury his

treasure now, in disgust at the vulgar patronage of a class, though his heart be

filled with tenderness for all. The instinct of the people can no longer meet

him  half-way;  it  is  useless  for  them  to  stretch  their  arms  out  to  him  in

yearning. What remains but to turn his quickened hatred against the ban,

strike at the barrier raised by the so-called culture, and condemn as judge

what blasted and degraded him as a living man and a source of life? He takes

a profound insight into fate in exchange for the godlike desire of creation and

help,  and  ends  his  days  as  a  lonely  philosopher,  with  the  wisdom  of

disillusion. It is the painfullest comedy: he who sees it will feel a sacred

obligation on him, and say to himself,-"Help must come: the higher unity in

the nature and soul of a people must be brought back, the cleft between inner

and outer must again disappear under the hammer of necessity." But to what

means can he look? What remains to him now but his knowledge? He hopes

to  plant  the  feeling  of  a  need,  by  speaking  from  the  breadth  of  that

knowledge, giving it freely with both hands. From the strong need the strong

action may one day arise. And to leave no doubt of the instance I am taking

of the need and the knowledge, my testimony shall stand, that it is German

unity in, its highest sense which is the goal of our endeavour, far more than

political  union:  it  is  the  unity  of  the  German  spirit  and  life  after  the

annihilation of the antagonism between form and substance, inward life and

convention. 5

  An excess of history seems to be an enemy to the life of a time, and

dangerous in five ways. Firstly, the contrast of inner and outer is emphasised

and  personality  weakened.  Secondly,  the  time  comes  to  imagine  that  it

possesses the rarest of virtues, justice, to a higher degree than any other time.

Thirdly, the instincts of a nation are thwarted, the maturity of the individual

arrested no less than that of the whole. Fourthly, we get the belief in the old

age of mankind, the belief, at all times harmful, that we are late survivals,

mere Epigoni. Lastly, an age reaches a dangerous condition of irony withregard  to  itself,  and  the  still  more  dangerous  state  of  cynicism,  when  a

cunning egoistic theory of action is matured that maims and at last destroys

the vital strength. To return to the first point: the modern man suffers from a

weakened  personality.  The  Roman  of  the  Empire  ceased  to  be  a  Roman

through the contemplation of the world that lay at his feet; he lost himself in

the crowd of foreigners that streamed into Rome, and degenerated amid the

cosmopolitan carnival of arts, worships and moralities. It is the same with the

modern man, who is continually having a world-panorama unrolled before

his  eyes  by  his  historical  artists.  He  is  turned  into  a  restless,  dilettante

spectator, and arrives at a condition when even great wars and revolutions

cannot affect him beyond the moment. The war is hardly at an end and it is

already converted into thousands of copies of printed matter, and will be soon

served up as the latest means of tickling the jaded palates of the historical

gourmets.  It  seems  impossible  for  a  strong  full  chord  to  be  prolonged,

however  powerfully  the  strings  are  swept:  it  dies  away  again  the  next

moment in the soft and strength-less echo of history. In ethical language, one

never succeeds in staying on a height; your deeds are sudden crashes, and not

a long roll of thunder. One may bring the greatest and most marvellous thing

to perfection; it must yet go down to Orcus unhonoured and unsung. For art

flies away when you are roofing your deeds with the historical awning. The

man who wishes to understand everything in a moment, when he ought to

grasp  the  unintelligible  as  the  sublime  by  a  long  struggle,  can  be  called

intelligent only in the sense of Schiller's epigram on the "reason of reasonable

men." There is something the child sees that he does not see; something the

child hears that he does not hear; and this something is the most important

thing of all. Because he does not understand it, his understanding is more

childish than the child's and more simple than simplicity itself; in spite of the

many clever wrinkles on his parchment face, and the masterly play of his

fingers in unravelling the knots. He has lost or destroyed his instinct ; he can

no longer trust the "divine animal" and let the reins hang loose, when his

understanding fails him and his way lies through the desert. His individuality

is shaken, and left without any sure belief in itself; it sinks into its own inner

being, which only means here the disordered chaos of what it has learned,

which will never express itself externally, being mere dogma that cannot turn

to life. Looking further, we see how the banishment of instinct by history has

turned men to shades and abstractions: no one ventures to show a personality,

but masks himself as a man of culture, a savant, poet or politician. If one takehold of these masks, believing he has to do with a serious thing and not a

mere puppet-show-for they all have an appearance of seriousness-he will find

nothing  but  rags  and  coloured  streamers  in  his  hands.  He  must  deceive

himself  no  more,  but  cry  aloud,  "Off  with  your  jackets,  or  be  what  you

seem!" A man of the royal stock of seriousness must no longer be a Don

Quixote, for he has better things to do than to tilt at such pretended realities.

But he must always keep a sharp look about him, call his "Halt! who goes

there?" to all the shrouded figures, and tear the masks from their faces. And

see the result! One might have thought that history encouraged men above all

to be honest, even if it were only to be honest fools : this used to be its effect,

but is so no longer. Historical education and the uniform frock-coat of the

citizen are both dominant at the same time. While there has never been such a

full-throated chatter about "free personality," personalities can be seen no

more (to say nothing of free ones); but merely men in uniform, with their

coats anxiously pulled over their ears. Individuality has withdrawn itself to its

recesses; it is seen no more from the outside, which makes one doubt if it be

possible to have causes without effects. Or will a race of eunuchs prove to be

necessary to guard the historical harem of the world? We can understand the

reason for their aloofness very well. Does it not seem as if their task were to

watch over history to see that nothing comes out except other histories, but

no deed that might be historical; to prevent personalities becoming "free,"

that is, sincere towards themselves and others, both in word and deed? Only

through this sincerity will the inner need and misery of the modern man be

brought to the light, and art and religion come as true helpers in the place of

that sad hypocrisy of convention and masquerade, to plant a common culture

which will answer to real necessities, and not teach, as the present "liberal

education" teaches, to tell lies about these needs, and thus become a walking

lie one's self. In such an age, that suffers from its "liberal education," how

unnatural,  artificial  and  unworthy  will  be  the  conditions  under  which  the

sincerest of all sciences, the holy naked goddess Philosophy, must exist! She

remains in such a world of compulsion and outward conformity, the subject

of the deep monologue of the lonely wanderer or the chance prey of any

hunter, the dark secret of the chamber or the daily talk of the old men and

children at the university. No one dare fulfil the law of philosophy in himself;

no one lives philosophically, with that single-hearted virile faith that forced

one  of  the  olden  time  to  bear  himself  as  a  Stoic,  wherever  he  was  and

whatever he did, if he had once sworn allegiance to the Stoa. All modernphilosophising  is  political  or  official,  bound  down  to  be  a  mere

phantasmagoria  of  learning  by  our  modern  governments,  churches,

universities, moralities and cowardices: it lives by sighing "if only . . ." and

by knowing that "it happened once upon a time. . . ." Philosophy has no place

in  historical  education,  if  it  will  be  more  than  the  knowledge  that  lives

indoors, and can have no expression in action. Were the modern man once

courageous and determined, and not merely such an indoor being even in his

hatreds, he would banish philosophy. At present he is satisfied with modestly

covering  her  nakedness.  Yes,  men  think,  write,  print,  speak  and  teach

philosophically: so much is permitted them. It is only otherwise in action, in

"life."  Only  one  thing  is  permitted  there,  and  everything  else  quite

impossible: such are the orders of historical education. "Are these human

beings,"  one  might  ask,  "or  only  machines  for  thinking,  writing  and

speaking?"  Goethe  says  of  Shakespeare:  "No  one  has  more  despised

correctness of costume than he: he knows too well the inner costume that all

men wear alike. You hear that he describes Romans wonderfully; I do not

think so: they are flesh-and-blood Englishmen; but at any rate they are men

from top to toe, and the Roman toga sits well on them." Would it be possible,

I wonder, to represent our present literary and national heroes, officials and

politicians  as  Romans?  I  am  sure  it  would  not,  as  they  are  no  men,  but

incarnate compendia, abstractions made concrete. If they have a character of

their own, it is so deeply sunk that it can never rise to the light of day: if they

are men, they are only men to a physiologist. To all others they are something

else, not men, not "beasts or gods," but historical pictures of the march of

civilisation,  and  nothing  but  pictures  and  civilisation,  form  without  any

ascertainable substance, bad form unfortunately, and uniform at that. And in

this  way  my  thesis  is  to  be  understood  and  considered:  "only  strong

personalities can endure history, the weak are extinguished by it." History

unsettles the feelings when they are not powerful enough to measure the past

by themselves. The man who dare no longer trust himself, but asks history

against his will for advice "how he ought to feel now," is insensibly turned by

his timidity into a play-actor, and plays a part, or generally many parts, very

badly therefore and superficially. Gradually all connection ceases between

the man and his historical subjects. We see noisy little fellows measuring

themselves with the Romans as though they were like them: they burrow in

the remains of the Greek poets, as if these were corpora for their dissection-

and as vilia as their own well-educated corpora might be. Suppose a man isworking at Democritus. The question is always on my tongue, why precisely

Democritus? Why not Heraclitus, or Philo, or Bacon, or Descartes? And then,

why a philosopher? Why not a poet or orator? And why especially a Greek?

Why not an Englishman or a Turk? Is not the past large enough to let you

find  some  place  where  you  may  disport  yourself  without  becoming

ridiculous? But, as I said, they are a race of eunuchs: and to the eunuch one

woman is the same as another, merely a woman, "woman in herself," the

Ever-unapproachable. And it is indifferent what they study, if history itself

always remain beautifully "objective" to them, as men, in fact, who could

never make history themselves. And since the Eternal Feminine could never

"draw you upward, you draw it down to you, and being neuter yourselves,

regard  history  as  neuter  also.  But  in  order  that  no  one  may  take  my

comparison of history and the Eternal Feminine too seriously, I will say at

once that I hold it, on the contrary, to be the Eternal Masculine: I only add

that  for  those  who  are  "historically  trained"  throughout,  it  must  be  quite

indifferent which it is; for they are themselves neither man nor woman, nor

even hermaphrodite, but mere neuters, or, in more philosophic language, the

Eternal Objective, If the personality be once be emptied of its subjectivity,

and come to what men call an "objective" condition, nothing can have any

more effect on it. Something good and true may be done, in action, poetry or

music: but the hollow culture of the day will look beyond the work and ask

the history of the author. If the author have already created something, our

historian will set out clearly the past and the probable future course of his

development, he will put him with others and compare them, and separate by

analysis the choice of his material and his treatment; he will wisely sum the

author  up  and  give  him  general  advice  for  his  future  path.  The  most

astonishing  works  may  be  created;  the  swarm  of  historical  neuters  will

always  be  in  their  place,  ready  to  consider  the  author  through  their  long

telescopes. The echo is heard at once: but always in the form of "criticism,"

though the critic never dreamed of the work's possibility a moment before. It

never comes to have an influence, but only a criticism: and the criticism itself

has  no  influence,  but  only  breeds  another  criticism.  And  so  we  come  to

consider the fact of many critics as a mark of influence, that of few or none as

a mark of failure. Actually everything remains in the old condition, even in

the presence of such "influence": men talk a little while of a new thing, and

then of some other new thing, and in the meantime they do what they have

always done. The historical training of our critics prevents their having aninfluence in the true sense, an influence on life and action. They put their

blotting  paper  on  the  blackest  writing,  and  their  thick  brushes  over  the

gracefullest  designs;  these  they  call  "corrections";-and  that  is  all.  Their

critical pens never cease to fly, for they have lost power over them; they are

driven  by  their  pens  instead  of  driving  them.  The  weakness  of  modern

personality comes out well in the measureless overflow of criticism, in the

want of self-mastery, and in what the Romans called: impotentia]]. 6

  But leaving these weaklings, let us turn rather to a point of strength for

which the modern man is famous. Let us ask the painful question whether he

has the right in virtue of his historical "objectivity" to call himself strong and

just  in  a  higher  degree  than  the  man  of  another  age.  Is  it  true  that  this

objectivity has its source in a heightened sense of the need for justice? Or,

being really an effect of quite other causes, does it only have the appearance

of coming from justice, and really lead to an unhealthy prejudice in favour of

the modern man? Socrates thought it near madness to imagine one possessed

a virtue without really possessing it. Such imagination has certainly more

danger in it than the contrary madness of a positive vice. For of this there is

still a cure; but the other makes a man or a time daily worse, and therefore

more unjust. No one has a higher claim to our reverence than the man with

the feeling and the strength for justice. For the highest and rarest virtues unite

and are lost in it, as an unfathomable sea absorbs the streams that flow from

every  side.  The  hand  of  the  just  man,  who  is  called  to  sit  in  judgment,

trembles no more when it holds the scales: he piles the weights inexorably

against his own side, his eyes are not dimmed as the balance rises and falls,

and his voice is neither hard nor broken when he pronounces the sentence.

Were  he  a  cold  demon  of  knowledge,  he  would  cast  round  him  the  icy

atmosphere  of  an  awful,  superhuman  majesty,  that  we  should  fear,  not

reverence. But he is a man, and has tried to rise from a careless doubt to a

strong certainty, from a gentle tolerance to the imperative "thou must"; from

the rare virtue of magnanimity to the rarest, of justice. He has come to be like

that demon without being more than a poor mortal at the outset; above all, he

has to atone to himself for his humanity and tragically shatter his own nature

on the rock of an impossible virtue.-All this places him on a lonely height as

the most reverend example of the human race. For truth is his aim, not in the

form of cold ineffectual knowledge, but the truth of the judge who punishes

according to law; not as the selfish possession of an individual, but the sacred

authority that removes the boundary stones from all selfish possessions; truth,