over truths. You even crush some to death, there are too many of them. Those

things  that  you  can  grasp,  however,  are  quite  unquestionable  ;  they  are

irrevocable decrees. I alone have the criterion of " truths " in my possession. I

alone can decide. It would seem as if a second consciousness had grown up in

me, as if the " life-will " in me had thrown a light upon the downward path

along which it has been running throughout the ages. The downward path-

hitherto this had been called the road to " Truth." All obscure impulse- "

darkness and dismay "-is at an end, the "good man " was precisely he who

was least aware of the proper way.* And, speaking in all earnestness, no one

before me knew the proper way, the way upwards: only after my time could

men  once  more  find  hope,  life-tasks,  and  roads  mapped  out  that  lead  to

culture- I am the joyful harbinger of this culture. . . . On this account alone I

am also a fatality. 2

  s3

    Immediately after the completion of the above-named work, and without

letting  even  one  day  go  by,  I  tackled  the  formidable  task  of  the

Transvaluation with a supreme feeling of pride which nothing could equal;

and, certain at each moment of my immortality, I cut sign after sign upon

tablets of brass with the sureness of Fate. The Preface came into being on 3rd

September 1888. When, after having written it down, I went out into the open

that morning, I was greeted by the most beautiful day I had ever seen in the

Upper Engadine-clear, glowing with colour, and presenting all the contrasts

and all the intermediary gradations between ice and the south. I left Sils-

Maria  only  on  the  20th  of  September.  I  had  been  forced  to  delay  my

departure owing to floods, and I was very soon, and for some days, the only

visitor in this wonderful spot, on which my gratitude bestows the gift of an

immortal name. After a journey that was full of incidents, and not without

danger to life,- as for instance at Como, which was flooded when I reached it

in the dead of night,-I got to Turin on the afternoon of the 21

  st.  Turin  is  the  only  suitable  place  for  me,  and  it  shall  be  my  home

henceforward. I took the same lodgings as I had occupied in the spring, 6111

  Via  Carlo  Alberto,  opposite  the  mighty  Palazzo  Carignano,  in  which

Vittorio Emanuele was born ; and I had a view of the Piazza Carlo Alberto

and above it across to the hills. Without hesitating, or allowing myself to be

disturbed for a single moment, I returned to my work, only the last quarter of

which had still to be written. On the 30th September, tremendous triumph ;

the seventh day; the leisure of a god on the banks of the Po.* On the sameday, I wrote the Preface to The Twilight of the Idols, the correction of the

proofs of which provided me with recreation during the month of September.

Never  in  my  life  have  I  experienced  such  an  autumn  ;  nor  had  I  ever

imagined that such things were possible on earth-a Claude Lorrain extended

to infinity, each day equal to the last in its wild perfection.

        PART 13 - "THE CASE OF WAGNER" A Musician's Problem"

  s1

  In order to do justice to this essay a man ought to suffer from the fate of

music as from an open wound.-From what do I suffer when I suffer from the

fate of music ? From the fact that music has lost its world-transfiguring, yea-

saying  character-  that  it  is  decadent  music  and  no  longer  the  flute  of

Dionysus. Supposing, however, that the fate of music be as dear to man as his

own life, because joy and suffering are alike bound up with it; then he will

find  this  pamphlet  comparatively  mild  and  full  of  consideration.  To  be

cheerful in such circumstances, and laugh good-naturedly with others at one's

self,-ridendo dicere severum* when the verum dicere would justify every sort

of hardness,-is humanity itself. Who doubts that I, old artilleryman that I am,

would  be  able  if  I  liked  to  point  my  heavy  guns  at  Wagner?-Everything

decisive in this question I kept to myself-I have loved Wagner.-After all, an

attack upon a more than usually subtle " unknown person " whom another

would not have divined so easily, lies in the meaning and path of my life-

task. Oh, I have still quite a number of other " unknown persons " to unmask

besides a Cagliostro of Music ! Above all, I have to direct an attack against

the  German  people,  who,  in  matters  of  the  spirit,  grow  every  day  more

indolent,  poorer  in  instincts,  and  more  honest;  who,  with  an  appetite  for

which they are to be envied, continue to diet themselves on contradictions,

and gulp down " Faith" in company with science, Christian love together with

anti-Semitism, and the will to power (to the " Empire "), dished up with the

gospel  of  the  humble,  without  showing  the  slightest  signs  of  indigestion.

Fancy this absence of party-feeling in the presence of opposites! Fancy this

gastric neutrality and " disinterestedness" ! Behold this sense of justice in the

German palate, which can grant equal rights to all,-which finds everything

tasteful! Without a shadow of a doubt the Germans are idealists. When I was

last  in  Germany,  I  found  German  taste  striving  to  grant  Wagner  and  the

Trumpeter of Sdkkingen * equal rights; while I myself witnessed the attempts

of the people of Leipzig to do honour to one of the most genuine and most

German of musicians,-using German here in the old sense of the word,-a manwho was no mere German of the Empire, the master Heinrich Schiitz, by

founding a Liszt Society, the object of which was to cultivate and spread of

cunning Church music. Without a shadow of doubt the Germans are idealists.

3

  s2

  But here nothing shall stop me from being rude, and from telling the

Germans one or two unpleasant home truths: who else would do it if I did not

?  I  refer  to  their  laxity  in  matters  historical.  Not  only  have  the  Germans

entirely lost the breadth of vision which enables one to grasp the course of

culture and the values of culture; not only are they one and all political (or

Church)  puppets  ;  but  they  have  also  actually  put  a  ban  upon  this  very

breadth of vision. A man must first and foremost be " German," he must

belong to " the race "; then only can he pass judgment upon all values and

lack of values in history-then only can he establish them. . . . To be German

is in itself an argument, " Germany, Germany above all," J is a principle ; the

Germans stand for the "moral order of the universe" in history; compared

with the Roman Empire, they are the upholders of freedom ; compared with

the eighteenth century, they are the restorers of morality, of the " Categorical

Imperative." There is such a thing as the writing of history according to the

lights of Imperial Germany; there is, I fear, anti-Semitic history-there is also

history  written  with  an  eye  to  the  Court,  and  Herr  von  Treitschke  is  not

ashamed  of  himself.  Quite  recently  an  idiotic  opinion  in  historicis,  an

observation of Vischer the Swabian aesthete, since happily deceased, made

the round of the German newspapers as a " truth " to which every German

must  assent.  The  observation  was  this  :  "  The  Renaissance  and  the

Reformation only together constitute a whole-the aesthetic rebirth, and the

moral rebirth." When I listen to such things, I lose all patience, and I feel

inclined, I even feel it my duty, to tell the Germans, for once in a way, all that

they have on their conscience. Every great crime against culture for the last

four centuries lies on their conscience. . . . And always for the same reason,

always owing to their bottomless cowardice in the face of reality, which is

also cowardice in the face of truth ; always owing to the love of falsehood

which has become almost instinctive in them-in short, " idealism." It was the

Germans who caused Europe to lose the fruits, the whole meaning of her last

period  of  greatness-the  period  of  the  Renaissance.  At  a  moment  when  a

higher order of values, values that were noble, that said yea to life, and that

guaranteed a future, had succeeded in triumphing over the opposite values,the values of degeneration, in the very seat of Christianity itself,-and even in

the hearts of those sitting there,-Luther, that cursed monk, not only restored

the Church, but, what was a thousand times worse, restored Christianity, and

at a time too when it lay defeated. Christianity, the Denial of the Will to Live,

exalted to a religion ! Luther was an impossible monk who, thanks to his own

" impossibility," attacked the Church, and in so doing restored it! Catholics

would be perfectly justified in celebrating feasts in honour of Luther, and in

producing festival plays * in his honour. Luther and the " rebirth of morality "

!  May  all  psychology  go  to  the  devil!  Without  a  shadow  of  a  doubt  the

Germans  are  idealists.  On  two  occasions  when,  at  the  cost  of  enormous

courage  and  self-control,  an  upright,  unequivocal,  and  perfectly  scientific

attitude of mind had been attained, the Germans were able to discover back

stairs leading down to the old " ideal" again, compromises between truth and

the " ideal," and, in short, formulae for the right to reject science and to

perpetrate  falsehoods.  Leibniz  and  Kant-these  two  great  breaks  upon  the

intellectual honesty of Europe ! Finally, at a moment when there appeared on

the bridge that spanned two centuries of decadence, a superior force of genius

and will which was strong enough to consolidate Europe and to convert it

into a political and economic unit, with the object of ruling the world, the

Germans,  with  their  Wars  of  Independence,  robbed  Europe  of  the

significance-the marvellous significance, of Napoleon's life. And in so doing

they laid on their conscience everything that followed, everything that exists

to-day,-this sickliness and want of reason which is most opposed to culture,

and which is called Nationalism,-this nevrose nationale from which Europe is

suffering acutely; this eternal subdivision of Europe into petty states, with

politics  on  a  municipal  scale:  they  have  robbed  Europe  itself  of  its

significance,  of  its  reason,-and  have  stuffed  it  into  a  cul-de-sac.  Is  there

anyone except me who knows the way out of this cul-de-sac ? Does anyone

except me know of an aspiration which would be great enough to bind the

people of Europe once more together? 3

  s3

  And after all, why should I not express my suspicions? In my case, too,

the Germans will attempt to make a great fate give birth merely to a mouse.

Up  to  the  present  they  have  compromised  themselves  with  me;  I  doubt

whether the future will improve them. Alas! how happy I should be to prove

a false prophet in this matter! My natural readers and listeners are already

Russians, Scandinavians, and Frenchmen-will they always be the same ? Inthe history of knowledge, Germans are represented only by doubtful names,

they have been able to produce only " unconscious " swindlers (this word

applies to Fichte, Schelling, Schopenhauer, Hegel, and Schleiermacher, just

as well as to Kant or Leibniz; they were all mere intellect in which truth

ultimately got the better of the fraud of four thousand years, reckoned as one

with the German intellect. " German intellect" is my foul air: I breathe with

difficulty in the neighbourhood of this psychological uncleanliness that has

now become instinctive-an uncleanliness which in every word and expression

betrays a German. They have never undergone a seventeenth century of hard

self-examination, as the French have,-a La Rochefoucauld, a Descartes, are a

thousand times more upright than the very first among Germans,-the latter

have not yet had any psychologists. But psychology is almost the standard of

measurement for the cleanliness or uncleanliness of a race. . . . For if a man is

not even clean, how can he be deep ? The Germans are like women, you can

scarcely ever fathom their depths-they haven't any, and that's the end of it.

Thus they cannot even be called shallow. That which is called " deep " in

Germany,  is  precisely  this  instinctive  uncleanliness  towards  one's  self,  of

which I have just spoken : people refuse to be clear in regard to their own

natures. Might I be allowed, perhaps, to suggest the word " German " as an

international epithet denoting this psychological depravity ?-At the moment

of  writing,  for  instance,  the  German  Emperor  is  declaring  it  to  be  his

Christian duty to liberate the slaves in Africa ; among us Europeans, then,

this would be called simply " German." . . . Have the Germans ever produced

even a book that had depth ? They are lacking in the mere idea of what

constitutes a book. I have known scholars who thought that Kant was deep.

At the Court of Prussia I fear that Herr von Treitschke is regarded as deep.

And when I happen to praise Stendhal as a deep psychologist, I have often

been compelled, in the company of German University Professors, to spell

his name aloud. 3

  s4

  And why should I not proceed to the end ? I am fond of clearing the air. It

is even part of my ambition to be considered as essentially a despiser of

Germans. I expressed my suspicions of the German character even at the age

of six-and-twenty (see Thoughts out of Season, vol. ii. pp. 164, 165), -to my

mind the Germans are impossible. When I try to think of the kind of man

who is opposed to me in all my instincts, my mental image takes the form of

a German. The first thing I ask myself when I begin analysing a man, is,whether he has a feeling for distance in him; whether he sees rank, gradation,

and order everywhere between man and man ; whether he makes distinctions;

for this is what constitutes a gentleman. Otherwise he belongs hopelessly to

that open-hearted, open-minded -alas ! and always very good-natured species,

la canaille ! But the Germans are canaille-alas ! they are so good-natured ! A

man lowers himself by frequenting the society of Germans : the German

places everyone on an equal footing. With the exception of my intercourse

with one or two artists, and above all with Richard Wagner, I cannot say that

I have spent one pleasant hour with Germans. Suppose, for one moment, that

the profoundest spirit of all ages were to appear among Germans, then one of

the saviours of the Capitol would be sure to arise and declare that his own

ugly soul was just as great. I can no longer abide this race with which a man

is always in bad company, which has no idea of nuances-woe to me ! I am a

nuance -and which has not esprit in its feet, and cannot even walk withal! In

short, the Germans have no feet at all, they simply have legs. The Germans

have not the faintest idea of how vulgar they are-but this in itself is the acme

of vulgarity,-they are not even ashamed of being merely Germans. They will

have  their  say  in  everything,  they  regard  themselves  as  fit  to  decide  all

questions; I even fear that they have decided about me. My whole life is

essentially a proof of this remark. In vain have I sought among them for a

sign of tact and delicacy towards myself. Among Jews I did indeed find it,

but not among Germans. I am so constituted as to be gentle and kindly to

every one,-I have the right not to draw distinctions,-but this does not prevent

my eyes from being open. I except no one, and least of all my friends,-I only

trust that this has not prejudiced my reputation for humanity among them ?

There are five or six things which I have always made points of honour.

Albeit, the truth remains that for many years I have considered almost every

letter that has reached me as a piece of cynicism. There is more cynicism in

an attitude of goodwill towards me than in any sort of hatred. I tell every

friend to his face that he has never thought it worth his while to study any one

of my writings : from the slightest hints I gather that they do not even know

what  lies  hidden  in  my  books.  And  with  regard  even  to  my  Zarathustra,

which  of  my  friends  would  have  seen  more  in  it  than  a  piece  of

unwarrantable,  though  fortunately  harmless,  arrogance  ?  Ten  years  have

elapsed, and no one has yet felt it a duty to his conscience to defend my name

against  the  absurd  silence  beneath  which  it  has  been  entombed.  It  was  a

foreigner, a Dane, who first showed sufficient keenness of instinct and ofcourage  to  do  this,  and  who  protested  indignantly  against  my  so-called

friends.  At  what  German  University  to-day  would  such  lectures  on  my

philosophy be possible, as those which Dr. Brandes delivered last spring in

Copenhagen, thus proving once more his right to the title psychologist ? For

my part, these things have never caused me any pain; that which is necessary

does not offend me. Amor fati is the core of my nature. This, however, does

not alter the fact that I love irony and even world-historic irony. And thus,

about  two  years  before  hurling  the  destructive  thunderbolt  of  the  Trans-

valuation, which will send the whole of civilisation into convulsions, I sent

my Case of Wagner out into the world. The Germans were given the chance

of blundering and immortalising their stupidity once more on my account,

and they still have just enough time to do it in. And have they fallen in with

my plans ? Admirably ! my dear Germans. Allow me to congratulate you.

                        PART 14 - WHY I AM A DESTINY

  s1

  I KNOW my destiny. There will come a day when my name will recall

the memory of something formidable-a crisis the like of which has never

been known on earth, the memory of the most profound clash of consciences,

and  the  passing  of  a  sentence  upon  all  that  which  theretofore  had  been

believed, exacted, and hallowed. I am not a man, I am dynamite. And with it

all there is nought of the founder of a religion in me. Religions are matters for

the mob; after coming in contact with a religious man, I always feel that I

must wash my hands. ... I require no " believers," it is my opinion that I am

too full of malice to believe even in myself; I never address myself to masses.

I am horribly frightened that one day I shall be pronounced " holy." You will

understand why I publish this book beforehand- it is to prevent people from

wronging me. I refuse to be a saint; I would rather be a clown. Maybe I am a

clown.  And  I  am  notwithstanding,  or  rather  not  notwithstanding,  the

mouthpiece of truth; for nothing more blown-out with falsehood has ever

existed, than a saint. But my truth is terrible: for until now lies have been

called  truth.  The  Transvaluation  of  all  Values,  this  is  my  formula  for

mankind's  greatest  step  towards  coming  to  its  senses-a  step  which  in  me

became  flesh  and  genius.  My  destiny  ordained  that  I  should  be  the  first

decent human being, and that I should feel myself opposed to the falsehood

of millenniums. I was the first to discover truth, and for the simple reason

that I was the first who became conscious of falsehood as falsehood-that is to

say, I smelt it as such. My genius resides in my nostrils. I contradict as no onehas contradicted until now, and am nevertheless the reverse of a negative

spirit. I am the harbinger of joy, the like of which has never existed before; I

have discovered tasks of such lofty greatness that, until my time, no one had

any idea of such things. Mankind can begin to have fresh hopes, only now

that I have lived; Thus, I am necessarily a man of Fate. For when Truth enters

the lists against the falsehood of ages, shocks are bound to ensue, and a spell

of earthquakes, followed by the transposition of hills and valleys, such as the

world has never yet imagined even in its dreams. The concept " politics "

then  becomes  elevated  entirely  to  the  sphere  of  spiritual  warfare.  All  the

mighty realms of the ancient order of society are blown into space-for they

are all based on falsehood : there will be wars, the like of which have never

been seen on earth before. Only from my time and after me will politics on a

large scale exist on earth. 4

  s2

  If you should require a formula for a destiny of this kind that has taken

human form, you will find it in my Zarathustra. " And he who would be a

creator in good and evil-verily, he must first be a destroyer, and break values

into pieces. " Thus the greatest evil belongs unto the greatest good: but this is

the creative good." I am by far the most terrible man that has ever existed ;

but this does not alter the fact that I shall become the most beneficent. I know

the joy of annihilation to a degree which is commensurate with my power to

annihilate. In both cases I obey my Dionysian nature, which knows not how

to  separate  the  negative  deed  from  the  saying  of  yea.  I  am  the  first

immoralist, and in this sense I am essentially the annihilator. 4

  s3

  People have never asked me as they should have done, what the name of

Zarathustra  precisely  meant  in  my  mouth,  in  the  mouth  of  the  first

immoralist; for that which distinguishes this Persian from all others in the

past  is  the  very  fact  that  he  was  the  exact  reverse  of  an  immoralist.

Zarathustra was the first to see in the struggle between good and evil the

essential wheel in the working of things. The translation of morality into the

realm of metaphysics, as force, cause, end-in-itself, is his work. But the very

question suggests its own answer. Zarathustra created this most portentous of

all  errors,-morality;  therefore  he  must  be  the  first  to  expose  it.  Not  only

because he has had longer and greater experience of the subject than any

other thinker,-all history is indeed the experimental refutation of the theory of

the so-called moral order of things,-but because of the more important factthat Zarathustra was the most truthful of thinkers. In his teaching alone is

truthfulness upheld as the highest virtue-that is to say, as the reverse of the

cowardice of the " idealist" who takes to his heels at the sight of reality.

Zarathustra has more pluck in his body than all other thinkers put together.

To tell the truth and to aim straight: that is the first Persian virtue. Have I

made  myself  clear  ?  .  .  .  The  overcoming  of  morality  by  itself,  through

truthfulness, the moralist's overcoming of himself in his opposite-in me-that

is what the name Zarathustra means in my mouth. 4

  s4

  In reality two negations are involved in my title Immoralist. I first of all

deny the type of man that has until now been regarded as the highest-the

good, the kind, and the charitable; and I also deny that kind of morality which

has become recognised and paramount as morality-in-itself-I speak of the

morality of decadence, or, to use a still cruder term, Christian morality. I

would agree to the second of the two negations being regarded as the more

decisive,  for,  reckoned  as  a  whole,  the  over-estimation  of  goodness  and

kindness seems to me already a consequence of decadence, a symptom of

weakness,  and  incompatible  with  any  ascending  and  yea-saying  life.

Negation and annihilation are inseparable from a yea-saying attitude towards

life. Let me halt for a moment at the question of the psychology of the good

man. In order to appraise the value of a certain type of man, the cost of his

maintenance must be calculated,-and the conditions of his existence must be

known. The condition of the existence of the good is falsehood: or, otherwise

expressed, the refusal at any price to see how reality is actually constituted.

The  refusal  to  see  that  this  reality  is  not  so  constituted  as  always  to  be

stimulating beneficent instincts, and still less, so as to suffer at all moments

the intrusion of ignorant and good-natured hands. To consider distress of all

kinds as an objection, as something which must be done away with, is the

greatest nonsense on earth; generally speaking, it is nonsense of the most

disastrous sort, fatal in its stupidity- almost as mad as the will to abolish bad

weather, out of pity for the poor, so to speak. In the great economy of the

whole universe, the terrors of reality (in the passions, in the desires, in the

will  to  power)  are  incalculably  more  necessary  than  that  form  of  petty

happiness which is called " goodness "; it is even needful to practise leniency

in order so much as to allow the latter a place at all, seeing that it is based

upon a falsification of the instincts. I shall have an excellent opportunity of

showing the incalculably calamitous consequences to the whole of history, ofthe  credo  of  optimism,  this  monstrous  offspring  of  the  homines  optimi.

Zarathustra,* the first who recognised that the optimist is just as degenerate

as the pessimist, though perhaps more detrimental, says: " Good men never

speak the truth. False shores and false harbours were you taught by the good.

In the lies of the good were you born and bred. Through the good everything

hath become false and crooked from the roots." Fortunately the world is not

built merely upon those instincts which would secure to the good-natured

herd animal his paltry happiness. To desire everybody to become a " good

man," " a gregarious animal,' " a blue-eyed, benevolent, beautiful soul," or-as

Herbert Spencer wished-a creature of altruism, would mean robbing existence

of its greatest character, castrating man, and reducing humanity to a level of

desiccated Chinese stagnation. And this some have tried to do! It is precisely

this that men called morality. In this sense Zarathustra calls "the good," now "

the  last  men,"  and  anon  "  the  beginning  of  the  end  ";  and  above  all,  he

considers them as the most detrimental kind of men, because they secure their

existence at the cost of Truth and at the cost of the Future. " The good-they

cannot create; they are ever the beginning of the end. " They crucify him who

writes new values on new tables; they sacrifice unto themselves the future;

they crucify the whole future of humanity ! " The good-they are ever the

beginning of the end. " And whatever harm the slanderers of the world may

do, the harm of the good is the most calamitous of all harm." 4

  s5

    Zarathustra, as the first psychologist of the good man, is perforce the

friend of the evil man. When a degenerate kind of man has succeeded to the

highest rank among the human species, his position must have been gained at

the cost of the reverse type-at the cost of the strong man who is certain of life.

When the gregarious animal stands in the glorious rays of the purest virtue,

the exceptional man must be degraded to the rank of the evil. If falsehood

insists  at  all  costs  on  claiming  the  word  "  truth  "  for  its  own  particular

standpoint, the really truthful man must be sought out among the despised.

Zarathustra  allows  of  no  doubt  here;  he  says  that  it  was  precisely  the

knowledge of the good, of the " best," which inspired his absolute horror of

men. And it was out of this feeling of repulsion that he grew the wings which

allowed him to soar into remote futures. He does not conceal the fact that his

type of man is one which is relatively superhuman-especially as opposed to

the " good " man, and that the good and the just would regard his overman as

the devil. " You higher men, on whom my gaze now falls, this is the doubtthat you wake in my breast, and this is my secret laughter: methinks you

would call my overman-the devil! So strange are you in your souls to all that

is great, that the overman would be terrible in your eyes for his goodness." It

is from this passage, and from no other, that you must set out to understand

the goal to which Zarathustra aspires-the kind of man that he conceives sees

reality as it is; he is strong enough for this-he is not estranged or far removed

from it, he is that reality himself, in his own nature can be found all the

terrible  and  questionable  character  of  reality:  only  thus  can  man  have

greatness. 4

  s6

  But I have chosen the title of Immoralist as a surname and as a badge of

honour in yet another sense; I am very proud to possess this name which

distinguishes me from all the rest of mankind. No one until now has felt

Christian  morality  beneath  him;  to  that  end  there  were  needed  height,  a

remoteness of vision, and an abysmal psychological depth, not believed to be

possible until now. Up to the present Christian morality has been the Circe of

all  thinkers-they  stood  at  her  service.  What  man,  before  my  time,  had

descended into the underground caverns from out of which the poisonous

fumes of this ideal-of this slandering of the world -burst forth ? What man

had even dared to suppose that they were underground caverns ? Was a single

one of the philosophers who preceded me a psychologist at all, and not the

very reverse of a psychologist-that is to say, a " superior swindler," an "

Idealist" ? Before my time there was no psychology. To be the first in this

new realm may amount to a curse ; at all events, it is a fatality : for one is also

the first to despise. My danger is the loathing of mankind. 4

  s7

  Have you understood me ? That which defines me, that which makes me

stand apart from the whole of the rest of humanity, is the fact that I unmasked

Christian morality. For this reason I was in need of a word which conveyed

the  idea  of  a  challenge  to  everybody.  Not  to  have  awakened  to  these

discoveries before, struck me as being the sign of the greatest uncleanliness

that mankind has on its conscience, as self-deception become instinctive, as

the fundamental will to be blind to every phenomenon, all causality and all

reality; in fact, as an almost criminal fraud in psychologicis. Blindness in

regard to Christianity is the essence of criminality-for it is the crime against

life.  Ages  and  peoples,  the  first  as  well  as  the  last,  philosophers  and  old

women, with the exception of five or six moments in history (and of myself,the seventh), are all alike in this. Until now the Christian has been the " moral

being," a peerless oddity, and, as " a moral being," he was more absurd, more

vain,  more  thoughtless,  and  a  greater  disadvantage  to  himself,  than  the

greatest despiser of humanity could have deemed possible. Christian morality

is the most malignant form of all falsehood, the actual Circe of humanity :

that which has corrupted mankind. It is not error as error which infuriates me

at  the  sight  of  this  spectacle;  it  is  not  the  millenniums  of  absence  of  "

goodwill," of discipline, of decency, and of bravery in spiritual things, which

betrays itself in the triumph of Christianity; it is rather the absence of nature,

it  is  the  perfectly  ghastly  fact  that  anti-nature  itself  received  the  highest

honours as morality and as law, and remained suspended over man as the

Categorical Imperative. Fancy blundering in this way, not as an individual,

not as a people, but as a whole species ! as humanity! To teach the contempt

of all the principal instincts of life; to posit falsely the existence of a " soul,"

of a " spirit," in order to be able to defy the body ; to spread the feeling that

there is something impure in the very first prerequisite of life-in sex ; to seek

the principle of evil in the profound need of growth and expansion-that is to

say, in severe self-love (the term itself is slanderous) ; and conversely to see a

higher moral value- but what am I talking about ?-I mean the moral value per

se, in the typical signs of decline, in the antagonism of the instincts, in "

selflessness,"  in  the  loss  of  ballast,  in  "  the  suppression  of  the  personal

element," and in " love of one's neighbour " (neigh-bour-itis !). What! is

humanity itself in a state of degeneration ? Has it always been in this state ?

One thing is certain, that you are taught only the values of decadence as the

highest values. The morality of self-renunciation is essentially the morality of

degeneration  ;  the  fact,  "  I  am  going  to  the  dogs,"  is  translated  into  the

imperative," Ye shall all go to the dogs "-and not only into the imperative.

This morality of self-renunciation, which is the only kind of morality that has

been taught until now, betrays the will to nonentity-it denies life to the very

roots. There still remains the possibility that it is not mankind that is in a state

of degeneration, but only that parasitical kind of man-the priest, who, by

means of morality and lies, has climbed up to his position of determinator of

values, who divined in Christian morality his road to power. And, to tell the

truth, this is my opinion. The teachers and leaders of mankind-including the

theologians-  have  been,  everyone  of  them,  decadents:  hence  their

transvaluation of all values into a hostility towards life; hence morality. The

definition of morality ; Morality is the idiosyncrasy of decadents, actuated bya desire to avenge themselves with success upon life. I attach great value to

this definition. 4

  s8

  Have you understood me ? I have not uttered a single word which I had

not  already  said  five  years  ago  through  my  mouthpiece  Zarathustra.  The

unmasking of Christian morality is an event which is unequalled in history, it

is a real catastrophe. The man who throws light upon it is a force majeure, a

fatality; he breaks the history of man into two. Time is reckoned up before

him and after him. The lightning flash of truth struck precisely that which

theretofore had stood highest: he who understands what was destroyed by

that flash should look to see whether he still holds anything in his hands.

Everything which until then was called truth, has been revealed as the most

detrimental,  most  spiteful,  and  most  subterranean  form  of  life  ;  the  holy

pretext, which was the " improvement " of man, has been recognised as a ruse

for  draining  life  of  its  energy  and  of  its  blood.  Morality  conceived  as

Vampirism.  .  .  .  The  man  who  unmasks  morality  has  also  unmasked  the

worth-lessness of the values in which men either believe or have believed ; he

no longer sees anything to be revered in the most venerable man-even in the

types of men that have been pronounced holy; all he can see in them is the

most fatal kind of abortions, fatal, because they fascinate. The concept " God

" was invented as the opposite of the concept life-everything detrimental,

poisonous, and slanderous, and all deadly hostility to life, was bound together

in one horrible unit in Him. The concepts " beyond " and " true world " were

invented in order to depreciate the only world that exists-in order that no goal

or aim, no sense or task, might be left to earthly reality. The concepts " soul,"

" spirit," and last of all the concept " immortal soul," were invented in order

to throw contempt on the body, in order to make it sick and " holy," in order

to cultivate an attitude of appalling levity towards all things in life which

deserve to be treated seriously, i.e. the questions of nutrition and habitation,

of intellectual diet, the treatment of the sick, cleanliness, and weather. Instead

of health, we find the " salvation of the soul"-that is to say, a folie cir-culaire

fluctuating  between  convulsions  and  penitence  and  the  hysteria  of

redemption.  The  concept  "  sin,"  together  with  the  torture  instrument

appertaining to it, which is the concept " free will," was invented in order to

confuse and muddle our instincts, and to render the mistrust of them man's

second nature ! In the concepts " disinterestedness and " self-denial," the

actual signs of decadence are to be found. The allurement of that which isdetrimental,  the  inability  to  discover  one's  own  advantage  and  self-

destruction, are made into absolute qualities, into the " duty," the " holiness,"

and the " divinity " of man. Finally-to keep the worst to the last-by the notion

of the good man, all that is favoured which is weak, ill, botched, and sick-in-

itself, which ought to be wiped out. The law of selection is thwarted, an ideal

is made out of opposition to the proud, well-constituted man, to him who says

yea to life, to him who is certain of the future, and who guarantees the future-

this man is henceforth called the evil one. And all this was believed in as

morality!-Ecrasez I'infame ! 4

  s9

  Have you understood me? Dionysus versus Christ. THE END



                      THE GREEK STATE (POSTHUMOUS)

                          Translated by Maximillian A. Mugge

  Preface to an unwritten book (1871)

  WE moderns have an advantage over the Greeks in two ideas, which are

given as it were as a compensation to a world behaving thoroughly slavishly

and yet at the same time anxiously eschewing the word " slave ": we talk of

the " dignity of man " and of the " dignity of labour." Everybody worries in

order miserably to perpetuate a miserable existence; this awful need compels

man to consuming labour; he (or, more exactly, the human intellect) seduced

by the " Will " now occasionally marvels at labour as something dignified.

However, in order that labour might have a claim on titles of honour, it would

be necessary above all, that Existence itself, to which labour after all is only a

painful means, should have more dignity and value than it appears to have

had, up to the present, to serious philosophies and religions. What else may

we find in the labour-need of all the millions but the impulse to exist at any

price, the same all-powerful impulse by which stunted plants stretch their

roots through earthless rocks !

  Out of this awful struggle for existence only individuals can emerge, and

they are at once occupied with the noble phantoms of artistic culture, lest they

should  arrive  at  practical  pessimism,  which  Nature  abhors  as  her  exact

opposite.  In  the  modern  world,  which,  compared  with  the  Greek,,usually

produces only abnormalities and centaurs, in which the individual, like that

fabulous creature in the beginning of the Horatian Art of Poetry, is jumbled

together out of pieces, here in the modern world in one and the same man thegreed of the struggle for existence and the need for art show themselves at the

same time: out of this unnatural amalgamation has originated the dilemma, to

excuse and to consecrate that first greed before this need for art. Therefore we

believe in the " Dignity of man " and the " Dignity of labour."

  The Greeks did not require such conceptual hallucinations, for among

them the idea that labour is a disgrace is expressed with startling frankness;

and another piece of wisdom, more hidden and less articulate, but everywhere

alive,  added  that  the  human  thing  also  was  an  ignominious  and  piteous

nothing and the "dream of a shadow." Labour is a disgrace, because existence

has no value in itself; but even though this very existence in the alluring

embellishment of artistic illusions shines forth and really seems to have a

value in itself, yet that proposition is still valid that labour is a disgraced

disgrace indeed by the fact that it is impossible for man, fighting for the

continuance of bare existence, to become an artist. In modern times it is not

the art-needing man but the slave who determines the general conceptions,

the  slave  who  according  to  his  nature  must  give  deceptive  names  to  all

conditions in order to be able to live. Such phantoms as the dignity of man,

the dignity of labour, are the needy products of slavedom hiding itself from

itself. Woful time, in which the slave requires such conceptions, in which he

is incited to think about and beyond himself! Cursed seducers, who have

destroyed the slave's state of innocence by the fruit of the tree of knowledge!

Now  the  slave  must  vainly  scrape  through  from  one  day  to  another  with

transparent  lies  recognisable  to  every  one  of  deeper  insight,  such  as  the

alleged " equal rights of all " or the so-called " fundamental rights of man," of

man as such, or the " dignity of labour:' Indeed he is not to understand at

what stage and at what height dignity can first be mentioned namely, at the

point, where the individual goes wholly beyond himself and no longer has to

work and to produce in order to preserve his individual existence.

  And even on this height of "labour" the Greek at times is overcome by a

feeling,  that  looks  like  shame.  In  one  place  Plutarch  with  earlier  Greek

instinct says that no nobly born youth on beholding the Zeus in Pisa would

have the desire to become himself a Phidias, or on seeing the Hera in Argos,

to become himself a Polyklet; and just as little would he wish to be Anacreon,

Philetas or Archilochus, however much he might revel in their poetry. To the

Greek  the  work  of  the  artist  falls  just  as  much  under  the  undignified

conception of labour as any ignoble craft. But if the compelling force of the

artistic impulse operates in him, then he must produce and submit himself tothat need of labour. And as a father admires the beauty and the gift of his

child but thinks of the act of procreation with shamefaced dislike, so it was

with the Greek. The joyful astonishment at the beautiful has not blinded him

as to its origin which appeared to him, like all " Becoming " in nature, to be a

powerful necessity, a forcing of itself into existence. That feeling by which

the process of procreation is considered as something shamefacedly to be

hidden,  although  by  it  man  serves  a  higher  purpose  than  his  individual

preservation, the same feeling veiled also the origin of the great works of art,

in  spite  of  the  fact  that  through  them  a  higher  form  of  existence  is

inaugurated,  just  as  through  that  other  act  comes  a  new  generation.  The

feeling of shame seems therefore to occur where man is merely a tool of

manifestations  of  will  infinitely  greater  than  he  is  permitted  to  consider

himself in the isolated shape of the individual.

  Now  we  have  the  general  idea  to  which  are  to  be  subordinated  the

feelings which the Greek had with regard to labour and slavery. Both were

considered by them as a necessary disgrace, of which one feels ashamed, as a

disgrace  and  as  a  necessity  at  the  same  time.  In  this  feeling  of  shame  is

hidden the unconscious discernment that the real aim needs those conditional

factors, but that in that need lies the fearful and beast-of-prey-like quality of

the Sphinx Nature, who in the glorification of the artistically free culture-life

so beautifully stretches forth her virgin-body, Culture, which is chiefly a real

need for art, rests upon a terrible basis: the latter however makes itself known

in the twilight sensation of shame. In order that there may be a broad, deep,

and fruitful soil for the development of art, the enormous majority must, in

the service of a minority be slavishly subjected to life's struggle, to a greater

degree than their own wants necessitate. At their cost, through the surplus of

their  labour,  that  privileged  class  is  to  be  relieved  from  the  struggle  for

existence, in order to create and to satisfy a new world of want.

  Accordingly we must accept this cruel sounding truth, that slavery is of

the essence of Culture; a truth of course, which leaves no doubt as to the

absolute value of Existence. This truth is the vulture, that gnaws at the liver

of the Promethean promoter of Culture. The misery of toiling men must still

increase in order to make the production of the world of art possible to a

small number of Olympian men. Here is to be found the source of that secret

wrath nourished by Communists and Socialists of all times, and also by their

feebler descendants, the white race of the " Liberals," not only against the

arts, but also against classical antiquity. If Culture really rested upon the willof a people, if here inexorable powers did not rule, powers which are law and

barrier to the individual, then the contempt for Culture, the glorification of a

"poorness in spirit," the iconoclastic annihilation of artistic claims would be

more  than  an  insurrection  of  the  suppressed  masses  against  dronelike

individuals; it would be the cry of compassion tearing down the walls of

Culture; the desire for justice, for the equalization of suffering, would swamp

all  other  ideas.  In  fact  here  and  there  sometimes  an  exuberant  degree  of

compassion has for a short time opened all the flood gates of Culture-life; a

rainbow of compassionate love and of peace appeared with the first radiant

rise of Christianity and under it was born Christianity's most beautiful fruit,

the gospel according to St John. But there are also instances to show that

powerful religions for long periods petrify a given degree of Culture, and cut

off  with  inexorable  sickle  everything  that  still  grows  on  strongly  and

luxuriantly. For it is not to be forgotten that the same cruelty, which we found

in the essence of every Culture, lies also in the essence of every powerful

religion and in general in the essence of power, which is always evil; so that

we shall understand it just as well, when a Culture is shattering, with a cry for

liberty or at least justice, a too highly piled bulwark of religious claims. That

which in this "sorry scheme" of things will live (i.e., must live), is at the

bottom of its nature a reflex of the primal-pain and primal-contradiction, and

must therefore strike our eyes-" an organ fashioned for this world and earth "-

as an insatiable greed for existence and an eternal self-contradiction, within

the  form  of  time,  therefore  as  Becoming.  Every  moment  devours  the

preceding  one,  every  birth  is  the  death  of  innumerable  beings;  begetting,

living, murdering, all is one. Therefore we may compare this grand Culture

with  a  blood-stained  victor,  who  in  his  triumphal  procession  carries  the

defeated along as slaves chained to his chariot, slaves whom a beneficent

power has so blinded that, almost crushed by the wheels of the chariot, they

nevertheless  still  exclaim:  "Dignity  of  labour!"  "Dignity  of  Man!"  The

voluptuous Cleopatra-Culture throws ever again the most priceless pearls, the

tears of compassion for the misery of slaves, into her golden goblet. Out of

the emasculation of modern man has been born the enormous social distress

of  the  present  time,  not  out  of  the  true  and  deep  commiseration  for  that

misery;  and  if  it  should  be  true  that  the  Greeks  perished  through  their

slavedom then another fact is much more certain, that we shall perish through

the lack of slavery. Slavedom did not appear in any way objectionable, much

less abominable, either to early Christianity or to the Germanic race. What anuplifting effect on us has the contemplation of the medieval bondman, with

his legal and moral relations,-relations that were inwardly strong and tender,-

towards the man of higher rank, with the profound fencing-in of his narrow

existence-how uplifting!-and how reproachful!

  He who cannot reflect upon the position of affairs in Society without

melancholy, who has learnt to conceive of it as the continual painful birth of

those  privileged  Culture-men,  in  whose  service  everything  else  must  be

devoured-he will no longer be deceived by that false glamour, which the

moderns have spread over the origin and meaning of the State. For what can

the State mean to us, if not the means by which that social-process described

just now is to be fused and to be guaranteed in its unimpeded continuance?

Be the sociable instinct in individual man as strong as it may, it is only the

iron clamp of the State that constrains the large masses upon one another in

such a fashion that a chemical decomposition of Society, with its pyramid-

like superstructure, is bound to take place. Whence however originates this

sudden  power  of  the  State,  whose  aim  lies  much  beyond  the  insight  and

beyond the egoism of the individual? How did the slave, the blind mole of

Culture, originate? The Greeks in their instinct relating to the law of nations

have betrayed it to us, in an instinct, which even in the ripest fulness of their

civilisation and humanity never ceased to utter as out of a brazen mouth such

words as: "to the victor belongs the vanquished, with wife and child, life and

property. Power gives the first right, and there is no right, which at bottom is

not presumption, usurpation, violence."

  Here  again  we  see  with  what  pitiless  inflexibility  Nature,  in  order  to

arrive at Society, forges for herself the cruel tool of the State-namely, that

conqueror with the iron hand, who is nothing else than the objectivation of

the  instinct  indicated.  By  the  indefinable  greatness  and  power  of  such

conquerors the spectator feels, that they are only the means of an intention

manifesting itself through them and yet hiding itself from them. The weaker

forces attach themselves to them with such mysterious speed, and transform

themselves so wonderfully, in the sudden swelling of that violent avalanche,

under the charm of that creative kernel, into an affinity hitherto not existing,

that it seems as if a magic will were emanating from them.

  Now when we see how little the vanquished trouble themselves after a

short time about the horrible origin of the State, so that history informs us of

no class of events worse than the origins of those sudden, violent, bloody

and, at least in one point, inexplicable usurpations: when hearts involuntarilygo out towards the magic of the growing State with the presentiment of an

invisible deep purpose, where the calculating intellect is enabled to see an

addition  of  forces  only;  when  now  the  State  is  even  contemplated  with

fervour  as  the  goal  and  ultimate  aim  of  the  sacrifices  and  duties  of  the

individual: then out of all that speaks the enormous necessity of the State,

without which Nature might not succeed in coming, through Society, to her

deliverance in semblance, in the mirror of the genius. What discernments

does the instinctive pleasure in the State not overcome! One would indeed

feel inclined to think that a man who looks into the origin of the State will

henceforth seek his salvation at an awful distance from it; and where can one

not  see  the  monuments  of  its  origin-devastated  lands,  destroyed  cities,

brutalised men, devouring hatred of nations! The State, of ignominiously low

birth, for the majority of men a continually flowing source of hardship, at

frequently recurring periods the consuming torch of mankind-and yet a word,

at  which  we  forget  ourselves,  a  battle  cry,  which  has  filled  men  with

enthusiasm for innumerable really heroic deeds, perhaps the highest and most

venerable  object  for  the  blind  and  egoistic  multitude  which  only  in  the

tremendous moments of State-life has the strange expression of greatness on

its face!

  We have, however, to consider the Greeks, with regard to the unique sun-

height of their art, as the "political men in themselves," and certainly history

knows of no second instance of such an awful unchaining of the political

passion, such an unconditional immolation of all other interests in the service

of  this  State-instinct;  at  the  best  one  might  distinguish  the  men  of  the

Renascence  in  Italy  with  a  similar  title  for  like  reasons  and  by  way  of

comparison. So overloaded is that passion among the Greeks that it begins

ever anew to rage against itself and to strike its teeth into its own flesh. This

bloody jealousy of city against city, of party against party, this murderous

greed of those little wars, the tiger-like triumph over the corpse of the slain

enemy, in short, the incessant renewal of those Trojan scenes of struggle and

horror, in the spectacle of which, as a genuine Hellene, Homer stands before

us absorbed with delight-whither does this naive barbarism of the Greek State

point? What is its excuse before the tribunal of eternal justice? Proud and

calm, the State steps before this tribunal and by the hand it leads the flower of

blossoming  womanhood:  Greek  society.  For  this  Helena  the  State  waged

those wars-and what grey-bearded judge could here condemn?-

  Under this mysterious connection which we here divine between Stateand art, political greed and artistic creation, battlefield and work of art, we

understand by the State, as already remarked, only the cramp-iron, which

compels the Social process; whereas without the State, in the natural bellum

omnizim contra omnes Society cannot strike root at all on a larger scale and

beyond  the  reach  of  the  family.  Now,  after  States  have  been  established

almost  everywhere,  that  bent  of  the  bellum  omnium  contra  omnes

concentrates itself from time to time into a terrible gathering of war-clouds

and discharges itself as it were in rare but so much the more violent shocks

and lightning flashes. But in consequence of the effect of that belt'um,-an

effect which is turned inwards and compressed,-Society is given time during

the intervals to germinate and burst into leaf, in order, as soon as warmer

days come, to let the shining blossoms of genius sprout forth.

  In  face  of  the  political  world  of  the  Hellenes,  I  will  not  hide  those

phenomena of the present in which I believe I discern dangerous atrophies of

the political sphere equally critical for art and society. I f there should exist

men, who as it were through birth are placed outside the national- and State-

instincts, who consequently have to esteem the State onlyin so far as they

conceive  that  it  coincides  with  their  own  interest,  then  such  men  will

necessarily  imagine  as  the  ultimate  political  aim  the  most  undisturbed

collateral  existence  of  great  political  communities  possible,in  which  they

might  be  permitted  to  pursue  their  ownpurposeswithoutrestriction.

Withthisideain their heads they will promote that policy which will offer the

greatest  security  to  these  purposes;  whereas  it  is  unthinkable,  that  they,

against their intentions, guided perhaps by an unconscious instinct, should

sacrifice themselves for the State-tendency, unthinkable because they lack

that very instinct. All other citizens of the State are in the dark about what

Nature intends with her State-instinct within them, and they follow blindly;

only those who stand outside this instinct know what they want from the

State and what the State is to grant them. Therefore it is almost unavoidable

that  such  men  should  gain  great  influence  in  the  State  because  they  are

allowed to consider it as a means, whereas all the others under the sway of

those unconscious purposes of the State are themselves only means for the

fulfilment of the State-purpose. In order now to attain, through the medium of

the  State  the  highest  furtherance  of  their  selfish  aims,  it  is  above  all

necessary, that the State be wholly freed from those awfully incalculable war-

convulsions so that it may be used rationally; and thereby they strive with all

their might for a condition of things in which war is an impossibility. For thatpurpose  the  thing  to  do  is  first  to  curtail  and  to  enfeeble  the  political

separatisms and factions and through the establishment of large equipoised

State-bodies  and  the  mutual  safeguarding  of  them  to  make  the  successful

result  of  an  aggressive  war  and  consequently  war  itself  the  greatest

improbability; as on the other hand they will endeavour to wrest the question

of war and peace from the decision of individual lords, in order to be able

rather  to  appeal  to  the  egoism  of  the  masses  or  their  representatives;  for

which purpose they again need slowly to dissolve the monarchic instincts of

the  nations.  This  purpose  they  attain  best  through  the  most  general

promulgation of the liberal optimistic view of the world, which has its roots

in the doctrines of French Rationalism and the French Revolution, ie., in a

wholly  un-Germanic,  genuinely  neo-Latin,  shallow,  and  unmetaphysical

philosophy. I cannot help seeing in the prevailing international movements of

the present day, and the simultaneous promulgation of universal suffrage, the

effects of the fear of war above everything else, yea I behold behind these

movements, those truly international homeless money-hermits, as the really

alarmed,  who,  with  their  natural  lack  of  the  State-instinct,  have  learnt  to

abuse  politics  as  a  means  of  the  Exchange,  and  State  and  Society  as  an

apparatus  for  their  own  enrichment.  Against  the  deviation  of  the  State

tendency into a money-tendency, to be feared from this side, the only remedy

is war and once again war, in the emotions of which this at least becomes

obvious, that the State is not founded upon the fear of the war-demon, as a

protective institution for egoistic individuals, but in love to fatherland and

prince, it produces an ethical impulse, indicative of a much higher destiny. If

I therefore designate as a dangerous and characteristic sign of the present

political situation the application of revolutionary thought in the service of a

selfish State-less money-aristocracy, if at the same time I conceive of the

enormous dissemination of liberal optimism as the result of modern financial

affairs fallen into strange hands, and if I imagine all evils of social conditions

together with the necessary decay of the arts to have either germinated from

that root or grown together with it, one will have to pardon my occasionally

chanting a Paean on war. Horribly clangs its silvery bow; and although it

comes along like the night, war is nevertheless Apollo, the true divinity for

consecrating and purifying the State. First of all, however, as is said in the

beginning of the " Iliad," he lets fly his arrow on the mules and dogs. Then he

strikes the men themselves, and everywhere pyres break into flames. Be it

then pronounced that war is just as much a necessity for the State as the slaveis for society, and who can avoid this verdict if he honestly asks himself

about the causes of the never-equalled Greek art-perfection ?

  He  who  contemplates  war  and  its  uniformed  possibility,  the  soldiers

profession, with respect to the hitherto described nature of the State, must

arrive at the conviction, that through war and in the profession of arms is

placed before our eyes an image, or even perhaps the prototype of the State.

Here we see as the most general effect of the war-tcndcncy, an immediate

decomposition and division of the chaotic mass into military castes, out of

which rises, pyramid shaped, on an exceedingly broad base of slaves, the

edifice  of  the  "  martial  society."  The  unconscious  purpose  of  the  whole

movement constrains every individual under its yoke, and produces also in

heterogeneous natures as it were a chemical transformation of their qualities

until they are brought into affinity with that purpose. In the highest castes one

perceivcs already a little more of what in this internal process is involved at

the bottom, namely the creation of the military genius-with whom we have

become acquainted as the original founder of states. In the case of many

States,  as,  for  example,  in  the  Lycurgian  constitution  of  Sparta,  one  can

distinctly perceive the impress of that fundamental idea of the State, that of

the creation of the military genius. If we now imagine the military primal

State in its greatest activity, at its proper " labour," and if we fix our glance

upon the whole technique of war, we cannot avoid correcting our notions

picked up from everywhere, as to the "dignity of man " and the "dignity of

labour" by the question, whether the idea of dignity is applicable also to that

labour, which has as its purpose the destruction of the "dignified " man, as

well as to the man who is entrusted with that "dignified labour," or whether in

this  warlike  task  of  the  State  those  mutually  contradictory  ideas  do  not

neutralise one another. I should like to think the warlike man to be a means of

the military genius and his labour again only a tool in the hands of that same

genius; and not to him, as absolute man and non-genius, but to him as a

means  of  the  genius-whose  pleasure  also  can  be  to  choose  his  tool's

destruction as a mere pawn sacrificed on the strategist's chessboard-is due a

degree of dignity, of that dignity namely, to have been deemed worthy of

being a means of the genius. But what is shown here in a single instance is

valid in the most general sense; every human being, with his total activity,

only  has  dignity  in  so  far  as  he  is  a  tool  of  the  genius,  consciously  or

unconsciously ; from this we may immediately deduce the ethical conclusion,

that "man in himself," the absolute man possesses neither dignity, nor rights,nor duties; only as a wholly determined being serving unconscious purposes

can man excuse his existence.

  Plato's  perfect  State  is  according  to  these  considerations  certainly

something  still  greater  than  even  the  warm-blooded  among  his  admirers

believe, not to mention the smiling mien of superiority with which our "

historically " educated refuse such a fruit of antiquity. The proper aim of the

State, the Olympian existence and ever-renewed procreation and preparation

of the genius,-compared with which all other things are only tools, expedients

and factors towards realisation-is here discovered with a poetic intuition and

painted with firmness. Plato saw through the awfully devastated Herma of the

then-existing  State-life  and  perceived  even  then  something  divine  in  its

interior. He believed that one might be able to take out this divine image and

that the grim and barbarically distorted outside and shell did not belong to the

essence of the State: the whole fervour and sublimity of his political passion

threw itself upon this belief, upon that desire-and in the flames of this fire he

perished. That in his perfect State he did not place at the head the genius in its

general meaning, but only the genius of wisdom and of knowledge, that he

altogether  excluded  the  inspired  artist  from  his  State,  that  was  a  rigid

consequence of the Socratian judgment on art, which Plato, struggling against

himself, had made his own. This more external, almost incidental gap must

not prevent our recognising in the total conception of the Platonic State the

wonderfully great hieroglyph of a profound and eternally to be interpreted

esoteric  doctrine  of  the  connection  between  State  and  Genius.  What  we

believed we could divine of this cryptograph we have said in this preface.

                    THE GREEK WOMAN (POSTHUMOUS)

                          Translated by Maximillian A. Mugge

  (1871)

  JUST  as  Plato  from  disguises  and  obscurities  brought  to  light  the

innermost purpose of the State, so also he conceived the chief cause of the

position of the Hellenic Woman with regard to the State; in both cases he saw

in what existed around him the image of the ideas manifested to him, and of

these ideas of course the actual was only a hazy picture and phantasmagoria.

He who according to the usual custom considers the position of the Hellenic

Woman to be altogether unworthy and repugnant to humanity, must also turn

with this reproach against the Platonic conception of this position; for, as it

were, the existing forms were only precisely set forth in this latter conception.

Here  therefore  our  question  repeats  itself:  should  not  the  nature  and  theposition of the Hellenic Woman have a necessary relation to the goals of the

Hellenic Will?

  Of course there is one side of the Platonic conception of woman, which

stands in abrupt contrast with Hellenic custom: Plato gives to woman a full

share in the rights, knowledge and duties of man, and considers woman only

as  the  weaker  sex,  in  that  she  will  not  achieve  remarkable  success  in  all

things, without however disputing this sex's title to all those things. We must

not attach more value to this strange notion than to the expulsion of the artist

from the ideal State; these are side-lines daringly mis-drawn, aberrations as it

were of the hand otherwise so sure and of the so calmly contemplating eye

which at times under the influence of the deceased master becomes dim and

dejected;  in  this  mood  he  exaggerates  the  master's  paradoxes  and  in  the

abundance  of  his  love  gives  himself  satisfaction  by  very  eccentrically

intensifying the latter's doctrines even to foolhardiness.

  The most significant word however that Plato as a Greek could say on the

relation of woman to the State, was that so objectionable demand, that in the

perfect State, the Faviily was to cease. At present let us take no account of his

abolishing even marriage, in order to carry out this demand fully, and of his

substituting  solemn  nuptials  arranged  by  order  of  the  State,  between  the

bravest men and the noblest women, for the attainment of beautiful offspring.

In that principal proposition however he has indicated most distinctly-indeed

too  distinctly,  offensively  distinctly-an  important  preparatory  step  of  the

Hellenic Will towards the procreation of the genius. But in the customs of the

Hellenic people the claim of the family on man and child was extremely

limited: the man lived in the State, the child grew up for the State and was

guided by the hand of the State. The Greek Will took care that the need of

culture could not be satisfied in the seclusion of a small circle. From the State

the individual has to receive everything in order to return everything to the

State. Woman accordingly means to the State, what sleep does to man. In her

nature lies the healing power, which replaces that which has been used up,

the beneficial rest in which everything immoderate confines itself, the eternal

Same, by which the excessive and the surplus regulate themselves. In her the

future generation dreams. Woman is more closely related to Nature than man

and in all her essentials she remains ever herself. Culture is with her always

something  external,  a  something  which  does  not  touch  the  kernel  that  is

eternally faithful to Nature, therefore the culture of woman might well appear

to the Athenian as something indifferent, yea-if one only wanted to conjure itup  in  one's  mind,  as  something  ridiculous.  He  who  at  once  feels  himself

compelled from that to infer the position of women among the Greeks as

unworthy  and  all  too  cruel,  should  not  indeed  take  as  his  criterion  the  "

culture " of modern woman and her claims, against which it is sufficient just

to point out the Olympian women together with Penelope, Antigone, Elektra.

Of course it is true that these are ideal figures, but who would be able to

create  such  ideals  out  of  the  present  world?-Further  indeed  is  to  be

considered what sons these women have borne, and what women they must

have been to have given birth to such sons! The Hellenic woman as mother

had to live in obscurity, because the political instinct together with its highest

aim demanded it. She had to vegetate like a plant, in the narrow circle, as a

symbol  of  the  Epicurean  wisdom  la/qe  biw/saj  (living  unseen,  unknown).

Again, in more recent times, with the complete disintegration of the principle

of the State, she had to step in as helper; the family as a makeshift for the

State is her work; and in this sense the artistic aim of the, State had to abase

itself to the level of a domestic art. Thereby it has been brought about, that

the passion of love, as the one realm wholly accessible to women, regulates

our  art  to  the  very  core.  Similarly,  home-education  considers  itself  so  to

speak  as  the  only  natural  one  and  suffers  State-education  only  as  a

questionable infringement upon the right of home-education : all this is right

as far as the modern State only is concerned.-With that the nature of woman

withal remains unaltered, but herpower is, according to the position which the

State takes up with regard to women, a different one. Women have indeed

really the power to make good to a certain extent the deficiencies of the State-

ever  faithful  to  their  nature,  which  I  have  compared  to  sleep.  In  Greek

antiquity they held that position, which the most supreme will of the State

assigned to them: for that reason they have been glorified as never since. The

goddesses of Greek mythology are their images: the Pythia and the Sibyl, as

well as the Socratic Diotima are the priestesses out of whom divine wisdom

speaks.  Now  one  understands  why  the  proud  resignation  of  the  Spartan

woman at the news of her son's death in battle can be no fable. Woman in

relation to the State felt herself in her proper position, therefore she had more

dignity than woman has ever had since. Plato who through abolishing family

and  marriage  still  intensifies  the  position  of  woman,  feels  now  so  much

reverence  towards  them,  that  oddly  enough  he  is  misled  by  a  subsequent

statement of their equality with man, to abolish again the order of rank which

is their due: the highest triumph of the woman of antiquity, to have seducedeven the wisest!

  As long as the State is still in an embryonic condition woman as mother

preponderates and determines the grade and the manifestations of Culture: in

the same way as woman is destined to complement the disorganised State.

What Tacitus says of German women: inesse quin etiam sanctum aliquid et

providum putant, nec aut consilia earum aspernantur aut responsa neglegunt,

applies on the whole to all nations not yet arrived at the real State. In such

stages one feels only the more strongly that which at all times becomes again

manifest, that the instincts of woman as the bulwark of the future generation

are invincible and that in her care for the preservation of the species Nature

speaks out of these instincts very distinctly. How far this divining power

reaches is determined, it seems, by the greater or lesser consolidation of the

State: in disorderly and more arbitrary conditions, where the whim or the

passion  of  the  individual  man  carries  along  with  itself  whole  tribes,  then

woman suddenly comes forward as the warning prophetess. But in Greece

too there was a never slumbering care that the terribly overcharged political

instinct might splinter into dust and atoms the little political organisms before

they attained their goals in any way. Here the Hellenic Will created for itself

ever new implements by means of which it spoke, adjusting, moderating,

warning: above all it is in the Pythia, that the power of woman to compensate

the State manifested itself so clearly, as it has never done since. That a people

split up thus into small tribes and municipalities, was yet at bottom whole and

was performing the task of its nature within its faction, was assured by that

wonderful phenomenon the Pythia and the Delphian oracle: for always, as

long as Hellenism created its great works of art, it spoke out of one mouth

and as one Pythia. We cannot hold back the portentous discernment that to

the Will individuation means much suffering, and that in order to reach those

individuals It needs an enormous step-ladder of individuals. It is true our

brains reel with the consideration whether the Will in order to arrive at Art,

has perhaps effused Itself out into these worlds, stars, bodies, and atoms: at

least it ought to become clear to us then, that Art is not necessary for the

individuals, but for the Will itself: a sublime outlook at which we shall be

permitted to glance once more from another position.



                              HOMER'S COMPETITION

                          Translated by Maximillian A. Mugge  When  one  speaks  of  "humanity"  the  notion  lies  at  the  bottom,  that

humanity is that which separates and distinguishes man from nature. But such

a distinction does not in reality exist: the "natural" qualities and the properly

called "human" ones have grown up inseparably together. Man in his highest

and  noblest  capacities  is  nature  and  bears  in  himself  her  awful  twofold

character.  His  abilities  generally  considered  dreadful  and  inhuman  are

perhaps  indeed  the  fertile  soil,  out  of  which  alone  can  grow  forth  all

humanity in emotions, actions and works.

  Thus the Greeks, the most humane men (Menschen) of ancient times,

have in themselves a trait of cruelty, of tiger-like pleasure in destruction: a

trait, which in the grotesquely magnified image of the Hellene, in Alexander

the Great, is very plainly visible, which, however, in their whole history, as

well  as  in  their  mythology,  must  terrify  us  who  meet  them  with  the

emasculate idea of modern humanity. When Alexander has the feet of Batis,

the brave defender of Gaza, bored through, and binds the living body to his

chariot in order to drag him about exposed to the scorn of his soldiers, that is

a sickening caricature of Achilles, who at night ill-uses Hector's corpse by a

similar trailing; but even this trait has for us something offensive, something

which inspires horror. It gives us a peep into the abysses of hatred. With the

same  sensation  perhaps  we  stand  before  the  bloody  and  insatiable  self-

laceration of two Greek parties, as for example in the Corcyrean revolution.

When the victor, in a fight of the cities, according to the law of warfare,

executes the whole male population and sells all the women and children into

slavery, we see, in the sanction of such a law, that the Greek deemed it a

positive  necessity  to  allow  his  hatred  to  break  forth  unimpeded;  in  such

moments  the  compressed  and  swollen  feeling  relieved  itself;  the  tiger

bounded forth, a voluptuous cruelty shone out of his fearful eye. Why had the

Greek sculptor to represent again and again war and fights in innumerable

repetitions,  extended  human  bodies  whose  sinews  are  tightened  through

hatred or through the recklessness of triumph, fighters wounded and writhing

with pain, or the dying with the last rattle in their throat? Why did the whole

Greek world exult in the fighting scenes of the Iliad? I am afraid, we do not

understand  them  enough  in  "Greek  fashion,"  and  that  we  should  even

shudder, if for once we did understand them thus.

  But what lies, as the womb of the Hellenic, behind the Homeric world? In

the latter, by the extremely artistic definiteness, and the calm and purity of

the lines we are already lifted far above the purely material amalgamation: itscolours, by an artistic deception, appear lighter, milder, warmer; its men, in

this coloured, warm illumination, appear better and more sympathetic--but

where do we look, if, no longer guided and protected by Homer's hand, we

step backwards into the pre-Homeric world? Only the night and horror, into

the products of a fancy accustomed to the horrible. What earthly existence is

reflected  in  the  loathsome-awful  theogonian  lore:  a  life  swayed  only  the

children of the night, strife, amorous desires, deception, age and death. Let us

imagine  the  suffocating  atmosphere  of  Hesiod's  poem,  still  thickened  and

darkened and without the mitigations and purifications, which poured over

Hellas  from  Delphi  and  the  numerous  seats  of  the  gods!  If  we  mix  this

thickened Beotian air with the grim voluptuousness of the Etruscans, then

such a reality would extort from us a world of myths within which Uranos,

Kronos and Zeus and the struggles of the Titans would appear as a relief.

Combat in this brooding atmosphere is salvation and safety; the cruelty of

victory is the summit of life's glories. And just as in truth the idea of Greek

law  has  developed  from  murder  and  expiation  of  murder,  so  also  nobler

civilisation takes her first wreath of victory from the altar of the expiation of

murder. Behind that bloody age stretches a wave-furrow deep into Hellenic

history. The names of Orpheus, of Mus�us, and their cults indicate to what

consequences the uninterrupted sight of a world of warfare and cruelty led--to

the loathing of existence, to the conception of this existence as a punishment

to  be  borne  to  the  end,  to  the  belief  in  the  identify  of  existence  and

indebtedness. But these particular conclusions are not specifically Hellenic;

through them Greece comes into contact with India and the Orient generally.

The Hellenic genius had ready yet another answer to the question: what does

a life of fighting and of victory mean? and gives this answer in the whole

breadth of Greek history.

  In order to understand the latter we must start from the fact that the Greek

genius admitted the existing fearful impulse, and deemed it justified; whereas

in the Orphic phase of thought was contained the belief that life with such an

impulse  as  its  root  would  not  be  worth  living.  Strife  and  the  pleasure  of

victory  were  acknowledged;  and  nothing  separates  the  Greek  world  more

from ours than the colouring, derived hence, of some ethical ideas, e.g., of

Eris and of Envy.

  When  the  traveller  Pausanius  during  his  wanderings  through  Greece

visited the Helicon, a very old copy of the first didactic poem of the Greeks,

Hesiod's The Works and Days, was shown to him, inscribed upon plates oflead and severely damaged by time and weather. However he recognised this

much, that, unlike the usual copies it had not at its head that little hymnus on

Zeus, but began at once with the declaration: "Two Eris-goddesses are on

earth." This is one of the most noteworthy Hellenic thoughts and worthy to be

impressed on the newcomer immediately at the entrance-gate of Greek ethics.

"One would like to praise the one Eris, just as much as to blame the other, of

one  uses  one's  reason.  For  these  two  goddesses  have  quite  different

dispositions. For the one, the cruel one, furthers the evil war and feud! No

mortal  likes  her,  but  under  the  yoke  of  need  one  pays  honour  to  the

burdensome Eris, according to the decree of the immortals. She, as the elder,

gave birth to black night. Zeus the high-ruling one, however, placed the other

Eris upon the roots of the earth and among men as a much better one. She

urges even the unskilled man to work, and if one who lacks property beholds

another who is rich, then he hastens to sow in similar fashion and to plant and

to put his house in order; the neighbour vies with the neighbour who strives

after fortune. Good is this Eris to men. The potter also has a grudge against

the  potter,  and  the  carpenter  against  the  carpenter;  the  beggar  envies  the

beggar, and the singer the singer."

  The two last verses which treat of the odium figulinum appear to our

scholars to be incomprehensible in this place. According to their judgment

the predicates: "grudge" and "envy" fit only the nature of the evil Eris, and

for this reason they do not hesitate to designate these verses as spurious or

thrown by chance into this place. For that judgment however a system of

ethics other than the Hellenic must have inspired these scholars unawares; for

in these verses to the good Eris Aristotle finds no offence. And not only

Aristotle but the whole Greek antiquity thinks of spite and envy otherwise

than we do and agrees with Hesiod, who first designates as an evil one that

Eris who leads men against one another to a hostile war of extermination, and

secondly praises another Eris as the good one, who as jealousy, spite, envy,

incites men to activity but not to the action of war to the knife but the action

of competition. The Greek is envious and conceives of this quality not as a

blemish,  but  as  the  effect  of  a  beneficent  deity.  What  a  gulf  of  ethical

judgment between us and him? Because he is envious he also feels, with

every superfluity of honour, riches, splendour and fortune, the envious eye of

a god resting on himself, and he fears this envy; in this case the latter reminds

him of the transitoriness of every human lot; he dreads his very happiness

and,  sacrificing  the  best  of  it,  he  bows  before  the  divine  envy.  Thisconception does not perhaps estrange him from his gods; their significance on

the contrary is expressed by the thought that with them man in whose soul

jealousy is enkindled against every other living being, is never allowed to

venture  into  competition.  In  the  fight  of  Thamyris  with  the  Muses,  of

Marsyas with Apollo, in the heart-moving fate of Niobe appears the horrible

opposition of the two powers, who must never fight with one another, man

and god.

  The greater and more sublime however a Greek is, the brighter in him

appears the ambitious flame, devouring everybody who runs with him on the

same track. Aristotle once made a list of such competitions on a large scale;

among them is the most striking instance how even a dead person can still

incite  a  living  one  to  consuming  jealousy;  thus  for  example  Aristotle

designates the relation between the Kolophonian Xenophanes and Homer.

We do not understand this attack on the national hero of poetry in all its

strength, if we do not imagine, as later on also with Plato, the root of this

attack to be the ardent desire to step into the place of the overthrown poet and

to  inherit  his  fame.  Every  great  Hellene  hands  on  the  torch  of  the

competition;  at  every  great  virtue  a  new  light  is  kindled.  If  the  young

Themistocles could not sleep at the thought of the laurels of Miltiades so his

early awakened bent released itself only in the long emulation with Aristides

in that uniquely noteworthy, purely instinctive genius of his political activity,

which  Thucydides  describes.  How  characteristic  are  both  question  and

answer, when a notable opponent of Pericles is asked, whether he or Pericles

was the better wrestler in the city, and he gives the answer: "Even if I throw

him down he denies that he has fallen, attains his purpose and convinces

those who saw him fall."

  If one wants to see that sentiment unashamed in its naive expressions, the

sentiment  as  to  the  necessity  of  competition  lest  the  state's  welfare  be

threatened,  one  should  think  of  the  original  meaning  of  ostracism,  as  for

example  the  Ephesians  pronounced  it  at  the  banishment  of  Hermodor.

"Among us nobody shall be the best; if however someone is the best, then let

him  be  so  elsewhere  and  among  others"  [Heraklitus].  Why  should  not

someone be the best? Because with that the competition would fail, and the

eternal  life-basis  of  the  Hellenic  state  would  be  endangered.  Later  on

ostracism receives quite another position with regard to competition; it is

applied, when the danger becomes obvious that one of the great competing

politicians and party-leaders feels himself urged on in the heat of the conflicttowards  harmful  and  destructive  measures  and  dubious  coups  d'etat.  The

original sense of this peculiar institution however is not that of a safety-valve

but that of a stimulant. The all-excelling individual was to be removed in

order that the competition of forces might re-awaken, a thought which is

hostile  to  the  "exclusiveness"  of  genius  in  the  modern  sense  but  which

assumes that in the natural order of things there are always several geniuses

which incite one another to action, as much also as they hold one another

within  the  bounds  of  moderation.  That  is  the  kernel  of  the  Hellenic

competition-conception:  it  abominates  autocracy,  and  fears  its  dangers;  it

desires as a preventive against the genius--a second genius.

  Every natural gift must develop itself by competition. Thus the Hellenic

national pedagogy demands, whereas modern educators fear nothing as much

as the unchaining of the so-called ambition. Here one fears selfishness as the

"evil in itself"--with the exception of the Jesuits, who agree with the Ancients

and who, possibly, for that reason, are the most efficient educators of our

time. They seem to believe that selfishness, i.e., the individual element is

only the most powerful agens but that it obtains its character as "good" and

"evil" essentially from the aims towards which it strives. To the Ancients

however the aim of the agonistic education was the welfare of the whole, of

the civic society. Every Athenian, for instance, was to cultivate his ego in

competition, so far that it should be of the highest service to Athens and

should  do  the  least  harm.  It  was  not  unmeasured  and  immeasurable  as

modern ambition generally is; the youth thought of the welfare of his native

town when he vied with others in running, throwing or singing; it was her

glory that he wanted to increase with his own; it was to his town's gods that

he dedicated the wreaths which the umpires as a mark of honour set upon his

head. Every Greek from childhood felt within himself the burning wish to be

in the competition of the towns as an instrument for the welfare of his own

town; in this his selfishness was kindled into flame, by this his selfishness

was bridled and restricted. Therefore the individuals in antiquity were freer,

because  their  aims  were  nearer  and  more  tangible.  Modern  man,  on  the

contrary, is everywhere hampered by infinity, like the fleet-footed Achilles in

the  allegory  of  the  Eleate  Zeno:  infinity  impedes  him,  he  does  not  even

overtake the tortoise.

  But as the youths to be educated were brought up struggling against one

another, so their educators were in turn in emulation amongst themselves.

Distrustfully  jealous,  the  great  musical  masters,  Pindar  and  Simonides,stepped side by side; in rivalry the sophist, the higher teacher of antiquity

meets his fellow-sophist; even the most universal kind of instruction, through

the drama, was imparted to the people only under the form of an enormous

wrestling of the great musical and dramatic artists. How wonderful! "And

even the artist has a grudge against the artist!" And the modern man dislikes

in an artist nothing so much as the personal battle-feeling, whereas the Greek

recognises the artist only in such a personal struggle. There were the modern

suspects weakness of the work of art, the Hellene seeks the source of his

highest strength! That, which by way of example in Plato is of special artistic

importance in his dialogues, is usually the result of an emulation with the art

of  the  orators,  of  the  sophists,  of  the  dramatists  of  his  time,  invented

deliberately in order that at the end he could say: "Behold, I can also do what

my great rivals can; yea I can do it even better than they. No Protagoras has

composed  such  beautiful  myths  as  I,  no  dramatist  such  a  spirited  and

fascinating whole as the Symposion, no orator penned such an oration as I

put up in the Gorgias--and now I reject all that together and condemn all

imitative art! Only the competition made me a poet, a sophist, an orator!"

What a problem unfolds itself there before us, if we ask about the relationship

between the competition and the conception of the work of art!--

  If on the other hand we remove the competition from Greek life, then we

look at once into the pre-Homeric abyss of horrible savagery, hatred, and

pleasure in destruction. This phenomenon alas! shows itself frequently when

a  great  personality  was,  owing  to  an  enormously  brilliant  deed,  suddenly

withdrawn from the competition and became hors de concours according to

his, and his fellow-citizens' judgment. Almost without exception the effect is

awful; and if one usually draws from these consequences the conclusion that

the Greek was unable to bear glory and fortune, one should say more exactly

that he was unable to bear fame without further struggle, and fortune at the

end of the competition. There is no more distinct instance than the fate of

Miltiades. Placed upon a solitary height and lifted far above every fellow-

combatant  through  is  incomparable  success  at  Marathon,  he  feels  a  low

thirsting for revenge awakened within himself against a citizen of Para, with

whom  he  had  been  at  enmity  long  ago.  To  satisfy  his  desire  he  misuses

reputation,  the  public  exchequer  and  civic  honour  and  disgraces  himself.

Conscious of his ill-success he falls into unworthy machinations. He forms a

clandestine and godless connection with Timo a priestess of Demeter, and

enters at night the sacred temple, from which every man was excluded. Afterhe has leapt over the wall and comes ever nearer the shrine of the goddess,

the  dreadful  horror  of  a  panic-like  terror  suddenly  seizes  him;  almost

prostrate and unconscious he feels himself driven back and leaping the wall

once more, he falls down paralysed and severely injured. The siege must be

raised and a disgraceful death impresses its seal upon a brilliant heroic career,

in order to darken it for all posterity. After the battle at Marathon the envy of

the celestials has caught him. And this divine envy breaks into flames when it

beholds man without rival, without opponent, on the solitary height of glory.

He now has beside him only the gods--and therefore he has them against him.

These  however  betray  him  into  a  deed  of  the  Hybris,  and  under  it  he

collapses.

  Let us well observe that just as Miltiades perishes so the noblest Greek

states perish when they, merit and fortune, have arrived from the racecourse

at the temple of Nike. Athens, which had destroyed the independence of her

allies and avenged with severity the rebellions of her subjected foes, Sparta,

which after the battle of �gospotamoi used her preponderance over Hellas in

a still harsher and more cruel fashion, both these, as in the case of Miltiades,

brought about their ruin through deeds of the Hybris, as a proof that without

envy, jealousy, and competing ambition the Hellenic State like the Hellenic

man  degenerates.  He  becomes  bad  and  cruel,  thirsting  for  revenge,  and

godless; in short, he becomes "pre-Homeric"--and then it needs only a panic

in order to bring about his fall and to crush him. Sparta and Athens surrender

to Persia, as Themistocles and Alcibiades have done; they betray Hellenism

after  they  have  given  up  the  noblest  Hellenic  fundamental  thought,  the

competition, and Alexander, the coarsened copy and abbreviation of Greek

history,  now  invents  the  cosmopolitan  Hellene,  and  the  so-called

"Hellenism."

    (Completed on December 29, 1872)

                              NIETZSCHE ON THALES

                          Translated by Maximillian A. Mugge

  Greek  philosophy  seems  to  begin  with  a  preposterous  idea,  with  the

proposition that water is the origin and mother-womb of all things. Is it really

necessary to stop there and become serious ? Yes, and for three reasons:

Firstly, because the proposition does enunciate something about the origin of

things; secondly, because it does so without figure and fable; thirdly and

lastly, because in it is contained, although only in the chrysalis state, the idea:

Everything  is  one.  The  first  mentioned  reason  leaves  Thales  still  in  thecompany of religious and superstitious people, the second however takes him

out of this company and shows him to us as a natural philosopher, but by

virtue of the third, Thales becomes the first Greek philosopher. If he had said:

"Out of water earth is evolved," we should only have a scientific hypothesis;

a false one, though nevertheless difficult to refute. But he went beyond the

scientific. In his presentation of this concept of unity through the hypothesis

of  water,  Thales  has  not  surmounted  the  low  level  of  the  physical

discernments of his time, but actually leapt over them. The deficient and

unorganized observations of an empiric nature which Thales had made as to

the  occurrence  and  transformations  of  water,  or  to  be  more  exact,  of  the

Moist, would not in the least have made possible or even suggested such an

immense generalization. That which drove him to this generalization was a

metaphysical  thought,  which  had  its  origin  in  mystic  intuition  and  which

together with the ever renewed endeavours to express it better, we find in all

philosophies,-the proposition: Everything is one !

  How forcefully such a faith deals with all empiricism is worthy of note;

with  Thales  especially  one  can  learn  how  Philosophy  has  behaved  at  all

times,  when  she  wanted  to  get  beyond  the  hedges  of  experience  to  her

magically attracting goal. On light supports she leaps in advance; hope and

divination wing her feet. Calculating reason too, clumsily pants after her and

seeks better supports in its attempt to reach that alluring goal, at which its

divine companion has already arrived. One imagines two wanderers by a wild

forest-stream which carries with it rolling stones; the one, light-footed, leaps

over it using the stones and swinging upon them ever further and further,

though  they  precipitously  sink  into  the  depths  behind.  The  other  stands

helpless there most of the time; one has first to build a pathway which will

bear a heavy, weary step; sometimes that cannot be done and then no god will

help one across the stream. What therefore carries philosophical thinking so

quickly to its goal ? Does it distinguish itself from calculating and measuring

thought only by its more rapid flight through large spaces ? No, for a strange

illogical power wings the foot of philosophical thinking; and this power is

creative imagination. Lifted by the latter, philosophical thinking leaps from

possibility to possibility, and these for the time being are taken as certainties;

and now and then even whilst on the wing it gets hold of certainties. An

ingenious presentiment shows them to the flier; demonstrable certainties are

divined at a distance to be at this point. Especially powerful is the strength of

imagination  in  the  lightning-like  seizing  and  illuminating  of  similarities;afterwards reflection applies its measuring and models (templates) and seeks

to substitute the similarities by equalities, that which was seen side by side by

causalities. But though this should never be possible, even in the case of

Thales  the  indemonstrable  philosophizing  has  yet  its  value;  although  all

supports are broken when Logic and the rigidity of Empiricism want to get

across to the proposition: Everything is water; yet still there is always, after

the  demolition  of  the  scientific  edifice,  a  remainder,  and  in  this  very

remainder lies a moving force and as it were the hope of future fertility.

  Of course I do not mean that the thought in any restriction or attenuation,

or as allegory, still retains some kind of " truth "; as if, for instance, one

might imagine the creating artist standing near a waterfall, and seeing in the

forms which leap towards him, an artistically prefiguring game of the water

with human and animal bodies, masks, plants, rocks, nymphs, griffins, and

with all existing types in general, so that to him the proposition: Everything is

water, is confirmed. The thought of Thales has rather its value -- even after

the perception of its indemonstrableness -- in the very fact, that it was meant

unmythically and unallegorically. The Greeks among whom Thales became

so suddenly conspicuous were the anti-type of all realists by only believing

essentially in the reality of mortals and gods, and by contemplating the whole

of nature as if it were only a disguise, masquerade and metamorphosis of

these god-humans. Humans were to them the truth, and essence of things;

everything else mere phenomenon and deceiving play. For that very reason

they experienced incredible difficulty in conceiving of ideas as ideas. Whilst

with the moderns the most personal item sublimates itself into abstractions,

with them the most abstract notions became personified. Thales, however,

said, "Not man but water is the reality of things"; he began to believe in

nature, in so far that he at least believed in water. As a mathematician and

astronomer he had grown cold towards everything mythical and allegorical,

and  even  if  he  did  not  succeed  in  becoming  disillusioned  as  to  the  pure

abstraction,  Everything  is  one,  and  although  he  left  off  at  a  physical

expression he was nevertheless among the Greeks of his time a surprising

rarity.  Perhaps  the  exceedingly  conspicuous  Orpheans  possessed  in  a  still

higher degree than he the faculty of conceiving abstractions and of thinking

unplastically (without images); only they did not succeed in expressing these

abstractions except in the form of the allegory. Also Pherecydes of Syrus who

is a contemporary of Thales and akin to him in many physical conceptions

hovers with the expression of the latter in that middle region where Allegoryis wedded to Mythos, so that he dares, for example, to compare the earth with

a winged oak, which hangs in the air with spread pinions and which Zeus

bedecks, after the defeat of Kronos, with a magnificent robe of honour, into

which  with  his  own  hands  Zeus  embroiders  lands,  water  and  rivers.  In

contrast with such gloomy allegorical philosophizing scarcely to be translated

into the realm of the comprehensible, Thales' are the works of a creative

master who began to look into Nature's depths without fantastic fabling. If as

it is true he used Science and the demonstrable but soon outleapt them, then

this likewise is a typical characteristic of the philosophical genius. The Greek

word  which  designates  the  Sage  belongs  etymologically  to  sapio,  I  taste,

sapiens, the tasting one,sisyphos, the person of the most delicate taste; the

peculiar art of the philosopher therefore consists, according to the opinion of

the  people,  in  a  delicate  selective  judgment  by  taste,  by  discernment,  by

significant differentiation. He is not prudent, if one calls him prudent, who in

his own affairs finds out the good; Aristotle rightly says: "That which Thales

and Anaxagoras know, people will call unusual, astounding,difficult,divine

but -- useless, since human possessions were of no concern to those two."

Through thus selecting and precipitating the unusual, astounding, difficult,

and divine, Philosophy marks the boundary lines dividing her from Science

in the same way as she does it from Prudence by the emphasizing of the

useless. Science without thus selecting, without such delicate taste, pounces

upon everything knowable, in the blind covetousness to know all at any price;

philosophical thinking however is always on the track of the things worth

knowing, on the track of the great and most important discernments. Now the

idea of greatness is changeable, as well in the moral as in the esthetic realm,

thus  Philosophy  begins  with  a  legislation  with  respect  to  greatness,  she

becomes  a  Nomenclator  (name-giver).  "  That  is  great,"  she  says,  and

therewith she raises us above the blind, untamed covetousness of our thirst

for knowledge. By the idea of greatness she assuages this thirst: and it is

chiefly by this, that she contemplates the greatest discernment, that of the

essence and kernel of things, as attainable and attained. When Thales says, "

Everything is water," we are startled up out of our worm-like mauling of and

crawling about among the individual sciences; we divine the last solution of

things and master through this divination the common perplexity of the lower

grades of knowledge. Philosophers try to make the total-chord of the universe

re-echo  within  themselves  and  then  to  project  it  into  ideas  outside

themselves: whilst they are contemplative like the artistic, sympathetic likethe religious, looking out for ends and causalities like the scientific, whilst

they  feel  themselves  swell  up  to  the  macrocosm,  they  still  retain  the

circumspection to contemplate themselves coldly as the reflex of the world;

they retain that cool-headedness, which dramatic artists possess, when they

transform themselves into other bodies, speak out of them, and yet know how

to project this transformation outside themselves into written verses. What

the verse is to the poet, dialectic thinking is to philosophers; they snatch at it

in order to hold fast their enchantment, in order to petrify it. And just as

words and verse to dramatists are only stammerings in a foreign language, to

tell  in  it  what  they  lived,  what  they  saw,  and  what  they  can  directly

promulgate by gesture and music only, thus the expression of every deep

philosophical intuition by means of dialectics and scientific reflection is, it is

true, on the one hand the only means to communicate what has been seen, but

on the other hand it is a paltry means, and at the bottom a metaphorical,

absolutely  inexact  translation  into  a  different  sphere  and  language.  Thus

Thales saw the Unity of the " Existent," and when he wanted to communicate

this idea he talked of water.

                            NIETZSCHE ON PARMENIDES

                          Translated by Maximillian A. Mugge

  While each word of Heraclitus expresses the pride and the majesty of

truth, but of truth grasped in intuitions rather than attained by the rope ladder

of logic, while in Sibylline rapture Heraclitus gazes but does not peer, knows

but does not calculate, his contemporary Parmenides stands beside him as

counter-image, likewise expressing a type of truth-teller but one formed of

ice rather than fire, pouring cold piercing light all around.

  Once in his life Parmenides, probably at a fairly advanced age, had a

moment of purest absolutely bloodless abstraction, unclouded by any reality.

This moment--un-Greek as no other in the two centuries of the Tragic Age--

whose product is the doctrine of Being--became for Parmenides' own life the

boundary stone that separates two periods. At the same time however, this

moment divides pre-Socratic thinking into two halves. The first might be

called the Anaximandrian period, the second the Parmenidean proper. The

first,  older  period  of  Parmenides'  own  philosophizing  still  bears

Anaximandrian  traces;  it  brought  forth  an  organized  philosophic-physical

system in answer to Anaximander's questions. When later Parmenides was

seized by that icy tremor of abstraction and came face to face with his utterly

simple proposition as to being and non-being, his own previous teachingsjoined the rubbish-heap of the older doctrines. Still, he seems not to have lost

every trace of paternal good-will toward the sturdy and well-made child of

his youth, and he helped himself out by saying, "There is only one right way,

to be sure, but if one wishes for a change to try another, then my former view,

as to quality and consistency, is the only right one." Guarding himself by this

approach, he awarded to his former physical system a dignified and extensive

position, even in that great poem on nature which was meant to proclaim his

new insight as really the only way of truth. This paternal solicitude, even

considering that it might have crept in by error, presents the only trace of

human sentiment in a nature wholly petrified by logical rigidity and almost

transformed into a thinking machine.

    Parmenides,  whose  personal  acquaintance  with  Anaximander  does  not

seem unbelievable to me, and whose starting position from Anaximander's

doctrines is not merely credible but evident, had the same distrust toward a

total separation of a world which only is and a world which only comes-to-be

that Heraclitus too had seized upon and which had led him to the denial of all

being. Both men sought a way out of the contradictoriness and disparity of a

double  world  order.  The  leap  into  the  indefinite,  undefineable,  by  which

Anaximander had once and for all escaped the realm of come-to-be and its

empirically given qualities, did not come easy to minds as independent as

those of Heraclitus and Parmenides. They sought to stay on their feet as long

as they could, preserving their leap for the spot where the foot no longer finds

support  and  one  must  jump  to  keep  from  falling.  Both  of  them  looked

repeatedly at just that world which Anaximander had condemned with such

melancholy and had declared as the place of wickedness and simultaneously

of atonement for the unjustness of all coming-to-be. Gazing at this world,

Heraclitus, as we have seen, discovered what wonderful order, regularity and

certainty manifested themselves in all coming-to-be; from this he concluded

that coming-to-be itself could not be anything evil or unjust. His look was

oriented from a point of view totally different from that of Parmenides. The

latter compared the qualities and believed that he found them not equal, but

divided into two rubrics. Comparing, for example, light and dark, he found

the latter obviously but the negation of the former. Thus he differentiated

between positive and negative qualities, seriously attempting to find and note

this basic contradictory principle throughout all nature. His method was as

follows: he took several contradictories, light and heavy for example, rare

and  dense,  active  and  passive,  and  held  them  against  his  original  modelcontradictories  light  and  dark.  Whatever  corresponded  to  light  was  the

positive quality, whatever corresponded to dark, the negative. Taking heavy

and light, for example, light [in the sense of 'weightless'] was apportioned to

light,  heavy  to  dark,  and  thus  heavy  seemed  to  him  but  the  negation  of

weightless, but weightlessness seemed a positive quality. The very method

exhibits  a  defiant  talent  for  abstract-logical  procedure,  closed  against  all

influences of sensation. For heaviness surely seems to urge itself upon the

senses  as  a  positive  quality;  yet  this  did  not  prevent  Parmenides  from

labelling it as a negation. Likewise he designated earth as against fire, cold as

against  warm,  dense  as  against  rare,  feminine  as  against  masculine,  and

passive as against active, to be negatives. Thus before his gaze our empirical

world  divided  into  two  separate  spheres,  the  one  characterized  by  light,

fieriness, warmth, weightlessness, rarification, activity and masculinity, and

the other by the opposite, negative qualities. The latter really express only the

lack, the absence of the former, positive ones. Thus he described the sphere

which lacks the positive qualities as dark, earthy, cold, heavy, dense, and

feminine-passive in general. Instead of the words "positive" and "negative"

he used the absolute terms "existent" and "nonexistent." Now he had arrived

at  the  principle--Anaximander  notwithstanding  that  this  world  of  ours

contains  something  which  is  existent,  as  well  as  something  which  is

nonexistent. The existent should therefore not be sought out-side the world

and beyond our horizon. Right here before us, everywhere, in all coming-to-

be, there is contained an active something which is existent.

  But now he was left with the task of formulating a more exact answer to

the question "What is coming-to-be?" And this was the moment when he had

to leap to keep from falling, although for natures such as Parmenides' perhaps

all leaping constitutes a kind of falling. Suffice it to say that we shall enter the

fog, the mysticism of qualitas occulta and even, just a little, the realm of

mythology. Parmenides, like Heraclitus, gazes at universal coming-to-be and

at impermanence, and he can interpret passing-away only as though it were a

fault of nonexistence. For how could the existent be guilty of passing away!

But coming-to-be, too, must be produced with the help of the nonexistent, for

the existent is always there. Of and by itself it could not come-to-be nor could

it explain coming-to-be. Hence coming-to-be as well as passing-away would

seem to be produced by the negative qualities. But since that which comes-to-

be has a content which is lost in the process of passing away, it presupposes

that the positive qualities (for they are the essence of such content) likewiseparticipate in both processes of change. In brief, we now have the dictum that

"For  coming-to-be,  the  existent  as  well  as  the  nonexistent  are  necessary;

whenever they interact, we have coming-to-be." But how are the positive and

the  negative  to  get  together?  Should  they  not  forever  flee  each  other,  as

contradictories,  and  thus  make  all  coming-to-be  impossible?  Here

Parmenides appeals to a qualitas occulta, to the mystic tendency of opposites

to  attract  and  unite,  and  he  symbolizes  the  opposition  in  the  name  of

Aphrodite and the empirically well-known relationship between masculinity

and femininity. It is the power of Aphrodite that weds the opposites, the

existent with the nonexistent. Desire unites the contradictory and mutually

repellent elements: the result is coming-to-be. When desire is satiated, hatred

and inner opposition drives the existent and the nonexistent apart once more-

and man says, "All things pass."

  But no one lays hands with impunity on such fearsome abstractions as

"the existent" and "the nonexistent." Slowly, upon touching them, the blood

congeals. There came the day when a strange insight befell Parmenides, an

insight which seemed to withdraw the value from all his old combinations so

that he felt like throwing them away like a bag of old worn-out coins. It is

usually  assumed  that  an  external  influence,  in  addition  to  the  inwardly

compelling consistency of such terms as "existent" and "nonexistent" shared

in the invention of that fateful day. This external event is supposed to be

Parmenides'  acquaintance  with  the  theology  of  that  ancient  far-travelled

rhapsodist, singer of mystic nature deification, the Colophonian Xenophanes.

Throughout an extraordinary lifetime, Xenophanes lived as a travelling poet

and through his travels became a widely informed and widely informative

person  who  understood  how  to  ask  questions  and  tell  stories.  Heraclitus

counted  him  among  the  polyhistorians  and  among  "historical"  natures  in

general, in the sense already alluded to. Whence and when he picked up the

mystical tendency toward the one, and the "one forever at rest," no one can

now reconstruct. Perhaps it was the concept of an old man finally settled

down, one before whose soul there appeared, after all the mobility of his

wanderings and after all his restless learning and looking, the highest and

greatest thing of all, a vision of divine rest, of the permanence of all things

within a pantheistic archetypal peace. To me, by the way, it seems no more

than accidental that in the same place, in Elea, two men should be living for a

while who both carried in their minds a concept of unity. They did not form a

school; they had nothing in common which one might have learned from theother and then passed along to others in turn. For the origin of their concepts

of unity was a totally different one in each case, a downright opposite one in

fact. If one of them did know the doctrine of the other, he would have had to

translate it into a language of his own, even to understand it. But even in such

translation the specific import of each would surely have been lost. Whereas

Parmenides  came  to  the  unity  of  the  existent  purely  by  adherence  to  his

supposed  logic,  spinning  it  out  of  the  concepts  of  being  and  nonbeing,

Xenophanes was a religious mystic who with his mystic unity belongs very

typically  to  the  sixth  century.  Even  though  he  was  not  as  cataclysmic  a

personality as Pythagoras, he shared his tendency and compulsion to improve

human beings, to cleanse and to heal them, as he wandered from place to

place. He is the teacher of ethics, though still on the rhapsodic level; in later

times he would have been a Sophist. In his bold disapproval of the current

mores and values he has not his equal in Greece. And to disapprove, he by no

means withdraws into solitude, like Heraclitus and Plato, but stands up before

the  very  public  whose  jubilant  admiration  of  Homer,  whose  passionate

yearning  for  the  honors  of  the  gymnastic  festivals,  whose  worship  of

anthropomorphic stones he scourged wrathfully and scornfully, yet not in the

quarrelsome fashion of a Thersites. The freedom of the individual finds its

high point in Xenophanes, and it is in this almost boundless withdrawal from

all conventionality that he is related more closely to Parmenides, not in that

ultimate divine unity which he once saw in a vision befitting his century and

which has hardly the expression or terminology in common with Parmenides'

one being, not to mention origin.

  It was rather an opposite frame of mind in which Parmenides found his

doctrine of being. On a certain day and in a certain frame of mind he tested

his two interactive contradictories, whose mutual desire and hatred constitute

the world and all coming-to-be. He tested the existent and the nonexistent,

the positive and the negative properties-and suddenly he found that he could

not get past the concept of a negative duality, the concept of non-existence.

Can some-thing which is not be a quality? Or, more basically, can something

which is not, be? For the only single form of knowledge which we trust

immediately and absolutely and to deny which amounts to insanity is the

tautology  A  =  A.  But  just  this  tautological  insight  proclaims  inexorably:

What is not, is not. What is, is. And suddently Parmenides felt a monstrous

logical  sin  burdening  his  whole  previous  life.  Had  he  not  light-heartedly

always assumed that there are such things as negative qualities, nonexistententities, that, in other words, A is not A? But only total perversity of thinking

could have done so. To be sure, he reflected, the great mass of people had

always made the same perverse judgment; he had merely participated in a

universal crime against logic. But the same moment that shows him his crime

illuminates him with a glorious discovery. He has found a principle, the key

to the cosmic secret, remote from all human illusion. Now, grasping the firm

and awful hand of tautological truth about being, he can climb down, into the

abyss of all things.

  On his way down he meets Heraclitus--an unhappy encounter. Caring

now for nothing except the strictest separation of being from non-being, he

must hate in his deepest soul the antinomy-play of Heraclitus. Propositions

such as "We are and at the same time are not," or "Being and nonbeing is at

the same time the same and not the same," tangle and cloud everything which

he had just illuminated and distinguished. They drove him to fury. "Away

with those people," he screamed, "who seem to have two heads and yet know

nothing. Everything is in flux with them, including their thinking. They stand

in dull astonishment before things and yet must be deaf as well as blind to

mix  up  the  opposites  the  way  they  do!"  The  irrationality  of  the  masses,

glorified in playful antinomies and lauded as the culmination of all wisdom

was now a painful and incomprehensible experience.

  And  then  he  really  dipped  into  the  cold  bath  of  his  awe-inspiring

abstractions. That which truly is must be forever present; you cannot say of it

"it was," "it will be." The existent cannot have come to be, for out of what

could it have come? Out of the nonexistent? But the nonexistent is not, and

cannot produce anything. Out of the existent? This would reproduce nothing

but itself. It is the same with passing away. Passing away is just as impossible

as coming-to-be, as is all change, all decrease, all increase. In fact the only

valid proposition that can be stated is "Everything of which you can say 'it

has been' or 'it will be' is not; of the existent you can never say 'it is not."' The

existent is indivisible, for where is the second power that could divide it? It is

immobile, for where could it move to? It can be neither infinitely large nor

infinitely  small,  for  it  is  perfect,  and  a  perfectly  given  infinity  is  a

contradiction. Thus it hovers: bounded, finished, immobile, everywhere in

balance, equally perfect at each point, like a globe, though not in space, for

this space would be a second existent. But there cannot be several existents.

For in order to separate them, there would have to be something which is not

existent, a supposition which cancels itself. Thus there is only eternal unity.  And now, whenever Parmenides glances back-ward at the world of come-

to-be, the world whose existence he used to try to comprehend by means of

ingenious conjectures, he becomes angry with his eyes for so much as seeing

come-to-be, with his ears for hearing it. "Whatever you do, do not be guided

by your dull eyes," is now his imperative, "nor by your resounding ears, nor

by your tongue, but test all things with the power of your thinking alone."

Thus  he  accomplished  the  immensely  significant  first  critique  of  man's

apparatus of knowledge, a critique as yet in-adequate but doomed to bear dire

consequences.  By  wrenching  apart  the  senses  and  the  capacity  for

abstraction, in other words by splitting up mind as though it were composed

of two quite separate capacities, he demolished intellect itself, encouraging

man  to  indulge  in  that  wholly  erroneous  distinction  between  "spirit"  and

"body" which, especially since Plato, lies upon philosophy like a curse. All

sense  perceptions,  says  Parmenides,  yield  but  illusions.  And  their  main

illusoriness  lies  in  their  pretense  that  the  non-existent  coexists  with  the

existent,  that  Becoming,  too,  has  Being.  All  the  manifold  colorful  world

known  to  experience,  all  the  transformations  of  its  qualities,  all  the

orderliness  of  its  ups  and  downs,  are  cast  aside  mercilessly  as  mere

semblance and illusion. Nothing may be learned from them. All effort spent

upon this false deceitful world which is futile and negligible, faked into a

lying existence by the senses is therefore wasted. When one makes as total a

judgment as does Parmenides about the whole of the world, one ceases to be

a  scientist,  an  investigator  into  any  of  the  world's  parts.  One's  sympathy

toward  phenomena  atrophies;  one  even  develops  a  hatred  for  phenomena

including  oneself,  a  hatred  for  being  unable  to  get  rid  of  the  everlasting

deceitfulness of sensation. Henceforward truth shall live only in the palest,

most abstracted generalities, in the empty husks of the most indefinite terms,

as  though  in  a  house  of  cobwebs.  And  be-side  such  truth  now  sits  our

philosopher, like-wise as bloodless as his abstractions, in the spun out fabric

of  his  formulas.  A  spider  at  least  wants  blood  from  its  victims.  The

Parmenidean philosopher hates most of all the blood of his victims, the blood

of the empirical reality which was sacrificed and shed by him.

  And this was a Greek who flourished approximately during the outbreak

of the Ionian Revolt. In those days it was possible for a Greek to flee from an

over-abundant  reality  as  though  it  were  but  the  tricky  scheming  of  the

imagination-and to flee, not like Plato into the land of eternal ideas, into the

workshop  of  the  world-creator,  feasting  one's  eyes  on  the  unblemishedunbreakable  archetypes,  but  into  the  rigor  mortis  of  the  coldest  emptiest

concept of all, the concept of being. Let us be exceedingly careful not to

interpret  such  a  remarkable  event  according  to  false  analogies.  The

Parmenidean escape was not the flight from the world taken by the Hindu

philosophers; it was not evoked by a profound religious conviction as to the

depravity, ephemerality and accursedness of human existence. Its ultimate

goal,  peace  in  being,  was  not  striven  after  as  though  it  were  the  mystic

absorption into one all-sufficing ecstatic state of mind which is the enigma

and  vexation  of  ordinary  minds.  Parmenides'  thinking  conveys  nothing

whatever of the dark intoxicating fragrance of Hindu wisdom which is not

entirely absent from Pythagoras and Empedocles. No, the strange thing about

his philosophic feat at this period is just its lack of fragrance, of color, soul,

and  form,  its  total  lack  of  blood,  religiosity  and  ethical  warmth.  What

astonishes  us  is  the  degree  of  schematism  and  abstraction  (in  a  Greek!),

above  all,  the  terrible  energetic  striving  for  certainty  in  an  epoch  which

otherwise thought mythically and whose imagination was highly mobile and

fluid. "Grant me, ye gods, but one certainty," runs Parmenides' prayer, "and if

it be but a log's breadth on which to lie, on which to ride upon the sea of

uncertainty.  Take  away  every-thing  that  comes-to-be,  everything  lush,

colorful, blossoming, illusory, everything that charms and is alive. Take all

these  for  yourselves  and  grant  me  but  the  one  and  only,  poor  empty

certainty."

  The  prelude  in  Parmenides'  philosophy  is  played  with  ontology  as  its

theme.  Experience  nowhere  offered  him  being  as  he  imagined  it,  but  he

concluded its existence from the fact that he was able to think it. This is a

conclusion  which  rests  on  the  assumption  that  we  have  an  organ  of

knowledge which reaches into the essence of things and is independent of

experience.  The  content  of  our  thinking,  according  to  Parmenides,  is  not

present in sense perception but is an additive from somewhere else, from an

extra-sensory world to which we have direct access by means of our thinking.

Now Aristotle asserted against all similar reasoning that existence is never an

intrinsic part of essence. One may never infer the existentia of being from the

concept being-whose essentia is nothing more than being itself. The logical

truth of the pair of opposites being and nonbeing is completely empty, if the

object of which it is a reflection cannot be given, i.e., the sense perception

from which this antithesis was abstracted. Without such derivation from a

perception, it is no more than a playing with ideas, which in fact yields noknowledge. For the mere logical criterion of truth, as Kant teaches it, the

correspondence  of  knowledge  with  the  universal  and  formal  laws  of

understanding  and  reason,  is,  to  be  sure,  the  conditio  sine  qua  non,  the

negative condition of all truth. But further than this, logic cannot go, and the

error as to content rather than form cannot be detected by using any logical

touch-stone whatever. As soon as we seek the content of the logical truth of

the paired propositions "What is, is; what is not, is not," we cannot in-deed

find any reality whatever which is construrted strictly in accordance with

those propositions. I may say of a tree that "it is" in distinction to things

which are not trees; I may say "it is coming to be" in distinction to itself seen

at a different time; I may even say "it is not," as for example in "it is not yet a

tree" when I am looking at a shrub. Words are but symbols for the relations

of things to one another and to us; nowhere do they touch upon absolute

truth.  Above  all,  the  word  "being"  designates  only  the  most  general

relationship which connects all things, as does the word "nonbeing." But if

the  existence  of  things  themselves  cannot  be  proved,  surely  the  inter-

relationship of things, their so-called being or nonbeing, will advance us not a

step toward the land of truth. Through words and concepts we shall never

reach beyond the wall of relations, to some sort of fabulous primal ground of

things. Even in the pure forms of sense and understanding, in space, time and

causality, we gain nothing that resembles an eternal verity. It is absolutely

impossible for a subject to see or have insight into something while leaving

itself out of the picture, so impossible that knowing and being are the most

opposite  of  all  spheres.  And  if  Parmenides  could  permit  himself,  in  the

uninformed naivete of his time, so far as critique of the intellect is concerned,

to derive absolute being from a forever subjective concept, today, after Kant,

it. is certainly reckless ignorance to attempt it. Now and again, particularly

among badly taught theologians who would like to play philosopher, the task

of  philosophy  is  designated  as  "comprehending  the  absolute  by  means  of

consciousness," even in the form of "The absolute is already present, how

could  it  otherwise  be  sought?"  (Hegel)  or  "Being  must  be  given  to  us

somehow, must be somehow attainable; if it were not we could not have the

concept." (Beneke) The concept of being! As though it did not show its low

empirical origin in its very etymology For esse basically means "to breathe."

And if man uses it of all things other than himself as well, he projects his

conviction that he himself breathes and lives by means of a metaphor, i.e., a

non-logical process, upon all other things. He comprehends their existence asa "breathing" by analogy with his own. The original meaning of the word was

soon blurred, but enough remains to make it obvious that man imagines the

existence of other things by analogy with his own existence, in other words

anthropomorphically and in any event, with non-logical projection. But even

for man-quite aside from his projection--the proposition "I breathe, therefore

being exists" is wholly insufficient. The same objection must be made against

it as must be made against ambulo, ergo sum or ergo est.

  The second concept, of more content than being, likewise invented by

Parmenides though not used by him as skillfully as by his disciple Zeno, is

that of the infinite. Nothing infinite can exist, for to assume it would yield the

contradictory concept of a perfect infinity. Now since our reality, our given

world, everywhere bears the stamp of just such perfect infinity, the word

signifies in its very nature a contradiction to logic and hence to the real, and

is  therefore  an  illusion,  a  lie,  a  phantasm.  Zeno  especially  makes  use  of

indirect proof. He says, for example, "There can be no movement from one

place to another, for if there were such movement, we would have a perfect

infinity, but this is an impossibility. Achilles cannot catch up with the tortoise

which has a small start over him, for in order to reach even the starting point

of the tortoise, Achilles must have traversed innumerable, infinitely many

spaces: first half of the interval, then a fourth of it, an eighth, a sixteenth, and

so on ad infinitum. If he in reality does catch up with the tortoise, this is an

un-logical phenomenon, not a real one. It is not true Being; it is merely an

illusion. For it is never possible to finish the infinite." Another popular device

of this doc-trine is the example of the flying and yet resting arrow. At each

moment of its flight it occupies a position. In this position it is at rest. But can

we say that the sum of infinitely many positions of rest is identical with

motion? Can we say that resting, infinitely repeated, equals motion, which is

its  contrary?  The  infinite  is  here  utilized  as  the  catalyst  of  reality;  in  its

presence  reality  dissolves.  If  the  concepts  are  firm,  eternal  and  exist-ent

(remembering that being and thinking coincide for Parmenides), if in other

words the infinite can never be complete, if rest can never become motion,

then the arrow has really never flown at all. It never left its initial position of

rest; no moment of time has passed. Or, to express it differently: in this so-

called, but merely alleged reality, there is really neither time nor space nor

motion. Finally, even the arrow itself is an illusion, for it has its origin in the

many, in the sense-produced phantasmagoria of the non-one. Let us assume

that the arrow has true being. Then it would be immobile, timeless, uncreatedrigid and eternal-which is impossible to conceive. Let us assume that motion

is truly real. Then there would be no rest, hence no position for the arrow,

hence no space-which is impossible to conceive. Let us assume that time is

real. Then it could not be infinitely divisible. The time that the arrow needs

would  have  to  consist  of  a  limited  number  of  moments;  each  of  these

moments would have to be an atomon--which is impossible to conceive. All

our  conceptions  lead  to  contradictions  as  soon  as  their  empirically  given

content, drawn from our perceivable world, is taken as an eternal verity. If

absolute motion exists, then space does not; if absolute space exists, then

motion does not; if absolute being exists, then the many does not. Wouldn't

one think that confronted with such logic a man would attain the insight that

such concepts do not touch the heart of things, do not undo the tangle of

reality? Parmenides and Zeno, on the contrary, hold fast to the truth and

universal validity of the concepts and discard the perceivable world as the

antithesis to all true and universally valid concepts, as the objectification of

illogic and contradiction. The starting point of all their proof is the wholly

unprovable, improbable assumption that with our capacity to form concepts

we possess the decisive and highest criterion as to being and nonbeing, i.e., as

to objective reality and its antithesis. Instead of being corrected and tested

against reality (considering that they are in fact derived from it) the concepts,

on the contrary, are supposed to measure and direct reality and, in case reality

contradicts  logic,  to  condemn  the  former.  In  order  to  impose  upon  the

concepts this capacity for judging reality, Parmenides had to ascribe to them

the being which was for him the only true being. Thinking and that single

uncreated perfect globe of existentiality were not to be comprehended as two

different  types  of  being,  since  of  course  there  could  be  no  dichotomy  in

being. Thus an incredibly bold notion became necessary, the notion of the

identity of thinking and being. No form of perception, no symbol, no allegory

could  help  here;  the  notion  was  utterly  beyond  conceiving,  but-it  was

necessary. In its very lack of any and all possibility for being translated into

sensation, it celebrated the highest triumph over the world and the claims of

the senses. Thinking and that bulbous-spherical being, wholly dead-inert and

rigid-immobile must, according to Parmenides' imperative, coincide and be

utterly the same thing. What a shock to human imagination! But let their

identity contradict sensation! Just that fact guarantees better than anything

else that this was a conception not derived from the senses.

  One might advance against Parmenides a sturdy pair of arguments adhominem or ex concessis. They would not bring the truth to light, to be sure,

though they do expose the falsehood inherent in the absolute separation of

senses and concepts, and in the identity of being and thinking. In the first

place: if thinking in concepts, on the part of reason, is real, then the many and

motion must partake of reality also, for reasoned thinking is mobile. It moves

from concept to concept. It is mobile, in other words, within a plurality of

realities. Against this, no objection can be made; it is quite impossible to

designate thinking as a rigid persistence, as an eternally unmoved thinking-

in-and-on-itself on the part of a unity. In the second place: if only fraud and

semblance emanate from the senses, and if in truth there is only the real

identity  of  being  and  thinking,  what  then  are  the  senses  themselves?

Evidently a part of semblance, since they do not coincide with thinking, and

since their product, the sensuous world, does not coincide with semblance.

But if the senses are semblance, to whom do they dissemble? How, being

unreal, can they deceive? Nonbeing cannot even practice deceit. Therefore

the  whence  of  illusion  and  semblance  remains  an  enigma,  in  fact  a

contradiction.  We  shall  call  these  two  argumenta  ad  hominem  one,  the

argument based on the mobility of reason; two, the argument based on the

origin of semblance. From the first follows the reality of motion and of the

many, from the second the impossibility of Parmenidean semblance. In both

cases, we are still accepting Parmenides' main doctrine concerning being as

well-founded. But this doctrine merely states, "The existent alone has being;

the nonexistent does not." Now if motion has being, then what is true of

being in general and in all cases is true of motion: it is uncreated, eternal,

indestructible, without increase or decrease. But if semblance is denied of this

world (by means of the question as to its origin), if the stage of so-called

coming-to-be,  of  change  -in  other  words  our  whole  multi-formed  restless

colorful and rich existence-is protected against Parmenidean discard, then it

is necessary to characterize this world of interaction and transformation as a

sum of such truly existent essences, existing simultaneously in all eternity. In

this sup-position too there is no room for transformation in a narrow sense,

i.e., for coming-to-be. But what we have now is a multiplicity which has true

being; all the properties have true being, as has motion. About each and every

moment of this world, even if we choose moments that lie a millenium apart,

one would have to be able to say: all true essences contained in the world are

existent simultaneously, unchanged, undiminished, without increase, without

decrease.  A  millenium  later  exactly  the  same  holds  true;  nothing  hasmeanwhile changed. If, in spite of this, the world looks totally different from

time  to  time,  this  is  not  an  illusion,  not  mere  semblance,  but  rather  the

consequence of everlasting motion. True being is moved sometimes this way,

sometimes that way, together asunder, upwardly downward, withinly in all

directions.



                    THE WILL TO POWER (POSTHUMOUS)

                              Translated by A.M. Ludovici

                                        PREFACE

  (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  1

  Of what is great one must either be silent or speak with greatness. With

greatness--that means cynically and with innocence.

  2

  What I relate is the history of the next two centuries. I describe what is

coming, what can no longer come differently: the advent of nihilism. This

history can be related even now; for necessity itself is at work here. This

future  speaks  even  now  in  a  hundred  signs,  this  destiny  announces  itself

everywhere; for this music of the future all ears are cocked even now. For

some time now, our whole European culture has been moving as toward a

catastrophe, with a tortured tension that is growing from decade to decade:

restlessly, violently, headlong, like a river that wants to reach the end, that no

longer reflects, that is afraid to reflect.

  3

  He that speaks here, conversely, has done nothing so far but reflect: a

philosopher and solitary by instinct, who has found his advantage in standing

aside and outside, in patience, in procrastination, in staying behind; as a spirit

of daring and experiment that has already lost its way once in every labyrinth

of the future; as a soothsayer-bird spirit who looks back when relating what

will come; as the first perfect nihilist of Europe who, however, has even now

lived through the whole of nihilism, to the end, leaving it behind, outside

himself.

  4

  For one should make no mistake about the meaning of the title that this

gospel  of  the  future  wants  to  bear.  "The  Will  to  Power:  Attempt  at  a

Revaluation  of  All  Values"--in  this  formulation  a  countermovement  findsexpression,  regarding  both  principle  and  task;  a  movement  that  in  some

future will take the place of this perfect nihilism--but presupposes it, logically

and psychologically, and certainly can come only after and out of it. For why

has the advent of nihilism become necessary? Because the values we have

had hitherto thus draw their final consequence; because nihilism represents

the ultimate logical conclusion of our great values and ideals--because we

must experience nihilism before we can find out what value these "values"

really had.--We require, sometime, new values.

                        BOOK ONE- EUROPEAN NIHILISM

  1 (1885-1886)

  Toward an Outline

  1.  Nihilism  stands  at  the  door:  whence  comes  this  uncanniest  of  all

guests?  Point  of  departure:  it  is  an  error  to  consider  "social  distress"  or

"physiological degeneration" or, worse, corruption, as the cause of nihilism.

Ours is the most decent and compassionate age. Distress, whether of the soul,

body,  or  intellect,  cannot  of  itself  give  birth  to  nihilism  (i.e.,  the  radical

repudiation of value, meaning, and desirability). Such distress always permits

a variety of interpretations. Rather: it is in one particular interpretation, the

Christian-moral one, that nihilism is rooted.

  2. The end of Christianity--at the hands of its own morality (which cannot

be replaced), which turns against the Christian God (the sense of truthfulness,

developed  highly  by  Christianity,  is  nauseated  by  the  falseness  and

mendaciousness of all Christian interpretations of the world and of history;

rebound from "God is truth" to the fanatical faith "All is false"; Buddhism of

action).

  3. Skepticism regarding morality is what is decisive. The end of the moral

interpretation of the world, which no longer has any sanction after it has tried

to escape into some beyond, leads to nihilism. "Everything lacks meaning"

(the untenability of one interpretation of the world, upon which a tremendous

amount  of  energy  has  been  lavished,  awakens  the  suspicion  that  all

interpretations  of  the  world  are  false).  Buddhistic  tendency,  yearning  for

Nothing. (Indian Buddhism is not the culmination of a thoroughly moralistic

development; its nihilism is therefore full of morality that is not overcome:

existence  as  punishment,  existence  construed  as  error,  error  thus  as  a

punishment--a  moral  valuation.)  Philosophical  attempts  to  overcome  the

"moral God" (Hegel, pantheism). Overcoming popular ideals: the sage; the

saint; the poet. The antagonism of "true" and "beautiful" and "good".  4.  Against  "meaninglessness"  on  the  one  hand,  against  moral  value

judgments on the other: to what extent has all science and philosophy so far

been influenced by moral judgments? and won't this net us the hostility of

science? Or an antiscientific mentality? Critique of Spinozism. Residues of

Christian value judgments are found everywhere in socialistic and positivistic

systems. A critique of Christian morality is still lacking

  5. The nihilistic consequences of contemporary natural science (together

with its attempts to escape into some beyond). The industry of its pursuit

eventually leads to self-disintegration, opposition, an antiscientific mentality.

Since Copernicus man has been rolling from the center toward X.*

  6. The nihilistic consequences of the ways of thinking in politics and

economics,  where  all  "principles"  are  practically  histrionic:  the  air  of

mediocrity,  wretchedness,  dishonesty,  etc.  Nationalism.  Anarchism,  etc.

Punishment. The redeeming class and human being are lacking--the justifiers.

  7.  The  nihilistic  consequences  of  historiography  and  of  the  "practical

historians," i.e., the romantics. The position of art: its position in the modern

world  absolutely  lacking  in  originality.  Its  decline  into  gloom.  Goethe's

allegedly Olympian stance.

  8. Art and the preparation of nihilism: romanticism (the conclusion of

Wagner's Nibelungen). I. NIHILISM

  2 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  What does nihilism mean? That the highest values devaluate themselves.

The aim is lacking; "why?" finds no answer.

  3 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Radical nihilism is the conviction of an absolute untenability of existence

when it comes to the highest values one recognizes; plus the realization that

we lack the least right to posit a beyond or an in-itself of things that might be

"divine" or morality incarnate.

  This realization is a consequence of the cultivation of "truthfulness"--thus

itself a consequence of the faith in morality.

  4 (June 10, 1887)3

  What were the advantages of the Christian moral hypothesis?

  1.  It  granted  man  an  absolute  value,  as  opposed  to  his  smallness  and

accidental occurrence in the flux of becoming and passing away.

  2. It served the advocates of God insofar as it conceded to the world, in

spite of suffering and evil, the character of perfection-including "freedom":

evil appeared full of meaning.  3.  It  posited  that  man  had  a  knowledge  of  absolute  values  and  thus

adequate knowledge precisely regarding what is most important.

  4. It prevented man from despising himself as man, from taking sides

against life; from despairing of knowledge: it was a means of preservation.

  In sum: morality was the great antidote against practical and theoretical

nihilism.

  5 (June 10, 1887)

  But  among  the  forces  cultivated  by  morality  was  truthfulness:  this

eventually  turned  against  morality,  discovered  its  teleology,  its  partial

perspective--and now the recognition of this inveterate mendaciousness that

one despairs of shedding becomes a stimulant. Now we discover in ourselves

needs implanted by centuries of moral interpretation--needs that now appear

to us as needs for untruth; on the other hand, the value for which we endure

life seems to hinge on these needs. This antagonism--not to esteem what we

know, and not to be allowed any longer to esteem the lies we should like to

tell ourselves--results in a process of dissolution.

  6 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  This is the antinomy:

  Insofar as we believe in morality we pass sentence on existence.

  7 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  The supreme values in whose service man should live, especially when

they were very hard on him and exacted a high puce--these social values were

erected over man to strengthen their voice, as if they were commands of God,

as 'reality," as the true" world, as a hope and future world. Now that the

shabby origin of these values is becoming clear, the universe seems to have

lost value, seems "meaningless"--but that is only a transitional stage.

  8 (1883-1888)

  The nihilistic consequence (the belief in valuelessness) as a consequence

of moral valuation: everything egoistic has come to disgust us (even though

we realize the impossibility of the unegoistic); what is necessary has come to

disgust us (even though we realize the impossibility of any liberum arbitrium

or intelligible freedom"). We see that we cannot reach the sphere in which we

have placed our values; but this does not by any means confer any value on

that other sphere in which we live: on the contrary, we are weary because we

have lost the main stimulus "In vain so far!"

  9 (Spring-Fall 1887)

    Pessimism as a preliminary form of nihilism.  10 (Spring-Fall 1887)

    Pessimism as strength--in what? in the energy of its logic, as anarchism

and nihilism, as analytic.

    Pessimism  as  decline--in  what?  as  growing  effeteness,  as  a  sort  of

cosmopolitan fingering, as "tout comprendre and historicism.

  The critical tension: the extremes appear and become predominant.

  11 (Spring-Fall 1887, rev. Spring-Fall 1888)

  The logic of pessimism down to ultimate nihilism: what is at work in it?

The idea of valuelessness, meaninglessness: to what extent moral valuations

hide behind all other high values.

    Conclusion:  Moral  value  judgments  are  ways  of  passing  sentence,

negations; morality is a way of turning one's back on the will to existence.

  Problem: But what is morality?

  12 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  Decline of Cosmological Values

  ( A )

  Nihilism as a psychological state will have to be reached, first, when we

have  sought  a  "meaning"  in  all  events  that  is  not  there:  so  the  seeker

eventually  becomes  discouraged.  Nihilism,  then,  is  the  recognition  of  the

long waste of strength, the agony of the "in vain," insecurity, the lack of any

opportunity to recover and to regain composure--being ashamed in front of

oneself, as if one had deceived oneself all too long.--This meaning could

have been: the "fulfillment" of some highest ethical canon in all events, the

moral world order; or the growth of love and harmony in the intercourse of

beings; or the gradual approximation of a state of universal happiness; or

even the development toward a state of universal annihilation--any goal at

least constitutes some meaning. What all these notions have in common is

that something is to be achieved through the process--and now one realizes

that becoming aims at nothing and achieves nothing.-- Thus, disappointment

regarding  an  alleged  aim  of  becoming  as  a  cause  of  nihilism:  whether

regarding a specific aim or, universalized, the realization that all previous

hypotheses  about  aims  that  concern  the  whole  "evolution"  are  inadequate

(man no longer the collaborator, let alone the center, of becoming).

  Nihilism  as  a  psychological  state  is  reached,  secondly,  when  one  has

posited a totality, a systematization, indeed any organization in all events,

and underneath all events, and a soul that longs to admire and revere has

wallowed in the idea of some supreme form of domination and administration(--if the soul be that of a logician, complete consistency and real dialectic are

quite sufficient to reconcile it to everything). Some sort of unity, some form

of "monism": this faith suffices to give man a deep feeling of standing in the

context of, and being dependent on, some whole that is infinitely superior to

him, and he sees himself as a mode of the deity.--"The well-being of the

universal demands the devotion of the individual"--but behold, there is no

such universal! At bottom, man has lost the faith in his own value when no

infinitely valuable whole works through him; i.e., he conceived such a whole

in order to be able to believe in his own value.

  Nihilism as psychological state has yet a third and last form.

  Given these two insights, that becoming has no goal and that underneath

all becoming there is no grand unity in which the individual could immerse

himself completely as in an element of supreme value, an escape remains: to

pass sentence on this whole world of becoming as a deception and to invent a

world beyond it, a true world. But as soon as man finds out how that world is

fabricated solely from psychological needs, and how he has absolutely no

right to it, the last form of nihilism comes into being: it includes disbelief in

any metaphysical world and forbids itself any belief in a true world. Having

reached this standpoint, one grants the reality of becoming as the only reality,

forbids  oneself  every  kind  of  clandestine  access  to  afterworlds  and  false

divinities--but cannot endure this world though one does not want to deny it.

  What has happened, at bottom? The feeling of valuelessness was reached

with  the  realization  that  the  overall  character  of  existence  may  not  be

interpreted by means of the concept of "aim," the concept of "unity," or the

concept of "truth." Existence has no goal or end; any comprehensive unity in

the plurality of events is lacking: the character of existence is not "true," is

false. One simply lacks any reason for convincing oneself that there is a true

world.  Briefly:  the  categories  "aim,"  "unity,"  "being"  which  we  used  to

project some value into the world--we pull out again; so the world looks

valueless.

  ( B )

  Suppose we realize how the world may no longer be interpreted in terms

of these three categories, and that the world begins to become valueless for us

after this insight: then we have to ask about the sources of our faith in these

three categories. Let us try if it is not possible to give up our faith in them.

Once we have devaluated these three categories, the demonstration that they

cannot be applied to the universe is no longer any reason for devaluating theuniverse.

    Conclusion: The faith in the categories of reason is the cause of nihilism.

We have measured the value of the world according to categories that refer to

a purely fictitious world.

  Final conclusion: All the values by means of which we have tried so far

to  render  the  world  estimable  for  ourselves  and  which  then  proved

inapplicable  and  therefore  devaluated  the  world--all  these  values  are,

psychologically  considered,  the  results  of  certain  perspectives  of  utility,

designed to maintain and increase human constructs of domination--and they

have been falsely projected into the essence of things. What we find here is

still  the  hyperbolic  naivete  of  man:  positing  himself  as  the  meaning  and

measure of the value of things.

  13 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Nihilism represents a pathological transitional stage (what is pathological

is the tremendous generalization, the inference that there is no meaning at

all): whether the productive forces are not yet strong enough, or whether

decadence still hesitates and has not yet invented its remedies.

    Presupposition of this hypothesis: that there is no truth, that there is no

absolute nature of things nor a "thing-in-itself." This, too, IS merely nihilism-

-even the most extreme nihilism. It places the value of things precisely in the

lack of any reality corresponding to these values and in their being merely a

symptom of strength on the part of the value-positers, a simplification for the

sake of life.

  14 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Values and their changes are related to increases in the power of those

positing the values.

  The  measure  of  unbelief,  of  permitted  "freedom  of  the  spirit"  as  an

expression of an increase in power.

  "Nihilism" an ideal of the highest degree of powerfulness of spirit, the

over-richest life--partly destructive, partly ironic.

  15 (Spring-Fall 1837)

  What is a belief? How does it originate? Every belief is a considering-

something-true.

  The most extreme form of nihilism would be the view that every belief,

every considering-something-true, is necessarily false cause there simply is

no true world. Thus, a perspectival appearance whose origin lies in us (in so

far as we continually need a narrower, abbreviated, simplified world).  -That  it  is  the  measure  of  strength  to  what  extent  we  can  admit  to

ourselves, without perishing, the merely apparent character, the necessity of

lies.

  To this extent, nihilism, as the denial of a truthful world, of being, might

be a divine way of thinking.

  16 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  If we are "disappointed," it is at least not regarding life: rather we are now

facing up to all kinds of "desiderata."

  With scornful wrath we contemplate what are called "ideals"; we despise

ourselves  only  because  there  are  moments  when  we  cannot  subdue  that

absurd impulse that is called "idealism." The influence of too much coddling

is stronger than the wrath of the disappointed.

  17 (Spring-Fall 1887; rev. 1888)

  To what extent Schopenhauer's nihilism still follows from the same ideal

that  created  Christian  theism.--One  felt  so  certain  about  the  highest

desiderata, the highest values, the highest perfection that the philosophers

assumed this as an absolute certainty, as if it were a priori: "God" at the apex

as  a  given  truth.  "To  become  as  God,"  "to  be  absorbed  into  God"--for

thousands of years these were the most naive and convincing desiderata (but

what convinces is not necessarily true--it is merely convincing: a note for

asses).

  One has unlearned the habit of conceding to this posited ideal the reality

of  a  person;  one  has  become  atheistic.  But  has  the  ideal  itself  been

renounced?--At bottom, the last metaphysicians still seek in it true "reality,"

the "thing-in-itself" compared to which everything else is merely apparent. It

is their dogma that our apparent world, being so plainly not the expression of

this ideal, cannot be "true"--and that, at bottom, it does not even lead us back

to that metaphysical world as its cause. The unconditional, representing that

highest perfection, cannot possibly be the ground of all that is conditional.

Schopenhauer  wanted  it  otherwise  and  therefore  had  to  conceive  of  this

metaphysical ground as the opposite of the ideal--as "evil, blind will": that

way it could be that "which appears," that which reveals itself in the world of

appearances. But even so he did not renounce the absoluteness of the ideal--

he sneaked by.-

  (Kant considered the hypothesis of "intelligible freedom" necessary in

order to acquit the ens perfection of responsibility for the world's being such-

and-such-in short, to account for evil and ills: a scandalous bit of logic for aphilosopher.)

  18 (1883-1888)

  The most universal sign of the modern age: man has lost dignity in his

own eyes to an incredible extent. For a long time the center and tragic hero of

existence in general; then at least intent on proving himself closely related to

the  decisive  and  essentially  valuable  side  of  existence--like  all

metaphysicians who wish to cling to the dignity of man, with their faith that

moral values are cardinal values. Those who have abandoned God cling that

much more firmly to the faith in morality.

  19 (1883-1888)

  Every purely moral value system (that of Buddhism, for example) ends in

nihilism: this to be expected in Europe. One still hopes to get along with a

moralism  without  religious  background:  but  that  necessarily  leads  to

nihilism.--In religion the constraint is lacking to consider ourselves as value-

positing.

  20 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The nihilistic question "for what?" is rooted in the old habit of supposing

that  the  goal  must  be  put  up,  given,  demanded  from  outside-by  some

superhuman authority. Having unlearned faith in that, one still follows the old

habit  and  seeks  another  authority  that  can  speak  unconditionally  and

command goals and tasks. The authority of conscience now steps up front

(the more emancipated one is from theology, the more imperativistic morality

becomes) to compensate for the loss of a personal authority. Or the authority

of reason. Or the social instinct (the herd). Or history with an immanent spirit

and a goal within, so one can entrust oneself to it. One wants to get around

the will, the willing of a goal, the risk of positing a goal for oneself; one

wants to rid oneself of the responsibility (one would accept fatalism). Finally,

happiness--and,  with  a  touch  of  Tartuffe,  the  happiness  of  the  greatest

number.

  One says to oneself:

  1. a definite goal is not necessary at all,

  2. cannot possibly be anticipated.

  Just  now  when  the  greatest  strength  of  will  would  be  necessary,  it  is

weakest  and  least  confident.  Absolute  mistrust  regarding  the  organizing

strength of the will for the whole.

  21 (Spring-Fall 1887; rev. 1888)

  The  perfect  nihilist.--The  nihilist's  eye  idealizes  in  the  direction  ofugliness and is unfaithful to his memories: it allows them to drop, lose their

leaves; it does not guard them against the corpselike pallor that weakness

pours out over what is distant and gone. And what he does not do for himself,

he also does not do for the whole past of mankind: he lets it drop.

  22 (Spring-Fall 1887)

    Nihilism. It is ambiguous:

  A. Nihilism as a sign of increased power of the spirit: as active nihilism.

  B. Nihilism as decline and recession of the power of the spirit: as passive

nihilism.

  23 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Nihilism as a normal condition.

  It can be a sign of strength: the spirit may have grown so strong that

previous goals ("convictions," articles of faith) have become incommensurate

(for  a  faith  generally  expresses  the  constraint  of  conditions  of  existence,

submission  to  the  authority  of  circumstances  under  which  one  flourishes,

grows, gains power). Or a sign of the lack of strength to posit for oneself,

productively, a goal, a why, a faith.

  It  reaches  its  maximum  of  relative  strength  as  a  violent  force  of

destruction--as active nihilism.

  Its opposite: the weary nihilism that no longer attacks; its most famous

form, Buddhism; a passive nihilism, a sign of weakness. The strength of the

spirit may be worn out, exhausted, so that previous goals and values have

become incommensurate and no longer are believed; so that the synthesis of

values  and  goals  (on  which  every  strong  culture  rests)  dissolves  and  the

individual  values  war  against  each  other:  disintegration--and  whatever

refreshes,  heals,  calms,  numbs  emerges  into  the  foreground  in  various

disguises, religious or moral, or political, or aesthetic, etc.

  24 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  Nihilism does not only contemplate the "in vain!" nor is it merely the

belief that everything deserves to perish: one helps to destroy.--This is, if you

will, illogical; but the nihilist does not believe that one needs to be logical.--It

is the condition of strong spirits and wills, and these do not find it possible to

stop with the No of "judgment": their nature demands the No of the deed. The

reduction to nothing by judgment is seconded by the reduction to nothing by

hand.

  25 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  On the genesis of the nihilist.--It is only late that one musters the couragefor  what  one  really  knows.'.  That  I  have  hitherto  been  a  thorough-going

nihilist, I have admitted to myself only recently: the energy and radicalism

with which I advanced as a nihilist deceived me about this basic fact. When

one moves toward a goal it seems impossible that "goal-lessness as such" is

the principle of our faith.

  26 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The pessimism of active energy: the question "for what?" after a terrible

struggle, even victory. That something is a hundred times more important

than the question of whether we feel well or not: basic instinct of all strong

natures--and consequently also whether others feel well or not. In sum, that

we have a goal for which one does not hesitate to offer human sacrifices, to

risk every danger, to take upon oneself whatever is bad and worst: the great

passion.

  27 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Causes of nihilism: 1. The higher species is lacking, i.e., those whose

inexhaustible fertility and power keep up the faith in man. (One should recall

what one owes to Napoleon: almost all of the higher hopes of this century.)

  2. The lower species ("herd," "mass," "society") unlearns modesty and

blows  up  its  needs  into  cosmic  and  metaphysical  values.  In  this  way  the

whole of existence is vulgarized: in so far as the mass is dominant it bullies

the exceptions, so they lose their faith in themselves and become nihilists.

  All attempts to think up higher types failed ("romanticism"; the artist, the

philosopher; against Carlyle's attempt to ascribe to them the highest moral

values).

  The resistance to higher types as a result.

  Decline and insecurity of all higher types. The fight against the genius

("folk poetry," etc.). Pity for the lowly and suffering as a measure for the

height of a soul.

  The philosopher is lacking who interprets the deed and does not merely

transpose it.

  28 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Main proposition. How complete nihilism is the necessary consequence

of the ideals entertained hitherto.

    Incomplete nihilism; its forms: we live in the midst of it.

  Attempts to escape nihilism without revaluating our values so far: they

produce the opposite, make the problem more acute.

  29 (1883-1888)  The  ways  of  self-narcotization.--Deep  down:  not  knowing  whither.

Emptiness.  Attempt  to  get  over  it  by  intoxication  intoxication  as  music;

intoxication  as  cruelty  in  the  tragic  enjoyment  of  the  destruction  of  the

noblest; intoxication as blind enthusiasm for single human beings or ages (as

hatred, etc.).--Attempt to work blindly as an instrument of science: opening

one's eyes to the many small enjoyments; e.g., also in the quest of knowledge

(modesty toward oneself); resignation to generalizing about oneself, a pathos;

mysticism, the voluptuous enjoyment of eternal emptiness; art "for its own

sake"  ("le  fait")  and  "pure  knowledge"  as  narcotic  states  of  disgust  with

oneself;  some  kind  or  other  of  continual  work,  or  of  some  stupid  little

fanaticism; a medley of all means, sickness owing to general immoderation

(debauchery kills enjoyment).

  1. Weakness of the will as a result.

  2. Extreme pride and the humiliation of petty weakness felt in contrast.

  30 (Nov. 1887-March 1888; rev. 1888)

  The time has come when we have to pay for having been Christians for

two thousand years: we are losing the center of gravity by virtue of which we

lived;  we  are  lost  for  a  while.  Abruptly  we  plunge  into  the  opposite

valuations, with all the energy that such an extreme overvaluation of man has

generated in man.

  Now  everything  is  false  through  and  through,  mere  "words,"  chaotic,

weak, or extravagant:

  a. one attempts a kind of this-worldly solution, but in the same sense--that

of the eventual triumph of truth, love, and justice (socialism: "equality of the

person");

  b. one also tries to hold on to the moral ideal (with the pre-eminence of

what is un-egoistic, self-denial, negation of the win);

  c.  one  tries  to  hold  on  even  to  the  "beyond"--even  if  only  as  some

antilogical "x"--but one immediately interprets it in such a way that some sort

of old-fashioned metaphysical comfort can be derived from it;

  d. one tries to find in events an old-fashioned divine governance--an order

of things that rewards, punishes, educates, and betters;

  e. one still believes in good and evil and experiences the triumph of the

good and the annihilation of evil as a task (that is English; typical case: the

flathead John Stuart Mill);

  f.  contempt  for  what  is  "natural,"  for  desire,  for  the  ego:  attempt  to

understand  even  the  highest  spirituality  and  art  as  the  consequence  ofdepersonalization and as desinteressement;

  g. the church is still permitted to obtrude into all important experiences

and main points of individual life to hallow them and give them a higher

meaning: we still have the "Christian state," "Christian marriage"

  31 (1884)

  There have been more thoughtful and thought-addicted ages than ours:

ages, e.g., like that in which the Buddha appeared, when after centuries of

quarrels among sects the people themselves were as deeply lost in the ravines

of philosophic doctrines as European nations were at times in the subtleties of

religious dogmas. Surely, one should not let "literature" and the press seduce

us  to  think  well  of  the  "spirit"  of  our  time:  the  existence  of  millions  of

spiritists  and  a  Christianity  that  goes  in  for  gymnastics  of  that  gruesome

ugliness that characterizes all English inventions are more instructive.

  European  pessimism  is  still  in  its  early  stages--bears  witness  against

itself: it still lacks that tremendous, yearning rigidity of expression in which

the Nothing is reflected, once found in India; it is still far too contrived and

too  little  "organic"-too  much  a  pessimism  of  scholars  and  poets:  I  mean,

much of it is excogitated and invented, is "created" and not a "cause."

  32 (Summer-Fall 1888)

  Critique  of  pessimism  to  date.--Resistance  to  eudaemonistic

considerations as the last reduction to the question: what does it mean? The

reduction of growing gloom.-

  Our pessimism: the world does not have the value we thought it had. Our

faith itself has so increased our desire for knowledge that today we have to

say  this.  Initial  result:  it  seems  worth  less;  that  is  how  it  is  experienced

initially.  It  is  only  in  this  sense  that  we  are  pessimists;  i.e.,  in  our

determination to admit this revaluation to ourselves without any reservation,

and to stop telling ourselves tales-lies-the old way.

  That  is  precisely  how  we  find  the  pathos  that  impels  us  to  seek  new

values. In sum: the world might be far more valuable than we used to believe;

we must see through the naivete of our ideals, and while we thought that we

accorded it the highest interpretation, we may not even have given our human

existence a moderately fair value.

  What  has  been  de�fied?  The  value  instincts  in  the  community  (that

which made possible its continued existence).

  What has been slandered? That which set apart the higher men from the

lower, the desires that create clefts.  33 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Causes of the advent of pessimism:

  1. that the most powerful desires of life that have the most future have

hitherto been slandered, so a curse weighs on life;

  2. that the growing courage and integrity and the bolder mistrust that now

characterize man comprehend that these instincts are inseparable from life,

and one therefore turns against life;

  3. that only the most mediocre, who have no feeling at all for this conflict,

flourish while the higher kind miscarries and, as a product of degeneration,

invites antipathy--that the mediocre on the other hand, when they pose as the

goal  and  meaning,  arouse  indignation  (that  nobody  is  able  any  more  to

answer any "for what or who?"

  4. that diminution, sensitivity to pain, restlessness, haste, and hustling

grow continually--that it becomes easier and easier to recognize this whole

commotion, this so-called "civilization," and that the individual, faced with

this tremendous machinery, loses courage and submits.

  34 (1&35-1886)

  Modern  pessimism  is  an  expression  of  the  uselessness  of  the  modern

world--not of the world of existence.

  35 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The  "predominance  of  suffering  over  pleasure"  or  the  opposite

(hedonism): these two doctrines are already signposts to nihilism.

  For  in  both  of  these  cases  no  ultimate  meaning  is  posited  except  the

appearance of pleasure or displeasure.

  But that is how a kind of man speaks that no longer dares to posit a will, a

purpose,  a  meaning:  for  any  healthier  kind  of  man  the  value  of  life  is

certainly not measured by the standard of these trifles. And suffering might

predominate, and in spite of that a powerful will might exist, a Yes to life, a

need for thus predominance.

  "Life is not worthwhile"; "resignation"; "why the tears?-- a weakly and

sentimental way of thinking. "Un monstre gai vaut mieux qu'un sentimental

ennuyeux.

  36 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  The  philosophical  nihilist  is  convinced  that  all  that  happens  is

meaningless and in vain; and that there ought not to be anything meaningless

and in vain. But whence this: there ought not to be. From where does one get

this "meaning," this standard?-- At bottom, the nihilist thinks that the sight ofsuch a bleak, useless existence makes a philosopher feel dissatisfied, bleak,

desperate. Such an insight goes against our finer sensibility as philosophers.

It amounts to the absurd valuation: to have any right to be, the character of

existence would have to give the philosopher pleasure.

  Now it is easy to see that pleasure and displeasure can only be means in

the course of events: the question remains whether we are at all able to see

the  "meaning,"  the  "aim,"  whether  the  question  of  meaninglessness  or  its

opposite is not insoluble for us.

  37 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The development of pessimism into nihilism.--Denaturalization of values.

Scholasticism  of  values.  Detached  and  idealistic,  values,  instead  of

dominating and guiding action, turn against action and condemn it.

    Opposites replace natural degrees and ranks. Hatred against the order of

rank. Opposites suit a plebeian age because easier to comprehend.

  The repudiated world versus an artificially built "true, valuable" one.--

Finally: one discovers of what material one has built the "true world": and

now  all  one  has  left  is  the  repudiated  world,  and  one  adds  this  supreme

disappointment to the reasons why it deserves to be repudiated.

  At this point nihilism is reached: all one has left are the values that pass

judgment--nothing else.

  Here the problem of strength and weakness originates:

  1. The weak perish of it;

  2. those who are stronger destroy what does not perish;

  3. those who are strongest overcome the values that pass judgment.

  In sum this constitutes the tragic age.

  38 (1883-1888)

  Recently much mischief has been done with an accidental and in every

way unsuitable word: everywhere "pessimism" is discussed, and the question

is debated whether pessmism or optimism is right, as if there must be answers

to that.

  One fails to see, although it could hardly be more obvious, that pessimism

is  not  a  problem  but  a  symptom,  that  the  name  should  be  replaced  by

"nihilism," that the question whether not-to-be is better than to be is itself a

disease, a sign of decline, an idiosyncrasy.

  The  nihilistic  movement  is  merely  the  expression  of  physiological

decadence.

  39 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)  To  be  comprehended:  That  every  kind  of  decay  and  sickness  has

continually  helped  to  form  overall  value  judgments;  that  decadence  has

actually  gained  predominance  in  the  value  judgments  that  have  become

accepted;  that  we  not  only  have  to  fight  against  the  consequences  of  all

present  misery  of  degeneration,  but  that  all  previous  decadence  is  still

residual,  i.e.,  survives.  Such  a  total  aberration  of  mankind  from  its  basic

instincts,  such  a  total  decadence  of  value  judgments--that  is  the  question

mark  par  excellence,  the  real  riddle  that  the  animal  "man"  poses  for  the

philosopher.

  40 (March-June 1888)

  The  concept  of  decadence.--Waste,  decay,  elimination  need  not  be

condemned: they are necessary consequences of life, of the growth of life.

The phenomenon of decadence is as necessary as any increase and advance

of life: one is in no position to abolish it. Reason demands, on the contrary,

that we do justice to it.

  It is a disgrace for all socialist systematizers that they suppose there could

be circumstances--social combinations--in which vice, disease, prostitution,

distress would no longer grow.--But that means condemning life.--A society

is not free to remain young. And even at the height of its strength it has to

form  refuse  and  waste  materials.  The  more  energetically  and  boldly  it

advances,  the  richer  it  will  be  in  failures  and  deformities,  the  closer  to

decline.--Age is not abolished by means of institutions. Neither is disease.

Nor vice.

  41 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  Basic insight regarding the nature of decadence: its supposed causes are

its consequences.

  This changes the whole perspective of moral problems.

  The  whole  moral  struggle  against  vice,  luxury,  crime,  even  disease,

appears  a  naivete  and  superfluous:  there  is  no  "improvement"  (against

repentance).

    Decadence itself is nothing to be fought: it is absolutely necessary and

belongs to every age and every people. What should be fought vigorously is

the contagion of the healthy parts of the organism.

  Is this being done? The opposite is done. Precisely that is attempted in the

name of humanity.

  How are the supreme values held so far, related to this basic biological

question? Philosophy, religion, morality, art, etc.  (The  cure:  e.g.,  militarism,  beginning  with  Napoleon  who  considered

civilization his natural enemy.)

  42 (March-June 1888)

  First principle:

  The supposed causes of degeneration are its consequences.

  But  the  supposed  remedies  of  degeneration  are  also  mere  palliatives

against  some  of  its  effects:  the  "cured"  are  merely  one  type  of  the

degenerates.

    Consequences of decadence: vice--the addiction to vice; sickness, crime-

criminality; celibacy-sterility; hystericism,weakness of the will; alcoholism;

pessimism;  anarchism;  libertinism  (also  of  the  spirit).  The  slanderers,

underminers, doubters, destroyers.

  43 (March-June 1888)

  On the concept of decadence.

  1.  Skepticism  is  a  consequence  of  decadence,  as  is  libertinism  of  the

spirit.

  2. The corruption of morals is a consequence of decadence (weakness of

the will, need for strong stimuli).

  3. Attempted cures, psychological and moral, do not change the course of

decadence, do not arrest it, are physiologically naught:

    Insight into the great nullity of these presumptuous "reactions"; they are

forms  of  narcotization  against  certain  terrible  consequences;  they  do  not

eliminate the morbid element; often they are heroic attempts to annul the man

of decadence and to realize the minimum of his harmfulness.

  4. Nihilism is no cause but merely the logical result of decadence.

  5. The "good" and "bad" man are merely two types of decadence: in all

basic phenomena they agree.

  6. The social question is a consequence of decadence.

  7. Sicknesses, especially those affecting nerves and head, are signs that

the  defensive  strength  of  the  strong  natures  is  lacking;  precisely  this  is

suggested  by  irritability,  so  pleasure  and  displeasure  become  foreground

problems.

  44 (Spring-Summer 1888)

  Most general types of decadence:

  1. Believing one chooses remedies, one chooses in fact that which hastens

exhaustion; Christianity is an example (to name the greatest example of such

an aberration of the instincts); "progress" is another instance.-  2. One loses one's power of resistance against stimuli--and comes to be at

the  mercy  of  accidents:  one  coarsens  and  enlarges  one's  experiences

  tremendously--"depersonalization," disintegration of the will; example: one

whole type of morality, the altruistic one which talks much of pity--and is

distinguished by the weakness of the personality, so that it is sounded, too,

and  like  an  overstimulated  string  vibrates  continually--an  extreme

irritability.-

  3. One confuses cause and effect: one fails to understand decadence as a

physiological condition and mistakes its consequences for the real cause of

the indisposition; example: all of religious morality.

  4.  One  longs  for  a  condition  in  which  one  no  longer  suffers:  life  is

actually experienced as the ground of ills; one esteems unconscious states,

without  feeling,  (sleep,  fainting)  as  incomparably  more  valuable  than

conscious ones; from this a method.

  45 (March-June 1888)

  On the hygiene of the "weak."--Everything done in weakness fails. Moral:

do  nothing.  Only  there  is  the  hitch  that  precisely  the  strength  to  suspend

activity, not to react, is sickest of all under the influence of weakness: one

never reacts more quickly and blindly than when one should not react at all.

  A strong nature manifests itself by waiting and postponing any reaction: it

is  as  much  characterized  by  a  certain  adiaphoria  as  weakness  is  by  an

involuntary  countermovement  and  the  suddenness  and  inevitability  of

"action."-- The will is weak-- and the prescription to avoid stupidities would

be to have a strong will and to do nothing.--Contradictio.--A kind of self-

destruction;  the  instinct  of  preservation  is  compromised.--The  weak  harm

themselves.--That is the type of decadence.

  In fact, we find a tremendous amount of reflection about practices that

would lead to impassability. The instinct is on the right track insofar as doing

nothing is more expedient than doing something.

  All the practices of the orders, the solitary philosophers, the fakirs are

inspired by the right value standard that a certain kind of man cannot benefit

himself more than by preventing himself as much as possible from acting.-

  Means of relief: absolute obedience, machinelike activity, avoidance of

people and things that would demand instant decisions and actions.

  46 (March-June 1888)

    Weakness of the will: that is a metaphor that can prove misleading. For

there  is  no  will,  and  consequently  neither  a  strong  nor  a  weak  will.  Themultitude and disgregation of impulses and the lack of any systematic order

among  them  result  in  a  "weak  will";  their  coordination  under  a  single

predominant  impulse  results  in  a  "strong  will":  in  the  first  case  it  is  the

oscillation and the lack of gravity; in the latter, the precision and clarity of the

direction.

  47 (March-June 1888)

  What is inherited is not the sickness but sickliness: the lack of strength to

resist the danger of infections, etc., the broken resistance; morally speaking,

resignation and meekness in face of the enemy.

  I have asked myself if all the supreme values of previous philosophy,

morality, and religion could not be compared to the values of the weakened,

the mentally ill, and neurasthenics: in a milder form, they represent the same

ills.-

  It is the value of all morbid states that they show us under a magnifying

glass certain states that are normal--but not easily visible when normal.-

  Health and sickness are not essentially different, as the ancient physicians

and  some  practitioners  even  today  suppose.  One  must  not  make  of  them

distinct principles or entities that fight over the living organism and turn it

into their arena. That is silly nonsense and chatter that is no good any longer.

In  fact,  there  are  only  differences  in  degree  between  these  two  kinds  of

existence: the exaggeration, the disproportion, the nonharmony of the normal

phenomena constitute the pathological state (Claude Bernard).

  Just  as  "evil"  can  be  considered  as  exaggeration,  disharmony,

disproportion,  "the  good"  may  be  a  protective  diet  against  the  danger  of

exaggeration, disharmony, and disproportion.

    Hereditary  weakness  as  the  dominant  feeling:  cause  of  the  supreme

values.

  N.B.  One  wants  weakness:  why?  Usually  because  one  is  necessarily

weak.

    Weakness as a task: weakening the desires, the feelings of pleasure and

displeasure, the will to power, to a sense of pride, to want to have and have

more; weakening as meekness; weakening as faith; weakening as aversion

and shame in the face of everything natural, as negation of life, as sickness

and  habitual  weakness--weakening  as  the  renunciation  of  revenge,  of

resistance, of enmity and wrath.

  -The  error  in  treatment:  one  does  not  want  to  fight  weakness  with  a

systeme fortifiant, but rather with a kind of justification and moralization;i.e., with an interpretation.-

  -Two totally different states confounded: e.g., the calm of strength, which

is  essentially  forbearance  from  reaction  (type  of  the  gods  whom  nothing

moves)--and the calm of exhaustion,. rigidity to the point of anesthesia. All

philosophic-ascetic  procedures  aim  at  the  second,  but  really  intend  the

former--for they attribute predicates to the attained state as if a divine state

had been attained.

  48 (March-June 1888)

  The most dangerous misunderstanding.--One concept apparently permits

no confusion or ambiguity: that of exhaustion. Exhaustion can be acquired or

inherited--in any case it changes the aspect of things, the value of things.

  As  opposed  to  those  who,  from  the  fullness  they  represent  and  feel,

involuntarily give to things and see them fuller, more powerful, and pregnant

with  future--who  at  least  are  able  to  bestow  something--the  exhausted

diminish and botch all they see--they impoverish the value: they are harmful.-

  About this no mistake seems possible: yet history contains the gruesome

fact that the exhausted have always been mistaken for the fullest--and the

fullest for the most harmful.

  Those poor in life, the weak, impoverish life; those rich in life, the strong,

enrich it. The first are parasites of life; the second give presents to it.--How is

it possible to confound these two?

  When the exhausted appeared with the gesture of the highest activity and

energy  (when  degeneration  effected  an  excess  of  spiritual  and  nervous

discharge), they were mistaken for the rich. They excited fear.--The cult of

the fool is always the cult of those rich in life, the powerful. The fanatic, the

possessed, the religious epileptic, all eccentrics have been experienced as the

highest types of power: as divine.

  This  kind  of  strength  that  excites  fear  was  considered  preeminently

divine: here was the origin of authority; here one interpreted, heard, sought

wisdom.--This  led  to  the  development,  almost  everywhere,  of  a  will  to

"deify," i.e., a will to the typical degeneration of spirit, body, and nerves: an

attempt to find the way to this higher level of being. To make oneself sick,

mad, to provoke the symptoms of derangement and ruin-that was taken for

becoming stronger, more superhuman, more terrible, wiser. One thought that

in this way one became so rich in power that one could give from one's

fullness. Wherever one adored one sought one who could give.

  Here the experience of intoxication proved misleading. This increases thefeeling  of  power  in  the  highest  degree--therefore,  naively  judged,  power

itself. On the highest rung of power one placed the most intoxicated, the

ecstatic. (--There are two sources of intoxication: the over-great fullness of

life and a state of pathological nourishment of the brain.)

  49 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  Acquired, not inherited, exhaustion: (1) Inadequate nourishment, often

from  ignorance  about  norishment;  e.g.,  among  scholars.  (2)  Erotic

precociousness: the curse in particular of French youth, above all in Paris,

who emerge into the world from their Lycees botched and soiled and never

free themselves again from the chain of contemptible inclinations, ironical

and  disdainful  toward  themselves--galley  slaves  with  all  refinements

(incidentally, in most cases already a symptom of the decadence of race and

family,  like  all  hypersensitivity;  also  the  contagion  of  the  milieu--to  let

oneself be determined by one's environment is decadent). (3) Alcoholism--

not  the  instinct  but  the  habit,  the  stupid  imitation,  the  cowardly  or  vain

assimilation to a dominant regime:

  What  a  blessing  a  Jew  is  among  Germans!  How  much  dullness,  how

blond the head, how blue the eye; the lack of esprit in face, word, posture; the

lazy stretching-oneself, the German need for a good rest--not prompted by

overwork  but  by  the  disgusting  stimulation  and  overstimulation  through

alcoholica.-

  50 (1888)

  Theory  of  exhaustion.--Vice,  the  mentally  ill  (resp.,  the  artists-),  the

criminals, the anarchists--these are not the oppressed classes but the scum of

previous society of all classes.-

  Realizing  that  all  our  classes  are  permeated  by  these  elements,  we

understand  that  modern  society  is  no  "society,"  no  "body,"  but  a  sick

conglomerate  of  chandalas--a  society  that  no  longer  has  the  strength  to

excrete.

  To what extent sickliness, owing to the symbiosis of centuries,

  goes much deeper:

  modern virtue,=

  modern spirituality, = as forms of sickness.

  Our science =

  51 (March-June 1888)

  The  state  of  corruption.--To  understand  how  all  forms  of  corruption

belong together, without forgetting the Christian corruption (Pascal as type)as  well  as  the  socialist-communist  corruption  (a  consequence  of  the

Christian--from  the  point  of  view  of  the  natural  sciences,  the  socialists'

conception of the highest society is the lowest in the order of rank); also the

"beyond" corruption: as if outside the actual world, that of becoming, there

were another world of being.

  Here no terms are permissible: here one has to eradicate, annihilate, wage

war; everywhere the Christian-nihilistic value standard still has to be pulled

up and fought under every mask; e.g., in present-day sociology, in present-

day music, in present-day pessimism (all of them forms of the Christian value

ideal).

  Either the one is true or the other: true here means elevating the type of

man.

  The priest, the shepherd of souls, as objectionable forms of existence. All

of education to date, helpless, untenable, without center of gravity, stained by

the contradiction of values.

  52 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  Nature is not immoral when it has no pity for the degenerate: on the

contrary, the growth of physiological and moral ills among mankind is the

consequence of a pathological and unnatural morality. The sensibility of the

majority of men is pathological and unnatural.

  Why is it that mankind is corrupt morally and physiologically?-The body

perishes when an organ is altered. The right of altruism cannot be derived

from physiology; nor can the right to help and to an equality of lots: these are

prizes for the degenerate and underprivileged.

  There is no solidarity in a society in which there are sterile, unproductive,

and destructive elements--which, incidentally? will have descendants even

more degenerate than they are themselves.

  53 (March-June 1888)

  Even the ideals of science can be deeply, yet completely unconsciously

influenced by decadence: our entire sociology is proof of that. The objection

to it is that from experience it knows only the form of the decay of society,

and inevitably it takes its own instincts of decay for the norms of sociological

judgment.

  In these norms the life that is declining in present-day Europe formulates

its social ideals: one cannot tell them from the ideals of old races that have

outlived themselves.-

  The  herd  instinct,  then--a  power  that  has  now  become  sovereign--issomething totally different from the instinct of an aristocratic society: and the

value  of  the  units  determines  the  significance  of  the  sum.--Our  entire

sociology simply does not know any other instinct than that of the herd, i.e.,

that of the sum of zeroes--where every zero has "equal rights," where it is

virtuous to be zero.-

  The valuation that is today applied to the different forms of society is

entirely identical with that which assigns a higher value to peace than to war:

but this judgment is antibiological, is itself a fruit of the decadence of life.--

Life is a consequence of war, society itself a means to war.--As a biologist,

Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  is  a  decadent;  as  a  moralist,  too  (he  considers  the

triumph of altruism a desideratum! ! !).

  54 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  It is my good fortune that after whole millennia of error and confusion I

have rediscovered the way that leads to a Yes and a No.

  I teach the No to all that makes weak--that exhausts.

  I teach the Yes to all that strengthens, that stores up strength, that justifies

the feeling of strength.

  So far one has taught neither the one nor the other: virtue has been taught,

mortification of the self, pity, even the negation of life. All these are the

values of the exhausted.

  Prolonged reflection on the physiology of exhaustion forced me to ask to

what  extent  the  judgments  of  the  exhausted  had  penetrated  the  world  of

values.

  My result was as surprising as possible, even for me who was at home in

many a strange world: I found that all of the supreme value judgments--all

that have come to dominate mankind, at least that part that has become tame--

can be derived from the judgments of the exhausted.

  Under the holiest names I pulled up destructive tendencies; one has called

God what weakens, teaches weakness, infects with weakness.--I found that

the "good man" is one of the forms in which decadence affirms itself.

  That virtue of which Schopenhauer still taught that it is the supreme, the

only virtue, and the basis of all virtues--precisely pity I recognized as more

dangerous than any vice. To cross as a matter of principle selection in the

species and its purification of refuse--that has so far been called virtue par

excellence.-

  One should respect fatality--that fatality that says to the weak: perish!-

  One  has  called  it  God--that  one  resisted  fatality,  that  one--corruptedmankind and made it rot.-- One should not use the name of God in vain.-

  The race is corrupted--not by its vices but by its ignorance; it is corrupted

because  it  did  not  recognize  exhaustion  as  exhaustion:  mistakes  about

physiological states are the source of all ills.-

  Virtue is our greatest misunderstanding.

  Problem: How did the exhausted come to make the laws about values?

Put differently: How did those come to power who are the last.--How did the

instinct of the human animal come to stand on its head?-

  55 (June 10, 1887)31

  Extreme positions are not succeeded by moderate ones but by extreme

positions of the opposite kind. Thus the belief in the absolute immorality of

nature, in aim- and meaninglessness, is the psychologically necessary affect

once the belief in God and an essentially moral order becomes untenable.

Nihilism  appears  at  that  point,  not  that  the  displeasure  at  existence  has

become  greater  than  before  but  because  one  has  come  to  mistrust  any

"meaning" in suffering, indeed in existence. One interpretation has collapsed;

but because it was considered the interpretation it now seems as if there were

no meaning at all in existence, as if everything were in vain.

  That  this  "in  vain"  constitutes  the  character  of  present-day  nihilism

remains to be shown. The mistrust of our previous valuations grows until it

becomes the question: "Are not all 'values' lures that draw out the comedy

without bringing it closer to a solution?" Duration "in vain," without end or

aim, is the most paralyzing idea, particularly when one understands that one

is being fooled and yet lacks the power not to be fooled.

  Let  us  think  this  thought  in  its  most  terrible  form:  existence  as  it  is,

without  meaning  or  aim,  yet  recurring  inevitably  without  any  finale  of

nothingness:  "the  eternal  recurrence."  This  is  the  most  extreme  form  of

nihilism: the nothing (the "meaningless"), eternally!

  The European form of Buddhism: the energy of knowledge and strength

compels this belief. It is the most scientific of all possible hypotheses. We

deny end goals: if existence had one it would have to have been reached.

  So one understands that an antithesis to pantheism is attempted here: for

"everything  perfect,  divine,  eternal"  also  compels  a  faith  in  the  "eternal

recurrence."  Question:  does  morality  make  impossible  *is  pantheistic

affirmation of all things, too? At bottom, it is only the moral god that has

been overcome. Does it make sense to conceive a god "beyond good and

evil"? Would a pantheism in this sense be possible? Can we remove the ideaof a goal from the process and then affirm the process in spite of this?-This

would be the case if something were attained at every moment within this

process--and always the same. Spinoza reached such an affirmative position

in so far as every moment has a logical necessity, and with his basic instinct,

which  was  logical,  he  felt  a  sense  of  triumph  that  the  world  should  be

constituted that way.

  But  his  case  is  only  a  single  case.  Every  basic  character  trait  that  is

encountered  at  the  bottom  of  every  event,  that  finds  expression  in  every

event, would have to lead every individual who experienced it as his own

basic character trait to welcome every moment of universal existence with a

sense of triumph. The crucial point would be that one experienced this basic

character trait in oneself as good, valuable--with pleasure.

  It  was  morality  that  protected  life  against  despair  and  the  leap  into

nothing, among men and classes who were violated and oppressed by men:

for it is the experience of being powerless against men, not against nature,

that generates the most desperate embitterment against existence. Morality

treated the violent despots, the doers of violence, the "masters" in general as

the enemies against whom the common man must be protected, which means

first of all encouraged and strengthened. Morality consequently taught men to

hate and despise most profoundly what is the basic character trait of those

who rule: their will to power. To abolish, deny, and dissolve this morality--

that would mean looking at the best-hated drive with an opposite feeling and

valuation. If the suffering and oppressed lost the faith that they have the right

to despise the will to power, they would enter the phase of hopeless despair.

This would be the case if this trait were essential to life and it could be shown

that even in this will to morality this very "will to power" were hidden, and

even  this  hatred  and  contempt  were  still  a  will  to  power.  The  oppressed

would come to see that they were on the same plain with the oppressors,

without prerogative, without higher rank.

  Rather the opposite! There is nothing to life that has value, except the

degree  of  power-assuming  that  life  itself  is  the  will  to  power.  Morality

guarded the underprivileged against nihilism by assigning to each an infinite

value, a metaphysical value, and by placing each in an order that did not

agree  with  the  worldly  order  of  rank  and  power:  it  taught  resignation,

meekness, etc. Supposipg that the faith in this morality would perish, then the

underprivileged would no longer have their comfort--and they would perish.

  This perishing takes the form of self-destruction--the instinctive selectionof  that  which  must  destroy.  Symptoms  of  this  selfdestruction  of  the

underprivileged: self-vivisection, poisoning, intoxication, romanticism, above

all the instinctive need for actions that turn the powerful into mortal enemies

(as it were, one breeds one's own hangmen); the will to destruction as the will

of  a  still  deeper  instinct,  the  instinct  of  self-destruction,  the  will  for

nothingness.

  Nihilism as a symptom that the underprivileged have no comfort left; that

they destroy in order to be destroyed; that without morality they no longer

have any reason to "resign themselves" --that they place themselves on the

plain  of  the  opposite  principle  and  also  want  power  by  compelling  the

powerful to become their hangmen. This is the European form of Buddhism--

saying No after all existence has lost its "meaning."

  It  is  not  that  "distress"  has  grown:  on  the  contrary.  "God,  morality,

resignation," were remedies on terribly low rungs of misery: active nihilism

appears  in  relatively  much  more  favorable  conditions.  The  feeling  that

morality has been overcome presupposes a fair degree of spiritual culture,

and this in turn that one is relatively well off. A certain spiritual weariness

that, owing to the long fight of philosophical opinions, has reached the most

hopeless skepticism regarding all philosophy, is another sign of the by no

means low position of these nihilists. Consider the situation in which the

Buddha  appeared.  The  doctrine  of  the  eternal  recurrence  would  have

scholarly presuppositions (as did the Buddha's doctrine; e.g., the concept of

causality, etc.).

  *

  What  does  "underprivileged"  mean?  Above  all,  physiologically--no

longer politically. The unhealthiest kind of man in Europe (in all classes)

furnishes  the  soil  for  this  nihilism:  they  will  experience  the  belief  in  the

eternal recurrence as a curse, struck by which one no longer shrinks from any

action; not to be extinguished passively but to extinguish everything that is so

aim- and meaningless, although this is a mere convulsion, a blind rage at the

insight that everything has been for eternities--even this moment of nihilism

and lust for destruction.--It is the value of such a crisis that it purlfies, that it

pushes  together  related  elements  to  perish  of  each  other,  that  it  assigns

common tasks to men who have opposite ways of thinking--and it also brings

to light the weaker and less secure among them and thus promotes an order of

rank  according  to  strength,  from  the  point  of  view  of  health:  those  who

command are recognized as those who command, those who obey as thosewho obey. Of course, outside every existing social order.

  *

  Who  will  prove  to  be  the  strongest  in  the  course  of  this?  The  most

moderate; those who do not require any extreme articles of faith; those who

not only concede but love a fair amount of accidents and nonsense; those who

can  think  of  man  with  a  considerable  reduction  of  his  value  without

becoming small and weak on that account: those richest in health who are

equal to most misfortunes and therefore not so afraid of misfortunes--human

beings who are sure of their power and represent the attained strength of

humanity with conscious pride.

  *

  How would such a human being even think of the eternal recurrence?

  56 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  - Periods of European Nihilism

  The period of unclarity, of all kinds of tentative men who would conserve

the old without letting go of the new.

  The  period  of  clarity:  one  understands  that  the  old  and  the  new  are

basically  opposite,  the  old  values  born  of  declining  and  the  new  ones  of

ascending life--that all the old ideals are hostile to life (born of decadence and

agents of decadence, even if in the magnificent Sunday-clothes of morality).

We understand the old and are far from strong enough for something new.

  The period of the three great affects: contempt, pity, destruction.

  The period of catastrophe: the advent of a doctrine that sifts men--driving

the  weak  to  decisions,  and  the  strong  as  well--  II.  HISTORY  OF

EUROPEAN NIHILISM

  57 (1884)

  My friends, it was hard for us when we were young: we suffered youth

itself like a serious sickness. That is due to the time into which we have been

thrown--a time of extensive inner decay and disintegration, a time that with

all its weaknesses, and even with its best strength, opposes the spirit of youth.

Disintegration characterizes this time, and thus uncertainty: nothing stands

firmly on its feet or on a hard faith in itself; one lives for tomorrow, as the

day  after  tomorrow  is  dubious.  Everything  on  our  way  is  slippery  and

dangerous, and the ice that still supports us has become thin: all of us feel the

warm, uncanny breath of the thawing wind; where we still walk, soon no one

will be able to walk.

  58 (1885-1888)  If this is not an age of decay and declining vitality, it is at least one of

headlong  and  arbitrary  experimentation:--and  it  is  probable  that  a

superabundance of bungled experiments should create an overall impression

as of decay--and perhaps even decay itself.

  59 (1885-1886)

  Toward a History of the Modern Eclipse

  The state nomads (civil servants, etc.): without home. The decline of the

family. The "good man" as a symptom of exhaustion. Justice as will to power

(breeding).

    Lasciviousness and neurosis. Black music: whither refreshing music? The

anarchist. Contempt for man, nausea. Deepest difference: whether hunger or

overabundance  becomes  creative?  The  former  generates  the  ideals  of

romanticism. Nordic unnaturalness. The need for alcoholica: the "distress" of

the workers. Philosophical nihilism.

  60 (1885)

  The slow emergence and rise of the middle and lower classes (including

the lower kind of spirit and body), of which one finds many preludes before

the  French  Revolution-and  it--would  have  taken  place  without  the

Revolution, too--on the whole, then, the predominance of the herd over all

shepherds and bellwethers-- involves

  1. eclipse of the spirit (the fusion of a Stoic and a frivolous appearance of

happiness, characteristic of noble cultures, decreases; one lets much suffering

be seen and heard that one formerly bore and hid);

  2. moral hypocrisy (a way of wishing to distinguish oneself not by means

of morality, but by means of the herd virtues: pity, consideration, moderation,

which are not recognized and honored outside the herd ability);

  3. a really great amount of shared suffering (pity) and joy (the pleasure in

large-scale  associations  found  in  all  herd  animals  --"community  spirit,"

"Fatherland," everything in which the individual does not count).

  61 (Summer-Fall 1883)

  Our time, with its aspiration to remedy and prevent accidental distresses

and to wage preventive war against disagreeable possibilities, is a time of the

poor.  Our  "rich"--are  poorest  of  all.  The  true  purpose  of  all  riches  is

forgotten.

  62 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Critique of modern man (his moralistic mendaciousness) :~A -the "good

man" corrupted and seduced by bad institutions (tyrants and priests);-reasonas  authority;-history  as  overcoming  of  errors;-the  future  as  progress;-the

Christian state ("the Lord of hosts");-the Christian sex impulse (or marriage);

-the kingdom of "justice" (the cult of "humanity");-"freedom."

  The romantic pose of modern man:-the noble man (Byron, Victor Hugo,

George  Sand);-noble  indignation;-consecration  through  passion  (as  true

"nature");-siding  with  the  oppressed  and  underprivileged:  motto  of  the

historians  and  novelists;-the  Stoics  of  duty,-selflessness  as  art  and

knowledge,-altruism as the most mendacious form of egoism (utilitarianism),

most sentimental egoism.

  All  this  is  eighteenth  century.  What,  on  the  other  hand,  has  not  been

inherited from it: insouciance, cheerfulness, elegance, brightness of the spirit.

The tempo of the spirit has changed; the enjoyment of refinement and clarity

of  the  spirit  has  given  place  to  the  enjoyment  of  color,  harmony,  mass,

reality, etc. Sensualism in matters of the spirit. In short, it is the eighteenth

century of Rousseau.

  63 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  On the whole, a tremendous quantum of humaneness has been attained in

present-day mankind. That this is not felt generally is itself a proof: we have

become  so  sensitive  concerning  small  states  of  distress  that  we  unjustly

ignore what has been attained.

  Here one must make allowance for the existence of much decadence, and

seen with such eyes our world has to look wretched and miserable. But such

eyes have at all times seen the same things:

  1. a certain overirritation even of the moral feelings;

  2. the quantum of embitterment and eclipse that pessimism carries into

judgments: these two together account for the predominance of the opposite

notion, that our morality is in a bad way.

  The fact of credit, of worldwide trade, of the means of transportation--

here a tremendous mild trust in man finds expression.--Another contributing

factor is

  3. the emancipation of science from moral and religious purposes: a very

good sign that, however, is usually misunderstood.

  In my own way I attempt a justification of history.

  64 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The  second  Buddhism.  The  nihilistic  catastrophe  that  finishes  Indian

culture.--Early signs of it: The immense increase of pity. Spiritual weariness.

The reduction of problems to questions of pleasure and displeasure. The warglory that provokes a counterstroke. Just as national demarcation provokes a

countermovement,  the  most  cordial  "fraternity."  The  impossibility  for

religion to go on working with dogmas and fables.

  65 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  What is attacked deep down today is the instinct and the will of tradition:

all institutions that owe their origins to this instinct violate the taste of the

modern spirit---At bottom, nothing is thought and done without the purpose

of eradicating this sense for tradition. One considers tradition a fatality; one

studies it, recognizes it (as "heredity"), but one does not want it. The tensing

of  a  will  over  long  temporal  distances,  the  selection  of  the  states  and

valuations that allow one to dispose of future centuries --precisely this is

antimodern  in  the  highest  degree.  Which  goes  to  show  that  it  is  the

disorganizing principles that give our age its character.

  66 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  "Be simple!"--for us complicated and elusive triers of the reins a demand

that  is  a  simple  stupidity.--Be  natural!  But  how  if  one  happens  to  be

"unnatural"?

  67 (1884)

  The former means for obtaining homogeneous, enduring characters for

long generations: unalienable landed property, honoring the old (origin of the

belief in gods and heroes as ancestors).

  Now the breaking up of landed property belongs to the opposite tendency:

newspapers (in place of daily prayers), railway, telegraph. Centralization of a

tremendous  number  of  different  interests  in  a  single  soul,  which  for  that

reason must be very strong and protean.

  68 (March-June 1888)

  Why  everything  turns  into  histrionics.--Modern  man  lacks:  the  sure

instinct (consequence of a long homogeneous form of activity of one kind of

man); the inability to achieve anything perfect is merely a consequence of

this: as an individual one can never make up for lost schooling.

  That which creates a morality, a code of laws: the profound instinct that

only automatism makes possible perfection in life and creation.

  But now we have reached the opposite point; indeed, we wanted to reach

it: the most extreme consciousness, man's ability to see through himself and

history. With this we are practically as far as possible from perfection in

being,  doing,  and  willing:  our  desire,  even  our  will  for  knowledge  is  a

symptom  of  a  tremendous  decadence.  We  strive  for  the  opposite  of  thatwhich strong races, strong natures want--understanding is an ending.-

  That science is possible in this sense that is cultivated today is proof that

all  elementary  instincts,  life's  instincts  of  self-defense  and  protection,  no

longer  function.  We  no  longer  collect,  we  squander  the  capital  of  our

ancestors, even in the way in which we seek knowledge.-

  69 (1885-1886) Nihilistic Traits

  a.  In  the  natural  sciences  ("meaninglessness");  causalism,  mechanism.

"Lawfulness" an entr'acte, a residue.

  b.  Ditto  in  politics:  one  lacks  the  faith  in  one's  right,  innocence;

mendaciousness rules and serving the moment.

  c. Ditto in economics: the abolition of slavery. The lack of a redeeming

class, one that justifies-advent of anarchism. "Education"?

  d. Ditto in history: fatalism, Darwinism; the final attempts to read reason

and divinity into it fail. Sentimentality in face of the past; one could not

endure a biography!-- (Here, too, phenomenalism: character as a mask; there

are no facts.)

  e.  Ditto  in  art:  romanticism  and  its  counterstroke  (aversion  against

romantic ideals and lies). The latter, moral as a sense of greater truthfulness,

but pessimistic. Pure "artists" (indifferent toward content). (Father-confessor

psychology  and  puritan  psychology,  two  forms  of  psychological

romanticism:  but  even  its  counterproposal,  the  attempt  to  adopt  a  purely

artistic  attitude  toward  man--even  there  the  opposite  valuation  is  not  yet

ventured!)

  70 (1885-1886)

  Against the doctrine of the influence of the milieu and external causes:

the force within is infinitely superior; much that looks like external influence

is  merely  its  adaptation  from  within.  The  very  same  milieus  can  be

interpreted and exploited in opposite ways: there are no facts.--A genius is

not explained in terms of such conditions of his origin.

  71 (Spring-Fall 1887; rev. Spring-Fall 1888)

    "Modernity"  in  the  perspective  of  the  metaphor  of  nourishment  and

digestion.-

    Sensibility  immensely  more  irritable  (--dressed  up  moralistically:  the

increase in pity--); the abundance of disparate impressions greater than ever:

cosmopolitanism  in  foods,  literatures,  newspapers,  forms,  tastes,  even

landscapes. The tempo of this influx prestissimo; the impressions erase each

other; one instinctively resists taking in anything, taking anything deeply, to"digest" anything; a weakening of the power to digest results from this. A

kind  of  adaptation  to  this  flood  of  impressions  takes  place:  men  unlearn

spontaneous action, they merely react to stimuli from outside. They spend

their  strength  partly  in  assimilating  things,  partly  in  defense,  partly  in

opposition. Profound weakening of spontaneity: the historian, critic, analyst,

the  interpreter,  the  observer,  the  collector,  the  reader-all  of  them  reactive

talents--all science!

  Artificial change of one's nature into a "mirror"; interested but, as it were,

merely epidermically interested; a coolness on principle, a balance, a fixed

low  temperature  closely  underneath  the  thin  surface  on  which  warmth,

movement, "tempest," and the play of waves are encountered.

    Opposition  of  external  mobility  and  a  certain  deep  heaviness  and

weariness.

  72 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  Where  does  our  modern  world  belong--to  exhaustion  or  ascent?--Its

manifoldness and unrest conditioned by the attainment of the highest level of

consciousness.

  73 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Overwork, curiosity and sympathy--our modern vices.

  74 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Toward a characterization of "modernity."--Overabundant development

of intermediary forms; atrophy of types; traditions break off, schools; the

overlordship  of  the  instincts  (prepared  philosophically:  the  unconscious

worth more) after the will power, the willing of end and means, has been

weakened.

  75 (1885)

  An able craftsman or scholar cuts a fine figure when he takes pride in his

art and looks on life content and satisfied. But nothing looks more wretched

than  when  a  shoemaker  or  schoolmaster  gives  us  to  understand  with  a

suffering mien that he was really born for something better. There is nothing

better than what is good-- and good is having some ability and using that to

create, Tuchtigkeit or virtu in the Italian Renaissance sense.

  Today, in our time when the state has an absurdly fat stomach, there are

in  all  fields  and  departments,  in  addition  to  the  real  workers,  also

"representatives";  e.g.,  besides  the  scholars  also  scribblers,  besides  the

suffering classes also garrulous, boastful peter-do-wells who "represent" this

suffering, not to speak of the professional politicians who are well off while"representing" distress with powerful lungs before a parliament. Our modern

life is extremely expensive owing to the large number of intermediaries; in an

ancient city, on the other hand, and, echoing that, also in many cities in Spain

and Italy, one appeared oneself and would have given a hoot to such modern

representatives and intermediaries--or a kick!

  76 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The predominance of dealers and intermediaries in spiritual matters, too:

the scribbler, the "representative," the historian (who fuses past and present),

the  exotician  and  cosmopolitan,  the  intermediaries  between  science  and

philosophy, the semitheologians.

    77(1883-1888)

  Nothing to date has nauseated me more than the parasites of the spirit: in

our unhealthy Europe one already finds them everywhere--and they have the

best conscience in the world. Perhaps a little dim, a little air pessimiste, but in

the main voraclous, dirty, dirtying, creeping in, nestling, thievish, scurvy--

and as innocent as all little sinners and microbes. They live off the fact that

other people have spirit and squander it: they know that it is of the very

essence of the rich spirit to squander itself carelessly, without petty caution,

from day to day.--For the spirit is a bad householder and pays no heed to how

everybody lives and feeds on it.

    78(1885-1886) Histrionics

  The colorfulness of modern man and its charm. Essentially concealment

and satiety.

  The scribbler.

  The politician (in "the nationalist swindle").

    Histrionics in the arts:

  lack of probity in prior training and schooling (Fromentin);

  the  romantics  (lack  of  philosophy  and  science  and  superabundance  of

literature);

  the novelists (Walter Scott, but also the Nibelungen monsters along with

the most nervous music);

  the Iyric poets.

  Being "scientific."

    Virtuosos (Jews).

  Popular ideals overcome, but not yet in the eyes of the people: the saint,

the sage, the prophet.

  79 (Spring-Fall 1887)  The modern spirit's lack of discipline, dressed up in all sorts of moral

fashions.--The showy words are: tolerance (for "the incapacity for Yes and

No"); la largeur de sympathie ( = one-third indifference, one-third curiosity,

one-third pathological irritability); "objectivity" (lack of personality, lack of

will,  incapacity  for  "love");  "freedom"  versus  rules  (romanticism);  "truth"

versus  forgery  and  lies  (naturalism);  being  "scientific"  (the  "document

hurnain": in other words, the novel of colportage and addition in place of

composition);  "passion"  meaning  disorder  and  immoderation;  "depth"

meaning confusion, the profuse chaos of symbols.

  80 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  Toward a critique of the big words.--I am full of suspicion and malice

against what they call "ideals": this is my pessimism, to have recognized how

the "higher feelings" are a source of misfortune and man's loss of value.

  One is deceived every time one expects "progress" from an ideal; every

time so far the victory of the ideal has meant a retrograde movement.

    Christianity,  the  revolution,  the  abolition  of  slavery,  equal  rights,

philanthropy, love of peace, justice, truth: all these big words have value only

in a fight, as flags: not as realities but as showy words for something quite

different (indeed, opposite!)

  81 (1883-1888)

  One knows the kind of human being who has fallen in love with the

motto, tout comprendre c'est tout pardonner. It is the weak, it is above all the

disappointed: if there is something to be forgiven in all, perhaps there is also

something to be despised in all. It is the philosophy of disappointment that

wraps itself so humanely in pity and looks sweet.

  These are romantics whose faith flew the coop: now they at least want to

watch  how  everything  passes  and  goes.  They  call  it  l'art  pour  l'art,

"objectivity," etc.

  82 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Chief  symptoms  of  pessimism:  the  diners  chez  Maguy;  Russian

pessimism  (Tolstoy,  Dostoevsky);  aesthetic  pessimism,  l'art  pour  l'art,

"description"  (romantic  and  antiromantic  pessimism);  epistemological

pessimism  (Schopenhauer,  phenomenalism-);  anarchistic  pessimism;  the

"religion of pity," Buddhistic premovement; cultural pessimism (exoticism,

cosmopolitanism); moralistic pessimism: I myself.

  83 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  "Without the Christian faith," Pascal thought, "you, no less than natureand  history,  will  become  for  yourselves  un  monstre  et  un  chaos."  This

prophecy we have furfilled, after the feeble-optimistic eighteenth century had

prettified and rationalized man.

    Schopenhauer and Pascal.--In an important sense, Schopenhauer is the

first  to  take  up  again  the  movement  of  Pascal:  un  rnonstre  et  un  chaos,

consequently something to be negated.-- History, nature, man himself.

  "Our inability to know the truth is the consequence of our corruption, our

moral decay"; thus Pascal. And thus, at bottom, Schopenhauer. "The deeper

the corruption of reason, the more necessary the doctrine of salvation"--or, in

Schopenhauer's terms, negation.

  84 (Spring-Fall 1887)

    Schopenhauer as throwback (state before the revolution): Pity, sensuality,

art,  weakness  of  the  will,  catholicism  of  spiritual  cravings--that  is  good

eighteenth century au fond.

    Schopenhauer's basic misunderstanding of the will (as if craving, instinct,

drive were the essence of will) is typical: lowering the value of the will to the

point of making a real mistake. Also hatred against willing; attempt to see

something higher, indeed that which is higher and valuable, in willing no

more, in "being a subject without aim and purpose" (in the "pure subject free

of will"). Great symptom of the exhaustion or the weakness of the will: for

the will is precisely that which treats cravings as their master and appoints to

them their way and measure.

  85 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  The unworthy attempt has been made to see Wagner and Schopenhauer as

types  of  mental  illness:  one  would  gain  an  incomparably  more  essential

insight  by  making  more  precise  scientifically  the  type  of  decadence  both

represent.

  86 (1888)

  Your  Henrik  Ibsen  has  become  very  clear  to  me.  For  all  his  robust

idealism  and  "will  to  truth"  he  did  not  dare  to  liberate  himself  from  the

illusionism of morality that speaks of freedom without wishing to admit to

itself what freedom is: the second stage in the metamorphosis of the "will to

power"--for those who lack freedom. On the first stage one demands justice

from those who are in power. On the second, one speaks of "freedom--that is,

one wants to get away from those in power. On the third, one speaks of

"equal rights"--that is, as long as one has not yet gained superiority one wants

to prevent one's competitors from growing in power.  87 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Decline  of  Protestantism:  understood  as  a  halfway  house  both

theoretically and historically. Actual superiority of Catholicism; the feeling of

Protestantism extinguished to such an extent that the strongest anti-Protestant

movements  are  no  longer  experienced  as  such  (for  example,  Wagner's

Parsifal). All of the higher regions of the spirit in France are Catholic in their

instincts; Bismarck realizes that Protestantism simply doesn't exist any more.

  88 (Spring-Fall 1887)

    Protestantism, that spiritually unclean and boring form of decadence in

which Christianity has been able so far to preserve itself in the mediocre

north: valuable for knowledge as something complex and a halfway house, in

so far as it brought together in the same heads experiences of different orders

and origins.

  89 (March-June 1888)

  How  did  the  German  spirit  transform  Christianity!--And  to  stick  to

Protestantism: how much beer there is in Protestant Christianity! Can one

even imagine a spiritually staler, lazier, more comfortably relaxed form of the

Christian faith than that of the average Protestant in Germany?

  That's what I call a modest version of Christianity! A homoeopathy of

Christianity is what I call it.

  One  reminds  me  that  today  we  also  encounter  an  immodest

Protestantism--that of the court chaplains and anti-Semitic speculators: but

nobody has claimed yet that any "spirit" whatever "moved" on the faces of

these waters.--That is merely a more indecent form of Christianity, by no

means more sensible.

  90 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

    Progress.--Let us not be deceived! Time marches forward; we'd like to

believe  that  everything  that  is  in  it  also  marches  forward--that  the

development is one that moves forward.

  The most level-headed are led astray by this illusion. But the nineteenth

century does not represent progress over the sixteenth; and the German spirit

of 1888 represents a regress from the German spirit of 1788.

    "Mankind" does not advance, it does not even exist. The overall aspect is

that of a tremendous experimental laboratory in which a few successes are

scored, scattered throughout all ages, while there are untold failures, and all

order,  logic,  union,  and  obligingness  are  lacking.  How  can  we  fail  to

recognize that the ascent of Christianity is a movement of decadence?-Thatthe German Reformation is a recrudescence of Christian barbarism?-That the

Revolution destroyed the instinct for a grand organization of society?

  Man represents no progress over the animal: the civilized tenderfoot is an

abortion  compared  to  the  Arab  and  Corsican;  the  Chinese  is  a  more

successful type, namely more durable, than the European.

  91 (1888) On German Pessimism

  The eclipse, the pessimistic coloring, comes necessarily in the wake of

the  Enlightenment.  Around  1770  the  decline  of  cheerfulness  began  to  be

noticed; women, with that feminine instinct which always sides with virtue,

supposed that immorality was the cause. Galiani hit the nail on the head: he

cites Voltaire's verse:

  Un monstre gai vaut mieux

  Qu'un sentimental ennuyeux.

  When I believe now that I am a few centuries ahead in Enlightenment not

only of Voltaire but even of Galiani, who was far profounder--how far must I

have  got  in  the  increase  of  darkness!  And  this  is  really  the  case,  and  I

bewared  in  time,  with  some  sort  of  regret,  of  the  German  and  Christian

narrowness and inconsequence of pessimism a la Schopenhauer or, worse,

Leopardi, and sought out the most quintessential forms (Asia). But in order to

endure this type of extreme pessimism (it can be perceived here and there in

my Birth of Tragedy) and to live alone "without God and morality" I had to

invent a counterpart for myself. Perhaps I know best why man alone laughs:

he alone suffers so deeply that he had to invent laughter. The unhappiest and

most melancholy animal is, as fitting, the most cheerful.

  92 (1883-1888)

  Regarding German culture, I have always had the feeling of decline. This

fact, that I first became acquainted with a type in decline, has often made me

unfair to the whole phenomenon of European culture. The Germans always

come after the others, much later: they are carrying something in the depths;

e.g.,-

    Dependence on other countries; e.g., Kant-Rousseau, Sensualists, Hume,

Swedenborg.

    Schopenhauer-Indians and romanticism, Voltaire.

    Wagner-French cult of the gruesome and of grand opera, Paris and the

flight into primeval states (marriage with the sister).

  --The law of the latecomers (province to Paris, Germany to France). Why

the Germans of all people discovered the Greek spirit (the more one developsa  drive,  the  more  attractive  does  it  become  to  plunge  for  once  into  its

opposite).

  Music is swan song.

  93 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

    Renaissance and Reformation.-What does the Renaissance prove? That

the reign of the individual has to be brief. The squandering is too great; the

very  possibility  of  collecting  and  capitalizing  is  lacking;  and  exhaustion

follows immediately. These are times when everything is spent, when the

very strength is spent with which one collects, capitalizes, and piles riches

upon  riches.-  Even  the  opponents  of  such  movements  are  forced  into  an

absurd waste of energy; they, too, soon become exhausted, spent, desolate.

  In the Reformation we possess a wild and vulgar counterpart to the Italian

Renaissance, born of related impulses; only in the retarded north, which had

remained coarse, they had to don a religious disguise; for there the concept of

the higher life had not yet detached itself from that of the religious life.

  Through the Reformation, too, the individual sought freedom; "everybody

his own priest" is also a mere formula of libertinage. In truth, one word was

enough--"evangelical freedom"--and all instincts that had reason to remain

hidden  broke  out  like  wild  dogs,  the  most  brutal  requirements  suddenly

acquired the courage to face themselves, and everything seemed justified.--

One  was  careful  not  to  understand  what  liberty  one  had  really  meant  at

bottom;  one  shut  one's  eyes  before  oneself.--But  shutting  one's  eyes  and

moistening one's lips with enthusiastic orations did not prevent one's hands

from grasping whatever could be grabbed, and the belly became the god of

the  "free  evangel,"  and  all  the  cravings  of  revenge  and  envy  satisfied

themselves with insatiable rage.-

  This took a while; then exhaustion set in, just as it had in the south of

Europe--and  here,  too,  a  vulgar  kind  of  exhaustion,  a  general  were  in

servitium.-- The indecent century of Germany arrived.-

  94 (1884)

  Chivalry as the conquered position of power: its gradual breaking up (and

in  part  transition  into  what  is  more  spread  out,  bourgeois).  In  La

Rochefoucauld  we  find  a  consciousness  of  the  true  motive  springs  of

noblesse of the mind--and a view of these motive springs that is darkened by

Christianity.

  The French Revolution as the continuation of Christianity. Rousseau is

the seducer: he again unfetters woman who is henceforth represented in anever  more  interesting  manner--as  suffering.  Then  the  slaves  and  Mrs.

Beecher- Stowe. Then the poor and the workers. Then the vice addicts and

the sick--all this is moved into the foreground (even to develop sympathy for

the genius one no longer knows any other way for the past five hundred years

than to represent him as the bearer of great suffering!). Next come the curse

on  voluptuousness  (Baudelaire  and  Schopenhauer);  the  most  decided

conviction that the lust to rule is the greatest vice; the perfect certainty that

morality and disinterestedness are identical concepts and that the "happiness

of all" is a goal worth striving for (i.e., the kingdom of heaven of Christ). We

are well along on the way: the kingdom of heaven of the poor in spirit has

begun.-- Intermediary stages: the bourgeois (a parvenu on account of money)

and the worker (on account of the machine).

    Comparison of Greek culture and that of the French in the age of Louis

XIV. Decided faith in oneself. A leisure class whose members make things

difficult for themselves and exercise much self-overcoming. The power of

form, the will to give form to oneself. "Happiness" admitted as a goal. Much

strength and energy behind the emphasis on forms. The delight in looking at

a life that seems so easy.--To the French, the Greeks looked like children.

  95 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The Three Centuries

  Their different sensibilities are best expressed thus:

    Aristocratism: Descartes, rule of reason, testimony of the sovereignty of

the will;

    Feminism: Rousseau, rule of feeling, testimony of the sovereignty of the

senses, mendacious;

    Animalism: Schopenhauer, rule of craving, testimony of the sovereignty

of animality, more honest but gloomy.

  The  seventeenth  century  is  aristocratic,  imposes  order,  looks  down

haughtily upon the animalic, is severe against the heart, not cozy, without

sentiment, "un-German," averse to what is burlesque and what is natural,

inclined  to  generalizations  and  sovereign  confronted  with  the  past--for  it

believes in itself. Much beast of prey au fond, much ascetic habit to remain

master. The century of strong will; also of strong passion.

  The eighteenth century is dominated by woman, given to enthusiasm, full

of esprit, shallow, but with a spirit in the service of what is desirable, of the

heart, libertine in the enjoyment of what is most spiritual, and undermines all

authorities;  intoxicated,  cheerful,  clear,  humane,  false  before  itself,  muchcanaille au fond, sociable.-

  The nineteenth century is more animalic and subterranean, uglier, more

realistic and vulgar, and precisely for that reason "better," "more honest,"

more submissive before every kind of "reality," truer; but weak in will, but

sad and full of dark cravings, but fatalistic. Not full of awe and reverence for

either  "reason"  or  "heart";  deeply  convinced  of  the  rule  of  cravings

(Schopenhauer  spoke  of  "will";  but  nothing  is  more  characteristic  of  his

philosophy than the absence of all genuine willing). Even morality reduced to

one instinct ("pity").

  Auguste Comte is a continuation of the eighteenth century (domination of

coeur  over  la  t�te,  sensualism  in  the  theory  of  knowledge,  altruistic

enthusiasm).

  That  science  has  become  sovereign  to  such  a  degree  proves  how  the

nineteenth  century  has  rid  itself  of  the  domination  of  ideals.  A  certain

frugality of desire makes possible our scientific curiosity and severity--which

is our kind of virtue.-

    Romanticism is an echo of the eighteenth century; a kind of piled-high

desire for its enthusiasm in the grand style (as a matter of fact, a good deal of

histrionics and self-deception: one wanted to represent strong natures and

grand passions).

  The nineteenth century looks instinctively for theories that seem to justify

its fatalistic submission to matters of fact. Already Hegel's success against

"sentimentality"  and  romantic  idealism  was  due  to  his  fatalistic  way  of

thinking, to his faith in the greater reason on the side of the victorious, to his

justification of the actual "state" (in place of "mankind," etc.).-

    Schopenhauer: we are something stupid and, at best, even something that

cancels  itself.  Success  of  determinism,  of  the  genealogical  derivation  of

obligations that had formerly been considered absolute, the doctrine of milieu

and adaptation, the reduction of will to reflexes, the denial of the will as an

"efficient cause"; finally--a real rechristening: one sees so little will that the

word becomes free to designate something else. Further theories: the doctrine

of objectivity--"will- less" contemplation--as the only road to truth; also to

beauty  (--also  the  faith  in  the  "genius"  to  justify  a  right  to  submission);

mechanism,  the  calculable  rigidity  of  the  mechanical  process;  the  alleged

"naturalism," elimination of the choosing, judging, interpreting subject as a

principle-

  Kant,  with  his  "practical  reason"  and  his  moral  fanaticism  is  whollyeighteenth century; still entirely outside the historical movement; without any

eye  for  the  actuality  of  his  time,  e.g.,  Revolution;  untouched  by  Greek

philosophy;  fanciful  visionary  of  the  concept  of  duty;  sensualist  with  the

backdrop of the pampering of dogmatism.-

  The movement back to Kant in our century is a movement back to the

eighteenth century: one wants to regain a right to the old ideals and the old

enthusiasm--for that reason an epistemology that "sets boundaries," which

means that it permits one to posit as one may see fit a beyond of reason.-

  Hegel's way of thinking is not far different from Goethe's: one needs only

to listen to Goethe about Spinoza. Will to deify the universe and life in order

to find repose and happiness in contemplation and in getting to the bottom of

things; Hegel seeks reason everywhere--before reason one may submit and

acquiesce. In Goethe a kind of almost joyous and trusting fatalism that does

not revolt, that does not flag, that seeks to form a totality out of himself, in

the faith that only in the totality everything redeems itself and appears good

and justified.

  96 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Period of the Enlightenment--followed by the period of sentimentality. To

what extent Schopenhauer belongs to "sentimentality" (Hegel to spirituality).

  97 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The seventeenth century suffers of man as of a sum of contradictions

("l'ames de contradictions" that we are); it seeks to discover, order, excavate

man--while the eighteenth century seeks to forget what is known of man's

nature in order to assimilate him to its utopia. "Superficial, tender, humane"--

enthusiastic about "man"-

  The seventeenth century seeks to erase the tracks of the individual to

make the work look as similar to life as possible. The eighteenth uses the

work in an attempt to arouse interest in the author. The seventeenth century

seeks  in  art--art,  a  piece  of  culture;  the  eighteenth  uses  art  to  make

propaganda for reforms of a social and political nature.

  "Utopia,"  the  "ideal  man,"  the  de�fication  of  nature,  the  vanity  of

posing, the subordination to propaganda for social goals, charlatanism--these

are our gifts from the eighteenth century.

  The style of the seventeenth century: propre, exact et libre.

  The strong individual, self-aufficient or zealously occupied before God--

and this modern obtrusiveness of authors who all but leap out at you--these

furnish some contrast. "To perform" --compare that with the scholars of Port-Royal.

  Alfieri had a sense for grand style.

  Hatred of the burlesque (undignified), lack of a sense for nature belong to

the seventeenth century.

  98 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Against  Rousseau.-  Unfortunately,  man  is  no  longer  evil  enough;

Rousseau's opponents who say "man is a beast of prey" are unfortunately

wrong. Not the corruption of man but the extent to which he has become

tender and moralized is his curse.

  Precisely in the sphere that Rousseau fought most violently one could

find  the  relatively  still  strong  and  well-turned-out  type  of  man  (those  in

whom the grand affects were still unbroken: will to power, will to enjoyment,

will and capacity to command). The man of the eighteenth century has to be

compared  with  the  man  of  the  Renaissance  (also  with  the  man  of  the

seventeenth century in France), so that one feels what is at stake: Rousseau is

a  symptom  of  self-contempt  and  heated  vanity--both  signs  that  the

domineering will is lacking: he moralizes and, as a man of rancor, seeks the

cause of his wretchedness in the ruling classes.

  99 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Against Rousseau.--The state of nature is terrible, man is a beast of prey;

our  civilization  represents  a  tremendous  triumph  over  this  beast-of-prey

nature:  thus  argued  Voltaire.  He  felt  the  mitigation,  the  subtleties,  the

spiritual joys of the civilized state; he despised narrowmindedness, also in the

form of virtue, and the lack of delicatesse, also among ascetics and monks.

  The moral reprehensibility of man seemed to preoccupy Rousseau; with

the  words  "unjust"  and  "cruel"  one  can  best  stir  up  the  instincts  of  the

oppressed who otherwise smart under the ban of the vetitum and disfavor, so

their conscience advises them against rebellious cravings. Such emancipators

seek one thing above all: to give their party the grand accents and poses of

the higher nature.

  100 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Rousseau: the rule based on feeling; nature as the source of justice; man

perfects himself to the extent to which he approaches nature (according to

Voltaire, to the extent to which he moves away from nature). The very same

epochs are for one ages of the progress of humanity; for the other, times

when injustice and inequality grow worse.

  Voltaire still comprehended umanita in the Renaissance sense; also virtu(as "high culture"); he tights for the cause of the "honnetes gens" and "de la

bonne compagnie," the cause of taste, of science, of the arts, of progress itself

and civilization.

  The fight began around 1760: the citizen of Geneva and le seigneur de

Ferney. Only from that moment on Voltaire becomes the man of his century,

the philosopher, the representative of tolerance and unbelief (till then merely

un bel esprit). Envy and hatred of Rousseau's success impelled him forward,

"to the heights."

  Pour "la canaille" un dieu remunerateur et vengeur- Voltaire.

  Critique of both points of view in regard to the value of civilization. The

social invention is for Voltaire the most beautiful there is: there is no higher

goal than to maintain and perfect it; precisely this is honn�tete, to respect

social conventions; virtue as obedience to certain necessary "prejudices" in

favor  of  the  preservation  of  "society."  Missionary  of  culture,  aristocrat,

representative  of  the  victorious,  ruling  classes  and  their  valuations.  But

Rousseau remained a plebeian, also as homme de lettres; that was unheard of;

his impudent contempt of all that was not he himself.

  What was sick in Rousseau was admired and imitated most. (Lord Byron

related to him; also worked himself up into sublime poses and into vindictive

rancor;  sign  of  "meanness";  later  attained  balance  through  Venice  and

comprehended what produces more ease and well- being~'insouciance.)

  Rousseau is proud in regard to what he is, in spite of his origins; but he is

beside himself when one reminds him of it.-

    Rousseau, beyond a doubt, mentally disturbed; in Voltaire an uncommon

health and light touch. The rancor of the sick; the periods of his insanity also

those of his contempt of man and his mistrust.

  The  defense  of  providence  by  Rousseau  (against  the  pessimism  of

Voltaire): he needed God in order to be able to cast a curse upon society and

civilization; everything had to be good in itself because God had created it;

only man has corrupted men. The "good man" as the natural man was pure

fantasy; but with the dogma of God's authorship it seemed probable and well-

founded.

    Romanticism a la Rousseau: passion ("the sovereign right of passion");

"naturalness"; the fascination of madness (folly included in greatness); the

absurd  vanity  of  the  weak  man;  the  rancor  of  the  mob  as  judge  ("for  a

hundred years now, a sick man has been accepted as a leader in politics").

  101 (Spring-Fall 1887)  Kant: makes the epistemological skepticism of the English possible for

Germans:

  1. by enlisting for it the sympathy of the moral and religious needs of the

Germans; just as the later philosophers of the Academy used skepticism for

the  same  reason,  as  a  preparation  for  Platonism  (vice  Augustin);  and  as

Pascal used even moralistic skepticism in order to excite the need for faith

("to justify it");

  2.  by  scholastically  involuting  and  curlicueing  it  and  thus  making  it

acceptable  for  the  German  taste  regarding  scientific  form  (for  Locke  and

Hume  in  themselves  were  too  bright,  too  clear,  i.e.,  judged  according  to

German value instincts, "too superficial"-)

  Kant: inferior in his psychology and knowledge of human nature; way off

when it comes to great historical values (French Revolution); a moral fanatic

a la Rousseau; a subterranean Christianity in his values; a dogmatist through

and through, but ponderously sick of this inclination, to such an extent that he

wished  to  tyrannize  it,  but  also  weary  right  away  of  skepticism;  not  yet

touched  by  the  slightest  breath  of  cosmopolitan  taste  and  the  beauty  of

antiquity--a delayer and mediator, nothing original (just as Leibniz mediated

and  built  a  bridge  between  mechanism  and  spiritualism,  as  Goethe  did

between the taste of the eighteenth century and that of the "historical sense"

(which is essentially a sense for the exotic), as German music did between

French and Italian music, as Charlemagne did between imperium Romanum

and nationalism--delayers par excellence. )

  102 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  In how far the Christian centuries with their pessimism were stronger

centuries than the eighteenth century--like the tragic era of the Greeks.

  The nineteenth century vis-a-vis the eighteenth century. In what respects

heir--in  what  respects  a  regression  (poorer  in  "spirit"  and  taste)--in  what

respects progress (darker, more realistic, stronger).

  103 (1883-1888)75

  What  does  it  mean  that  we  have  such  a  feeling  for  the  campagna

Romana?  And  for  high  mountain  ranges?  What  is  the  meaning  of  our

nationalism?

    Chateaubriand  in  1803,  in  a  letter  to  M.  de  Fontanes,  gives  the  first

impression of the campagna Romana.

    President  de  Grosses  says  of  the  campagna  Romana:  "il  fallait  que

Romulus fut ivre, quand il songea a batir une ville dans un terrain aussi laid."    Delacroix, too, did not like Rome, it frightened him. He was enthusiastic

about Venice, like Shakespeare, like Byron, like George Sand. This aversion

to Rome also in Theoph. Gautier--and in Rich. Wagner.

  Lamartine has found language for Sorrent and Posilipp.

  Victor Hugo was enthusiastic about Spain, "parce que aucune autre nation

n'a  moins  emprunte'  a  l'antiquite',  parce  qu'elle  n'a  subi  aucune  influence

classique.''

  104 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  The two great tentative ones, made to overcome the eighteenth century:

  Napoleon, by awakening again the man, the soldier, and the great fight

for power-conceiving Europe as a political unit;

    Goethe,  by  imagining  a  European  culture  that  would  harvest  the  full

inheritance of attained humanity.

  German  culture  of  this  century  arouses  mistrust-in  music  this  full,

redeeming and binding element of Goethe is lacking- The Austrians have

remained German only by virtue of their music.

  105 (1883-1888)

  The  preponderance  of  music  in  the  romantics  of  1839  and  1840.

Delacroix. Ingres, a passionate musician (cult of Gluck, Haydn, Beethoven,

Mozart),  said  to  his  students  in  Rome,  "si  je  pouvais  vous  rendre  tous

musicians, vous y gagneriez comme peintres"; also Horace Vernet, with a

special  passion  for  Don  Giovanni  (as  Mendelssohn  testifies,  1831);  also

Stendhal, who said of himself: Combien de lieues ne ferais-je pas a pied, et

combien de jours de prison ne me soumetterais-je pas pour entendre Don

Juan ou le Matromonio segreto: et je ne sais pour queue autre chose je ferais

cet eport. At that time he was 56.

  Borrowed  forms;  e.g.,  Brahms  as  typical  "epigone";  Mendelssohn's

educated Protestantism, ditto (an earlier "soul" is recaptured poetically-)

  -moral  and  poetical  substitutions  in  Wagner,  one  art  as  stopgap  for

deficiencies in the others

  -the "historical sense," inspiration from poetry and ancient sagas

  -that  typical  transformation  of  which  G.  Flaubert  offers  the  clearest

example  among  the  French  and  Richard  Wagner  among  the  Germans,  in

which the romantic faith in love and the future is transformed into the desire

for the nothing, 1830 into 1850.

  106 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  Why does German music culminate in the period of German    romanticism?  Why  is  Goethe  missing  in  German  music?  How  much

Schiller--more precisely, how much "Thekla"--there is in Beethoven!

    Schumann has in himself Eichendorff, Uhland, Heine, Hoffmann, Tieck.

Richard Wagner has Freischutz, Hoffmann, Grimm, the romantic saga, the

mystical  catholicism  of  instinct,  symbolism,  the  "libertinism  of  passion"

(Rousseau's  intent).  The  Flying  Dutchman  tastes  of  France,  where  le

tene'breux was the type of the seducer in 1830.

  Cult of music, of the revolutionary romanticism of form. Wagner sums up

romanticism, German as well as French-

  107 (1888)

    Estimated merely for his value for Germany and German culture, Richard

Wagner remains a great question mark, perhaps a German misfortune, in any

case a destiny: but what does it matter? Isn't he very much more than merely

a German event? It even seems to me that there is no place where he belongs

less  than  Germany:  nothing  was  prepared  for  him  there;  his  whole  type

remains  simply  strange  among  Germans,  odd,  uncomprehended,

incomprehensible But one is careful not to admit this to oneself: for that one

is too kindly, too square, too German. "Credo quia absurdus est": that is what

the German spirit wants and also wanted in this case--and so it believes for

the  present  whatever  Wagner  wanted  people  to  believe  about  him.  The

German spirit has at all times lacked subtlety and divination in psychologicis.

Today, under the high pressure of fatherlandism and self-admiration, it is

visibly thickening and becoming coarser: how should it be capable of coping

with the problem of Wagner!-

  108 (1885)

  So far, the Germans are nothing, but they will become something; thus

they have no culture yet-thus they cannot have any culture yet. That is my

proposition:  let  those  who  cannot  help  it  take  offense.--So  far  they  are

nothing: that means, they are all sorts of things. They will become something:

that means, they will stop some day being all sorts of things. The latter is at

bottom a mere wish, scarcely a hope; fortunately, a wish on which one can

live, a matter of will, of work, of discipline, of breeding, as well as a matter

of  annoyance,  of  desire,  of  missing  something,  of  discomfort,  even  of

embitterment-in brief, we Germans desire something from ourselves that has

not yet been desired from us--we desire something more!

  That this "German as he is not yet" deserves something better than today's

German "Bildung"; that all who are "in the process of becoming" must befurious  when  they  perceive  some  satisfaction  in  this  area,  an  impertinent

"retiring  on  one's  laurels"  or  "selfcongratulation":  that  is  my  second

proposition on which I also have not yet changed my mind.

  109 (1885)

    Principle: There is an element of decay in everything that characterizes

modern man: but close beside this sickness stand signs of an untested force

and powerfulness of the soul. The same reasons that produce the increasing

smallness of man drive the stronger and rarer individuals up to greatness.

  110 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Overall insight: the ambiguous character of our modern world the very

same  symptoms  could  point  to  decline  and  to  strength.  And  the  signs  of

strength, of the attainment of majority, could be misconstrued as weakness on

the basis of traditional (residual) negative emotional valuations. In brief, our

feelings, as feelings about values, are not up to date.

  To generalize: feelings about values are always behind the times; they

express conditions of preservation and growth that belong to times long gone

by; they resist new conditions of existence with which they cannot cope and

which they necessarily misunderstand: thus they inhibit and arouse suspicion

against what is new.-

  111 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The problem of the nineteenth century. Whether its strong and weak sides

belong together? Whether it is all of one piece? Whether the diverseness of

its  ideals  and  their  mutual  inconsistency  are  due  to  a  higher  aim:  as

something higher.---For it could be the precondition of greatness to grow to

such an extent in violent tension. Dissatisfaction, nihilism could be a good

sign.

  112 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Overall  insight.-Actually,  every  major  growth  is  accompanied  by  a

tremendous crumbling and passing away: suffering, the symptoms of decline

belong  in  the  times  of  tremendous  advances;  every  fruitful  and  powerful

movement  of  humanity  has  also  created  at  the  same  time  a  nihilistic

movement. It could be the sign of a crucial and most essential growth, of the

transition  to  new  conditions  of  existence,  that  the  most  extreme  form  of

pessimism,  genuine  nihilism,  would  come  into  the  world.  This  I  have

comprehended.

  113 (1883-1888)

  ( A )  To begin with a full and cordial tribute to contemporary humanity: not to

be deceived by appearances--this type of humanity is less striking but gives

far better warranties of duration; its tempo is slower, but the beat is much

richer.  Health  is  increasing,  the  actual  conditions  for  a  strong  body  get

recognized and are slowly created, "asceticism" ironice. One shrinks from

extremes; a certain confidence in the "right road''; no enthusing; temporary

acclimatization to narrower values (like "fatherland," like "scholarship," etc.).

  Still,  this  whole  picture  would  remain  ambiguous:  it  could  be  an

ascending but also a descending movement of life.

  ( B )

  Faith  in  "progress"-in  the  lower  spheres  of  intelligence  it  appears  as

ascending life; but this is self-deception; in the higher spheres of intelligence

as decending life.

    Description of the symptoms.

  Unity of point of view: uncertainty about standards of value. Fear of a

general "in vain." Nihilism.

  114 (June 10,1887)

  Actually, we have no longer such need of an antidote to the first nihilism:

life  in  our  Europe  is  no  longer  that  uncertain,  capricious,  absurd.  Such  a

tremendous increase in the value of man, the value of trouble, etc., is not so

needful  now;  we  can  take  a  significant  decrease  of  this  value,  we  may

concede  much  absurdity  and  caprice:  the  power  man  has  attained  now

permits  a  demotion  of  the  means  of  breeding  of  which  the  moral

interpretation was the strongest. "God"' is far too extreme a hypothesis.

  115 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  If anything signifies our humanization--a genuine and actual progress--it

is  the  fact  that  we  no  longer  require  excessive  oppositions,  indeed  no

opposites at all-- we may love the senses, we have spiritualized and made

them artistic in every degree; we have a right to all those things which were

most maligned until now."

  116 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  The inversion of the order of rank.-The pious counterfeiters, the priests,

among  us  become  chandalas--they  replace  the  charlatans,  quacks,

counterfeiters, and wizards; we consider them corrupters of the will, great

slanderers of life on which they wish to revenge themselves, rebels among

the underprivileged. We have turned the caste of senants, the Sudras, into our

middle class, our "Volk" ["people"], those who make political decisions.  On the other hand, the chandala of former times is at the top: foremost,

those who blaspheme God, the immoralists, the nomads of every type, the

artists, Jews, musicians--at bottom, all disreputable classes of men-

  We have raised ourselves to the level of honorable thoughts; even more,

we determine honor on earth, "nobility"--All of us are today advocates of

life.--We immoralists are today the strongest power: the other great powers

need us--we construe the world in our image-

  We have transferred the concept of the "chandala" to the priests, teachers

of a beyond, and the Christian society that is grown together with them, as

well as all who are of the same origin, the pessimists, nihilists, romantics of

pity, criminals, vice addicts-- the whole sphere in which the concept of "God"

is imagined as a savior-

  We are proud of no longer having to be liars, slanderers, men who cast

suspicion on life-

  117 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Progress of the nineteenth century against the eighteenth (--at bottom we

good Europeans wage a war against the eighteenth century--):

  1.  "Return  to  nature"  understood  more  and  more  decisively  in  the

opposite sense from Rousseau's. Away from idyl and opera!

  2. more and more decisively anti-idealistic, more concrete, more fearless,

industrious, moderate, suspicious against sudden changes, antirevolutionary;

  3. more and more decisively the question concerning the health of the

body is put ahead of that of "the soul": the latter being understood as a state

consequent  upon  the  former,  and  the  former  at  the  very  least  as  a

precondition of the health of the soul.

  118 (1883-1888)

  If anything at all has been achieved, it is a more innocuous relation to the

senses, a more joyous, benevolent, Goethean attitude toward sensuality; also

a prouder feeling regarding the search for knowledge, so that the "pure fool"

is not given much credit.

  119 (Spring-Fall 1887; rev. 1888)

  We who are "objective."-It is not "pity" that opens the gates to the most

distant  and  strange  types  of  being  and  culture  to  us,  but  rather  our

accessibility  and  lack  of  partiality  that  does  not  empathize  with  or  share

suffering but on the contrary takes delight in a hundred things that formerly

led people to suffer (feel outraged or deeply moved, or prompted hostile and

cold looks-). Suffering in all its nuances has become interesting for us: in thisrespect we are certainly not fuller of pity, even when we are shaken by the

sight of suffering and moved to tears: we do not by any means for that reason

feel like helping.

  In  this  voluntary  desire  to  contemplate  all  sorts  of  distress  and

transgressions  we  have  become  stronger  and  more  vigorous  than  the

eighteenth century was; it is a proof of our increase in vigor (we have come

closer  to  the  seventeenth  and  sixteenth  centuries.).  But  it  is  a  profound

misunderstanding to construe our "romanticism" as a proof that our "souls"

have become "more beautiful"-

  We desire strong sensations as all coarser ages and social strata do.--This

should be distinguished from the needs of those with weak nerves and the

decadents: they have a need for pepper, even for cruelty-

  All of us seek states in which bourgeois morality no longer has any say,

and priestly morality even less (--every book to which some of the air of

pastors  and  theologians  still  clings  gives  us  the  impression  of  a  pitiable

niaiserie  and  poverty.--"Good  society"  consists  of  those  whom  at  bottom

nothing interests except what is forbidden in bourgeois society and gives a

bad reputation: the same applies to books, music, politics, and the estimation

of woman.

  120 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  How  man  has  become  more  natural  in  the  nineteenth  century  (the

eighteenth century is that of elegance, refinement, and sentiments genereux).-

-Not "return to nature"--for there has never yet been a natural humanity. The

scholasticism of un- and antinatural values is the rule, is the beginning; man

reaches nature only after a long struggle--he never "returns" to Nature: i.e.,

daring to be immoral like nature.

  We are coarser, more direct, full of irony against generous feelings even

when we succumb to them.

  More natural is our first society, that of the rich, the leisure class: they

hunt each other, love between the sexes is a kind of sport in which marriage

furnishes an obstacle and a provocation; they amuse themselves and live for

pleasure; they esteem physical advantages above all, are curious and bold.

  More  natural  is  our  attitude  to  the  search  for  knowledge:  we  possess

libertinage  of  the  spirit  in  all  innocence,  we  hate  pompous  and  hieratical

manners, we delight in what is most forbidden, we should hardly know any

longer  of  any  interest  of  knowledge  if  the  way  to  it  were  paved  with

boredom.  More  natural  is  our  attitude  toward  morality.  Principles  have  become

ridiculous; nobody permits himself any longer to speak without irony of his

"duty." But a helpful, benevolent disposition is esteemed (morality is found

in an instinct, and the rest is spurned. In addition a few concepts of points of

honor-).

  More natural is our position in politicis: we see problems of power, of

one quantum of power against another. We do not believe in any right that is

not supported by the power of enforcement: we feel all rights to be conquests.

  More natural is our estimation of great human beings and great things: we

consider passion a privilege, we consider nothing great unless it includes a

great crime; we conceive all being-great as a placing-oneself-outside as far as

morality is concerned.

  More  natural  is  our  attitude  toward  nature:  we  no  longer  love  it  on

account of its "innocence," "reason," or "beauty"; we have made it nicely

"devilish" and "dumb." But instead of despising it on that account, we have

felt more closely related to it ever since, more at home in it. It does not aspire

to virtue, and for that we respect nature.

  More  natural  is  our  attitude  toward  art:  we  do  not  demand  beautiful

illusory lies from it, etc.; brutal positivism reigns, recognizing facts without

becoming excited.

  In summa: there are signs that the European of the nineteenth century is

less ashamed of his instincts; he has taken a goodly step toward admitting to

himself his unconditional naturalness, i.e., his immorality, without becoming

embittered--on the contrary, strong enough to endure only this sight.

  This  sounds  to  some  ears  as  if  corruption  had  progressed--  and  it  is

certain that man has not come dose to that "nature" of which Rousseau speaks

but has progressed another step in civilization, which Rousseau abhorred. We

have become stronger: we have again come closer to the seventeenth century,

especially to the taste of its end (Dancourt, Lesage, Regnard).

  121 (1888)

  Culture contra civilization.-The high points of culture and civilization do

not coincide: one should not be deceived about the abysmal antagonism of

culture and civilization. The great moments of culture were always, morally

speaking, times of corruption; and conversely, the periods when the taming of

the human animal ("civilization") was desired and enforced were times of

intolerance against the boldest and most spiritual natures. Civilization has

aims different from those of culture--perhaps they are even opposite-  122 (January-Fall 1888)

  What I warn against: the instincts of decadence should not be confused

with humaneness; the means of civilization, which lead to disintegration and

necessarily  to  decadence,  should  not  be  confused  with  culture;  the

libertinage, the principle of "laisser aller," should not be confused with the

will to power (--which is the counterprinciple).

  123 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The unfinished problems I pose anew: the problem of civilization, the

fight  between  Rousseau  and  Voltaire  around  1760.  Man  becomes  more

profound, mistrustful, "immoral," stronger, more confident of himself--and to

this  extent  "more  natural":  this  is  "progress."--At  the  same  time,  in

accordance with a kind of division of labor, the strata that have become more

evil are separated from those that have become milder and tamer-so that the

overall fact is not noticed immediately.--It is characteristic of strength, of the

self-control and fascination of strength, that these stronger strata possess the

art of making others experience their progress in evil as something higher. It

is  characteristic  of  every  "progress"  that  the  strengthened  elements  are

reinterpreted as "good."

  124 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  To give men back the courage to their natural drives-

  To check their self-underestimation (not that of man as an individual but

that of man as nature-)-

  To  remove  antitheses  from  things  after  comprehending  that  we  have

projected them there-

  To  remove  the  idiosyncrasies  of  society  from  existence  (guilt,

punishment, justice, honesty, freedom, love, etc.)-

  Progress  toward  "naturalness":  in  all  political  questions,  also  in  the

relations of parties, even of commercial, workers', and employers' parties,

questions of power are at stake--"what one can do," and only after that what

one ought to do.

  125 (1885)l

    Socialism--as the logical conclusion of the tyranny of the least and the

dumbest, i.e., those who are superficial, envious, and three-quarters actors-is

indeed entailed by "modern ideas" and their latent anarchism; but in the tepid

air of democratic well-being the capacity to reach conclusions, or to finish,

weakens.  One  follows  --but  one  no  longer  sees  what  follows.  Therefore

socialism is on the whole a hopeless and sour affair; and nothing offers amore  amusing  spectacle  than  the  contrast  between  the  poisonous  and

desperate faces cut by today's socialists--and to what wretched and pinched

feelings their style bears witness!--and the harmless lambs' happiness of their

hopes and desiderata. Nevertheless, in many places in Europe they may yet

bring off occasional coups and attacks: there will be deep "rumblings" in the

stomach of the next century, and the Paris commune, which has its apologists

and  advocates  in  Germany,  too,  was  perhaps  no  more  than  a  minor

indigestion compared to what is coming. But there will always be too many

who  have  possessions  for  socialism  to  signify  more  than  an  attack  of

sickness--and those who have possessions are of one mind on one article of

faith: "one must possess something in order to be something." But this is the

oldest and healthiest of all instincts: I should add, "one must want to have

more than one has in order to become more." For this is the doctrine preached

by life itself to all that has life: the morality of development. To have and to

want to have more--growth, in one word--that is life itself. In the doctrine of

socialism there is hidden, rather badly, a "will to negate life"; the human

beings  or  races  that  think  up  such  a  doctrine  must  be  bungled.  Indeed,  I

should  wish  that  a  few  great  experiments  might  prove  that  in  a  socialist

society life negates itself, cuts off its own roots. The earth is large enough

and man still sufficiently unexhausted; hence such a practical instruction and

demonstratio ad absurdum would not strike me as undesirable, even if it were

gained and paid for with a tremendous expenditure of human lives. In any

case,  even  as  a  restless  mole  under  the  soil  of  a  society  that  wallows  in

stupidity, socialism will be able to be something useful and therapeutic: it

delays "peace on earth" and the total mollification of the democratic herd

animal; it forces the Europeans to retain spirit, namely cunning and cautious

care, not to abjure manly and warlike virtues altogether, and to retain some

remnant of spirit, of clarity, sobriety, and coldness of the spirit- it protects

Europe for the time being from the marasmus femininus that threatens it.

  126 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The most favorable inhibitions and remedies of modernity:

  1. universal military service with real wars in which the time for joking is

past;

  2. national bigotry (simplifies, concentrates);

  3. improved nutrition (meat);

  4. increasing cleanliness and healthfulness of domiciles;

  5.  hegemony  of  physiology  over  theology,  moralism,  economics,andpolitics;

  6. military severity in the demand for and handling of one's"obligations"

(one does not praise any more-).

  127 (1884)

  I am glad about the military development of Europe; also of the internal

states of anarchy: the time of repose and Chinese ossification, which Galiani

predicted  for  this  century,  is  over.  Personal  manly  virtu  of  the  body,  is

regaining  value,  estimation  becomes  more  physical,  nutrition  meatier.

Beautiful men are again becoming possible. Pallid hypocrisy (with mandarins

at  the  top,  as  Comte  dreamed)  is  over.  The  barbarian  in  each  of  us  is

affirmed; also the wild beast. Precisely for that reason philosophers have a

future.--Kant is a scarecrow, some day!

  128 (1884)

  I  have  as  yet  found  no  reason  for  discouragement.  Whoever  has

preserved, and bred in himself, a strong will, together with an ample spirit,

has more favorable opportunities than ever. For the trainability of men has

become very great in this democratic Europe; men who learn easily and adapt

themselves easily are the rule: the herd animal, even highly intelligent, has

been  prepared.  Whoever  can  command  finds  those  who  must  obey:  I  am

thinking,  e.g.,  of  Napoleon  and  Bismarck.  The  rivalry  with  strong  and

unintelligent  wills,  which  is  the  greatest  obstacle,  is  small.  Who  doesn't

topple these "objective" gentlemen with weak wills, like Rancle or Renan!

  129 (1885)

  Spiritual enlightenment is an infallible means for making men unsure,

weaker in will, so they are more in need of company and support--in short,

for  developing  the  herd  animal  in  man.  Therefore  all  great  artists  of

government so far (Confucius in China, the imperium Romanum, Napoleon,

the papacy at the time when it took an interest in power and not merely in the

world), in the places where the dominant instincts have culminated so far,

also employed spiritual enlightenment--at least let it have its way (like the

popes of the Renaissance). The self-deception of the mass concerning this

point, e.g., in every democracy, is extremely valuable: making men smaller

and more governable is desired as "progress"!

  130 (1883-1888)

  The  highest  equity  and  mildness  as  a  state  of  weakening  (the  New

Testament  and  the  original  Christian  community--apparent  as  complete

betisel in the Englishmen, Darwin and Wallace). Your equity, you highernatures, impels you toward suffrage universel, etc.; your "humanity," toward

mildness confronted with crime and stupidity. In the long run you thus make

stupidity and the unscrupulous victorious: comfort and stupidity--the mean.

    Externally: age of tremendous wars, upheavals, explosions.

  Internally:  ever  greater  weakness  of  man,  events  as  excitants.  The

Parisian as the European extreme.

    Consequences:  (1)  barbarians  (at  first,  of  course,  below  the  form  of

culture so far [e.g., Duhring]); (2) sovereign individuals (where masses of

barbarian force are crossed with a lack of all restraint regarding whatever has

been). Age of the greatest stupidity, brutality, and the masses, and of the

highest individuals.

  131 (1884)

    Innumerable individuals of a higher type now perish: but whoever gets

away  is  strong  as  the  devil.  Similar  to  the  situation  at  the  time  of  the

Renaissance.

  132 (1885)

  Good Europeans that we are--what distinguishes us above the men of

fatherlands?-First, we are atheists and immoralists, but for the present we

support the religions and moralities of the herd instinct: for these prepare a

type of man that must one day fall into our hands, that must desire our hands.

  Beyond good and evil--but we demand that herd morality should be held

sacred unconditionally.

  We hold in reserve many types of philosophy which need to be taught:

possibly, the pessimistic type, as a hammer; a European Buddhism might

perhaps be indispensable.

  We  probably  support  the  development  and  maturing  of  democratic

institutions: they enhance weakness of the will: in socialism we see a thorn

that protects against comfortableness.

  Position toward peoples. Our preferences; we pay attention to the results

of interbreeding.

  Apart, wealthy, strong: irony at the expense of the "press" and its culture.

Worry lest scholars become journalistic. We feel contemptuous of every kind

of  culture  that  is  compatible  with  reading,  not  to  speak  of  writing  for,

newspapers.

  We take our accidental positions (like Goethe, Stendhal), our experiences,

as foreground and stress them to deceive about our depths. We ourselves are

waiting and beware of staking our hearts on them. They serve us as hostelsfor a night, which a wanderer needs and accepts--we beware of settling down.

  We are ahead of our fellow men in possessing a disciplina voluntaris. All

strength applied to development of strength of the will, an art that permits us

to wear masks, an art of understanding beyond the affects (also to think in a

"supra-European" way, at times).

    Preparation for becoming the legislators of the future, the masters of the

earth, at least our children. Basic concern with marriages.

  133 (1885)

  The  twentieth  century.--Abbe  Galiani  once  said:  La  prevoyance  est  la

cause des guerres actuelles de l'Europe. Si l'on voulait se donner la peine de

ne rien prevoir, tout le monde serait tranquille, et je ne crois pas qu'on serait

plus malheureux parce qu'on ne ferait pas la guerre. Since I do not by any

means share the unwarlike views of my friend Galiani, I am not afraid of

predicting a few things and thus, possibly, of conjuring up the cause of wars.

  A tremendous stock-taking after the most terrible earth quake: with new

questions.

  134 (1885-1886)

  This is the time of the great noon, of the most terrible clearing up: my

type of pessimism--great point of departure.

  I. Basic contradiction in civilization and the enhancement of man.

  II.  Moral  valuations  as  a  history  of  lies  and  the  art  of  slander  in  the

service of a will to power (the herd will that rebels against the human beings

who are stronger).

  III. The conditions of every enhancement of culture (making possible a

selection at the expense of a mass) are the conditions of all growth.

  IV. The multiple ambiguity of the world as a question of strength that

sees  all  things  in  the  perspective  of  its  growth.  Moral-Christian  value

judgments  as  slaves'  rebellion  and  slaves'  mendaciousness  (against  the

aristocratic values of the ancient world). How far does art reach down into the

essence of strength?

          BOOK II - CRITIQUE OF HIGHEST VALUES HITHERTO

    Excerpts

  I. Critique of Religion

  1. Genesis of Religions

  142 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  Toward a critique of the law-book of Manu.-- The whole book is founded

on the holy lie. Was the well-being of mankind the inspiration of this system?Was this species of man, who believes in the interestedness of every action,

interested or not in imposing this system? To improve mankind--how is this

intention inspired? Where is the concept of improvement derived from?

  We find a species of man, the priestly, which feels itself to be the norm,

the  high  point  and  the  supreme  expression  of  the  type  man:  this  species

derives  the  concept  "improvement"  from  itself.  It  believes  in  its  own

superiority, it wills itself to be superior in fact: the origin of the holy lie is the

will to power--

    Establishment of rule: to this end, the rule of those concepts that place a

non plus ultra of power with the priesthood. Power through the lie--in the

knowledge that one does not possess it physically, militarily--the lie as a

supplement to power, a new concept of "truth."

  It is a mistake to suppose an unconscious and naive development here, a

kind  of  self-deception--  Fanatics  do  not  invent  such  carefully  thought-out

systems of oppression-- The most cold-blooded reflection was at work here;

the  same  kind  of  reflection  as  a  Plato  applied  when  he  imagined  his

"Republic." "He who wills the end must will the means"--all lawgivers have

been clear in their minds regarding this politician's insight.

  We  possess  the  classic  model  in  specifically  Aryan  forms:  we  may

therefore  hold  the  best-endowed  and  most  reflective  species  of  man

responsible for the most fundamental lie that has ever been told-- That lie has

been copied almost everywhere: Aryan influence has corrupted all the world-

-

  143 (March-June 1888)

  A lot is said today about the Semitic spirit of the New Testament: but

what is called Semitic is merely priestly--and in the racially purest Aryan

law-book, in Manu, this kind of "Semitism," i.e., the spirit of the priest, is

worse than anywhere else.

  The development of the Jewish priestly state is not original: they learned

the pattern in Babylon: the pattern is Aryan. When, later on, the same thing

became dominant in a Europe with a preponderance of Germanic blood, this

was in accordance with the spirit of the ruling race: a great atavism. The

Germanic Middle Ages aimed at a revival of the Aryan order of castes.

    Mohammedanism in turn learned from Christianity: the employment of

the "beyond" as an instrument of punishment.

  The pattern of an unchanging community with priests at its head--this

oldest of the great cultural products of Asia in the realm of organization--wasbound to invite reflection and imitation in every respect. Again Plato: but

above all the Egyptians.

  144 (1885)

  Moralities and religions are the principal means by which one can make

whatever one wishes out of man, provided one possesses a superfluity of

creative forces and can assert one's will over long periods of time--in the

form of legislation, religions, and customs.

  145 (1884-1888)

  What an affirmative Aryan religion, the product of the ruling class, looks

like:  the  law-book  of  Manu.  (The  deification  of  the  feeling  of  power  in

Brahma:  interesting  that  it  arose  among  the  warrior  caste  and  was  only

transferred to the priests.)

  What  an  affirmative  Semitic  religion,  the  product  of  the  ruling  class,

looks like: the law-book of Mohammed, the older parts of the Old Testament.

(Mohammedanism,  as  a  religion  for  men,  is  deeply  contemptuous  of  the

sentimentality  and  mendaciousness  of  Christianity--which  it  feels  to  be  a

woman's religion.)

  What a negative Semitic religion, the product of an oppressed class, looks

like: the New Testament (--in Indian-Aryan terms: a chandala religion).

  What a negative Aryan religion looks like, grown up among the ruling

orders: Buddhism.

  It is quite in order that we possess no religion of oppressed Aryan races,

for that is a contradiction: a master race is either on top or it is destroyed.

  151 (1885-1886)

  Religions are destroyed by belief in morality. The Christian moral God is

not tenable: hence "atheism"--as if there could be no other kinds of god.

  Similarly,  culture  is  destroyed  by  belief  in  morality.  For  when  one

discovers the necessary conditions out of which alone it can grow, one no

longer wants it (Buddhism).

  2. History of Christianity

  168 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  --The church is precisely that against which Jesus preached--and against

which he taught his disciples to fight--

  169 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  A god who died for our sins: redemption through faith; resurrection after

death--all these are counterfeits of true Christianity for which that disastrous

wrong-headed fellow [Paul] must be held responsible.  The exemplary life consists of love and humility; in a fullness of heart

that  does  not  exclude  even  the  lowliest;  in  a  formal  repudiation  of

maintaining one's rights, of self-defense, of victory in the sense of personal

triumph; in faith in blessedness here on earth, in spite of distress, opposition

and  death;  in  reconciliation;  in  the  absence  of  anger;  not  wanting  to  be

rewarded; not being obliged to anyone; the completest spiritual-intellectual

independence; a very proud life beneath the will to a life of poverty and

service.

  After the church had let itself be deprived of the entire Christian way of

life and had quite specifically sanctioned life under the state, that form of life

that  Jesus  had  combatted  and  condemned,  it  had  to  find  the  meaning  of

Christianity  in  something  else:  in  faith  in  unbelievable  things,  in  the

ceremonial of prayers, worship, feasts, etc. The concept "sin," "forgiveness,"

"reward"--all  quite  unimportant  and  virtually  excluded  from  primitive

Christianity--now comes into the foreground.

  An appalling mishmash of Greek philosophy and Judaism; asceticism;

continual judging and condemning; order of rank, etc.

  191 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

    Christians have never put into practice the acts Jesus prescribed for them,

and the impudent chatter about "justification by faith" and its unique and

supreme significance is only the consequence of the church's lack of courage

and will to confess the works which Jesus demanded.

  The Buddhist acts differently from the non-Buddhist; the Christian acts as

all the world does and possesses a Christianity of ceremonies and moods.

  The  profound  and  contemptible  mendaciousness  of  Christianity  in

Europe--:  we  really  are  becoming  the  contempt  of  the  Arabs,  Hindus,

Chinese-- Listen to the speeches of German's first statesman on what has

really occupied Europe for forty years now--listen to the language, the court-

chaplain Tartuffery.

  3. Christian Ideals

  II. Critique of Morality

  1. Origin of Moral Valuations

  2. The Herd

  3. General Remarks on Morality

  4. How Virtue is Made to Dominate

  5. The Moral Ideal

  A. Critique of Ideals  338 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  What  is  the  counterfeiting  aspect  of  morality?--  It  pretends  to  know

something, namely what "good and evil" is. That means wanting to know

why mankind is here, its goal, its destiny. That means wanting to know that

mankind has a goal, a destiny--

  339 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  The very obscure and arbitrary idea that mankind has a single task to

perform, that it is moving as a whole towards some goal, is still very young.

Perhaps we shall be rid of it again before it becomes a "fixed idea"--

  This  mankind  is  not  a  whole:  it  is  an  inextricable  multiplicity  of

ascending and descending life-processes--it does not have a youth followed

by  maturity  and  finally  by  old  age;  the  strata  are  twisted  and  entwined

together--and in a few millennia there may still be even younger types of man

than we can show today. Decadence, on the other hand, belongs to all epochs

of mankind: refuse and decaying matter are found everywhere; it is one of

life's processes to exclude the forms of decline and decay.

  *

  When  Christian  prejudice  was  a  power,  this  question  did  not  exist:

meaning lay in the salvation of the individual soul; whether mankind could

endure for a long or a short time did not come into consideration. The best

Christians  desired  that  it  should  end  as  soon  as  possible--concerning  that

which was needful to the individual there was no doubt--

  The  task  of  every  present  individual  was  the  same  as  for  a  future

individual  in  any  kind  of  future:  value,  meaning,  domain  of  values  were

fixed, unconditional, eternal, one with God-- That which deviated from this

eternal type was sinful, devilish, condemned--

  For  each  soul,  the  gravitational  center  of  valuation  was  placed  within

itself: salvation or damnation! The salvation of the immortal soul! Extremest

form of personalization-- For every soul there was only one perfecting; only

one ideal; only one way to redemption-- Extremest form of equality of rights,

tied  to  an  optical  magnification  of  one's  own  importance  to  the  point  of

insanity-- Nothing but insanely important souls, revolving about themselves

with a frightful fear--

  No man believes now in this absurd self-inflation: and we have sifted our

wisdom  through  a  sieve  of  contempt.  Nevertheless,  the  optical  habit  of

seeking  the  value  of  man  in  his  approach  to  an  ideal  man  remains

undisturbed: fundamentally, one upholds the perspective of personalization aswell as equality of rights before the ideal. In summa: one believes one knows

what the ultimate desideratum is with regard to the ideal man--

  This belief, however, is only the consequence of a dreadful deterioration

through  the  Christian  ideal:  as  one  at  once  discovers  with  every  careful

examination  of  the  "ideal  type."  One  believes  one  knows,  first  that  an

approach to one type is desirable; secondly, that one knows what this type is

like; thirdly, that every deviation from this type is a regression, an inhibition,

a loss of force and power in man--

  To dream of conditions in which this perfect man will be in the vast

majority: even our socialists, even the Utilitarians have not gone farther than

this.--

  In this way a goal seems to have entered the development of mankind: at

any rate, the belief in progress towards the ideal is the only form in which a

goal in history is thought of today. In summa: one has transferred the arrival

of  the  "kingdom  of  God"  into  the  future,  on  earth,  in  human  form--but

fundamentally one has held fast to the belief in the old ideal--

  B. Critique of the "Good Man," the Saint, etc.

  352 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  The concept of power, whether of a god or of a man, always includes

both the ability to help and the ability to harm. Thus it is with the Arabs; thus

with the Hebrews. Thus with all strong races.

  It is a fateful step when one separates the power for the one from the

power  for  the  other  into  a  dualism--  In  this  way,  morality  becomes  the

poisoner of life--

  C. Disagreement of the So-Called Evil Qualities

  377 (1883-1888)

    Falsity.--Every sovereign instinct has the others for its tools, retainers,

flatterers: it never lets itself be called by its ugly name: and it countenances

no praise in which it is not also praised indirectly. All praise and blame in

general crystallizes around every sovereign instinct to form a rigorous order

and etiquette. This is one of the causes of falsity.

  Every instinct that struggles for mastery but finds itself under a yoke

requires for itself, as strengthening and as support for its self-esteem, all the

beautiful names and recognized values: so, as a rule, it ventures forth under

the name of the "master" it is combatting and from whom it wants to get free

(e.g.,  the  fleshly  desires  or  the  desires  for  power  under  the  dominion  of

Christian values).-- This is the other cause of falsity.  Perfect  na�vete  reigns  in  both  cases:  the  falsity  does  not  become

conscious. It is a sign of a broken instinct when man sees the driving force

and  its  "expression"  ("the  mask")  as  separate  things--a  sign  of  self-

contradiction, and victorious far less often. Absolute innocence in bearing,

word, affect, a "good conscience" in falsity, the certainty with which one

grasps  the  greatest  and  most  splendid  words  and  postures--all  this  is

necessary for victory.

  In the other case: when one has extreme clear-sightedness one needs the

genius of the actor and tremendous training in self-control if one is to achieve

victory. That is why priests are the most skillful conscious hypocrites; then

princes, whom rank and ancestry have endowed with a kind of acting ability.

Thirdly, men of society, diplomats. Fourthly, women.

  Basic idea: falsity seems so profound, so omnisided, the will so clearly

opposed  to  direct  self-knowledge  and  the  calling  of  things  by  their  right

names,  that  it  is  very  highly  probable  that  truth,  will  to  truth  is  really

something else and only a disguise. (The need for faith is the greatest brake-

shoe on truthfulness.)

  380 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  1. Systematic falsification of history; so that it may provide the proof of

moral valuation:

  a. decline of a people and corruption; b. rise of a people and virtue; c.

zenith of a people ("its culture") as a consequence of moral elevation.

  2. Systematic falsification of great human beings, the great creators, the

great epochs:

  one desires that faith should be the distinguishing mark of the great: but

slackness, skepticism, "immorality," the right to throw off a faith, belong to

greatness (Caesar, also Homer, Aristophanes, Leonardo, Goethe). One always

suppresses the main thing, their "freedom of will"--

  382 (Spring-Fall 1887; rev. Spring-Fall 1888)

    Schopenhauer interpreted high intellectuality as liberation from the will;

he did not want to see the freedom from moral prejudice which is part of the

emancipation  of  the  great  spirit,  the  typical  immorality  of  the  genius;  he

artfully  posited  the  only  thing  he  held  in  honor,  the  moral  value  of

"depersonalization,"  as  the  condition  of  spiritual  activity,  of  "objective"

viewing. "Truth," even in art, appears after the withdrawal of the will--

  I  see  a  fundamentally  different  valuation  cutting  across  all  the  moral

idiosyncrasies:  I  know  nothing  of  such  an  absurd  distinction  between"genius" and the moral and immoral world of the will. The moral man is a

lower species than the immoral, a weaker species; indeed--he is a type in

regard to morality, but not a type in himself; a copy, a good copy at best--the

measure of his value lies outside him. I assess a man by the quantum of

power and abundance of his will: not by its enfeeblement and extinction; I

regard  a  philosophy  which  teaches  denial  of  the  will  as  a  teaching  of

defamation  and  slander--  I  assess  the  power  of  a  will  by  how  much

resistance, pain, torture it endures and knows how to turn to its advantage; I

do not account the evil and painful character of existence a reproach to it, but

hope rather that it will one day be more evil and painful than hitherto--

  The high point of the spirit imagined by Schopenhauer was to attain to the

recognition that there is no meaning in anything, in short, to recognize what

the  good  man  already  instinctively  does--  He  denies  the  possibility  of  a

higher  kind  of  intellect--he  took  his  insight  for  a  non  plus  ultra.  Here

spirituality is placed much lower than goodness; its highest value (e.g., as art)

would  be  to  urge  and  prepare  moral  conversion:  absolute  domination  of

moral values.--

  Beside  Schopenhauer  I  would  characterize  Kant:  nothing  Greek,

absolutely antihistorical (his passage on the French Revolution) and a moral

fanatic (Goethe's passage on radical evil). Saintliness was in the background

in his case, too.

  I need a critique of the saint--

  Hegel's value. "Passion."--

    Shopkeeper's philosophy of Mr. Spencer; complete absence of an ideal,

except that of the mediocre man.

    Fundamental instinctive principle of all philosophers and historians and

psychologists:  everything  of  value  in  man,  art,  history,  science,  religion,

technology must be proved to be of moral value, morally conditioned, in aim,

means and outcome. Everything understood in the light of the supreme value:

e.g., Rousseau's question concerning civilization: "Does man become better

through  it?"--an  amusing  question,  since  the  reverse  is  obvious  and  is

precisely that which speaks in favor of civilization.

  383 (March-June 1888)

  Religious morality.-- Affect, great desire, the passion for power, love,

revenge,  possessions--:  moralists  want  to  extinguish  and  uproot  them,  to

"purify" the soul of them.

  The  logic  is:  the  desires  often  produce  great  misfortune--consequentlythey are evil, reprehensible. A man must free himself from them: otherwise

he cannot be a good man--

  This is the same logic as: "if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out.: In the

particular  case  in  which  that  dangerous  "innocent  from  the  country,"  the

founder of Christianity, recommended this practice to his disciples, the case

of sexual excitation, the consequence is, unfortunately, not only the loss of an

organ but the emasculation of a man's character-- And the same applies to the

moralist's madness that demands, instead of the restraining of the passions,

their extirpation. Its conclusion is always: only the castrated man is a good

man.

  Instead  of  taking  into  service  the  great  sources  of  strength,  those

impetuous torrents of the soul that are so often dangerous and overwhelming,

and  economizing  them,  this  most  shortsighted  and  pernicious  mode  of

thought, the moral mode of thought, wants to make them dry up.

  384 (1885-1886)

  Overcoming of the affects?-- No, if what is implied is their weakening

and  extirpation.  But  putting  them  into  service:  which  may  also  mean

subjecting them to a protracted tyranny (not only as an individual, but as a

community, race, etc.). At last they are confidently granted freedom again:

they love us as good servants and go voluntarily wherever our best interests

lie.

  385 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Moral intolerance is an expression of weakness in a man: he is afraid of

his own "immorality," he must deny his strongest drives because he does not

yet know how to employ them. Thus the most fruitful regions of the earth

remain uncultivated the longest:-- the force is lacking that could here become

master--

  386 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  There are very naive people and men who believe that continual fine

weather is something desirable: even today they believe, in rebus moralibus,

[Moral matters.] that the "good man," and nothing but the "good man," is

something  desirable--and  that  the  course  of  human  evolution  is  directed

toward the survival of the "good man" only (and that one must bend all one's

efforts  in  that  direction--).  This  is  in  the  highest  degree  an  uneconomic

thought and, as stated, the acme of na�vete, nothing but the expression of

the  pleasing  effect  produced  by  the  "good  man"  (he  arouses  no  fear,  he

permits one to relax, he gives what one is able to take).  From a superior viewpoint one desires the contrary: the ever-increasing

dominion of evil, the growing emancipation of man from the narrow and

fear-ridden bonds of morality, the increase of force, in order to press the

mightiest natural powers--the affects--into service.

  387 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  The whole conception of an order of rank among the passions: as if the

right and normal thing were for one to be guided by reason--with the passions

as abnormal, dangerous, semi-animal, and, moreover, so far as their aim is

concerned, nothing other than desires for pleasure--

  Passion is degraded (1) as if it were only in unseemly cases, and not

necessarily and always, the motive force; (2) in as much as it has for its

object something of no great value, amusement--

  The  misunderstanding  of  passion  and  reason,  as  if  the  latter  were  an

independent  entity  and  not  rather  a  system  of  relations  between  various

passions and desires; and as if every passion did not possess its quantum of

reason--

  388 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  How, under the impress of the ascetic morality of depersonalization, it

was  precisely  the  affects  of  love,  goodness,  pity,  even  those  of  justice,

magnanimity, heroism, that were necessarily misunderstood:

  It  is  richness  in  personality,  abundance  in  oneself,  overflowing  and

bestowing, instinctive good health and affirmation of oneself, that produce

great sacrifice and great love: it is strong and godlike selfhood from which

these  affects  grow,  just  as  surely  as  did  the  desire  to  become  master,

encroachment,  the  inner  certainty  of  having  a  right  to  everything.  What

according  to  common  ideas  are  opposite  dispositions  are  rather  one

disposition; and if one is not firm and brave within oneself, one has nothing

to bestow and cannot stretch our one's hand to protect and support--

  How  was  one  able  so  to  transform  these  instincts  that  man  thought

valuable that which was directed against his self? when he sacrificed his self

to another self. Oh the psychological wretchedness and mendaciousness that

has  hitherto  laid  down  the  law  in  the  church  and  in  church-infected

philosophy!

  If man is sinful through and through, then he ought only to hate himself.

Fundamentally, he would have to treat his fellow men on the same basis as he

treats himself; charity needs to be justified--its justification lies in the fact

that  God  has  commanded  it.--  It  follows  from  this,  that  all  the  naturalinstincts  of  man  (the  instinct  of  love,  etc.)  appear  to  be  forbidden  in

themselves and only after they have been denied are they restored to their

rights on the basis of obedience to God--Pascal, the admirable logician of

Christianity, went so far! consider his relations to his sister. "Not to make

oneself love" seemed Christian to him.

  D. Critique of the Words: Improvement, Perfecting, Elevation

  398 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  What I want to make clear by all the means in my power:

  a. that there is no worse confusion than the confusion of breeding with

taming: which is what has been done-- Breeding, as I understand it, is a

means of storing up the tremendous forces of mankind so that the generations

can  build  upon  the  work  of  their  forefathers--not  only  outwardly,  but

inwardly, organically growing out of them and becoming something stronger-

-

  b. that it is extraordinarily dangerous to believe that mankind as a whole

will progress and grow stronger if individuals become flabby, equal, average-

- Mankind is an abstraction: the goal of breeding, even in the case of a single

individual, can only be the stronger man (--the man without breeding is weak,

extravagant, unstable--).

  6. Further Considerations for a Critique of Morality

  III. Critique of Philosophy

  1. General Observations

  410 (1885-1886) For the Preface

  Deeply mistrustful of the dogmas of epistemology, I loved to look now

out of this window, now out of that; I guarded against settling down with any

of these dogmas, considered them harmful--and finally: is it likely that a tool

is  able  to  criticize  its  own  fitness?--  What  I  noticed  was  rather  that  no

epistemological skepticism or dogmatism had ever arisen free from ulterior

motives--that  it  acquires  a  value  of  the  second  rank  as  soon  as  one  has

considered what it was that compelled the adoption of this point of view.

    Fundamental  insight:  Kant  as  well  as  Hegel  and  Schopenhauer--the

skeptical-epochistic  attitude  as  will  as  the  historicizing,  as  well  as  the

pessimistic--have a moral origin. I saw no one who had ventured a critique of

moral value feelings: and I soon turned my back one the meager attempts

made  to  arrive  at  a  description  of  the  origin  of  these  feelings  (as  by  the

English and German Darwinists).

  How  can  Spinoza's  position,  his  denial  and  rejection  of  moral  valuejudgments, be explained? (It was one consequence of his theodicy!)

  413 (1885)

  Ulterior  moral  motives  have  hitherto  most  obstructed  the  course  of

philosophy.

  423 (March-June 1888)

  Theory and practice.-- Fateful distinction, as if there were an actual drive

for knowledge that, without regard to questions of usefulness and harm, went

blindly  for  the  truth;  and  then,  separate  from  this,  the  whole  world  of

practical interests--

  I tried to show, on the other hand, what instincts have been active behind

all  these  pure  theoreticians--how  they  have  all,  under  the  spell  of  their

instincts, gone fatalistically for something that was "truth" for them--for them

and only for them. The conflict between different systems, including that

between  epistemological  scruples,  is  a  conflict  between  quite  definite

instincts (forms of vitality, decline, classes, races, etc.).

  The  so-called  drive  for  knowledge  can  be  traced  back  to  a  drive  to

appropriate  and  conquer:  the  senses,  the  memory,  the  instincts,  etc.  have

developed as a consequence of this drive. The quickest possible reduction of

the phenomena, economy, the accumulation of the spoils of knowledge (i.e.,

of world appropriated and made manageable)--

  Morality is such a curious science because it is in the highest degree

practical: so that the position of pure knowledge, scientific integrity, is at

once  abandoned  as  soon  as  the  claims  of  morality  must  be  answered.

Morality says: I need many answers--reasons, arguments; scruples can come

afterward, or not at all--.

  "How  should  one  act?"--  If  one  considers  that  one  is  dealing  with  a

sovereignly developed type that has "acted" for countless millennia, and in

which everything has become instinct, expediency, automatism, fatality, then

the urgency of this moral question must actually seem ridiculous.

  "How should one act?"-- Morality has always been a misunderstanding:

in reality, a species fated to act in this or that fashion wanted to justify itself,

by dictating its norm as the universal norm--

  "How should one act?" is not a cause but an effect. Morality follows, the

ideal comes at the end.

  --On the other hand, the appearance of moral scruples (in other words: the

becoming-conscious  of  the  values  by  which  one  acts)  betrays  a  certain

sickliness;  strong  ages  and  peoples  do  not  reflect  on  their  rights,  on  theprinciples  on  which  they  act,  on  their  instincts  and  reasons.  Becoming-

conscious is a sign that real morality, i.e., instinctive certainty in actions, is

going to the devil-- Every time a new world of consciousness is created, the

moralists  are  a  sign  of  damage,  impoverishment,  disorganization.--  The

deeply instinctive are shy of logicizing duties: among them are found Pyrrhic

opponents of dialectics and of knowability in general-- A virtue is refuted

with a "for"--

  Thesis: the appearance of moralists belongs to an age in which morality is

coming to an end.

  Thesis: the moralist disintegrates the moral instincts, however much he

may suppose himself to be their restorer.

  Thesis: that which really drives the moralist is not the moral instincts but

the  instincts  of  decadence  translated  into  the  formulas  of  morality--  (he

regards it as corruption when the instincts become uncertain).

  Thesis: the instincts of decadence, which, through the moralists, want to

become master over the instinctive morality of strong races and ages, are

  1. the instincts of the weak and underprivileged; 2. the instincts of the

exceptions, the solitaries, the abandoned, of the abortus [Abortion.] in what is

lofty and what is petty. 3. the instincts of those habituated to suffering, who

need a noble interpretation of their condition and therefore must know as

little as possible about physiology.

  2. Critique of Greek Philosophy

  428 (March-June 1888)

  How far psychologists have been corrupted by the moral idiosyncrasy:--

not  one  of  the  ancient  philosophers  had  the  courage  for  a  theory  of  the

"unfree will" (i.e., for a theory that denies morality);--no one had the courage

to define the typical element in pleasure, every sort of pleasure ("happiness")

as  the  feeling  of  power:  for  to  take  pleasure  in  power  was  considered

immoral;--no one had the courage to conceive virtue as a consequence of

immorality (of a will to power) in the service of the species (or of the race or

polis), for the will to power was considered immorality.

  In the entire evolution of morality, truth never appears: all the conceptual

elements  employed  are  fictions;  all  the  psychologica  accepted  are

falsifications;  all  the  forms  of  logic  dragged  into  this  realm  of  lies  are

sophistries. What distinguishes moral philosophers themselves is a complete

absence  of  cleanliness  and  intellectual  self-discipline:  they  take  "beautiful

feelings" for arguments: they regard their "heaving bosom" as the bellows ofdivinity-- Moral philosophy is the scabrous period in the history of the spirit.

  The first great example: in the name of morality, under the patronage of

morality, an unheard-of wrong was perpetrated, in fact a piece of decadence

in every respect. One cannot insist too strongly upon the fact that the great

Greek  philosophers  represent  the  decadence  of  every  kind  of  Greek

excellence and make it contagious-- "Virtue" made completely abstract was

the greatest seduction to make oneself abstract: i.e., to detach oneself.

  It is a very remarkable moment: the Sophists verge upon the first critique

of morality, the first insight into morality:--they juxtapose the multiplicity

(the  geographical  relativity)  of  the  moral  value  judgments;--they  let  it  be

known that every morality can be dialectically justified; i.e., they divine that

all  attempts  to  give  reasons  for  morality  are  necessarily  sophistical--a

proposition later proved on the grand scale by the ancient philosophers, from

Plato onwards (down to Kant);--they postulate the first truth that a "morality-

in-itself," a "good-in-itself" do not exist, that it is a swindle to talk of "truth"

in this field.

  Where was intellectual integrity in those days?

  The Greek culture of the Sophists had developed out of all the Greek

instincts; it belongs to the culture of the Periclean age as necessarily as Plato

does not: it has its predecessors in Heraclitus, in Democritus, in the scientific

types of the old philosophy; it finds expression in, e.g., the high culture of

Thucydides. And--it has ultimately shown itself to be right: every advance in

epistemological  and  moral  knowledge  has  reinstated  the  Sophists--  Our

contemporary way of thinking is to a great extent Heraclitean, Democritean,

and  Protagorean:  it  suffices  to  say  Protagorean,  because  Protagoras

represented a synthesis of Heraclitus and Democritus.

  (Plato:  a  great  Cagliostro--remember  how  Epicurus  judged  him;  how

Timon,  the  friend  of  Pyrrho,  judged  him---  Is  Plato's  integrity  beyond

question?-- But we know at least that he wanted to have taught as absolute

truth what he himself did not regard as even conditionally true: namely, the

separate existence and separate immortality of "souls.")

  430 (March-June 1888)

  The great rationality of all education in morality has always been that one

tried to attain to the certainty of an instinct: so that neither good intentions

nor good means had to enter consciousness as such. As the soldier exercises,

so should man learn to act. In fact, this unconsciousness belongs to any kind

of  perfection:  even  the  mathematician  employs  his  combinationsunconsciously--

  What,  then,  is  the  significance  of  the  reaction  of  Socrates,  who

recommended dialectics as the road to virtue and made mock when morality

did not know how to justify itself logically?-- As if this were not part of its

value--without consciousness it is no good--

  Positing proofs as the presupposition for personal excellence in virtue

signified  nothing  less  than  the  disintegration  of  Greek  instincts.  They  are

themselves types of disintegration, all these great "virtuous men" and word-

spinners.

  In  praxi,  this  means  that  moral  judgments  are  torn  from  their

conditionality, in which they have grown and alone possess any meaning,

from their Greek and Greek-political ground and soil, to be denaturalized

under the pretense of sublimation. The great concepts "good" and "just" are

severed  from  the  presuppositions  to  which  they  belong  and,  as  liberated

"ideas," become objects of dialectic. One looks for truth in them, one takes

them for entities or signs of entities: one invents a world where they are at

home, where they originate--

  In summa: the mischief has already reached its climax in Plato-- And then

one had need to invent the abstractly perfect man as well:--good, just, wise, a

dialectician--in  short,  the  scarecrow  of  the  ancient  philosopher:  a  plant

removed from all soil; a humanity without any particular regulating instincts;

a virtue that "proves" itself with reasons. The perfectly absurd "individuum"

in itself! unnaturalness of the first water--

  In short, the consequence of the denaturalization of moral values was the

creation of a degenerate type of man--"the good man," "the happy man," "the

wise man."-- Socrates represents a moment of the profoundest perversity in

the history of values.

  440 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  When morality--that is to say subtlety, caution, bravery, equity--has been

as  it  were  stored  up  through  the  practice  of  a  whole  succession  of

generations, then the total force of this accumulated virtue radiates even into

that sphere where integrity is most seldom found, into the spiritual sphere. In

all becoming-conscious there is expressed a discomfiture of the organism; it

has to try something new, nothing is sufficiently adapted for it, there is toil,

tension, strain--all this constitutes becoming-conscious--

  Genius  resides  in  instinct;  goodness  likewise.  One  acts  perfectly  only

when  one  acts  instinctively.  Even  from  the  viewpoint  of  morality,  allconscious  thinking  is  merely  tentative,  usually  the  reverse  of  morality.

Scientific integrity is always ruptured when the thinker begins to reason: try

the  experiment  of  putting  the  wisest  men  on  the  most  delicate  scales  by

making them talk about morality--

  It could be proved that all conscious thinking would also show a far lower

standard of morality than the thinking of the same man when it is directed by

his instincts.

  3. Truth and Error of Philosophers

  456 (March-June 1888)

  A  certain  degree  of  faith  serves  us  today  as  an  objection  to  what  is

believed--even more as a question mark against the spiritual health of the

believer.

  4. Further Considerations for a Critique of Philosophy

  462 (Spring-Fall 1887)

    Fundamental innovations: In place of "moral values," purely naturalistic

values. Naturalization of morality.

  In place of "sociology," a theory of the forms of domination.

  In  place  of  "society,"  the  culture  complex,  as  my  chief  interest  (as  a

whole or in its parts).

  In  place  of  "epistemology,"  a  perspective  theory  of  affects  (to  which

belongs  a  hierarchy  of  the  affects;  the  affects  transfigured;  their  superior

order, their "spirituality").

  In place of "metaphysics," and religion, the theory of eternal recurrence

(this as a means of breeding and selection).

          BOOK THREE - PRINCIPLES OF A NEW EVALUATION

  I. THE WILL TO POWER AS KNOWLEDGE 1. Method of Inquiry

  466 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  It is not the victory of science that distinguishes our nineteenth century,

but the victory of scientific method over science.

  467 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  History of scientific method, considered by Auguste Comte as virtually

philosophy itself.

  468 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The great methodologists: Aristotle, Bacon, Descartes, Auguste

  469 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  The  most  valuable  insights  are  arrived  at  last;  but  the  most  valuable

insights are methods.  All  the  methods,  all  the  presuppositions  of  our  contemporary  science

were for millennia regarded with the profoundest contempt; on their account

one was excluded from the society of respectable people--one was considered

as an "enemy of God," as a reviler of the highest ideal, as "possessed."

  We have had the whole pathos of mankind against us--our conception of

what "truth" should be, what service of truth should be, our objectivity, our

method,  our  silent,  cautious,  mistrustful  ways  were  considered  perfectly

contemptible--

  At bottom, it has been an aesthetic taste that has hindered mankind most:

it  believed  in  the  picturesque  effect  of  truth,  it  demanded  of  the  man  of

knowledge that he should produce a powerful effect on the imagination.

  This looks as if an antithesis has been achieved, a leap made; in reality,

the schooling through moral hyperbole prepared the way step by step for that

milder of pathos that became incarnate in the scientific character--

  The conscientiousness in small things, the self-control of the religious

man  were  a  preparatory  school  for  the  scientific  character:  above  all,  the

disposition  that  takes  problems  seriously,  regardless  of  the  personal

consequences-- 2. The Epistemological Starting Point

  470 (1885-1886)

    Profound aversion to reposing once and for all in any one total view of

the world. Fascination of the opposing point of view: refusal to be deprived

of the stimulus of the enigmatic.

  471 (1885-1886)

  The presupposition that things are, at bottom, ordered so morally that

human reason must be justified--is an ingenuous presupposition and a piece

of naivete, the after-effect of belief in God's veracity--God understood as the

creator of things.--These concepts an inheritance from a former existence in a

beyond

  472 (1883-1888)

    Contradiction of the alleged "facts of consciousness." Observation is a

thousand times more difficult, error perhaps a condition of observation in

general.

  473 (1886-1887)

  The intellect cannot criticize itself, simply because it cannot be compared

with other species of intellect and because its capacity to know would be

revealed  only  in  the  presence  of  "true  reality,"  i.e.,  because  in  order  to

criticize the intellect we should have to be a higher being with "absoluteknowledge." This presupposes that, distinct from every perspective kind of

outlook or sensual-spiritual appropriation, something exists, an "in-itself."--

But the psychological derivation of the belief in things forbids us to speak of

" things-in-themselves . "

  474 (Nov.1887-March 1888)

  That a sort of adequate relationship subsists between subject and object,

that the object is something that if seen from within would be a subject, is a

well-meant invention which, I think, has had its day. The measure of that of

which we are in any way conscious is totally dependent upon the coarse

utility  of  its  becoming-conscious:  how  could  this  nook-perspective  of

consciousness  permit  us  to  assert  anything  of  "subject"  and  "object"  that

touched reality!--

  475 (1885-1886)

  Critique  of  modern  philosophy:  erroneous  starting  point,  as  if  there

existed "facts of consciousness"--and no phenomenalism in introspection.

  476 (1884)

    "Consciousness"--to what extent the idea of an idea, the idea of will, the

idea of a feeling (known to ourselves alone) are totally superficial! Our inner

world, too, "appearance"!

  477 (Nov.1887-March 1888)

  I maintain the phenomenality of the inner world, too: everything of which

we  become  conscious  is  arranged,  simplified,  schematized,  interpreted

through  and  through--the  actual  process  of  inner  "perception,"  the  causal

connection between thoughts, feelings, desires, between subject and object,

are  absolutely  hidden  from  us--and  are  perhaps  purely  imaginary.  The

"apparent inner world" is governed by just the same forms and procedures as

the "outer" world. We never encounter "facts": pleasure and displeasure are

subsequent and derivative intellectual phenomena--

    "Causality" eludes us; to suppose a direct causal link beween thoughts, as

logic does--that is the consequence of the crudest and clumsiest observation.

Between two thoughts all kinds of affects play their game: but their motions

are too fast, therefore we fail to recognize them, we deny them--

  "Thinking," as epistemologists conceive it, simply does not occur: it is a

quite arbitrary fiction, arrived at by selecting one element from the process

and  eliminating  all  the  rest,  an  artificial  arrangement  for  the  purpose  of

intelligibility--

  The "spirit," something that thinks: where possible even "absolute, purespirit"--this  conception  is  a  second  derivative  of  that  false  introspection

which believes in "thinking": first an act is imagined which simply does not

occur, "thinking," and secondly a subject-substratum in which every act of

thinking, and nothing else, has its origin: that is to say, both the deed and the

doer are fictions.

  478 (March-June 1888)

  One must not look for phenomenalism in the wrong place: nothing is

more phenomenal (or, more clearly:) nothing is so much deception as this

inner world which we observe with the famous "inner sense."

  We have believed in the will as cause to such an extent that we have from

our  personal  experience  introduced  a  cause  into  events  in  general  (i.e.,

intention a cause of events--).

  We believe that thoughts as they succeed one another in our minds stand

in some kind of causal relation: the logician especially, who actually speaks

of nothing but instances which never occur in reality, has grown accustomed

to the prejudice that thoughts cause thoughts--.

  We believe--and even our philosopers still believe--that pleasure and pain

are causes of reactions, that the purpose of pleasure and pain is to occasion

reactions. For millennia, pleasure and the avoidance of displeasure have been

flatly asserted as the motives for every action. Upon reflection, however, we

should concede that everything would have taken the same course, according

to exactly the same sequence of causes and effects, if these states of "pleasure

and displeasure" had been absent, and that one is simply deceiving oneself if

one thinks they cause anything at all: they are epiphenomena with a quite

different object than to evoke reactions; they are themselves effects within

the instituted process of reaction.

  In  summa:  everything  of  which  we  become  conscious  is  a  terminal

phenomenon, an end--and causes nothing; every successive phenomenon in

consciousness is completely atomistic--And we have sought to understand the

world through the reverse conception--as if nothing were real and effective

but thinking, feeling, willing!--

  479 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

  The  phenomenalism  of  the  "inner  world."  Chronological  inversion,  so

that the cause enters consciousness later than the effect.--We have learned

that pain is projected to a part of the body without being situated there--we

have learned that sense impressions naively supposed to be conditioned by

the outer world are, on the contrary, conditioned by the inner world; that weare always unconscious of the real activity of the outer world--The fragment

of outer world of which we are conscious is born after an effect from outside

has impressed itself upon us, and is subsequently projected as its "cause"--

  In the phenomenalism of the "inner world" we invert the chronological

order of cause and effect. The fundamental fact of "inner experience" is that

the cause is imagined after the effect has taken place--The same applies to the

succession of thoughts: --we seek the reason for a thought before we are

conscious  of  it;  and  the  reason  enters  consciousness  first,  and  then  its

consequence--Our entire dream life is the interpretation of complex feelings

with a view to possible causes--and in such way that we are conscious of a

condition only when the supposed causal chain associated with it has entered

consciousness.

  The whole of "inner experience" rests upon the fact that a cause for an

excitement of the nerve centers is sought and imagined --and that only a

cause thus discovered enters consciousness: this cause in no way corresponds

to the real cause--it is a groping on the basis of previous "inner experiences,"

i.e.,  of  memory.  But  memory  also  maintains  the  habit  of  the  old

interpretations, i.e., of erroneous causality--so that the "inner experience" has

to contain within it the consequences of all previous false causal fictions. Our

"outer world" as we project it every moment is indissolubly tied to the old

error of the ground: we interpret it by means of the schematism of "things,"

etc.

  "Inner  experience"  enters  our  consciousness  only  after  it  has  found  a

language  the  individual  understands--i.e.,  a  translation  of  a  condition  into

conditions familiar to him--; "to understand" means merely: to be able to

express something new in the language of something old and familiar. E.g., "I

feel unwell"--such a judgment presupposes a great and late neutrality of the

observer--; the simple man always says: this or that makes me feel unwell --

he makes up his mind about his feeling unwell only when he has seen a

reason for feeling unwell.--I call that a lack of philology; to be able to read

off a text as a text without interposing an interpretation is the last-developed

form of "inner experience"-- perhaps one that is hardly possible--

  480 (March-June 1888)

  There exists neither "spirit," nor reason, nor thinking, nor consciousness,

nor soul, nor will, nor truth: all are fictions that are of no use. There is no

question of "subject and object," but of a particular species of animal that can

prosper only through a certain relative rightness; above all, regularity of itsperceptions (so that it can accumulate experience)--

    Knowledge works as a tool of power. Hence it is plain that it increases

with every increase of power--

  The  meaning  of  "knowledge":  here,  as  in  the  case  of  "good"  or

"beautiful",  the  concept  is  to  be  regarded  in  a  strict  and  narrow

anthropocentric  and  biological  sense.  In  order  for  a  particular  species  to

maintain  itself  and  increase  its  power,  its  conception  of  reality  must

comprehend enough of the calculable and constant for it to base a scheme of

behavior on it. The utility of preservation --not some abstract-theoretical need

not  to  be  deceived--stands  as  the  motive  behind  the  development  of  the

organs  of  knowledge--they  develop  in  such  a  way  that  their  observations

suffice for our preservation. In other words: the measure of the desire for

knowledge depends upon the measure to which the will to power grows in a

species:  a  species  grasps  a  certain  amount  of  reality  in  order  to  become

master of it, in order to press it into service. 3. Belief in the "Ego." The

Subject

  481 (1883-1888)

  Against positivism, which halts at phenomena--"There are only facts"--I

would say: No, facts is precisely what there is not, only interpretations. We

cannot establish any fact "in itself": perhaps it is folly to want to do such a

thing.

    "Everything is subjective," you say; but even this is interpretation. The

"subject" is not something given, it is something added and invented and

projected behind what there is.--Finally, is it necessary to posit an interpreter

behind the interpretation? Even this is invention, hypothesis.

  In  so  far  as  the  word  "knowledge"  has  any  meaning,  the  world  is

knowable; but it is interpretable otherwise, it has no meaning behind it, but

countless meanings.--"Perspectivism."

  It  is  our  needs  that  interpret  the  world;  our  drives  and  their  For  and

Against. Every drive is a kind of lust to rule; each one has its perspective that

it would like to compel all the other drives to accept as a norm.

  482 (1886-1887)

  We set up a word at the point at which our ignorance begins, at which we

can see no further, e.g., the word "I," the word "do," the word "suffer":--these

are perhaps the horizon of our knowledge, but not "truths."

  483 (1885)

  Through thought the ego is posited; but hitherto one believed as ordinarypeople do, that in "I think" there was something of immediate certainty, and

that  this  "I"  was  the  given  cause  of  thought,  from  which  by  analogy  we

understood all other causal relationships. However habitual and indispensable

this fiction may have become by now--that in itself proves nothing against its

imaginary origin: a belief can be a condition of life and nonetheless be false.

  484 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  "There is thinking: therefore there is something that thinks": this is the

upshot of all Descartes' argumentation. But that means positing as "true �

priori" our belief in the concept of substance-- that when there is thought

there  has  to  be  something  "that  thinks"  is  simply  a  formulation  of  our

grammatical  custom  that  adds  a  doer  to  every  deed.  In  short,  this  is  not

merely  the  substantiation  of  a  fact  but  a  logical-metaphysical  postulate--

Along the lines followed by Descartes one does not come upon something

absolutely certain but only upon the fact of a very strong belief.

  If one reduces the proposition to "There is thinking, therefore there are

thoughts," one has produced a mere tautology: and precisely that which is in

question, the "reality of thought," is not touched upon--that is, in this form the

"apparent reality" of thought cannot be denied. But what Descartes desired

was that thought should have, not an apparent reality, but a reality in itself.

  485 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The concept of substance is a consequence of the concept of the subject:

not the reverse! If we relinquish the soul, "the subject," the precondition for

"substance" in general disappears. One acquires degrees of being, one loses

that which has being.

  Critique of "reality": where does the "more or less real," the gradation of

being in which we believe, lead to?--

  The  degree  to  which  we  feel  life  and  power  (logic  and  coherence  of

experience) gives us our measure of "being", "reality", not appearance.

  The subject: this is the term for our belief in a unity underlying all the

different impulses of the highest feeling of reality: we understand this belief

as the effect of one cause--we believe so firmly in our belief that for its sake

we imagine "truth", "reality", substantiality in general.-- "The subject" is the

fiction that many similar states in us are the effect of one substratum: but it is

we who first created the "similarity" of these states; our adjusting them and

making them similar is the fact, not their similarity (--which ought rather to

be denied--).

  486 (1885-1886)  One would have to know what being is, in order to decide whether this or

that  is  real  (e.g.,  "the  facts  of  consciousness");  in  the  same  way,  what

certainty is, what knowledge is, and the like.-- But since we do not know this,

a critique of the faculty of knowledge is senseless: how should a tool be able

to criticize itself when it can use only itself for the critique? It cannot even

define itself!

  487 (1883-1886)

  Must all philosophy not ultimately bring to light the preconditions upon

which the process of reason depends?--our belief in the "ego" as a substance,

as the sole reality from which we ascribe reality to things in general? The

oldest  "realism"  at  last  comes  to  light:  at  the  same  time  that  the  entire

religious  history  of  mankind  is  recognized  as  the  history  of  the  soul

superstition. Here we come to a limit: our thinking itself involves this belief

(with  its  distinction  of  substance,  accident;  deed,  doer,  etc.);  to  let  it  go

means: being no longer able to think.

  But that a belief, however necessary it may be for the preservation of a

species, has nothing to do with truth, one knows from the fact that, e.g., we

have to believe in time, space, and motion, without feeling compelled to grant

them absolute reality.

  488 (Spring-Fall 1887)

    Psychological derivation of our belief in reason.--The concept "reality",

"being", is taken from our feeling of the "subject".

  "The subject": interpreted from within ourselves, so that the ego counts as

a substance, as the cause of all deeds, as a doer.

  The  logical-metaphysical  postulates,  the  belief  in  substance,  accident,

attribute, etc., derive their convincing force from our habit of regarding all

our deeds as consequences of our will--so that the ego, as substance, does not

vanish in the multiplicity of change.--But there is no such thing as will.--

  We have no categories at all that permit us to distinguish a "world in

itself"  from  a  "world  of  appearance."  All  our  categories  of  reason  are  of

sensual origin: derived from the empirical world. "The soul", "the ego"--the

history of these concepts shows that here, too, the oldest distinction ("breath",

"life")--

  If there is nothing material, there is also nothing immaterial. The concept

no longer contains anything.

  No  subject  "atoms".  The  sphere  of  a  subject  constantly  growing  or

decreasing, the center of the system constantly shifting; in cases where itcannot organize the appropriate mass, it breaks into two parts. On the other

hand,  it  can  transform  a  weaker  subject  into  its  functionary  without

destroying  it,  and  to  a  certain  degree  form  a  new  unity  with  it.  No

"substance", rather something that in itself strives after greater strength, and

that wants to "preserve" itself only indirectly (it wants to surpass itself--).

  489 (1886-1887)

  Everyting that enters consciousness as "unity" is already tremendously

complex: we always have only a semblance of Unity.

  The  phenomenon  of  the  body  is  the  richer,  clearer,  more  tangible

phenomenon: to be discussed first, methodologically, without coming to any

decision about its ultimate significance.

  490 (1885)

  The assumption of one single subject is perhaps unnecessary; perhaps it is

just as permissible to assume a multiplicity of subjects, whose interaction and

struggle is the basis of our thought and our consciousness in general? A kind

of  aristocracy  of  "cells"  in  which  dominion  resides?  To  be  sure,  an

aristocracy  of  equals,  used  to  ruling  jointly  and  understanding  how  to

command?

  My hypotheses: The subject as multiplicity

  Pain intellectual and dependent upon the judgment "harmful": projected.

  The  effect  always  "unconscious":  the  inferred  and  imagined  cause  is

projected, follows in time.

  Pleasure is a kind of pain.

  The  only  force  that  exists  is  of  the  same  kind  as  that  of  the  will:  a

commanding of other subjects, which thereupon change.

  The continual transitoriness and fleetingness of the subject. "Mortal soul."

  Number as perspective form.

  491 (1885-1886)

  Belief in the body is more fundamental than belief in the soul: the latter

arose from unscientific reflection on the agonies of the body (something that

leaves it. Belief in the truth of dreams--).

  492 (1885)

  The body and physiology the starting point: why?--We gain the correct

idea of the nature of our subject-unity, namely as regents at the head of a

communality (not as "souls" or "life forces"), also of the dependence of these

regents upon the ruled and of an order of rank and division of labor as the

conditions that make possible the whole and its parts. In the same way, howliving unities continually arise and die and how the "subject" is not eternal; in

the same way, that the struggle expresses itself in obeying and commanding,

and that a fluctuating assessment of the limits of power is part of life. The

relative ignorance in which the regent is kept concerning individual activities

and even disturbances within the communality is among the conditions under

which  rule  can  be  exercised.  In  short,  we  also  gain  a  valuation  of  not-

knowing, of seeing things on a broad scale, of simplification and falsification,

of perspectivity. The most important thing, however, is: that we understand

that  the  ruler  and  his  subjects  are  of  the  same  kind,  all  feeling,  willing,

thinking--and that, wherever we see or divine movement in a body, we learn

to  conclude  that  there  is  a  subjective,  invisible  life  appertaining  to  it.

Movement is symbolism for the eye; it indicates that something has been felt,

willed, thought.

  The danger of the direct questioning of the subject about the subject and

of  all  self-reflection  of  the  spirit  lies  in  this,  that  it  could  be  useful  and

important  for  one's  activity  to  interpret  oneself  falsely.  That  is  why  we

question the body and reject the evidence of the sharpened senses: we try, if

you  like,  to  see  whether  the  inferior  parts  themselves  cannot  enter  into

communication with us. 4. Biology of the Drive to Knowledge. Perspectivism

  493 (1885)

  Truth is the kind of error without which a certain species of life could not

live. The value for life is ultimately decisive.

  494 (1885)

  It  is  improbable  that  our  "knowledge"  should  extend  further  than  is

strictly necessary for the preservation of life. Morphology shows us how the

senses  and  the  nerves,  as  well  as  the  brain,  develop  in  proportion  to  the

difficulty of finding nourishment.

  495

  If the morality of "thou shalt not lie" is rejected, the "sense for truth" will

have  to  legitimize  itself  before  another  tribunal:--  as  a  means  of  the

preservation of man, as will to power.

  Likewise our love of the beautiful: it also is our shaping will. The two

senses stand side-by-side; the sense for the real is the means of acquiring the

power  to  shape  things  according  to  our  wish.  The  joy  in  shaping  and

reshaping--a  primeval  joy!  We  can  comprehend  only  a  world  that  we

ourselves have made.

  496 (1884)  Of the multifariousness of knowledge. To trace one's own relationship to

many  other  things  (or  the  relationship  of  kind)--  how  should  that  be

"knowledge" of other things! The way of knowing and of knowledge is itself

already part of the conditions of existence: so that the conclusion that there

could be no other kind of intellect (for us) than that which preserves us is

precipitate: this actual condition of existence is perhaps only accidental and

perhaps in no way necessary.

  Our apparatus for acquiring knowledge is not designed for "knowledge."

  497 (1884)

  The  most  strongly  believed  a  priori  "truths"  are  for  me  provisional

assumptions; e.g., the law of causality, a very well acquired habit of belief, so

much a part of us that not to believe in it would destroy the race. But are they

for that reason truths? What a conclusion! As if the preservation of man were

a proof of truth!

  498 (1884)

  To  what  extent  even  our  intellect  is  a  consequence  of  conditions  of

existence--: we would not have it if we did not need to have it, and we would

not have it as it is if we did not need to have it as it is, if we could live

otherwise.

  499 (1885)

    "Thinking" in primitive conditions (pre-organic) is the crystallization of

forms, as in the case of crystal.--In our thought, the essential feature is fitting

new material into old schemes (= Procrustes' bed), making equal what is new.

  500 (1885-1886)

  Sense perceptions projected "outside": "inside" and "outside"--does the

body command here--?

  The same equalizing and ordering force that rules in the idioplasma, rules

also in the incorporation of the outer world: our sense perceptions are already

the result of this assimiliation and equalization in regard to all the past in us;

they do not follow directly upon the "impression"--

  501 (1886-1887)

  All thought, judgment, perception, considered as comparison, has as its

precondition a "positing of equality," and earlier still a "making equal." The

process  of  making  equal  is  the  same  as  the  process  of  incorporation  of

appropriated material in the amoeba.

    "Memory" late, in so far as here the drive to make equal seems already to

have been subdued: differentiation is preserved. Remembering as a process ofclassification and pigeonholing: who is active?

  502 (1885)

  One must revise one's ideas about memory: here lies the chief temptation

to assume a "soul," which, outside time, reproduces, recognizes, etc. But that

which is experienced lives on "in the memory"; I cannot help it if it "comes

back,"  the  will  is  inactive  in  this  case,  as  in  the  coming  of  any  thought.

Something happens of which I become conscious: now something similar

comes--who called it? roused it?

  503 (1884)

  The entire apparatus of knowledge is an apparatus for abstraction and

simplification--directed not at knowledge but at taking possession of things:

"end" and "means" are as remote from its essential nature as are "concepts."

With "end" and "means" one takes possession of the process (one invents a

process that can be grasped); with "concepts," however, of the "things" that

constitute the process.

  504 (1883-1888)

    Consciousness--beginning quite externally, as coordination and becoming

conscious  of  "impressions"--at  first  at  the  furthest  distance  from  the

biological center of the individual; but a process that deepens and intensifies

itself, and continually draws nearer to that center.

  505 (1885-1886)

  Our  perceptions,  as  we  understand  them:  i.e.,  the  sum  of  all  those

perceptions the becoming- conscious of which was useful and essential to us

and  to  the  entire  organic  process--therefore  not  all  perceptions  in  general

(e.g., not the electric); this means: we have senses for only a selection of

perceptions--those  with  which  we  have  to  concern  ourselves  in  order  to

preserve  ourselves.  Consciousness  is  present  only  to  the  extent  that

consciousness is useful. It cannot be doubted that all sense perceptions are

permeated with value judgments (useful and harmful--consequently, pleasant

or unpleasant). Each individual color is also for us an expression of value

(although we seldom admit it, or do so only after a protracted impression of

exclusively  the  same  color;  e.g.,  a  prisoner  in  prison,  or  a  lunatic).  Thus

insects also react differently to different colors: some like this color, some

that; e.g., ants.

  506 (1884)

  First  images--to  explain  how  images  arise  in  the  spirit.  Then  words,

applied to images. Finally concepts, possible only when there are words--thecollecting  together  of  many  images  in  something  nonvisible  but  audible

(word). The tiny amount of emotion to which the "word" gives rise, as we

contemplate similar images for which one word exists--this weak emotion is

the  common  element,  the  basis  of  the  concept.  That  weak  sensations  are

regarded as alike, sensed as being the same, is the fundamental fact. Thus

confusion of two sensations that are close neighbors, as we take note of these

sensations; but who is taking note? Believing is the primal beginning even in

every sense impression: a kind of affirmation the first intellectual activity! A

"holding-true"  in  the  beginning!  Therefore  it  is  to  be  explained:  how

"holding-true" arose! What sensation lies behind "true"?

  507 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  The valuation "I believe that this and that is so" as the essence of "truth."

In valuations are expressed conditions of preservation and growth. All our

organs  of  knowledge  and  our  senses  are  developed  only  with  regard  to

conditions of preservation and growth. Trust in reason and its categories, in

dialectic, therefore the valuation of logic, proves only their usefulness for life,

proved by experience--not that something is true.

  That  a  great  deal  of  belief  must  be  present;  that  judgments  may  be

ventured;  that  doubt  concerning  all  essential  values  is  lacking--that  is  the

precondition of every living thing and its life. Therefore, what is needed is

that something must be held to be true--not that something is true.

  "The real and the apparent world"--I have traced this antithesis back to

value  relations.  We  have  projected  the  conditions  of  our  preservation  as

predicates of being in general. Because we have to be stable in our beliefs if

we are to prosper, we have made the "real" world a world not of change and

becoming, but one of being. 5. Origin of Reason and Logic

  508 (1883-1888)

  Originally  a  chaos  of  ideas.  The  ideas  that  were  consistent  with  one

another remained, the greater number perished--and are perishing.

  509 (1883-1888)

  The earthly kingdom of desires out of which logic grew: the herd instinct

in  the  background.  The  assumption  of  similar  cases  presupposes  "similar

souls." For the purpose of mutual agreement and dominion.

  510 (1883-1888)

  On the origin of logic. The fundamental inclination to posit as equal, to

see things as equal, is modified, held in check, by consideration of usefulness

and harmfulness, by considerations of success: it adapts itself to a milderdegree in which it can be satisfied without at the same time denying and

endangering life. This whole process corresponds exactly to that external,

mechanical process (which is its symbol) by which protoplasm makes what it

appropriates equal to itself and fits it into its own forms and files.

  511 (1885-1886)

  Equality and similarity.

  1. The coarser organ sees much apparent equality;

  2. the spirit wants equality, i.e., to subsume a sense impression into an

existing series: in the same way as the body assimilates inorganic matter.

  Toward  an  understanding  of  logic:  the  will  to  equality  is  the  will  to

power--the belief that something is thus and thus (the essence of judgment) is

the consequence of a will that as much as possible shall be equal.

  512 (1885)

  Logic is bound to the condition: assume there are identical cases. In fact,

to make possible logical thinking and inferences, this condition must first be

treated fictitously as fulfilled. That is: the will to logical truth can be carried

through only after a fundamental falsification of all events is assumed. From

which it follows that a drive rules here that is capable of employing both

means, firstly falsification, then the implementation of its own point of view:

logic does not spring from will to truth.

  513 (Fall 1886)

  The inventive force that invented categories labored in the service of our

needs, namely of our need for security, for quick understanding on the basis

of  signs  and  sounds,  for  means  of  abbreviation:--"substance",  "subject",

"object", "being", "becoming" have nothing to do with metaphysical truths.--

  It is the powerful who made the names of things into law, and among the

powerful it is the greatest artists in abstraction who created the categories.

  514 (March-June 1888)

  A morality, a mode of living, tried and proved by long experience and

testing,  at  length  enters  consciousness  as  a  law,  as  dominating--And

therewith  the  entire  group  of  related  values  and  states  enters  into  it:  it

becomes venerable, unassailable, holy, true; it is part of its development that

its origin should be forgotten.-- That is a sign it has become master--

  Exactly  the  same  thing  could  have  happened  with  the  categories  of

reason: they could have prevailed, after much groping and fumbling, through

their relative utility--There came a point when one collected them together,

raised them to consciousness as a whole--and when one commanded them,i.e., when they had the effect of a command--From then on, they counted as

�  priori,  as  beyond  experience,  as  irrefutable.  And  yet  perhaps  they

represent nothing more than the expediency of a certain race and species --

their utility alone is their "truth"--

  515 (March-June 1888)

  Not "to know" but to schematize to impose upon chaos as much regularity

and form as our practical needs require.

  In the formation of reason, logic, the categories, it was need that was

authoritative: the need, not to "know," but to subsume, to schematize, for the

purpose  of  intelligibility  and  calculation--(The  development  of  reason  is

adjustment,  invention,  with  the  aim  of  making  similar,  equal--the  same

process that every sense impression goes through!) No pre-existing "idea"

was  here  at  work,  but  the  utilitarian  fact  that  only  when  we  see  things

coarsely and made equal do they become calculable and usable to us--Finality

in reason is an effect, not a cause: life miscarries with any other kinds of

reason, to which there is a continual impulse--it becomes difficult to survey--

too unequal--

  The categories are "truths"' only in the sense that they are conditions of

life for us: as Euclidean space is a conditional "truth." (Between ourselves:

since no one would maintain that there is any necessity for men to exist,

reason, as well as Euclidean space, is a mere idiosyncracy of a certain species

of animal, and one among many--)

  The  subjective  compulsion  not  to  contradict  here  is  a  biological

compulsion: the instinct for the utility of inferring as we do infer is part of us,

we almost are this instinct--But what naivete to extract from this a proof that

we  are  therewith  in  possession  of  a  "truth  in  itself"!--Not  being  able  to

contradict is proof of an incapacity, not of "truth."

  516 (Spring-Fall 1887; rev. Spring-Fall 1888)

  We are unable to affirm and to deny one and the same thing: this is a

subjective empirical law, not the expression of any "necessity" but only of an

inability.

  If, according to Aristotle, the law of contradiction is the most certain of

all  principles,  if  it  is  the  ultimate  and  most  basic,  upon  which  every

demonstrative proof rests, if the principle of every axiom lies in it; then one

should consider all the more rigorously what presuppositions already lie at

the bottom of it. Either it asserts something about. actuality, about being, as if

one already knew this from another source; that is, as if opposite attributescould  not  be  ascribed  to  it.  Or  the  proposition  means:  opposite  attributes

should not be ascribed to it. In that case, logic would be an imperative, not to

know the true, but to posit and arrange a world that shall be called true by us.

  In short, the question remains open: are the axioms of logic adequate to

reality or are they a means and measure for us to create reality, the concept

"reality," for ourselves.?--To affirm the former one would, as already said,

have to have a previous knowledge of being--which is certainly not the case.

The proposition therefore contains no criterion of truth, but an imperative

concerning that which should count as true.

    Supposing there were no self-identical "A", such as is presupposed by

every proposition of logic (and of mathematics), and the "A" were already

mere  appearance,  then  logic  would  have  a  merely  apparent  world  as  its

condition.  In  fact,  we  believe  in  this  proposition  under  the  influence  of

ceaseless experience which seems continually to confirrn it. The "thing"--that

is the real substratum of "A"; our belief in things is the precondition of our

belief in logic. The "A" of logic is, like the atom, a reconstruction of the

thing--If we do not grasp this, but make of logic a criterion of true being, we

are  on  the  way  to  positing  as  realities  all  those  hypostases:  substance,

attribute, object, subject, action, etc.; that is, to conceiving a metaphysical

world, that is, a "real world" (--this, however, is the apparent world once

more--).

  The very first acts of thought, affirmation and denial, holding true and

holding not true, are, in as much as they presuppose, not only the habit of

holding things true and holding them not true, but a right to do this, already

dominated  by  the  belief  that  we  can  gain  possession  of  knowledge,  that

judgments really can hit upon the truth;--in short, logic does not doubt its

ability to assert something about the true-in-itself (namely, that it cannot have

opposite attributes).

  Here  reigns  the  coarse  sensualistic  prejudice  that  sensations  teach  us

truths about things--that I cannot say at the same time of one and the same

thing that it is hard and that it is soft. (The instinctive proof "I cannot have

two opposite sensations at the same time"--quite coarse and false.)

  The conceptual ban on contradiction proceeds from the belief that we are

able to form concepts, that the concept not only designates the essence of a

thing  but  comprehends  it--In  fact,  logic  (like  geometry  and  arithmetic)

applies only to fictitious entities that we have created. Logic is the attempt to

comprehend  the  actual  world  by  means  of  a  scheme  of  being  posited  byourselves; more correctly, to make it formulatable and calculable for us--

  517 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  In order to think and infer it is necessary to assume beings: logic handles

only formulas for what remains the same. That is why this assumption would

not be proof of reality: "beings" are part of our perspective. The "ego" as a

being (--not affected by becoming and development).

  The fictitious world of subject, substance, "reason" etc., is needed--: there

is in us a power to order, simplify, falsify, artificially distinguish. "Truth" is

the  will  to  be  master  over  the  multiplicity  of  sensations:--to  classify

phenomena into definite categories. In this we start from a belief in the "in-

itself" of things (we take phenomena as real).

  The  character  of  the  world  in  a  state  of  becoming  as  incapable  of

formulation,  as  "false,"  as  "'self-contradictory."  Knowledge  and  becoming

exclude one another. Consequently, "knowledge" must be something else:

there must first of all be a will to make knowable, a kind of becoming must

itself create the deception of beings.

  518 (1885-1886)

  If our "ego" is for us the sole being, after the model of which we fashion

and understand all being: very well! Then there would be very much room to

doubt whether what we have here is not a perspective illusion--an apparent

unity  that  encloses  everything  like  a  horizon.  The  evidence  of  the  body

reveals a tremendous multiplicity; it is allowable, for purposes of method, to

employ  the  more  easily  studied,  richer  phenomena  as  evidence  for  the

understanding of the poorer. Finally: supposing everything is becoming, then

knowledge is possible only on the basis of belief in being.

  519 (1883-1888)

  If there "is only one being, the ego" and all other "being" is fashioned

after its model--if, finally, belief in the "ego" stands or falls with belief in

logic, i.e., the metaphysical truth of the categories of reason; if, on the other

hand, the ego proves to be something in a state of becoming: then--

  520 (1885)

  Continual  transition  forbids  us  to  speak  of  "individuals,"  etc;  the

"number" of beings is itself in flux. We would know nothing of time and

motion if we did not, in a coarse fashion, believe we see what is at "rest"

beside what is in motion. The same applies to cause and effect, and without

the  erroneous  conception  of  "empty  space"  we  should  certainly  not  have

acquired the conception of space. The principle of identity has behind it the"apparent fact" of things that are the same. A world in a state of becoming

could not, in a strict sense, be "comprehended" or "known"; only to the extent

that  the  "comprehending"  and  "knowing"  intellect  encounters  a  coarse,

already-created world, fabricated out of mere appearances but become firm to

the extent that this kind of appearance has preserved life--only to this extent

is there anything like "knowledge"; i.e., a measuring of earlier and later errors

by one another.

  521 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  On "logical semblance"-- The concepts "individual" and "species" equally

false  and  merely  apparent.  "Species"  expresses  only  the  fact  that  an

abundance of similar creatures appear at the same time and that the tempo of

their further growth and change is for a long time slowed down, so actual

small continuations and increases are not very much noticed (--a phase of

evolution in which the evolution is not visible, so an equilibrium seems to

have been attained, making possible the false notion that a goal has been

attained--and that evolution has a goal--).

  The form counts as something enduring and therefore more valuable; but

the form has merely been invented by us; and however often "the same form

is attained," it does not mean that it is the same form--what appears is always

something new, and it is only we, who are always comparing, who include

the new, to the extent that it is similar to the old, in the unity of the "form."

As if a type should be attained and, as it were, was intended by and inherent

in the process of formation.

  Form, species, law, idea, purpose--in all these cases the same error is

made of giving a false reality to a fiction, as if events were in some way

obedient to something--an artificial distinction is made in respect of events

between that which acts and that toward which the act is directed (but this

"which" and this "toward" are only posited in obedience to our metaphysical-

logical dogmatism: they are not "facts").

  One should not understand this compulsion to construct concepts, species,

forms, purposes, laws ("a world of identical cases") as if they enabled us to

fix the real world; but as a compulsion to arrange a world for ourselves in

which our existence is made possible:--we thereby create a world which is

calculable, simplified, comprehensible, etc., for us.

  This same compulsion exists in the sense activities that support reason--

by simplification, coarsening, emphasizing, and elaborating, upon which all

"recognition," all ability to make oneself intelligible rests. Our needs havemade our senses so precise that the "same apparent world" always reappears

and has thus acquired the semblance of reality.

  Our  subjective  compulsion  to  believe  in  logic  only  reveals  that,  long

before logic itself entered our consciousness, we did nothing but introduce its

postulates into events: now we discover them in events--we can no longer do

otherwise--and imagine that this compulsion guarantees something connected

with "truth." It is we who created the "thing," the "identical thing," subject,

attribute,  activity,  object,  substance,  form,  after  we  had  long  pursued  the

process of making identical, coarse and simple. The world seems logical to us

because we have made it logical.

  522 (1886-1887)

  Ultimate solution.--We believe in reason: this, however, is the philosophy

of gray concepts. Language depends on the most naive prejudices.

  Now we read disharmonies and problems into things because we think

only  in  the  form  of  language--and  thus  believe  in  the  "eternal  truth"  of

"reason" (e.g., subject, attribute, etc.)

  We  cease  to  think  when  we  refuse  to  do  so  under  the  constraint  of

language; we barely reach the doubt that sees this limitation as a limitation.

  Rational thought is interpretation according to a scheme that we cannot

throw off.. 6. Consciousness

  523 (March-June 1888)

  Nothing  is  more  erroneous  than  to  make  of  psychical  and  physical

phenomena the two faces, the two revelations of one and the same substance.

Nothing is explained thereby: the concept "substance" is perfectly useless as

an  explanation.  Consciousness  in  a  subsidiary  role,  almost  indifferent,

superfluous,  perhaps  destined  to  vanish  and  give  way  to  a  perfect

automatism--

  When we observe only the inner phenomena we may be compared with

the deaf-and-dumb, who divine through movements of the lips the words they

do  not  hear.  From  the  phenomena  of  the  inner  sense  we  conclude  the

existence of invisible and other phenomena that we would apprehend if our

means of observation were adequate and that one calls the nerve current.

  We  lack  any  sensitive  organs  for  this  inner  world,  so  we  sense  a

thousandfold complexity as a unity; so we introduce causation where any

reason  for  motion  and  change  remains  invisible  to  us  --the  sequence  of

thoughts and feelings is only their becoming visible in consciousness. That

this  sequence  has  anything  to  do  with  a  causal  chain  is  completelyunbelievable: consciousness has never furnished us with an example of cause

and effect.

  524 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  The role of "consciousness."--It is essential that one should not make a

mistake over the role of "consciousness": it is our relation with the "outer

world" that evolved it. On the other hand, the direction or protection and care

in respect of the co-ordination of the bodily functions does not enter our

consciousness; any more than spiritual accumulation: that a higher court rules

over these things cannot be doubted--a kind of directing committee on which

the  various  chief  desires  make  their  votes  and  power  felt.  "Pleasure,"

"displeasure" are hints from this sphere; also the act of will; also ideas.

  In summa: That which becomes conscious is involved in causal relations

which are entirely withheld from us--the sequence of thoughts, feelings, ideas

in consciousness does not signify that this sequence is a causal sequence; but

apparently  it  is  so,  to  the  highest  degree.  Upon  this  appearance  we  have

founded our whole idea of spirit, reason, logic, etc. (--none of these exist:

they are fictitious syntheses and unities), and projected these into things and

behind things!

    Usually,  one  takes  consciousness  itself  as  the  general  sensorium  and

supreme  court;  nonetheless,  it  is  only  a  means  of  communication:  it  is

evolved through social intercourse and with a view to the interests of social

intercourse--"Intercourse" here understood to include the influences of the

outer world and the reactions they compel on our side; also our effect upon

the outer world. It is not the directing agent, but an organ of the directing

agent.

  525 (1888)

  My  proposition  compressed  into  a  formula  that  smells  of  antiquity,

Christianity,  scholasticism,  and  other  muskiness:  in  the  concept  "God  as

spirit," God as perfection is negated--

  526 (March-lune 1888)

  Where a certain unity obtains in the grouping of things, one has always

posited spirit as the cause of this coordination: for which notion there is no

ground  whatever.  Why  should  the  idea  of  a  complex  fact  be  one  of  the

conditions of this fact? or why should the notion of a complex fact have to

precede it as its cause?--

  We shall be on our guard against explaining purposiveness in terms of

spirit: there is no ground whatever for ascribing to spirit the properties oforganization  and  systematization.  The  nervous  system  has  a  much  more

extensive domain; the world of consciousness is added to it. Consciousness

plays no role in the total process of adaptation and systematization.

  527 (1886-1887)

    Physiologists, like philosophers, believe that consciousness increases in

value in proportion as it increases in clarity: the clearest consciousness, the

most  logical  and  coldest  thinking,  is  supposed  to  be  of  the  first  rank.

However--by what measure is this value determined?--In regard to release of

will,  the  most  superficial,  most  simplified  thinking  is  the  most  useful--it

could therefore--etc. (because it leaves few motives over).

    Precision  in  action  is  antagonistic  to  far-seeing  providentiality,  the

judgments of which are often uncertain: the latter is led by the deeper instinct.

  528 (1886-1887)

    Principal error of psychologists: they regard the indistinct idea as a lower

kind  of  idea  than  the  distinct:  but  that  which  removes  itself  from  our

consciousness and for that reason becomes obscure can on that account be

perfectly  clear  in  itself.  Becoming  obscure  is  a  matter  of  perspective  of

consciousness.

  529 (March-June 1888)

  Tremendous blunders:

  1. the absurd overestimation of consciousness, the transformation of it

into a unity, an entity: "spirit", "soul", something that feels, thinks, wills--

  2.  spirit  as  cause,  especially  wherever  purposiveness,  system,  co-

ordination appear;

  3. consciousness as the highest achieveable form, as the supreme kind of

being, as "God";

  4. will introduced wherever there are effects;

  5. the "real world" as a spiritual world, as accessible through the facts of

consciousness;

  6. knowledge as uniquely the faculty of consciousness wherever there is

knowledge at all.

    Consequences:

  every advance lies in an advance in becoming conscious; every regression

in becoming unconscious; (--becoming unconscious was considered a falling

back to the desires and senses --as becoming animal--)

  one  approaches  reality,  "real  being",  through  dialectic;  one  distances

oneself from it through the instincts, senses, mechanism--  to resolve man into spirit would mean to make him into God: spirit, will,

goodness--all one; all good must proceed from spirituality, must be a fact of

consciousness;  any  advance  toward  the  better  can  only  be  an  advance  in

becoming conscious 7. Judgment. True--False

  In the case of Kant, theological prejudice, his unconscious dogmatism, his

moralistic perspective, were dominant, directing, commanding.

  The proton pseudos: how is the fact of knowledge possible? is knowledge

a fact at all? what is knowledge? If we do not know what knowledge is, we

cannot possibly answer the question whether there is knowledge.--Very well!

But if I do not already "know' whether there is knowledge, whether there can

be knowledge, I cannot reasonably put the question "what is knowledge?"

Kant believes in the fact of knowledge: what he wants is a piece of naivete:

knowledge of knowledge!

    "Knowledge is judgment!" But judgment is a belief that something is thus

and  thus!  And  not  knowledge!  "All  knowledge  consists  of  synthetic

judgments" of universal validity (the case is thus and not otherwise in every

case), of necessary validity (the opposite of the assertion can never occur).

  The legitimacy of belief in knowledge is always presupposed: just as the

legitimacy  of  the  feelings  of  conscience-judgments  is  presupposed.  Here

moral ontology is the dominant prejudice.

  The conclusion is therefore:

  1. there are assertions that we consider universally valid and necessary;

  2. necessity and universal validity cannot be derived from experience;

  3. consequently they must be founded, not upon experience, but upon

something else, and derive from another source of knowledge!

  (Kant infers (1) there are assertions which are valid only under a certain

condition; (2) this condition is that they derive, not from experience, but from

pure reason.)

    Therefore: the question is, whence do we derive our reasons for believing

in the truth of such assertions? No, how our belief is caused! But the origin of

a  belief,  of  a  strong  conviction,  is  a  psychological  problem:  and  a  very

narrow  and  limited  experience  often  produces  such  a  belief!  It  already

presupposes  that  there  is  not  "data �  posteriori"  but  also  data �  priori,

"preceding  experience."  Necessity  and  universal  validity  could  never  be

given to us by experience: why does that mean that they are present without

any experience at all?

  There are no isolated judgments!  An  isolated  judgment  is  never  "true,"  never  knowledge;  only  in  the

connection and relation of many judgments is there any surety.

  What distinguishes the true from the false belief? What is knowledge? He

"knows" it, that is heavenly!

    Necessity and universality can never be given by experience! thus they

are  independent  of  experience,  prior  to  all  experience!  That  insight  that

occurs a priori, therefore independently of all experience, out of sheer reason,

is "a pure form of knowledge"!

  "The basic laws of logic, the law of identity and the law of contradiction,

are  forms  of  pure  knowledge,  because  they  precede  all  experience."--But

these are not forms of knowledge at all! they are regulative articles of belief.

  To establish the � priori character (the pure rationality) of the judgments

of mathematics, space must be conceived as a form of pure reason.

  Hume had declared: "There are no synthetic � priori judgments." Kant

says: But there are! Those of mathematics! And if there are such judgments,

perhaps there is also metaphysics, a knowledge of things by pure reason!

    Mathematics  is  possible  under  conditions  under  which  metaphysics  is

never possible. All human knowlege is either experience or mathematics.

  A judgment is synthetic; i.e., it connects different ideas.

  It is � priori; i.e., every connection is a universally valid and necessary

one, which can never be given by sense perception but only through pure

reason.

  If there are to be synthetic a priori judgments, then reason must be in a

position to make connections: connection is a form. Reason must possess the

capacity of giving form.

  531 (1885-1886)

    Judgment is our oldest belief, our most habitual holding-true or holding-

untrue,  an  assertion  or  denial,  a  certainty  that  something  is  thus  and  not

otherwise, a belief that here we really "know"-- what is it that is believed true

in all judgments?

  What are attributes?--We have not regarded change in us as change but as

an "in itself" that is foreign to us, that we merely "perceive": and we have

posited it, not as an event, but as a being, as a "quality"--and in addition

invented an entity to which it adheres; i.e., we have regarded the effect as

something that effects, and this we have regarded as a being. But even in this

formulation,  the  concept  "effect"  is  arbitrary:  for  those  changes  that  take

place in us, and that we firmly believe we have not ourselves caused, wemerely infer to be effects, in accordance with the conclusion: "every change

must have an author";--but this conclusion is already mythology: it separates

that  which  effects  from  the  effecting.  If  I  say  "lightning  flashes,"  I  have

posited the flash once as an activity and a second time as a subject, and thus

added to the event a being that is not one with the event but is rather fixed,

"is" and does not "become."--To regard an event as an "effecting," and this as

being, that is the double error, or interpretation, of which we are guilty.

  532 (1885)

    Judgment--this is the belief: "This and that are so." Thus there is in every

judgment the avowal of having encountered an "identical case": it therefore

presupposes  comparison  with  the  aid  of  memory.  The  judgment  does  not

produce the appearance of an identical case. Rather it believes it perceives

one: it works under the presupposition that identical cases exist. Now, what is

that function that must be much older and must have been at work much

earlier,  that  makes  cases  identical  and  similar  which  are  in  themselves

dissimilar? What is that second function, which on the basis of the first, etc.

"Whatever arouses the same sensation is the same": but what is it that makes

sensations  the  same,  "accepts"  them  as  the  same?  There  could  be  no

judgments  at  all  if  a  kind  of  equalization  were  not  practiced  within

sensations: memory is possible only with a continual emphasizing of what is

already  familiar,  experienced.--Before  judgment  occurs,  the  process  of

assimilation  must  already  have  taken  place;  thus  here,  too,  there  is  an

intellectual  activity  that  does  not  enter  consciousness,  as  pain  does  as  a

consequence  of  a  wound.  Probably  an  inner  event  corresponds  to  each

organic function; hence assimilation, rejection, growth, etc.

    Essential: to start from the body and employ it as guide. It is the much

richer phenomenon, which allows of clearer observation. Belief in the body is

better established than belief in the spirit.

  "No matter how strongly a thing may be believed, strength of belief is no

criterion of truth." But what is truth? Perhaps a kind of belief that has become

a condition of life? In that case, to be sure, strength could be a criterion; e.g.,

in regard to causality.

  533 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Logical certainty, transparency, as criterion of truth ("omncillud verum

est, quod clare et distincte percipitur." Descartes): with that, the mechanical

hypothesis concerning the world is desired and credible.

  But this is a crude confusion: like simplex sigillum veri. How does oneknow that the real nature of things stands in this relation to our intellect?--

Could it not be otherwise? that it is the hypothesis that gives the intellect the

greatest feeling of power and security, that is most preferred, valued and

consequently  characterized  as  true?--The  intellect  posits  its  freest  and

strongest  capacity  and  capability  as  criterion  of  the  most  valuable,

consequently of the true--

  "True": from the standpoint of feeling--: that which excites the feeling

most strongly ("ego");

  from the standpoint of thought--: that which gives thought the greatest

feeling of strength;

  from the standpoint of touch, seeing, hearing--: that which calls for the

greatest resistance.

  Thus it is the highest degrees of performance that awaken belief in the

"truth,"  that  is  to  say  reality,  of  the  object.  The  feeling  of  strength,  of

struggle, of resistance convinces us that there is something that is here being

resisted.

  534 (1887-1888)

  The criterion of truth resides in the enhancement of the feeling of power.

  535 (1885)

  "Truth":  this,  according  to  my  way  of  thinking,  does  not  necessarily

denote the antithesis of error, but in the most fundamental cases only the

posture of various errors in relation to one another. Perhaps one is older,

more profound than another, even ineradicable, in so far as an organic entity

of our species could not live without it; while other errors do not tyrannize

over us in this way as conditions of life, but on the contrary when compared

with such "tyrants" can be set aside and "refuted."

  An assumption that is irrefutable--why should it for that reason be "true"?

This proposition may perhaps outrage logicians, who posit their limitations as

the limitations of things: but I long ago declared war on this optimism of

logicians.

  536 (Jan.-Fall 1888)

    Everything simple is merely imaginary, is not "true." But whatever is real,

whatever is true, is neither one nor even reducible to one.

  537 (1885-1888)

  What is truth?--Inertia; that hypothesis which gives rise to contentment;

smallest expenditure of spiritual force, etc.

  538 (1883-1888)  First proposition. The easier mode of thought conquers the harder mode;--

as  dogma:  simplex  sigillum  veri.--  Ditto:  to  suppose  that  clarity  proves

anything about truth is perfect childishness--

    Second proposition. The doctrine of being, of things, of all sorts of fixed

unities  is  a  hundred  times  easier  than  the  doctrine  of  becoming,  of

development--

  Third  proposition.  Logic  was  intended  as  facilitation;  as  a  means  of

expression--not as truth--Later it acquired the effect of truth--

  539 (March-June 1888)

    Parmenides said, "one cannot think of what is not",--we are at the other

extreme, and say "what can be thought of must certainly be a fiction.''

  540 (1885)

  There  are  many  kinds  of  eyes.  Even  the  sphinx  has  eyes--  and

consequently there are many kinds of "truths," and consequently there is no

truth. Spencer.

  541 (March-June 1888)

    Inscriptions for the Door of a Modern Madhouse

  "What is thought necessarily is morally necessary." Herbert

  "The ultimate test of the truth of a proposition is the conceivability of its

negation." Herbert Spencer.

  542 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  If the character of existence should be false--which would be possible--

what would truth, all our truth, be then?--An unconscionable falsification of

the false? The false raised to a higher power?--

  543 (Nov. 1887-March 1888)

  In a world that is essentially false, truthfulness would be an antinatural

tendency: such a tendency could have meaning only as a means to a higher

power of falsehood. In order for a world of the true, of being, to be invented,

the truthful man would first have to be created (including the fact that such a

man believes himself "truthful").

  Simple, transparent, not in contradiction with himself, durable, remaining

always the same, without wrinkle, volt, concealment, form: a man of this

kind conceives a world of being as "God" in his own image.

  For truthfulness to be possible, the whole sphere of man must be very

clean,  small  and,  respectable;  advantage  in  every  sense  must  be  with  the

truthful man.--Lies, deception, dissimulation must arouse astonishment--

  544 (1885-1887; rev. Spring-Fall 1888)  Increase in "dissimulation" proportionate to the rising order of rank of

creatures.  It  seems  to  be  lacking  in  the  inorganic  world--  power  against

power, quite crudely cunning begins in the organic world; plants are already

masters  of  it.  The  highest  human  beings,  such  as  Caesar,  Napoleon

(Stendhal's  remark  on  him),  also  the  higher  races  (Italians),  the  Greeks

(Odysseus);  a  thousandfold  craftiness  belongs  to  the  essence  of  the

enhancement  of  man--  problem  of  the  actor.  My  Dionysus  ideal--The

perspective  of  all  organic  functions,  all  the  strongest  instincts  of  life:  the

force in all life that wills error; error as the precondition even of thought.

Before there is "thought" there must have been "invention"; the construction

of identical cases, of the appearance of sameness, is more primitive than the

knowledge of sameness. 8. Against Causalism

  545 (1885)

  I believe in absolute space as the substratum of force: the latter limits and

forms.  Time  eternal.  But  space  and  time  do  not  exist  in  themselves.

"Changes" are only appearances (or sense processes for us); if we posit the

recurrence of these, however regular, nothing is established thereby except

this simple fact, that it has always happened thus. The feeling that post hoc is

propter  hoc  can  easily  be  shown  to  be  a  misunderstanding;  it  is

comprehensible. But appearances cannot be "causes"!

  546 (1885-1886)

  The interpretation of an event as either an act or the suffering of an act (--

thus every act a becoming-other, presupposes an author and someone upon

who "change" is effected.

  547 (1885-1886)

    Psychological history of the concept "subject." The body, the thing, the

"whole" construed by the eye, awaken the distinction between a deed and a

doer; the doer, the cause of the deed, conceived ever more subtly, finally left

behind the "subject."

  548 (1885-1886)

  Our bad habit of taking a mnemonic, an abbreviative formula, to be an

entity, finally as a cause, e.g., to say of lightning "it flashes." Or the little

word "I." To make a kind of perspective in seeing the cause of seeing: that

was what happened in the invention of the "subject," the "I"!

  549 (1885)

    "Subject", "object", "attribute"--these distinctions are fabricated and are

now imposed as a schematism upon all the apparent facts. The fundamentalfalse  observation  is  that  I  believe  it  is  I  who  does  something,  suffer

something, "have" something, "have" a quality.

  550 (1885-1886)

  In every judgment there resides the entire, full, profound belief in subject

and attribute, or in cause and effect (that is, as the assertion that every effect

is an activity and that every activity presupposes an agent); and this latter

belief  is  only  a  special  case  of  the  former,  so  there  remains  as  the

fundamental  belief  the  belief  that  there  are  subjects,  that  everything  that

happens is related attributively to some subject.

  I notice something and seek a reason for it; this means originally: I seek

an intention in it, and above all someone who has intentions, a subject, a

doer: every event a deed--formerly One saw intentions in all events, this is

our oldest habit. Do animals also possess it? As living beings, must they not

also rely on interpretations based on themselves?--

  The question "why?" is always a question after the causa finalis' after the

"what for?" We have no "sense for the causa efficiens": here Hume was right;

habit (but not only that of the individual!) makes us expect that a certain

often-observed  occurrence  will  follow  another:  nothing  more!  That  which

gives the extraordinary firmness to our belief in causality is not the great

habit of seeing one occurrence following another but our inability to interpret

events otherwise than as events caused by intentions. It is belief in the living

and thinking as the only effective force--in will, in intention--it is belief that

every event is a deed, that every deed presupposes a doer, it is belief in the

"subject." Is this belief in the concept of subject and attribute not a great

stupidity?

    Question: is intention the cause of an event? Or is that also illusion?

  Is it not the event itself?

  551 (March-June 1888)

  Critique of the concept "cause".- We have absolutely no experience of a

cause;  psychologically  considered,  we  derive  the  entire  concept  from  the

subjective conviction that we are causes, namely, that the arm moves--But

that is an error. We separate ourselves, the doers, from the deed, and we

make use of this pattern everywhere--we seek a doer for every event. What is

it we have done? We have misunderstood the feeling of strength, tension,

resistance, a muscular feeling that is already the beginning of the act, as the

cause, or we have taken the will to do this or that for a cause because the

action follows upon it--cause, i.e.,-  There is no such thing as "cause"; some cases in which it seemed to be

given us, and in which we have projected it out of ourselves in order to

understand  an  event,  have  been  shown  to  be  self-deceptions.  Our

"understanding of an event" has consisted in our inventing a subject which

was made responsible for something that happens and for how it happens. We

have combined our feeling of will, our feeling of "freedom," our feeling of

responsibility and our intention to perform an act, into the concept "cause":

causa efficiens and causa finalis are fundamentally one.

  We believed that an effect was explained when a condition was detected

in which the effect was already inherent. In fact, we invent all causes after the

schema of the effect: the latter is known to us--Conversely, we are not in a

position to predict of any thing what it will "effect." The thing, the subject,

will, intention--all inherent in the conception "cause." We search for things in

order to explain why something has changed. Even the atom is this kind of

super-added "thing" and "primitive subject"--

  At length we grasp that things--consequently atoms, too-- effect nothing:

because they do not exist at all--that the concept of causality is completely

useless.-- A necessary sequence of states does not imply a causal relationship

between them (--that would mean making their effective capacity leap from 1

to 2, to 3, to 4, to 5). There are neither causes nor effects. Linguistically we

do not know how to rid ourselves of them. But that does not matter. If I think

of the muscle apart from its "effects", I negate it--

  In  summa:  an  event  is  neither  effected  nor  does  it  effect.  Causa  is  a

capacity to produce effects that has been super-added to the events--

    Interpretation by causality a deception--A "thing" is the sum of its effects,

synthetically united by a concept, an image. In fact, science has emptied the

concept causality of its content and retained it as a formula of an equation, in

which it has become at bottom a matter of indifference on which side cause is

placed and on which side effect. It is asserted that in two complex states

(constellations of force) the quanta of force remain constant.

  The calculability of an event does not reside in the fact that a rule is

adhered to, or that a necessity is obeyed, or that a law of causality has been

projected by us into every event: it resides in the recurrence of "identical

cases".

  There is no such thing as a sense of causality, as Kant thinks. One is

surprised, one is disturbed, one desires something familiar to hold on to--As

soon  as  we  are  shown  something  old  in  the  new'  we  are  calmed.  Thesupposed instinct for causality is only fear of the unfamiliar and the attempt

to  discover  something  familiar  in  it--a  search,  not  for  causes,  but  for  the

familiar.

  552 (Spring-Fall 1887)

  Against determinism and teleology.-- From the fact that something ensues

regularly and ensues calculably, it does not follow that it ensues necessarily.

That a quantum of force determines and conducts itself in every particular

case  in  one  way  and  manner  does  not  make  it  into  an  "unfree  will."

"Mechanical necessity" is not a fact: it is we who first interpreted it into

events.  We  have  interpreted  the  formulatable  character  of  events  as  the

consequence of a necessity that rules over events. But from the fact that I do

a  certain  thing,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  I  am  compelled  to  do  it.

Compulsion in things certainly cannot be demonstrated: the rule proves only

that one and the same event is not another event as well. Only because we

have introduced subjects, "doers," into things does it appear that all events are

the consequences of compulsion exerted upon subjects--exerted by whom?

again by a "doer." Cause and effect--a dangerous concept so long as one

thinks  of  something  that  causes  and  something  upon  which  an  effect  is

produced.

  a. Necessity is not a fact but an interpretation.

  b. When one has grasped that the "subject" is not something that creates

effects, but only a fiction, much follows.

  It is only after the model of the subject that we have invented the reality

of things and projected them into the medley of sensations. If we no longer

believe in the effective subject, then belief also disappears in effective things,

in  reciprocation,  cause  and  effect  between  those  phenomena  that  we  call

things.

  There  also  disappears,  of  course,  the  world  of  effective  atoms:  the

assumption of which always depended on the supposition that one needed

subjects.

  At last, the "thing-in-itself" also disappears, because this is fundamentally

the conception of a "subject-in-itself." But we have grasped that the subject is

a fiction. The antithesis "thing-in-itself" and "appearance" is untenable; with

that, however, the concept "appearance" also disappears.

  c. If we give up the effective subject, we also give up the object upon

which effects are produced. Duration, identity with itself, being are inherent

neither in that which is called subject nor in that which is called object: theyare  complexes  of  events  apparently  durable  in  comparison  with  other

complexes--e.g., through the difference in tempo of the event (rest--motion,

firm--loose:  opposites  that  do  not  exist  in  themselves  and  that  actually

express only variations in degree that from a certain perspective appear to be

opposites. There are no opposites: only from those of logic do we derive the

concept of opposites--and falsely transfer it to things).

  d. If we give up the concept "subject" and "object," then also the concept

"substance"--and as a consequence also the various modifications of it, e.g.,

"matter,"  "spirit,"  and  other  hypothetical  entities,  "the  eternity  and

immutability of matter," etc. We have got rid of materiality.

  From the standpoint of morality, the world is false. But to the extent that

morality itself is a part of this world, morality is false.

  Will to truth is a making firm, a making true and durable, an abolition of

the false character of things, a reinterpretation of it into beings. "Truth" is

therefore  not  something  there,  that  might  be  found  or  discovered--but

something that must be created and that gives a name to a process, or rather

to  a  will  to  overcome  that  has  in  itself  no  end--introducing  truth,  as  a

processus in infinitum, an active determining--not a becoming conscious of

something that is in itself firm and determined. It is a word for the "will to

power."

  Life is founded upon the premise of a belief in enduring and regularly

recurring things; the more powerful life is, the wider must be the knowable

world  to  which  we,  as  it  were,  attribute  being.  Logicizing,  rationalizing,

systematizing as expedients of life.

  Man  projects  his  drive  to  truth,  his  "goal"  in  a  certain  sense  outside

himself as a world that has being, as a metaphysical world, as a "thing-in-

itself," as a world already in existence. His needs as creator invent the world

upon which he works, anticipate it; this anticipation (this "belief" in truth) is

his support.

  All  events,  all  motion,  all  becoming,  as  a  determination,  degrees  and

relations of force, as a struggle--

  As soon as we imagine someone who is responsible for our being thus

and thus, etc. (God, nature), and therefore attribute to him the intention that

we  should  exist  and  be  happy  or  wretched,  we  corrupt  for  ourselves  the

innocence  of  becoming.  We  then  have  someone  who  wants  to  achieve

something through us and with us.

  The "'welfare of the individual" is just as imaginary as the "welfare of thespecies": the former is not sacrificed to the latter, species viewed from a

distance is just as transient as the individual. "Preservation of the species" is

only a consequence of the growth of the species, i.e., the. overcoming of the

species on the road to a stronger type.

  [Theses.] That the apparent "purposiveness" ("that purposiveness which

endlessly surpasses all the arts of man") is merely the consequence of the will

to power manifest in all events; that becoming stronger involves an ordering

process which looks like a sketchy purposiveness; that apparent ends are not

intentional but, as soon as dominion is established over a lesser power and

the latter operates as a function of the greater power, an order of rank, of

organization is bound to produce the appearance of an order of means and

ends.

  Against apparent "necessity": --this is only an expression for the fact that

a force is not also something else.

  Against apparent "purposiveness": --the latter only an expression for an

order  of  spheres  of  power  and  their  interplay.  9.  Thing-in-Itself  and

Appearance

  553 (1886-1887)

  The sore spot of Kant's critical philosophy has gradually become visible

even to dull eyes: Kant no longer has a right to his distinction "appearance"

and  "thing-in-itself"--he  had  deprived  himself  of  the  right  to  go  on

distinguishing  in  this  old  familiar  way,  in  so  far  as  he  rejected  as

impermissible making inferences from phenomena to a cause of phenomena--

in  accordance  with  his  conception  of  causality  and  its  purely  intra-

phenomenal  validity--  which  conception,  on  the  other  hand,  already

anticipates this distinction, as if the "thing-in-itself" were not only inferred

but given.

  554 (1885-1886)

    Causalism.--It is obvious that things-in-themselves cannot be related to

one  another  as  cause  and  effect,  nor  can  appearance  be  so  related  to

appearance;  from  which  it  follows  that  in  a  philosophy  that  believes  in

things-in-themselves and appearances the concept "cause and effect" cannot

be applied. Kant's mistakes

  In fact, the concept "cause and effect" derives, psychologically speaking,

only from a mode of thought that believes that always and everywhere will

operates upon will--that believes only in living things and fundamentally only

in  "souls"  (and  not  in  things).  Within  the  mechanistic  view  of  the  world