in a word, as the tribunal of the world, and not as the chance prey of a single

hunter. The search for truth is often thoughtlessly praised: but it only has

anything  great  in  it  if  the  seeker  have  the  sincere  unconditional  will  for

justice. Its roots are in justice alone: but a whole crowd of different motives

may combine in the search for it, that have nothing to do with truth at all;

curiosity, for example, or dread of ennui, envy, vanity, or amusement. Thus

the world seems to be full of men who "serve truth": and yet the virtue of

justice is seldom present, more seldom known, and almost always mortally

hated. On the other hand a throng of sham virtues has entered in at all times

with pomp and honour. Few in truth serve truth, as only few have the pure

will for justice; and very few even of these have the strength to be just. The

will  alone  is  not  enough:  the  impulse  to  justice  without  the  power  of

judgment has been the cause of the greatest suffering to men. And thus the

common good could, require nothing better than for the seed of this power to

be strewn as widely as possible, that the fanatic may be distinguished from

the true judge, and the blind desire from the conscious power. But there are

no means of planting a power of judgment: and so when one speaks to men of

truth and justice, they will be ever troubled by the doubt whether it be the

fanatic or the judge who is speaking to them. And they must be pardoned for

always treating the "servants of truth" with special kindness, who possess

neither the will nor the power to judge and have set before them the task of

finding "pure knowledge without reference to consequences," knowledge, in

plain terms, that comes to nothing. There are very many truths which are

unimportant; problems that require no struggle to solve, to say nothing of

sacrifice. And in this safe realm of indifference a man may very successfully

become a "cold demon of knowledge." And yet-if we find whole regiments of

learned  inquirers  being  turned  to  such  demons  in  some  age  specially

favourable to them, it is always unfortunately possible that the age is lacking

in  a  great  and  strong  sense  of  justice,  the  noblest  spring  of  the  so-called

impulse to truth. Consider the historical virtuoso of the present time: is he the

justest man of his age? True, he has developed in himself such a delicacy and

sensitiveness that "nothing human is alien to him." Times and persons most

widely separated come together in the concords of his lyre. He has become a

passive instrument, whose tones find an echo in similar instruments : until the

whole atmo- sphere of a time is filled with such echoes, all buzzing in one

soft chord. Yet I think one only hears the overtones of the original historical

note : its rough powerful quality can be no longer guessed from these thinand shrill vibrations. The original note sang of action, need, and terror; the

overtone  lulls  us  into  a  soft  dilettante  sleep.  It  is  as  though  the  heroic

symphony had been arranged for two flutes for the use of dreaming opium-

smokers. We can now judge how these virtuosi stand towards the claim of the

modern man to a higher and purer conception of justice. This virtue has never

a pleasing quality; it never charms; it is harsh and strident. Generosity stands

very low on the ladder of the virtues in comparison; and generosity is the

mark of a few rare historians! Most of them only get as far as tolerance, in

other words they leave what cannot be explained away, they correct it and

touch  it  up  condescendingly,  on  the  tacit  assumption  that  the  novice  will

count  it  as  justice  if  the  past  be  narrated  without  harshness  or  open

expressions of hatred. But only superior strength can really judge; weakness

must tolerate, if it do not pretend to be strength and turn justice to a play-

actress. There is still a dreadful class of historians remaining-clever, stern and

honest,  but  narrow-minded:  who  have  the  "good  will"  to  be  just  with  a

pathetic belief in their actual judgments, which are all false; for the same

reason, almost, as the verdicts of the usual juries are false. How difficult it is

to find a real historical talent, if we exclude all the disguised egoists, and the

partisans who pretend to take up an impartial attitude for the sake of their

own  unholy  game!  And  we  also  exclude  the  thoughtless  folk  who  write

history in the naive faith that justice resides in the popular view of their time,

and that to write in the spirit of the time is to be just; a faith that is found in

all religions, and which, in religion, serves very well. The measurement of

the opinions and deeds of the past by the universal opinions of the present is

called "objectivity" by these simple people: they find the canon of all truth

here: their work is to adapt the past to the present triviality. And they call all

historical writing "subjective" that does not regard these popular opinions as

canonical. Might not an illusion lurk in the highest interpretation of the word

objectivity? We understand by it a certain standpoint in the historian, who

sees the procession of motive and consequence too clearly for it to have an

effect on his own personality. We think of the aesthetic phenomenon of the

detachment from all personal concern with which the painter sees the picture

and forgets himself, in a stormy landscape, amid thunder and lightning, or on

a rough sea: and we require the same artistic vision and absorption in his

object from the historian. But it is only a superstition to say that the picture

given to such a man by the object really shows the truth of things. Unless it

be  that  objects  are  expected  in  such  moments  to  paint  or  photographthemselves by their own activity on a purely passive medium! But this would

be a myth, and a bad one at that. One forgets that this moment is actually the

powerful and spontaneous moment of creation in the artist, of "composition"

in its highest form, of which the result will be an artistically, but not an

historically, true picture. To think objectively, in this sense, of history is the

work  of  the  dramatist:  to  think  one  thing  with  another,  and  weave  the

elements into a single whole; with the presumption that the unity of plan must

be put into the objects if it be not already there. So man veils and subdues the

past, and expresses his impulse to art-but not his impulse to truth or justice.

Objectivity and justice have nothing to do with each other. There could be a

kind of historical writing that had no drop of common fact in it and yet could

claim to be called in the highest degree objective. Grillparzer goes so far as to

say  that  "history  is  nothing  but  the  manner  in  which  the  spirit  of  man

apprehends  facts  that  are  obscure  to  him,  links  things  together  whose

connection  heaven  only  knows,  replaces  the  unintelligible  by  something

intelligible, puts his own ideas of causation into the external world, which

can perhaps be explained only from within: and assumes the existence of

chance, where thousands of small causes may be really at work. Each man

has  his  own  individual  needs,  and  so  millions  of  tendencies  are  running

together, straight or crooked, parallel or across, forward or backward, helping

or hindering each other. They have all the appearance of chance, and make it

impossible, quite apart from all natural influences, to establish any universal

lines on which past events must have run." But as a result of this so-called

"objective" way of looking at things, such a "must" ought to be made clear. It

is a presumption that takes a curious form if adopted by the historian as a

dogma. Schiller is quite clear about its truly subjective nature when he says

of the historian, "one event after the other begins to draw away from blind

chance  and  lawless  freedom,  and  take  its  place  as  the  member  of  an

harmonious whole-which is of course only apparent in its presentation. But

what is one to think of the innocent statement, wavering between tautology

and  nonsense,  of  a  famous  historical  virtuoso?  "It  seems  that  all  human

actions and impulses are subordinate to the process of the material world, that

works  unnoticed,  powerfully  and  irresistibly."  In  such  a  sentence  one  no

longer finds obscure wisdom in the form of obvious folly; as in the saying of

Goethe's gardener, "Nature may be forced but not compelled," or in the notice

on the side-show at a fair, in Swift: "The largest elephant in the world, except

himself, to be seen here." For what opposition is there between human actionand the process of the world? It seems to me that such historians cease to be

instructive as soon as they begin to generalise; their weakness is shown by

their obscurity. In other sciences the generalisations are the most important

things, as they contain the laws. But if such generalisations as these are to

stand as laws, the historian's labour is lost; for the residue of truth, after the

obscure  and  insoluble  part  is  removed,  is  nothing  but  the  commonest

knowledge.  The  smallest  range  of  experience  will  teach  it.  But  to  worry

whole peoples for the purpose, and spend many hard years of work on it, is

like crowding one scientific experiment on another long after the law can be

deduced  from  the  results  already  obtained:  and  this  absurd  excess  of

experiment has been the bane of all natural science since Zollner. If the value

of a drama lay merely in its final scene, the drama itself would be a very long,

crooked and laborious road to the goal: and I hope history will not find its

whole significance in general propositions, and regard them as its blossom

and fruit. On the contrary, its real value lies in inventing ingenious variations

on  a  probably  commonplace  theme,  in  raising  the  popular  melody  to  a

universal  symbol  and  showing  what  a  world  of  depth,  power  and  beauty

exists in it. But this requires above all a great artistic faculty, a creative vision

from a height, the loving study of the data of experience, the free elaborating

of a given type,-objectivity in fact, though this time as a positive quality.

Objectivity is so often merely a phrase. Instead of the quiet gaze of the artist

that is lit by an inward flame, we have an affectation of tranquillity; just as a

cold detachment may mask a lack of moral feeling. In some cases a triviality

of  thought,  the  everyday  wisdom  that  is  too  dull  not  to  seem  calm  and

disinterested, comes to represent the artistic condition in which the subjective

side has quite sunk out of sight. Everything is favoured that does not rouse

emotion, and the driest phrase is the correct one. They go so far as to accept a

man who is not affected at all by some particular moment in the past as the

right man to describe it. This is the usual relation of the Greeks and the

classical scholars. They have nothing to do with each other-and this is called

"objectivity"! The intentional air of detachment that is assumed for effect, the

sober  art  of  the  superficial  motive-hunter  is  most  exasperating  when  the

highest and rarest things are in question; and it is the vanity of the historian

that drives him to this attitude of indifference. He goes to justify the axiom

that a man's vanity corresponds to his lack of wit. No, be honest at any rate!

Do not pretend to the artist's strength, that is the real objectivity; do not try to

be just, if you are not born to that dread vocation. As if it were the task ofevery time to be just to everything before it! Ages and generations have never

the right to be the judges of all previous ages and generations: only to the

rarest men in them can that difficult mission fall. Who compels you to judge?

If it is your wish-you must prove first that you are capable of justice. As

judges, you must stand higher than that which is to be judged: as it is, you

have only come later. The guests that come last to the table should rightly

take the last places: and will you take the first? Then do some great and

mighty deed: the place may be prepared for you then, even though you do

come last. You can only explain the past by what is highest in the present.

Only by straining the noblest qualities you have to their highest power will

you find out what is greatest in the past, most worth knowing and preserving.

Like by like! otherwise you will draw the past to your own level. Do not

Believe any history that does not spring from the mind of a rare spirit. You

will  know  the  quality  of  the  spirit,  by  its  being  forced  to  say  something

universal, or to repeat something that is known already; the fine historian

must have the power of coining the known into a thing never heard before

and proclaiming the universal so simply and profoundly that the simple is lost

in  the  profound,  and  the  profound  in  the  simple.  No  one  can  be  a  great

historian and artist, and a shallowpate at the same time. But one must not

despise the workers who sift and cast together the material because they can

never  become  great  historians.  They  must,  still  less,  be  confounded  with

them, for they are the necessary bricklayers and apprentices in the service of

the master: just as the French used to speak, more naively than a German

would, of the "historiens de M. Thiers." These workmen should gradually

become extremely learned, but never, for that reason, turn to be masters.

Great learning and great shallowness go together very well under one hat.

Thus, history is to be written by the man of experience and character. He who

has not lived through something greater and nobler than others, will riot be

able to explain anything great and noble in the past. The language of the past

is always oracular: you will only understand if as builders of the future who

know the present. We can only explain the extraordinarily wide influence of

Delphi by the fact that the Delphic priests had an exact knowledge of the

past: and, similarly, only he who is building up the future has a right to judge

the past. If you set a great aim before your eyes, you control at the same time

the itch for analysis that makes the present into a desert for you, and all rest,

all peaceful growth and ripening, impossible. Hedge yourselves with a great,

all-embracing hope, and strive on. Make of yourselves a mirror where thefuture may see itself, and forget the superstition that you are Epigoni. You

have enough to ponder and find out, in pondering the life of the future: but do

not ask history to show you the means and the instrument to it. If you live

yourselves back into the history of great men you will find inn it the high

command to come to maturity and leave that blighting system of cultivation

offered  by  your  time:  which  sees  its  own  profit  in  not  allowing  you  to

become ripe, that it may use and dominate you while you are yet unripe. And

if you want biographies, do not look for those with the legend "Mr. So-and-so

and his times," but for one whose title-page might be inscribed "a fighter

against  his  time."  Feast  your  souls  on  Plutarch,  and  dare  to  believe  in

yourselves when you believe in his heroes. A hundred such men-educated

against the fashion of to-day, made familiar with the heroic, and come to

maturity-are enough to give an eternal quietus to the noisy sham education of

this time. 7

  The unrestrained historical sense, pushed to its logical extreme, uproots

the future, because it destroys illusions and robs existing things of the only

atmosphere  in  which  they  can  live.  Historical  justice,  even  if  practised

conscientiously, with a pure heart, is therefore a dreadful virtue, because it

always undermines and ruins the living thing: its judgment always means

annihilation. If there be no constructive impulse behind the historical one, if

the  clearance  of  rubbish  be  not  merely  to  leave  the  ground  free  for  the

hopeful  living  future  to  build  its  house,  if  justice  alone  be  supreme,  the

creative instinct is sapped and discouraged. A religion, for example, that has

to  be  turned  into  a  matter  of  historical  knowledge  by  the  power  of  pure

justice, and to be scientifically studied throughout, is destroyed at the end of

it  all.  For  the  historical  audit  brings  so  much  to  light  which  is  false  and

absurd,  violent  and  inhuman,  that  the  condition  of  pious  illusion  falls  to

pieces. And a thing can only live through a pious illusion. For man is creative

only through love and in the shadow of love's illusions, only through the

unconditional belief in perfection and righteousness. Everything that forces a

man to be no longer unconditioned in his love, cuts at the root of his strength:

he must wither, and be dishonoured. Art has the opposite effect to history:

and only perhaps if history suffer transformation into a pure work of art, can

it preserve instincts or arouse them. Such history would be quite against the

analytical and inartistic tendencies of our time, and even be considered false.

But the history that merely destroys without any impulse to construct, will in

the long-run make its instruments tired of life; for such men destroy illusions,and  "he  who  destroys  illusions  in  himself  and  others  is  punished  by  the

ultimate tyrant, Nature." For a time a man can take up history like any other

study,  and  it  will  be  perfectly  harmless.  Recent  theology  seems  to  have

entered quite innocently into partnership with history, and scarcely sees even

now that it has unwittingly bound itself to the Voltairean ecrasez![1] No one

need  expect  from  that  any  new  and  powerful  constructive  impulse:  they

might as well have let the so-called Protestant Union serve as the cradle of a

new religion, and the jurist Holtzendorf, the editor of the far more dubiously

named Protestant Bible, be its John the Baptist. This state of innocence may

be  continued  for  some  time  by  the  Hegelian  philosophy,-still  seething  in

some  of  the  older  heads,-by  which  men  can  distinguish  the  "idea  of

Christianity"  from  its  various  imperfect  "manifestations";  and  persuade

themselves  that  it  is  the  "self-movement  of  the  Idea"  that  is  ever

particularising itself in purer and purer forms, and at last becomes the purest,

most transparent, in fact scarcely visible form in the brain of the present

theologus liberalis vulgaris. But to listen to this, pure Christianity speaking its

mind about the earlier impure Christianity, the uninitiated hearer would often

get the impression that the talk was not of Christianity at all but of . . .-what

are we to think? if we find Christianity described by the "greatest theologian

of the century"[2] as the religion that claims to "find itself in all real religions

and some other barely possible religions," and if the "true church" is to be a

thing "which may become a liquid mass with no fixed outline, with no fixed

place for its different parts, but everything to be peacefully welded together"-

what, I ask again, are we to think ? Christianity has been denaturalised by

historical treatment-which in its most complete form means "just" treatment

until it has been resolved into pure knowledge and destroyed in the process.

This can be studied in everything that has life. For it ceases to have life if it

be perfectly dissected, and lives in pain and anguish as soon as the historical

dissection  begins.  There  are  some  who  believe  in  the  saving  power  of

German  music  to  revolutionise  the  German  nature.  They  angrily  exclaim

against the special injustice done to our culture, when such men as Mozart

and Beethoven are beginning to be spattered with the learned mud of the

biographers and forced to answer a thousand searching questions on the rack

of historical criticism. Is it not premature death, or at least mutilation, for

anything whose living influence is not yet exhausted, when men turn their

curious eyes to the little minutiae of life and art, and look for problems of

knowledge  where  one  ought  to  learn  to  live,  and  forget  problems?  Set  acouple of these modern biographers to consider the origins of Christianity or

the Lutheran reformation: their sober, practical investigations would be quite

sufficient to make all spiritual "action at a distance" impossible: just as the

smallest animal can prevent the growth of the mightiest oak by simply eating

up the acorn. All living things need an atmosphere, a mysterious mist, around

them. If that veil be taken away and a religion, an art, or a genius condemned

to revolve like a star without an atmosphere, we must not be surprised if it

becomes hard and unfruitful, and soon withers. It is so with all great things

"that  never  prosper  without  some  illusion,"  as  Hans  Sachs  says  in  the

Meistersinger. Every people, every man even, who would become ripe, needs

such a veil of illusion, such a protecting cloud. But now men hate to become

ripe, for they honour history above life. They cry in triumph that "science is

now beginning to rule life." Possibly it might; but a life thus ruled Is not of

much value. It is not such true life, and promises much less for the future than

the life that used to be guided not by science, but by instincts and powerful

illusions.  But  this  is  not  to  be  the  age  of  ripe,  alert  and  harmonious

personalities, but of work that may be of most use to the commonwealth.

Men are to be fashioned to the needs of the time, that they may soon take

their place in the machine. They must work in the factory of the "common

good" before they are ripe, or rather to prevent them becoming ripe ; for this

would be a luxury that would draw away a deal of power from the "labour

market." Some birds are blinded that they may sing better; I do not think men

sing to-day better than their grandfathers, though I am sure they are blinded

early. But light, too clear, too sudden and dazzling, is the infamous means

used to blind them. The young man is kicked through all the centuries: boys

who know nothing of war, diplomacy, or commerce are considered fit to be

introduced to political history. We moderns also run through art galleries and

hear concerts in the same way as the young man runs through history. We can

feel that one thing, sounds differently from another, and pronounce on the

different  "effects."  And  the  power  of  gradually  losing  all  feelings  of

strangeness or astonishment, and finally being pleased at anything, is called

the historical sense, or historical culture. The crowd of influences streaming

on the young soul is so great, the clods of barbarism and violence flung at

him  so  strange  and  overwhelming,  that  an  assumed  stupidity  is  his  only

refuge. Where there is a subtler and stronger self -consciousness we find

another  emotion  too-disgust.  The  young  man  has  become  homeless:  he

doubts all ideas, all moralities. He knows "it was different in every age, andwhat you are does not matter." In a heavy apathy he lets opinion on opinion

pass by him, and understands the meaning of Holderlin's words when he read

the  work  of  Diogenes  Laertius  on  the  lives  and  doctrines  of  the  Greek

philosophers: "I have seen here too what has often occurred to me, that the

change and waste in men's thoughts and systems is far more tragic than the

fates that overtake what men are accustomed to call the only realities." No,

such  study  of  history  bewilders  and  overwhelms,  It  is  not  necessary  for

youth, as the ancients show, but even in the highest degree dangerous, as the

moderns show. Consider the historical student, the heir of ennui, that appears

even in his boyhood. He has the "methods" for original work, the "correct

ideas" and the airs of the master at his fingers' ends. A little isolated period of

the  past  is  marked  out  for  sacrifice.  He  cleverly  applies  his  method,  and

produces something, or rather, in prouder phrase, "creates" something. He

becomes a "servant of truth" and a ruler in the great domain of history. If he

was what they call ripe as a boy, he is now over-ripe. You only need shake

him and wisdom will rattle down into your lap; but the wisdom is rotten, and

every apple has its worm. Believe me, if men work in the factory of science

and have to make themselves useful before they are really ripe, science is

ruined as much as the slaves who have been employed too soon. I am sorry to

use  the  common  jargon  about  slave-owners  and  taskmasters  in  respect  of

such conditions, that might be thought free from any economic taint: but the

words  "factory,  labour-market,  auction-sale,  practical  use,"  and  all  the

auxiliaries of egoism, come involuntarily to the lips in describing the younger

generation  of  savants.  Successful  mediocrity  tends  to  become  still  more

mediocre, science still more " useful." Our modern savants are only wise on

one subject, in all the rest they are, to say the least, different from those of the

old stamp. In spite of that they demand honour and profit for themselves, as if

the state and public opinion were bound to take the new coinage for the same

value as the old. The carters have made a trade-compact among themselves,

and settled that genius is superfluous, for every carrier is being re-stamped as

one.  And  probably  a  later  age  will  see  that  their  edifices  are  only  carted

together and not built. To those who have ever on their lips the modern cry of

battle and sacrifice-"Division of labour! fall into line!" we may say roundly:

"If you try to further the progress of science as quickly as possible, you will

end by destroying it as quickly as possible; just as the hen is worn out which

you force to lay too many eggs." The progress of science has been amazingly

rapid in the last decade; but consider the savants, those exhausted hens. Theyare certainly not "harmonious" natures: they can merely cackle more than

before, because they lay eggs oftener: but the eggs are always smaller, though

their  books  are  bigger.  The  natural  result  of  it  all  is  the  favourite

"popularising"  of  science  (or  rather  its  feminising  and  infantising),  the

villainous habit of cutting the cloth of science to fit the figure of the "general

public." Goethe saw the abuse in this, and demanded that science should only

influence  the  outer  world  by  way  of  a  nobler  ideal  of  action.  The  older

generation of savants had good reason for thinking this abuse an oppressive

burden: the modern savants have an equally good reason for welcoming it,

because, leaving their little corner of knowledge out of account, they are part

of the "general public" themselves, and its needs are theirs. They only require

to  take  themselves  less  seriously  to  be  able  to  open  their  little  kingdom

successfully to popular curiosity. This easy-going behaviour is called "the

modest condescension of the savant to the people"; whereas in reality he has

only "descended" to himself, so far as he is not a savant but a plebeian. Rise

to the conception of a people, you learned men; you can never have one noble

or  high  enough.  If  you  thought  much  of  the  people,  you  would  have

compassion towards them, and shrink from offering your historical aquafortis

as a refreshing drink. But you really think very little of them, for you dare not

take  any  reasonable  pains  for  their  future;  and  you  act  like  practical

pessimists, men who feel the coming catastrophe and become indifferent and

careless of their own and others' existence. "If only the earth last for us: and if

it do not last, it is no matter." Thus they come to live an ironical existence. 8

  It may seem a paradox, though it is none, that I should attribute a kind of

"ironical  self-consciousness"  to  an  age  that  is  generally  so  honestly,  and

clamorously,  vain  of  its  historical  training;  and  should  see  a  suspicion

hovering near it that there is really nothing to be proud of, and a fear lest the

time for rejoicing at historical knowledge may soon have gone by. Goethe

has  shown  a  similar  riddle  in  man's  nature,  in  his  remarkable  study  of

Newton: he finds a "troubled feeling of his own error" at the base-or rather on

the height-of his being, just as if he was conscious at times of having a deeper

insight into things, that vanished the moment after. This gave him a certain

ironical view of his own nature. And one finds that the greater and more

developed "historical men" are conscious of all the superstition and absurdity

in the belief that a people's education need be so extremely historical as it is;

the mightiest nations, mightiest in action and influence, have lived otherwise,

and their youth has been trained otherwise. The knowledge gives a scepticalturn to their minds. "The absurdity and superstition," these sceptics say, "suit

men like ourselves, who come as the latest withered shoots of a gladder and

mightier stock, and fulfil Hesiod's prophecy, that men will one day be born

gray-headed, and that Zeus will destroy that generation as soon as the sign be

visible." Historical culture is really a kind of inherited grayness, and those

who have borne its mark from childhood must believe instinctively in the old

age of mankind. To old age belongs the old man's business of looking back

and casting up his accounts, of seeking consolation in the memories of the

past,-in historical culture. But the human race is tough and persistent, and

will not admit that the lapse of a thousand years, or a hundred thousand,

entitles any one to sum up its progress from the past to the future; that is, it

will  not  be  observed  as  a  whole  at  all  by  that  infinitesimal  atom,  the

individual man. What is there in a couple of thousand years-the period of

thirty-four consecutive human lives of sixty years each to make us speak of

youth at the beginning, and "the old age of mankind" at the end of them?

Does  not  this  paralysing  belief  in  a  fast-fading  humanity  cover  the

misunderstanding of a theological idea, inherited from the Middle Ages, that

the end of the world is approaching and we are waiting anxiously for the

judgment? Does not the increasing demand for historical judgment give us

that idea in a new dress? as if our time were the latest possible time, and

commanded to hold that universal judgment of the past, which the Christian

never expected from a man, but from "the Son of Man." The memento mori,

spoken to humanity as well as the individual, was a sting that never ceased to

pain, the crown of mediaeval knowledge and consciousness. The opposite

message of a later time, memento vivere[3], is spoken rather timidly, without

the full power of the lungs; and there is something almost dishonest about it.

For mankind still keeps to its memento mori, and shows it by the universal

need for history; science may flap its wings as it will, it has never been able

to gain the free air. A deep feeling of hopelessness has remained, and taken

the  historical  colouring  that  has  now  darkened  and  depressed  all  higher

education. A religion that, of all the hours of man's life, thinks the last the

most important, that has prophesied the end of earthly life and condemned all

creatures to live in the fifth act of a tragedy, may call forth the subtlest and

noblest powers of man, but it is an enemy to all new planting, to all bold

attempts or free aspirations. It opposes all flight into the unknown, because it

has  no  life  or  hope  there  itself.  It  only  lets  the  new  bud  press  forth  on

sufferance, to blight it in its own good time: "it might lead life astray and giveit a false value." What the Florentines did under the influence of Savonarola's

exhortations, when they made the famous holocaust of pictures, manuscripts,

masks  and  mirrors,  Christianity  would  like  to  do  with  every  culture  that

allured to further effort and bore that memento vivere on its standard. And if

it cannot take the direct way-the way of main force-it gains its end all the

same by allying itself with historical culture, though generally without its

connivance; and speaking through its mouth, turns away every fresh birth

with a shrug of its shoulders, and makes us feel all the more that we are late-

comers and Epigoni, that we are, in a word, born with gray hair. The deep

and serious contemplation of the unworthiness of all past action, of the world

ripe for judgment, has been whittled down to the sceptical consciousness that

it is anyhow a good thing to know all that has happened, as it is too late to do

anything  better.  The  historical  sense  makes  its  servants  passive  and

retrospective. Only in moments of forgetfulness, when that sense is dormant,

does the man who is sick of the historical fever ever act; though he only

analyses his deed again after it is over (which prevents it from having any

further  consequences),  and  finally  puts  it  on  the  dissecting  table  for  the

purposes of history. In this sense we are still living in the Middle Ages, and

history is still a disguised theology; just as the reverence with which the

unlearned layman looks on the learned class is inherited through the clergy.

What men gave formerly to the Church they give now, though in smaller

measure, to science. But the fact of giving at all is the work of the Church,

not of the modern spirit, which among its other good qualities has something

of the miser in it, and is a bad hand at the excellent virtue of liberality. These

words may not be very acceptable, any more than my derivation of the excess

of  history  from  the  mediaeval  memento  mori  and  the  hopelessness  that

Christianity bears in its heart towards all future ages of earthly existence. But

you should always try to replace my hesitating explanations by a better one.

For the origin of historical culture, and of its absolutely radical antagonism to

the spirit of a new time and a "modern consciousness" must itself be known

by a historical process. History must solve the problem of history, science

must turn its sting against itself. This threefold "must" is the imperative of the

"new spirit," if it is really to contain something new, powerful, vital and

original. Or is it true that we Germans-to leave the Romance nations out of

account must always be mere "followers" in all the higher reaches of culture,

because that is all we can be? The words of Wilhelm Wackernagel are well

worth pondering: "We Germans are a nation of 'followers' and with all ourhigher science and even our faith, are merely the successors of the ancient

world.  Even  those  who  are  opposed  to  it  are  continually  breathing  the

immortal spirit of classical culture with that of Christianity: and if any one

could separate these two elements from the living air surrounding the soul of

man, there would not be much remaining for a spiritual life to exist on." Even

if we would rest content with our vocation to follow antiquity, even if we

decided to take it in an earnest and strenuous spirit and to show our high

prerogative in our earnestness,-we should yet be compelled to ask whether it

were our eternal destiny to be pupils of a fading antiquity. We might be

allowed at some time to put our aim higher and further above us. And after

congratulating  ourselves  on  having  brought  that  secondary  spirit  of

Alexandrian  culture  in  us  to  such  marvellous  productiveness-through  our

"universal history"-we might go on to place before us, as our noblest prize,

the still higher task of striving beyond and above this Alexandrian world; and

bravely find our prototypes in the ancient Greek world, where all was great,

natural  and  human.  But  it  is  just  there  that  we  find  the  reality  of  a  true

unhistorical  culture-and  in  spite  of  that,  or  perhaps  because  of  it,  an

unspeakably rich and vital culture. Were we Germans nothing but followers,

we could not be anything greater or prouder than the lineal inheritors and

followers of such a culture. This however must be added. The thought of

being Epigoni, that is often a torture, can yet create a spring of hope for the

future, to the individual as well as the people: so far, that is, as we can regard

ourselves as the heirs and followers of the marvellous classical power, and

see therein both our honour and our spur. But not as the late and bitter fruit of

a powerful stock, giving that stock a further spell of cold life, as antiquaries

and  gravediggers.  Such  late-comers  live  truly  an  ironical  existence.

Annihilation follows their halting walk on tiptoe through life. They shudder

before  it  in  the  midst  of  their  rejoicing  over  the  past.  They  are  living

memories, and their own memories have no meaning; for there are none to

inherit them. And thus they are wrapped in the melancholy thought that their

life is an injustice, which no future life can set right again. Suppose that these

antiquaries, these late arrivals, were to change their painful ironic modesty

for a certain shamelessness. Suppose we heard them saying, aloud, "The race

is at its zenith, for it has manifested itself consciously for the first time." We

should  have  a  comedy,  in  which  the  dark  meaning  of  a  certain  very

celebrated philosophy would unroll itself for the benefit of German culture. I

believe there has been no dangerous turning-point in the progress of Germanculture  in  this  century  that  has  not  been  made  more  dangerous  by  the

enormous and still living influence of this Hegelian philosophy. The belief

that one is a late-comer in the world is, anyhow, harmful and degrading: but

it  must  appear  frightful  and  devastating  when  it  raises  our  late-comer  to

godhead, by a neat turn of the wheel, as the true meaning and object of all

past  creation,  and  his  conscious  misery  is  set  up  as  the  perfection  of  the

world's history. Such a point of view has accustomed the Germans to talk of a

"world-process," and justify their own time as its necessary result. And it has

put history in the place of the other spiritual powers, art and religion, as the

one sovereign; inasmuch as it is the "Idea realising itself," the "Dialectic of

the spirit of the nations," and the "tribunal of the world." History understood

in this Hegelian way has been contemptuously called God's sojourn upon

earth,-though  the  God  was  first  created  by  the  history.  He,  at  any  rate,

became  transparent  and  intelligible  inside  Hegelian  skulls,  and  has  risen

through all the dialectically possible steps in his being up to the manifestation

of the Self: so that for Hegel the highest and final stage of the world-process

came  together  in  his  own  Berlin  existence.  He  ought  to  have  said  that

everything after him was merely to be regarded as the musical coda of the

great historical rondo,-or rather, as simply superfluous. He has not said it; and

thus  he  has  implanted  in  a  generation  leavened  throughout  by  him  the

worship of the "power of history," that practically turns every moment into a

sheer gaping at success, into an idolatry of the actual: for which we have now

discovered the characteristic phrase "to adapt ourselves to circumstances."

But the man who has once learnt to crook the knee and bow the head before

the power of history, nods "yes" at last, like a Chinese doll, to every power,

whether it be a government or a public opinion or a numerical majority; and

his limbs move correctly as the power pulls the string. If each success have

come by a "rational necessity" and every event show the victory of logic or

the "Idea", then-down on your knees quickly, and let every step in the ladder

of success have its reverence! There are no more living mythologies, you

say"? Religions are at their last gasp? Look at the religion of the power of

history, and the priests of the mythology of Ideas, with their scarred knees!

Do not all the virtues follow in the train of the new faith? And shall we not

call it unselfishness, when the historical man lets himself be turned into an

"objective" mirror of all that is? Is it not magnanimity to renounce all power

in heaven and earth in order to adore the mere fact of power? Is it not justice,

always to hold the balance of forces in your hands and observe which is thestronger  and  heavier?  And  what  a  school  of  politeness  is  such  a

contemplation  of  the  past!  To  take  everything  objectively,  to  be  angry  at

nothing,  to  love  nothing,  to  understand  everything-makes  one  gentle  and

pliable. Even if a man brought up in this school will show himself openly

offended, one is just as pleased, knowing it is only meant in the artistic sense

of ira et studium though it is really sine ira et studio.[4] What old-fashioned

thoughts I have on such a combination of virtue and mythology! But they

must out, however one may laugh at them. I would even say that history

always teaches-"it was once," and morality-"it ought not to be, or have been."

So  history  becomes  a  compendium  of  actual  immorality.  But  how  wrong

would  one  be  to  regard  history  as  the  judge  of  this  actual  immorality!

Morality is offended by the fact that a Raphael had to die at thirty-six; such a

being ought not to die. If you came to the help of history, as the apologists of

the actual, you would say: "he had spoken everything that was in him to

speak, a longer life would only have enabled him to create a similar beauty,

and not a new beauty," and so on. Thus you become an advocatus diaboli[5]

by setting up the success, the fact, as your idol: whereas the fact is always

dull, at all times more like a calf than a god. Your apologies for history are

helped by ignorance: for it is only because you do not know what a natura

naturans like Raphael is, that you are not on fire when you think it existed

once  and  can  never  exist  again.  Some  one  has  lately  tried  to  tell  us  that

Goethe  had  out-lived  himself  with  his  eighty-two  years:  and  yet  I  would

gladly take two of Goethe's "outlived" years in exchange for whole cartloads

of fresh modern lifetimes, to have another set of such conversations as those

with  Eckermann,  and  be  preserved  from  all  the  "modern"  talk  of  these

esquires of the moment. How few living men have a right to live, as against

those mighty dead! That the many live and those few live no longer, is simply

a brutal truth, that is, a piece of unalterable folly, a blank wall of "it was once

so" against the moral judgment "it ought not to have been." Yes, against the

moral  judgment!  For  you  may  speak  of  what  virtue  you  will,  of  justice,

courage, magnanimity, of wisdom and human compassion,-you will find the

virtuous man will always rise against the blind force of facts, the tyranny of

the actual, and submit himself to laws that are not the fickle laws of history.

He ever swims against the waves of history, either by fighting his passions, as

the nearest brute facts of his existence, or by training himself to honesty amid

the glittering nets spun round him by falsehood. Were history nothing more

than the "all-embracing system of passion and error", man would have to readit as Goethe wished Werther to be read;-just as if it called to him, "Be a man

and  follow  me  not!"  But  fortunately  history  also  keeps  alive  for  us  the

memory of the great "fighters against history," that is, against the blind power

of the actual; it puts itself in the pillory just by glorifying the true historical

nature in men who troubled themselves very little about the "thus it is," in

order that they might follow a "thus it must be" with greater joy and greater

pride. Not to drag their generation to the grave, but to found a new one-that is

the motive that ever drives them onward; and even if they are born late, there

is a way of living by which they can forget it-and future generations will

know them only as the first-comers. 9

  Is perhaps our time such a "first-comer"? Its historical sense is so strong,

and  has  such  universal  and  boundless  expression,  that  future  times  will

commend it, if only for this, as a first-comer-if there be any future time, in the

sense of future culture. But here comes a grave doubt. Close to the modern

man's pride there stands his irony about himself, his consciousness that he

must live in a historical, or twilit, atmosphere, the fear that he can retain none

of  his  youthful  hopes  and  powers.  Here  and  there  one  goes  further  into

cynicism, and justifies the course of history, nay, the whole evolution of the

world, as simply leading up to the modern man, according to the cynical

canon:-"what  you  see  now  had  to  come,  man  had  to  be  thus  and  not

otherwise, no one can stand against this necessity." He who cannot rest in, a

state of irony flies for refuge to the cynicism. The last decade makes him a

present of one of its most beautiful inventions, a full and well-rounded phrase

for  this  cynicism:  he  calls  his  way  of  living  thoughtlessly  and  after  the

fashion  of  his  time,  "the  full  surrender  of  his  personality  to  the  world-

process." The personality and the world-process! The world- process and the

personality of the earthworm! If only one did not eternally hear the word

"world, world, world," that hyperbole of all hyperboles; when we should only

speak, in a decent manner, of "man, man, man"! Heirs of the Greeks and

Romans, of Christianity? All that seems nothing to the cynics. But "heirs of

the world-process"; the final target of the world-process; the meaning and

solution  of  all  riddles  of  the  universe,  the  ripest  fruit  on  the  tree  of

knowledge!-that is what I call a right noble thought: by this token are the

firstlings of every time to be known, although they may have arrived last. The

historical imagination has never flown so far, even in a dream; for now the

history of man is merely the continuation of that of animals and plants: the

universal historian finds traces of himself even in the utter depths of the sea,in the living slime. He stands astounded in face of the enormous way that

man has run, and his gaze quivers before the mightier wonder, the modern

man who can see all this way! He stands proudly on the pyramid of the

world-process: and while he lays the final stone of his knowledge, he seems

to cry aloud to listening Nature: "We are at the top, we are the top, we are the

completion of Nature!" O thou too proud European of the nineteenth century,

art thou not mad? Thy knowledge does not complete Nature, it only kills

thine own nature! Measure the height of what thou knowest by the depths of

thy  power  to  do.  Thou  climbest  the  sunbeams  of  knowledge  up  towards

heaven-but also down to Chaos. Thy manner of going is fatal to thee; the

ground slips from under thy feet into the unknown; thy life has no other stay,

but only spider's webs that every new stroke of thy knowledge tears asunder.-

But not another serious word about this, for there is a lighter side to it all. The

moralist, the artist, the saint and the statesman, may well be troubled, when

they see that all foundations are breaking up in mad unconscious ruin, and

resolving  themselves  into  the  ever  flowing  stream  of  becoming;  that  all

creation is being tirelessly spun into webs of history by the modern man, the

great spider in the mesh of the world-net. We ourselves may be glad for once

in a way that we see it all in the shining magic mirror of a philosophical

parodist, in whose brain the time has come to an ironical consciousness of

itself, to a point even of wickedness, in Goethe's phrase. Hegel once said,

"when the spirit makes a fresh start, we philosophers are at hand." Our time

did make a fresh start-into irony, and lo! Edward von Hartmann was at hand,

with  his  famous  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious-or,  more  plainly,  his

philosophy  of  unconscious  irony.  We  have  seldom  read  a  more  jovial

production,  a  greater  philosophical  joke  than  Hartmann's  book.  Any  one

whom it does not fully enlighten about "becoming," who is not swept and

garnished  throughout  by  it,  is  ready  to  become  a  monument  of  the  past

himself. The beginning and end of the world-process, from the first throb of

consciousness  to  its  final  leap  into  nothingness,  with  the  task  of  our

generation settled for it;-all drawn from that clever fount of inspiration, the

Unconscious,  and  glittering  in  Apocalyptic  light,  imitating  an  honest

seriousness to the life, as if it were a serious philosophy and not a huge joke,-

such a system shows its creator to be one of the first philosophical parodists

of all time. Let us then sacrifice on his altar, and offer the inventor of a true

universal  medicine  a  lock  of  hair,  in  Schleiermacher's  phrase.  For  what

medicine would be more salutary to combat the excess of historical culturethan Hartmann's parody of the world's history? If we wished to express in the

fewest words what Hartmann really has to tell us from his mephitic tripod of

unconscious  irony,  it  would  be  something  like  this:  our  time  could  only

remain as it is, if men should become thoroughly sick of this existence. And I

fervently believe he is right. The frightful petrifaction of the time, the restless

rattle of the ghostly bones, held naively up to us by David Strauss as the most

beautiful fact of all-is justified by Hartmann not only from the past, ex causis

efficientibus, but also from the future, ex causa finali. The rogue let light

stream over our time from the last day, and saw that it was very good,-for

him, that is, who wishes to feel the indigestibility of life at its full strength,

and for whom the last day cannot come quickly enough. True, Hartmann calls

the old age of life that mankind is approaching the "old age of man": but that

is  the  blessed  state,  according  to  him,  where  there  is  only  a  successful

mediocrity; where art is the "evening's amusement of the Berlin financier,"

and "the time has no more need for geniuses, either because it would be

casting pearls before swine, or because the time has advanced beyond the

stage where the geniuses are found, to one more important," to that stage of

social  evolution,  in  fact,  in  which  every  worker  "leads  a  comfortable

existence, with hours of work that leave him sufficient leisure to cultivate his

intellect." Rogue of rogues, you say well what is the aspiration of present-day

mankind : but you know too what a spectre of disgust will arise at the end of

this  old  age  of  mankind,  as  the  result  of  the  intellectual  culture  of  stolid

mediocrity.  It  is  very  pitiful  to  see,  but  it  will  be  still  more  pitiful  yet.

"Antichrist is visibly extending his arms: "yet it must be so, for after all we

are on the right road-of disgust at all existence. "Forward then, boldly, with

the world-process, as workers in the vineyard of the Lord, for it is the process

alone that can lead to redemption!" The vineyard of the Lord! The process!

To redemption! Who does not see and hear in this how historical culture, that

only knows the word "becoming," parodies itself on purpose and says the

most irresponsible things about itself through its grotesque mask? For what

does the rogue mean by this cry to the workers in the vineyard? By what

"work" are they to strive boldly forward? Or, to ask another question:-what

further  has  the  historically  educated  fanatic  of  the  world-process  to  do,

swimming and drowning as he is in the sea of becoming, that he may at last

gather in that vintage of disgust, the precious grape of the vineyard? He has

nothing to do but to live on as he has lived, love what he has loved, hate what

he has hated, and read the newspapers he has always read. The only sin is forhim to live otherwise than he has lived. We are told how he has lived, with

monumental clearness, by that famous page with its large typed sentences, on

which the whole rabble of our modern cultured folk have thrown themselves

in blind ecstasy, because they believe they read their own justification there,

haloed with an Apocalyptic light. For the unconscious parodist has demanded

of every one of them, "the full surrender of his personality to the world-

process, for the sake of his end, the redemption of the world": or still more

clearly,-"the assertion of the will to live is proclaimed to be the first step on

the right road: for it is only in the full surrender to life and its sorrow, and not

in the cowardice of personal renunciation and retreat, that anything can be

done for the world-process. . . . The striving for the denial of the individual

will is as foolish as it is useless, more foolish even than suicide. . . The

thoughtful reader will understand without further explanation how a practical

philosophy can be erected on these principles, and that such a philosophy

cannot endure any disunion, but only the fullest reconciliation with life." The

thoughtful  reader  will  understand!  Then  one  really  could  misunderstand

Hartmann ! And what a splendid joke it is, that he should be misunderstood!

Why  should  the  Germans  of  to-day  be  particularly  subtle?  A  valiant

Englishman looks in vain for "delicacy of perception" and dares to say that

"in  the  German  mind  there  does  seem  to  be  something  splay,  something

blunt-edged,  un-handy  and  infelicitous."  Could  the  great  German  parodist

contradict this? According to him, we are approaching "that ideal condition in

which the human race makes its history with full consciousness": but we are

obviously far from the perhaps more ideal condition, in which mankind can

read Hartmann's book with full consciousness. If we once reach it, the word

"world-process" will never pass any man's lips again without a smile. For he

will  remember  the  time  when  people  listened  to  the  mock  gospel  of

Hartmann, sucked it in, attacked it, reverenced it, extended it and canonised it

with all the honesty of that "German mind," with "the uncanny seriousness of

an owl," as Goethe has it. But the world must go forward, the ideal condition

cannot be won by dreaming, it must be fought and wrestled for, and the way

to redemption lies only through joyousness, the way to redemption from that

dull, owlish seriousness. The time will come when we shall wisely keep away

from all constructions of the world-process, or even of the history of man; a

time when we shall no more look at masses but at individuals, who form a

sort  of  bridge  over  the  wan  stream  of  becoming.  They  may  not  perhaps

continue a process, but they live out of time, as contemporaries: and thanks tohistory that permits such a company, they live as the Republic of geniuses of

which Schopenhauer speaks. One giant calls to the other across the waste

spaces of time, and the high spirit-talk goes on, undisturbed by the wanton

noisy dwarfs who creep among them. The task of history is to be the mediator

between these, and even to give the motive and power to produce the great

man. The aim of mankind can lie ultimately only in its highest examples. Our

low comedian has his word on this too with his wonderful dialectic, which is

just as genuine as its admirers are admirable. "The idea of evolution cannot

stand with our giving the world-process an endless duration in the past, for

thus every conceivable evolution must have taken place, which is not the case

(O rogue!); and so we cannot allow the process an endless duration in the

future. Both would raise the conception of evolution to a mere ideal (And

again  rogue!),  and  would  make  the  world-process  like  the  sieve  of  the

Danaides.  The  complete  victory  of  the  logical  over  the  illogical  (O  thou

complete  rogue!)  must  coincide  with  the  last  day,  the  end  in  time  of  the

world-process." No, thou clear, scornful spirit, so long as the illogical rules as

it does to-day,-so long, for example, as the world-process can be spoken of as

thou speakest of it, amid such deep-throated assent,-the last day is yet far off.

For it is still too joyful on this earth, many an illusion still blooms here-like

the illusion of thy contemporaries about thee. We are not yet ripe to be hurled

into thy nothingness: for we believe that we shall have a still more splendid

time,  when  men  once  begin  to  understand  thee,  thou  misunderstood,

unconscious one! But if, in spite of that, disgust shall come throned in power,

as thou hast prophesied to thy readers if thy portrayal of the present and the

future  shall  prove  to  be  right,-and  no  one  has  despised  them  with  such

loathing  as  thou,-I  am  ready  then  to  cry  with  the  majority  in  the  form

prescribed by thee, that next Saturday evening, punctually at twelve o'clock,

thy  world  shall  fall  to  pieces.  And  our  decree  shall  conclude  thus-from

tomorrow time shall not exist, and the Times shall no more be published.

Perhaps it will be in vain, and our decree of no avail: at any rate we have still

time for a fine experiment. Take a balance and put Hartmann's "Unconscious"

in one of the scales, and his "World-process" in the other. There are some

who believe they weigh equally; for in each scale there is an evil word-and a

good  joke.  When  they  are  once  understood,  no  one  will  take  Hartmann's

words on the world-process as anything but a joke. It is, as a fact, high time

to move forward with the whole battalion of satire and malice against the

excesses of the "historical sense," the wanton love of the world-process at theexpense of life and existence, the blind confusion of all perspective. And it

will be to the credit of the philosopher of the Unconscious that he has been

the first to see the humour of the world-process, and to succeed in making

others  see  it  still  more  strongly  by  the  extraordinary  seriousness  of  his

presentation. The existence of the "world" and "humanity" need not trouble

us for some time, except to provide us with a good joke: for the presumption

of the small earthworm is the most uproariously comic thing on the face of

the earth. Ask thyself to what end thou art here, as an individual; and if no

one can tell thee, try then to justify the meaning of thy existence a posteriori,

by putting before thyself a high and noble end. Perish on that rock! I know no

better  aim  for  life  than  to  be  broken  on  something  great  and  impossible,

anima magn� prodigus[6]. But if we have the doctrines of the finality of

"becoming," of the flux of all ideas, types, and species, of the lack of all

radical difference between man and beast (a true but fatal idea as I think),-if

we  have  these  thrust  on  the  people  in  the  usual  mad  way  for  another

generation,  no  one  need  be  surprised  if  that  people  drown  on  its  little

miserable shoals of egoism, and petrify in its self-seeking. At first it will fall

asunder and cease to be a people. In its place perhaps individualist systems,

secret societies for the extermination of non-members, and similar utilitarian

creations, will appear on the theater of the future. Are we to continue to work

for these creations and write history from the standpoint of the masses; to

look for laws in it, to be deduced from the needs of the masses, the laws of

motion of the lowest loam and clay strata of society? The masses seem to be

worth notice in three aspects only: first as the copies of great men, printed on

bad paper from worn-out plates, next as a contrast to the great men, and lastly

as their tools: for the rest, let the devil and statistics fly away with them! How

could statistics prove that there are laws in history? Laws? Yes, they may

prove how common and abominably uniform the masses are: and should we

call the effects of leaden folly, imitation, love and hunger-laws? We may

admit it: but we are sure of this too-that so far as there are laws in history, the

laws are of no value and the history of no value either. And least valuable of

all is that kind of history which takes the great popular movements as the

most important events of the past, and regards the great men only as their

clearest expression, the visible bubbles on the stream. Thus the masses have

to produce the great man, chaos to bring forth order; and finally all the hymns

are naturally sung to the teeming chaos. Everything is called "great" that has

moved the masses for some long time, and becomes, as they say, a "historicalpower." But is not this really an intentional confusion of quantity and quality?

When the brutish mob have found some idea, a religious idea for example,

which satisfies them, when they have defended it through thick and thin for

centuries; then, and then only, will they discover its inventor to have been a

great  man.  Thehighest  and  noblest  does  not  affect  the  masses  at  all.  The

historical consequences of Christianity, its "historical power," toughness and

persistence  prove  nothing,  fortunately,  as  to  its  founder's  greatness.  They

would have been a witness against him. For be- tween him and the historical

success of Christianity lies a dark heavy weight of passion and error, lust of

power and honour, and the crushing force of the Roman Empire. From this,

Christianity had its earthly taste, and its earthly foundations too, that made its

continuance in this world possible. Greatness should not depend on success.

Demosthenes  is  great  without  it.  The  purest  and  noblest  adherents  of

Christianity have always doubted and hindered, rather than helped, its effect

in the world, its so-called "historical power"; for they were accustomed to

stand outside the "world," and cared little for the "process of the Christian

Idea." Hence they have generally remained unknown to history, and their

very names are lost. In Christian terms, the devil is the prince of the world,

and  the  lord  of  progress  and  consequence:  he  is  the  power  behind  all

"historical power," and so will it remain, however ill it may sound today in

ears that are accustomed to canonise such power and consequence. The world

has become skilled at giving new names to things and even baptizing the

devil. It is truly an hour of great danger. Men seem to be near the discovery

that the egoism of individuals, groups or masses has been at all times the

lever of the "historical movements": and yet they are in no way disturbed by

the discovery, but proclaim that "egoism shall be our god." With this new

faith in their hearts, they begin quite intentionally to build future history on

egoism:  though  it  must  be  a  clever  egoism,  one  that  allows  of  some

limitation, that it may stand firmer; one that studies history for the purpose of

recognising the foolish kind of egoism. Their study has taught them that the

state has a special mission in all future egoistic systems: it will be the patron

of all the clever egoisms, to protect them with all the power of its military and

police against the dangerous outbreaks of the other kind. There is the same

idea  in  introducing  history-natural  as  well  as  human  history-among  the

labouring classes, whose folly makes them dangerous. For men know well

that  a  grain  of  historical  culture  is  able  to  break  down  the  rough,  blind

instincts and desires, or to turn them to the service of a clever egoism. In factthey  are  beginning  to  think,  with  Edward  von  Hartmann,  of  "fixing

themselves  with  an  eye  to  the  future  in  their  earthly  home,  and  making

themselves  comfortable  there."  Hartmann  calls  this  life  the  "manhood  of

humanity" with an ironical reference to what is now called "manhood";-as if

only  our  sober  models  of  selfishness  were  embraced  by  it  ;  just  as  he

prophesies an age of graybeards following on this stage,-obviously another

ironical  glance  at  our  ancient  time-servers.  For  he  speaks  of  the  ripe

discretion with which "they view all the stormy passions of their past life and

understand  the  vanity  of  the  ends  they  seem  to  have  striven  for."  No,  a

manhood of crafty and historically cultured egoism corresponds to an old age

that hangs to life with no dignity but a horrible tenacity, where the "last scene

of all That ends this strange eventful history, Is second childishness and mere

oblivion, Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything."[7] Whether the

dangers of our life and culture come from these dreary, toothless old men, or

from the so-called "men" of Hartmann, we have the right to defend our youth

with tooth and claw against both of them, and never tire of saving the future

from these false prophets. But in this battle we shall discover an unpleasant

truth-that  men  intentionally  help,  and  encourage,  and  use,  the  worst

aberrations of the historical sense from which the present time suffers. They

use it, however, against youth, in order to transform it into that ripe "egoism

of manhood" they so long for: they use it to overcome the natural reluctance

of the young by its magical splendour, which unmans while it enlightens

them. Yes, we know only too well the kind of ascendency history can gain;

how  it  can  uproot  the  strongest  instincts  of  youth,  passion,  courage,

unselfishness and love; can cool its feeling for justice, can crush or repress its

desire for a slow ripening by the contrary desire to be soon productive, ready

and  useful;  and  cast  a  sick  doubt  over  all  honesty  and  downrightness  of

feeling. It can even cozen youth of its fairest privilege, the power of planting

a great thought with the fullest confidence, and letting it grow of itself to a

still greater thought. An excess of history can do all that, as we have seen, by

no  longer  allowing  a  man  to  feel  and  act  unhistorically:  for  history  is

continually shifting his horizon and removing the atmosphere surrounding

him. From an infinite horizon he withdraws into himself, back into the small

egoistic circle, where he must become dry and withered: he may possibly

attain to cleverness, but never to wisdom. He lets himself be talked over, is

always  calculating  and  parleying  with  facts.  He  is  never  enthusiastic,  but

blinks his eyes, and understands how to look for his own profit or his party'sin the profit or loss of somebody else. He unlearns all his useless modesty,

and turns little by little into the "man" or the "graybeard" of Hartmann. And

that is what they want him to be: that is the meaning of the present cynical

demand for the "full surrender of the personality to the world-process"-for the

sake of his end, the redemption of the world, as the rogue E. von Hartmann

tells  us.  Though  redemption  can  scarcely  be  the  conscious  aim  of  these

people: the world were better redeemed by being redeemed from these "men"

and "graybeards." For then would come the reign of youth. 10

  And in this kingdom of youth I can cry Land! Land! Enough, and more

than enough, of the wild voyage over dark strange seas, of eternal search and

eternal disappointment! The coast is at last in sight. Whatever it be, we must

land there, and the worst haven is better than tossing again in the hopeless

waves of an infinite scepticism. Let us hold fast by the land: we shall find the

good harbours later and make the voyage easier for those who come after us.

The voyage was dangerous and exciting. How far are we even now from that

quiet state of contemplation with which we first saw our ship launched! In

tracking  out  the  dangers  of  history,  we  have  found  ourselves  especially

exposed to them. We carry on us the marks of that sorrow which an excess of

history brings in its train to the men of the modern time. And this present

treatise, as I will not attempt to deny, shows the modern note of a weak

personality  in  the  intemperateness  of  its  criticism,  the  unripeness  of  its

humanity,  in  the  too  frequent  transitions  from  irony  to  cynicism,  from

arrogance to scepticism. And yet I trust in the inspiring power that directs my

vessel instead of genius; I trust in youth, that has brought me on the right

road in forcing from me a protest against the modern historical education, and

a demand that the man must learn to live, above all, and only use history in

the  service  of  the  life  that  he  has  learned  to  live.  He  must  be  young  to

understand  this  protest;  and  considering  the  premature  grayness  of  our

present youth, he can scarcely be young enough if he would understand its

reason  as  well.  An  example  will  help  me.  In  Germany,  not  more  than  a

century ago, a natural instinct for what is called "poetry" was awakened in

some young men. Are we to think that the generations who had lived before

that time had not spoken of the art, however really strange and unnatural it

may  have  been  to  them?  We  know  the  contrary;  that  they  had  thought,

written, and quarrelled about it with all their might in "words, words, words."

Giving life to such words did not prove the death of the word-makers; in a

certain sense they are living still. For if, as Gibbon says, nothing but time-though a long time-is needed for a world to perish, so nothing but time-

though still more time-is needed for a false idea to be destroyed in Germany,

the "Land of Little-by-little." In any event, there are perhaps a hundred men

more now than there were a century ago who know what poetry is: perhaps in

another  century  there  will  be  a  hundred  more  who  have  learned  in  the

meantime what culture is, and that the Germans have had as yet no culture,

however  proudly  they  may  talk  about  it.  The  general  satisfaction  of  the

Germans at their culture will seem as foolish and incredible to such men as

the once lauded classicism of Gottsched, or the reputation of Ramler as the

German Pindar, seemed to us. They will perhaps think this "culture" to be

merely  a  kind  of  knowledge  about  culture,  and  a  false  and  superficial

knowledge at that. False and superficial, because the Germans endured the

contradiction  between  life  and  knowledge,  and  did  not  see  what  was

characteristic in the culture of really educated peoples, that it can only rise

and bloom from life. But by the Germans it is worn like a paper flower, or

spread over like the icing on a cake; and so must remain a useless lie for ever.

The education of youth in Germany starts from this false and unfruitful idea

of culture. Its aim, when faced squarely, is not to form the liberally educated

man, but the professor, the man of science, who wants to be able to make use

of his science as soon as possible, and stands on one side in order to see life

clearly.  The  result,  even  from  a  ruthlessly  practical  point  of  view,  is  the

historically and aesthetically trained Philistine, the babbler of old saws and

new  wisdom  on  Church,  State  and  Art,  the  sensorium  that  receives  a

thousand  impressions,  the  insatiable  belly  that  yet  knows  not  what  true

hunger and thirst is. An education with such an aim and result is against

nature. But only he who is not quite drowned in it can feel that; only youth

can feel it, because it still has the instinct of nature, that is the first to be

broken by that education. But he who will break through that education in his

turn, must come to the help of youth when called upon; must let the clear

light of understanding shine on its unconscious striving, and bring it to a full,

vocal consciousness, How is he to attain such a strange end? Principally by

destroying the superstition that this kind of education is necessary. People

think nothing but this troublesome reality of ours is possible. Look through

the literature of higher education in school and college for the last ten years,

and  you  will  be  astonished-and  pained-to  find  how  much  alike  all  the

proposals  of  reform  have  been;  in  spite  of  all  the  hesitations  and  violent

controversies  surrounding  them.  You  will  see  how  blindly  they  have  alladopted the old idea of the "educated man" (in our sense) being the necessary

and reasonable basis of the system. The monotonous canon runs thus: the

young  man  must  begin  with  a  knowledge  of  culture,  not  even  with  a

knowledge of life, still less with life and the living of it. This knowledge of

culture is forced into the young mind in the form of historical knowledge;

which means that his head is filled with an enormous mass of ideas, taken

second-hand from past times and peoples, not from immediate contact with

life. He desires to experience something for himself, and feel a close-knit,

living  system  of  experiences  growing  within  himself.  But  his  desire  is

drowned and dizzied in the sea of shams, as if it were possible to sum up in a

few years the highest and notablest experiences of ancient times, and the

greatest times too. It is the same mad method that carries our young artists off

to picture-galleries, instead of the studio of a master, and above all the one

studio of the only master, Nature. As if one could discover by a hasty rush

through history the ideas and technique of past times, and their individual

outlook on life! For life itself is a kind of handicraft that must be learned

thoroughly and industriously, and diligently practised, if we are not to have

mere botchers and babblers as the issue of it all! Plato thought it necessary

for the first generation of his new society (in the perfect state) to be brought

up with the help of a "mighty lie." The children were to be taught to believe

that they had all lain dreaming for a long time under the earth, where they had

been moulded and formed by the master-hand of Nature. It was impossible to

go against the past, and work against the work of gods! And so it had to be an

unbreakable law of nature, that he who is born to be a philosopher has gold in

his body, the fighter has only silver, and the workman iron and bronze. As it

is not possible to blend these metals, according to Plato, so there could never

be any confusion between the classes: the belief in the �terna veritas of this

arrangement was the basis of the new education and the new state. So the

modern German believes also in the �terna veritas of his education, of his

kind of culture: and yet this belief will fail-as the Platonic state would have

failed-if the mighty German lie be ever opposed by the truth, that the German

has no culture because he cannot build one on the basis of his education. He

wishes for the flower without the root or the stalk; and so he wishes in vain.

That is the simple truth, a rude and unpleasant truth, but yet a mighty one.

But our first generation must be brought up in this "mighty truth," and must

suffer from it too; for it must educate itself through it, even against its own

nature, to attain a new nature and manner of life, which shall yet proceedfrom the old. So it might say to itself, in the old Spanish phrase, "Defienda

me Dios de my," God keep me from myself, from the character, that is, which

has been put into me. It must taste that truth drop by drop, like a bitter,

powerful medicine. And every man in this generation must subdue himself to

pass the judgment on his own nature, which he might pass more easily on his

whole time:-"We are without instruction, nay, we are too corrupt to live, to

see and hear truly and simply, to understand what is near and natural to us.

We have not yet laid even the foundations of culture, for we are not ourselves

convinced that we have a sincere life in us." We crumble and fall asunder,

our whole being is divided, half mechanically, into an inner and outer side;

we are sown with ideas as with dragon's teeth, and bring forth a new dragon -

brood of them; we suffer from the malady of words, and have no trust in any

feeling that is not stamped with its special word. And being such a dead

fabric of words and ideas, that yet has an uncanny movement in it, I have still

perhaps the right to say cogito ergo sum, though not vivo ergo cogito. I am

permitted the empty esse, not the full green vivere. A primary feeling tells me

that I am a thinking being but not a living one, that I am no "animal," but at

most a "cogital." "Give me life, and I will soon make you a culture out of it"-

will be the cry of every man in this new generation, and they will all know

each other by this cry. But who will give them this life? No god and no man

will give it-only their own youth. Set this free, and you will set life free as

well. For it only lay concealed, in a prison; it is not yet withered or dead-ask

your own selves! But it is sick, this life that is set free, and must be healed. It

suffers from many diseases, and not only from the memory of its chains. It

suffers  from  the  malady  which  I  have  spoken  of,  the  malady  of  history.

Excess  of  history  has  attacked  the  plastic  power  of  life,  that  no  more

understands how to use the past as a means of strength and nourishment. It is

a fearful disease, and yet, if youth had not a natural gift for clear vision, no

one would see that it is a disease, and that a paradise of health has been lost.

But the same youth, with that same natural instinct of health, has guessed

how the paradise can be regained. It knows the magic herbs and simples for

the malady of history, and the excess of it. And what are they called? It is no

marvel that they bear the names of poisons: the antidotes to history are the

"unhistorical " and the "super-historical." With these names we return to the

beginning  of  our  inquiry  and  draw  near  to  its  final  close.  By  the  word

"unhistorical"  I  mean  the  power,  the  art  of  forgetting,  and  of  drawing  a

limited horizon round one's self. I call the power "super-historical" whichturns the eyes from the process of becoming to that which gives existence an

eternal and stable character, to art and religion. Science-for it is science that

makes us speak of "poisons"-sees in these powers contrary powers: for it

considers  only  that  view  of  things  to  be  true  and  right,  and  therefore

scientific,  which  regards  something  as  finished  and  historical,  not  as

continuing and eternal. Thus it lives in a deep antagonism towards the powers

that make for eternity-art and religion,-for it hates the forgetfulness that is the

death of knowledge, and tries to remove all limitation of horizon and cast

men into an infinite boundless sea, whose waves are bright with the clear

knowledge-of becoming! If they could only live therein! Just as towns are

shaken by an avalanche and become desolate, and man builds his house there

in fear and for a season only; so life is broken in sunder and becomes weak

and spiritless, if the avalanche of ideas started by science take from man the

foundation of his rest and security, the belief in what is stable and eternal.

Must life dominate knowledge, or knowledge life? Which of the two is the

higher, and decisive power? There is no room for doubt: life is the higher,

and the dominating power, for the knowledge that annihilated life would be

itself annihilated too. Knowledge presupposes life, and has the same interest

in  maintaining  it  that  every  creature  has  in  its  own  preservation.  Science

needs very careful watching: there is a hygiene of life near the volumes of

science, and one of its sentences runs thus:-The unhistorical and the super-

historical are the natural antidotes against the overpowering of life by history;

they are the cures for the historical disease. We who are sick of the disease

may suffer a little from the antidote. But this is no proof that the treatment we

have chosen is wrong.. And here I see the mission of the youth that forms the

first generation of fighters and dragon- slayers: it will bring a more beautiful

and blessed humanity and culture, but will have itself no more than a glimpse

of  the  promised  land  of  happiness  and  wondrous  beauty.  This  youth  will

suffer both from the malady and its antidotes: and yet it believes in strength

and health and boasts a nature closer to the great Nature than its forebears,

the cultured men and graybeards of the present. But its mission is to shake to

their foundations the present conceptions of "health" and "culture," and erect

hatred and scorn in the place of this rococo mass of ideas. And the clearest

sign of its own strength and health is just the fact that it can use no idea, no

party-cry from the present-day mint of words and ideas to symbolise its own

existence: but only claims conviction from the power in it that acts and fights,

breaks up and destroys; and from an ever heightened feeling of life when thehour  strikes.  You  may  deny  this  youth  any  culture-but  how  would  youth

count that a reproach? You may speak of its rawness and intemperateness-but

it is not yet old and wise enough to be acquiescent. It need not pretend to a

ready-made culture at all; but enjoys all the rights and the consolations-of

youth, especially the right of brave unthinking honesty and the consolation of

an  inspiring  hope.  I  know  that  such  hopeful  beings  understand  all  these

truisms from within, and can translate them into a doctrine for their own use,

through  their  personal  experience.  To  the  others  there  will  appear,  in  the

meantime,  nothing  but  a  row  of  covered  dishes,  that  may  perhaps  seem

empty: until they see one day with astonished eyes that the dishes are full,

and that all ideas and impulses and passions are massed together in these

truisms that cannot lie covered for long. I leave those doubting ones to time,

that brings all things to light; and turn at last to that great company of hope,

to tell them the way and the course of their salvation, their rescue from the

disease of history, and their own history as well, in a parable; whereby they

may  again  become  healthy  enough  to  study  history  anew,  and  under  the

guidance  of  life  make  use  of  the  past  in  that  threefold  way-monumental,

antiquarian, or critical. At first they will be more ignorant than the "educated

men" of the present: for they will have unlearnt much and have lost any

desire even to discover what those educated men especially wish to know : in

fact, their chief mark from the educated point of view will be just their want

of science; their indifference and inaccessibility to all the good and famous

things. But at the end of the cure, they are men again and have ceased to be

mere shadows of humanity. That is something; there is yet hope, and do not

ye who hope laugh in your hearts? How can we reach that end? you will ask.

The  Delphian  god  cries  his  oracle  to  you  at  the  beginning  of  your

wanderings, "Know thyself." It is a hard saying: for that god "tells nothing

and conceals nothing but merely points the way," as Heraclitus said. But

whither does he point? In certain epochs the Greeks were in a similar danger

of being overwhelmed by what was past and foreign, and perishing on the

rock of "history." They never lived proud and untouched. Their "culture" was

for  a  long  time  a  chaos  of  foreign  forms  and  ideas,-Semitic,  Babylonian,

Lydian and Egyptian,-and their religion a battle of all the gods of the East;

just  as  German  culture  and  religion  is  at  present  a  death-struggle  of  all

foreign nations and bygone times. And yet, Hellenic culture was no mere

mechanical unity, thanks to that Delphic oracle. The Greeks gradually learned

to  organise  the  chaos,  by  taking  Apollo's  advice  and  thinking  back  tothemselves, to their own true necessities, and letting all the sham necessities

go. Thus they again came into possession of themselves, and did not remain

long the Epigoni of the whole East, burdened with their inheritance. After

that hard fight, they increased and enriched the treasure they had inherited by

their obedience to the oracle, and they became the ancestors and models for

all the cultured nations of the future. This is a parable for each one of us: he

must organise the chaos in himself by "thinking himself back" to his true

needs. He will want all his honesty, all the sturdiness and sincerity in his

character to help him to revolt against second- hand thought, second-hand

learning,  second-hand  action.  And  he  will  begin  then  to  understand  that

culture can be something more than a "decoration of life"-a concealment and

disfiguring of it, in other words; for all adornment hides what is adorned. And

thus the Greek idea, as against the Roman, will be discovered to him, the idea

of culture as a new and finer nature, without distinction of inner and outer,

without  convention  or  disguise,  as  a  unity  of  thought  and  will,  life  and

appearance. He will learn too, from his own experience, that it was by a

greater force of moral character that the Greeks were victorious, and that

everything which makes for sincerity is a further step towards true culture,

however this sincerity may harm the ideals of education that are reverenced at

the time, or even have power to shatter a whole system of merely decorative

culture.

                          SCHOPENHAUER AS EDUCATOR

                              Translated by Adrian Collins

  1

  WHEN  the  traveller,  who  had  seen  many  countries  and  nations  and

continents,  was  asked  what  common  attribute  he  had  found  everywhere

existing among men, he answered, "They have a tendency to sloth." Many

may think that the fuller truth would have been, "They are all timid." They

hide  themselves  behind  "manners"  and  "opinions."  At  bottom  every  man

knows well enough that he is a unique being, only once on this earth; and by

no  extraordinary  chance  will  such  a  marvellously  picturesque  piece  of

diversity in unity as he is, ever be put together a second time. He knows this,

but hides it like an evil conscience;-and why? From fear of his neighbour,

who looks for the latest conventionalities in him, and is wrapped up in them

himself. But what is it that forces the man to fear his neighbour, to think and

act with his herd, and not seek his own joy? Shyness perhaps, in a few rare

cases, but in the majority it is idleness, the "taking things easily," in a wordthe "tendency to sloth," of which the traveller spoke. He was right; men are

more slothful than timid, and their greatest fear is of the burdens that an

uncompromising honesty and nakedness of speech and action would lay on

them. It is only the artists who hate this lazy wandering in borrowed manners

and ill-fitting opinions, and discover the secret of the evil conscience, the

truth that each human being is a unique marvel. They show us, how in every

little movement of his muscles the man is an individual self, and further-as an

analytical deduction from his individuality-a beautiful and interesting object,

a new and incredible phenomenon (as is every work of nature), that can never

become tedious. If the great thinker despise mankind, it is for their laziness;

they  seem  mere  indifferent  bits  of  pottery,  not  worth  any  commerce  or

improvement. The man who will not belong to the general mass, has only to

stop "taking himself easily"; to follow his conscience, which cries out to him,

"Be  thyself!  all  that  thou  doest  and  thinkest  and  desirest,  is  not  thyself!"

Every youthful soul hears this cry day and night, and quivers to hear it: for

she divines the sum of happiness that has been from eternity destined for her,

if she think of her true deliverance; and towards this happiness she can in no

wise be helped, so long as she lies in the chains of Opinion and of Fear. And

how comfortless and unmeaning may life become without this deliverance!

There is no more desolate or Ishmaelitish creature in nature than the man who

has broken away from his true genius, and does nothing but peer aimlessly

about him. There is no reason to attack such a man at all, for he is a mere

husk  without  a  kernel,  a  painted  cloth,  tattered  and  sagging,  a  scarecrow

ghost, that can rouse no fear, and certainly no pity. And though one be right

in saying of a sluggard that he is "killing time" yet in respect of an age that

rests its salvation on public opinion,-that is, on private laziness,-one must be

quite determined that such a time shall be "killed," once and for all: I mean

that it shall be blotted from life's true History of Liberty. Later generations

will be greatly disgusted, when they come to treat the movements of a period

in  which  no  living  men  ruled,  but  shadow-men  on  the  screen  of  public

opinion; and to some far posterity our age may well be the darkest chapter of

history, the most unknown because the least human. I have walked through

the new streets of our cities, and thought how of all the dreadful houses that

these gentlemen with their public opinion have built for themselves, not a

stone will remain in a hundred years, and that the opinions of these busy

masons may well have fallen with them. But how full of hope should they all

be who feel that they are no citizens of this age! If they were, they wouldhave to help on the work of "killing their time," and of perishing with it,-

when they wish rather to quicken the time to life, and in that life themselves

to live. But even if the future leave us nothing to hope for, the wonderful fact

of  our  existing  at  this  present  moment  of  time  gives  us  the  greatest

encouragement to live after our own rule and measure; so inexplicable is it,

that we should be living just to-day, though there have been an infinity of

time wherein we might have arisen; that we own nothing but a span's length

of it, this "to-day" and must show in it wherefore and whereunto we have

arisen. We have to answer for our existence to ourselves; and will therefore

be  our  own  true  pilots,  and  not  admit  that  our  being  resembles  a  blind

fortuity. One must take a rather impudent and reckless way with the riddle;

especially as the key is apt to be lost, however things turn out. Why cling to

your bit of earth, or your little business, or listen to what your neighbour

says? It is so provincial to bind oneself to views which are no longer binding

a couple of hundred miles away. East and West are signs that somebody

chalks up in front of us to fool such cowards as we are. "I will make the

attempt to gain freedom," says the youthful soul; and will be hindered, just

because two nations happen to hate each other and go to war, or because

there is a sea between two parts of the earth, or a religion is taught in the

vicinity,  which  did  not  exist  two  thousand  years  ago.  "And  this  is  not-

thyself," the soul says. "No one can build thee the bridge, over which thou

must cross the river of life, save thyself alone. There are paths and bridges

and demi-gods without number, that will gladly carry thee over, but only at

the price of thine own self: thy self wouldst thou have to give in pawn, and

then lose it. There is in the world one road whereon none may go, except

thou: ask not whither it lead, but go forward. Who was it that spake that true

word-'A man has never risen higher than when he knoweth not whither his

road may yet lead him'?" But how can we "find ourselves" again, and how

can man "know himself"? He is a thing obscure and veiled: if the hare have

seven skins, man can cast from him seventy times seven, and yet will not be

able to say "Here art thou in very truth; this is outer shell no more." Also this

digging into one's self, this straight, violent descent into the pit of one's being,

is a troublesome and dangerous business to start. A man may easily take such

hurt, that no physician can heal him. And again, what were the use, since

everything bears witness to our essence,-our friendships and enmities, our

looks and greetings, our memories and forgetfulnesses, our books and our

writing! This is the most effective way: to let the youthful soul look back onlife with the question, "What hast thou up to now truly loved, what has drawn

thy soul upward, mastered it and blessed it too?" Set up these things that thou

hast honoured before thee, and, maybe, they will show thee, in their being

and  their  order,  a  law  which  is  the  fundamental  law  of  thine  own  self.

Compare  these  objects,  consider  how  one  completes  and  broadens  and

transcends and explains another, how they form a ladder on which thou hast

all  the  time  been  climbing  to  thy  self:  for  thy  true  being  lies  not  deeply

hidden in thee, but an infinite height above thee, or at least above that which

thou  dost  commonly  take  to  be  thyself.  The  true  educators  and  moulders

reveal to thee the real groundwork and import of thy being, something that in

itself cannot be moulded or educated, but is anyhow difficult of approach,

bound and crippled: thy educators can be nothing but thy deliverers. And that

is the secret of all culture: it does not give artificial limbs, wax noses, or

spectacles for the eyes-a thing that could buy such gifts is but the base coin of

education. But it is rather a liberation, a removal of all the weeds and rubbish

and vermin that attack the delicate shoots, the streaming forth of light and

warmth, the tender dropping of the night rain; it is the following and the

adoring of Nature when she is pitifully-minded as a mother;-her completion,

when it bends before her fierce and ruthless blasts and turns them to good,

and draws a veil over all expression of her tragic unreason-for she is a step-

mother  too,  sometimes.  There  are  other  means  of  "finding  ourselves,"  of

coming  to  ourselves  out  of  the  confusion  wherein  we  all  wander  as  in  a

dreary cloud; but I know none better than to think on our educators. So I will

to-day take as my theme the hard teacher Arthur Schopenhauer, and speak of

others later. 2

  In  order  to  describe  properly  what  an  event  my  first  look  into

Schopenhauer's writings was for me, I must dwell for a minute on an idea,

that recurred more constantly in my youth, and touched me more nearly, than

any other. I wandered then as I pleased in a world of wishes, and thought that

destiny would relieve me of the dreadful and wearisome duty of educating

myself: some philosopher would come at the right moment to do it for me,-

some true philosopher, who could be obeyed without further question, as he

would be trusted more than one's self. Then I said within me: "What would

be the principles, on which he might teach thee? "And I pondered in my mind

what he would say to the two maxims of education that hold the field in our

time. The first demands that the teacher should find out at once the strong

point in his pupil, and then direct all his skill and will, all the moisture and allthe sunshine, to bring the fruit of that single virtue to maturity. The second

requires him to raise to a higher power all the qualities that already exist,

cherish them and bring them into a harmonious relation. But, we may ask,

should one who has a decided talent for working in gold be made for that

reason to learn music? And can we admit that Benvenuto Cellini's father was

right in continually forcing him back to the "dear little horn"-the "cursed

piping," as his son called it? We cannot think so in the case of such a strong

and  clearly  marked  talent  as  his,  and  it  may  well  be  that  this  maxim  of

harmonious development applies only to weaker natures, in which there is a

whole swarm of desires and inclinations, though they may not amount to very

much,  singly  or  together.  On  the  other  hand,  where  do  we  find  such  a

blending of harmonious voices-nay, the soul of harmony itself-as we see in

natures  like  Cellini's,  where  everything-knowledge,  desire,  love  and  hate-

tends towards a single point, the root of all, and a harmonious system, the

resultant of the various forces, is built up through the irresistible domination

of this vital centre? And so perhaps the two maxims are not contrary at all:

the one merely saying that man must have a centre, the other, a circumference

as well. The philosophic teacher of my dream would not only discover the

central force, but would know how to prevent its being destructive of the

other powers: his task, I thought, would be the welding of the whole man into

a solar system with life and movement, and the discovery of its paraphysical

laws. In the meantime I could not find my philosopher, however I tried; I saw

how badly we moderns compare with the Greeks and Romans, even in the

serious study of educational problems. You can go through all Germany, and

especially all the universities, with this need in your heart, and will not find

what you seek; many humbler wishes than that are still unfulfilled there. For

example, if a German seriously wish to make himself an orator, or to enter a

"school for authors," he will find neither master nor school: no one yet seems

to have thought that speaking and writing are arts which cannot be learnt

without the most careful method and untiring application. But, to their shame,

nothing shows more clearly the insolent self-satisfaction of our people than

the lack of demand for educators; it comes partly from meanness, partly from

want of thought. Anything will do as a so-called "family tutor," even among

our most eminent and cultured people: and what a menagerie of crazy heads

and mouldy devices mostly go to make up the belauded Gymnasium! And

consider what we are satisfied with in our finishing schools,-our universities.

Look at our professors and their institutions! And compare the difficulty ofthe task of educating a man to be a man! Above all, the wonderful way in

which the German savants fall to their dish of knowledge, shows that they are

thinking more of Science than mankind; and they are trained to lead a forlorn

hope in her service, in order to encourage ever new generations to the same

sacrifice. If their traffic with knowledge be not limited and controlled by any

more general principles of education, but allowed to run on indefinitely,-"the

more the better,"-it is as harmful to learning as the economic theory of laisser

faire to common morality. No one recognises now that the education of the

professors is an exceedingly difficult problem, if their humanity is not to be

sacrificed or shrivelled up:-this difficulty can be actually seen in countless

examples  of  natures  warped  and  twisted  by  their  reckless  and  premature

devotion to science. There is a still more important testimony to the complete

absence of higher education, pointing to a greater and more universal danger.

It is clear at once why an orator or writer cannot now be educated,-because

there are no teachers; and why a savant must be a distorted and perverted

thing,-because he will have been trained by the inhuman abstraction, science.

This being so, let a man ask himself: "Where are now the types of moral

excellence and fame for all our generation-learned and unlearned, high and

low-the  visible  abstract  of  constructive  ethics  for  this  age?  Where  has

vanished all the reflection on moral questions that has occupied every great

developed society at all epochs?" There is no fame for that now, and there are

none to reflect: we are really drawing on the inherited moral capital which

our predecessors accumulated for us, and which we do not know how to

increase, but only to squander. Such things are either not mentioned in our

society, or, if at all, with a naive want of personal experience that makes one

disgusted. It comes to this, that our schools and professors simply turn aside

from any moral instruction or content themselves with formulae; virtue is a

word and nothing more, on both sides, an old-fashioned word that they laugh

at-and it is worse when they do not laugh, for then they are hypocrites. An

explanation of this faint-heartedness and ebbing of all moral strength would

be  difficult  and  complex:  but  whoever  is  considering  the  influence  of

Christianity in its hour of victory on the morality of the mediaeval world,

must not forget that it reacts also in its defeat, which is apparently its position

to-day. By its lofty ideal, Christianity has outbidden the ancient Systems of

Ethics and their invariable naturalism, with which men came to feel a dull

disgust:  and  afterwards  when  they  did  reach  the  knowledge  of  what  was

better  and  higher,  they  found  they  had  no  longer  the  power,  for  all  theirdesire, to return to its embodiment in the antique virtues. And so the life of

the modern man is passed in see-sawing between Christianity and Paganism,

between  a  furtive  or  hypocritical  approach  to  Christian  morality,  and  an

equally shy and spiritless dallying with the antique: and he does not thrive

under it. His inherited fear of naturalism, and its more recent attraction for

him, his desire to come to rest somewhere, while in the impotence of his

intellect  he  swings  backwards  and  forwards  between  the  "good"  and  the

"better"  course-all  this  argues  an  instability  in  the  modern  mind  that

condemns  it  to  be  without  joy  or  fruit.  Never  were  moral  teachers  more

necessary and never were they more unlikely to be found: physicians are

most in danger themselves in times when they are most needed and many

men are sick. For where are our modern physicians who are strong and sure-

footed enough to hold up another or lead him by the hand? There lies a

certain heavy gloom on the best men of our time, an eternal loathing for the

battle that is fought in their hearts between honesty and lies, a wavering of

trust in themselves, which makes them quite incapable of showing to others

the way they must go. So I was right in speaking of my "wandering in a

world of wishes" when I dreamt of finding a true philosopher who could lift

me from the slough of insufficiency, and teach me again simply and honestly-

to  be  in  my  thoughts  and  life,  in  the  deepest  sense  of  the  word,  "out  of

season"; simply and honestly for men have now become such complicated

machines that they must be dishonest, if they speak at all, or wish to act on

their words. With such needs and desires within me did I come to know

Schopenhauer.  I  belong  to  those  readers  of  Schopenhauer  who  know

perfectly well, after they have turned the first page, that they will read all the

others, and listen to every word that he has spoken. My trust in him sprang to

life at once, and has been the same for nine years. I understood him as though

he had written for me (this is the most intelligible, though a rather foolish and

conceited  way  of  expressing  it).  Hence  I  never  found  a  paradox  in  him,

though occasionally some small errors: for paradoxes are only assertions that

carry no conviction, because the author has made them himself without any

conviction, wishing to appear brilliant, or to mislead, or, above all, to pose.

Schopenhauer  never  poses:  he  writes  for  himself,  and  no  one  likes  to  be

deceived-least of all a philosopher who has set this up as his law: "deceive

nobody,  not  even  thyself,"  neither  with  the  "white  lies"  of  all  social

intercourse, which writers almost unconsciously imitate, still less with the

more conscious deceits of the platform, and the artificial methods of rhetoric.Schopenhauer's speeches are to himself alone; or if you like to imagine an

auditor, let it be a son whom the father is instructing. It is a rough, honest,

good-humoured talk to one who "hears and loves." Such writers are rare. His

strength  and  sanity  surround  us  at  the  first  sound  of  his  voice:  it  is  like

entering the heights of the forest, where we breathe deep and are well again.

We feel a bracing air everywhere, a certain candour and naturalness of his

own, that belongs to men who are at home with themselves, and masters of a

very  rich  home  indeed:  he  is  quite  different  from  the  writers  who  are

surprised at themselves if they have said something intelligent, and whose

pronouncements for that reason have something nervous and unnatural about

them. We are just as little reminded in Schopenhauer of the professor with his

stiff joints worse for want of exercise, his narrow chest and scraggy figure,

his slinking or strutting gait. And again his rough and rather grim soul leads

us not so much to miss as to despise the suppleness and courtly grace of the

excellent Frenchmen; and no one will find in him the gilded imitations of

pseudo-gallicism that our German writers prize so highly. His style in places

reminds me a little of Goethe, but is not otherwise on any German model. For

he knows how to be profound with simplicity, striking without rhetoric, and

severely logical without pedantry: and of what German could he have learnt

that? He also keeps free from the hair-splitting, jerky and (with all respect)

rather un-German manner of Lessing: no small merit in him, for Lessing is

the most tempting of all models for prose style. The highest praise I can give

his  manner  of  presentation  is  to  apply  his  own  phrase  to  himself:-"A

philosopher must be very honest to avail himself of no aid from poetry or

rhetoric."  That  honesty  is  something,  and  even  a  virtue,  is  one  of  those

private opinions which are forbidden in this age of public opinion; and so I

shall  not  be  praising  Schopenhauer,  but  only  giving  him  a  distinguishing

mark, when I repeat that he is honest, even as a writer: so few of them are

that we are apt to mistrust every one who writes at all. I only know a single

author that I can rank with Schopenhauer, or even above him, in the matter of

honesty; and that is Montaigne. The joy of living on this earth is increased by

the existence of such a man. The effect on myself, at any rate, since my first

acquaintance with that strong and masterful spirit, has been, that I can say of

him as he of Plutarch-"As soon as I open him, I seem to grow a pair of

wings." If I had the task of making myself at home on the earth, I would

choose him as my companion. Schopenhauer has a second characteristic in

common with Montaigne, besides honesty; a joy that really makes othersjoyful.  "Aliis  laetus,  sibi  sapiens."  There  are  two  very  different  kinds  of

joyfulness. The true thinker always communicates joy and life, whether he is

showing  his  serious  or  comic  side,  his  human  insight  or  his  godlike

forbearance:  without  surly  looks  or  trembling  hands  or  watery  eyes,  but

simply and truly, with fearlessness and strength, a little cavalierly perhaps,

and sternly, but always as a conqueror: and it is this that brings the deepest

and intensest joy, to see the conquering god with all the monsters that he has

fought. But the joyfulness one finds here and there in the mediocre writers

and limited thinkers makes some of us miserable; I felt this, for example,

with the "joyfulness" of David Strauss. We are generally ashamed of such a

quality in our contemporaries, because they show the nakedness of our time,

and of the men in it, to posterity. Such fils de joie do not see the sufferings

and the monsters, that they pretend, as philosophers, to see and fight; and so

their joy deceives us, and we hate it; it tempts to the false belief that they

have gained some victory. At bottom there is only joy where there is victory:

and  this  applies  to  true  philosophy  as  much  as  to  any  work  of  art.  The

contents may be forbidding and serious, as the problem of existence always

is; the work will only prove tiresome and oppressive, if the slipshod thinker

and the dilettante have spread the mist of their insufficiency over it: while

nothing happier or better can come to man's lot than to be near one of those

conquering spirits whose profound thought has made them love what is most

vital, and whose wisdom has found its goal in beauty. They really speak: they

are no stammerers or babblers; they live and move, and have no part in the

danse macabre of the rest of humanity. And so in their company one feels a

natural man again, and could cry out with Goethe-"What a wondrous and

priceless thing is a living creature! How fitted to his surroundings, how true,

and real!" I have been describing nothing but the first, almost physiological,

impression made upon me by Schopenhauer, the magical emanation of inner

force from one plant of Nature to another, that follows the slightest contact.

Analysing it, I find that this influence of Schopenhauer has three elements,

his  honesty,  his  joy,  and  his  consistency.  He  is  honest,  as  speaking  and

writing  for  himself  alone;  joyful,  because  his  thought  has  conquered  the

greatest difficulties; consistent, because he cannot help being so. His strength

rises like a flame in the calm air, straight up, without a tremor or deviation.

He finds his way, without our noticing that he has been seeking it: so surely

and cleverly and inevitably does he run his course, as if by some law of

gravitation. If any one have felt what it means to find, in our present world ofCentaurs and Chimaeras, a single-hearted and unaffected child of nature who

moves unconstrained on his own road, he will understand my joy and surprise

in discovering Schopenhauer: I knew in him the educator and philosopher I

had so long desired. Only, however, in his writings: which was a great loss.

All the more did I exert myself to see behind the book the living man whose

testament it was, and who promised his inheritance to such as could, and

would, be more than his readers-his pupils and his sons. 3

  I get profit from a philosopher, just so far as he can be an example to me.

There  is  no  doubt  that  a  man  can  draw  whole  nations  after  him  by  his

example; as is shown by Indian history, which is practically the history of

Indian  philosophy.  But  this  example  must  exist  in  his  outward  life,  not

merely in his books ; it must follow the way of the Grecian philosophers,

whose doctrine was in their dress and bearing and general manner of life

rather than in their speech or writing. We have nothing yet of this "breathing

testimony"  in  German  philosophical  life;  the  spirit  has,  apparently,  long

completed its emancipation, while the flesh has hardly begun; yet it is foolish

to think that the spirit can be really free and independent when this victory

over limitation-which is ultimately a formative limiting of one's self-is not

embodied anew in every look and movement. Kant held to his university,

submitted to its regulations, and belonged, as his colleagues and students

thought, to a definite religious faith: and naturally his example has produced,

above all, University professors of philosophy. Schopenhauer makes small

account  of  the  learned  tribe,  keeps  himself  exclusive,  and  cultivates  an

independence from state and society as his ideal, to escape the chains of

circumstance here : that is his value to us. Many steps in the enfranchisement

of the philosopher are unknown in Germany; they cannot always remain so.

Our  artists  live  more  bravely  and  honourably  than  our  philosophers;  and

Richard Wagner, the best example of all, shows how genius need not fear a

fight to the death with the established forms and ordinances, if we wish to

bring the higher truth and order, that lives in him, to the light. The "truth,"

however, of which we hear so much from our professors, seems to be a far

more modest being, and no kind of disturbance is to be feared from her; she

is  an  easy-going  and  pleasant  creature,  who  is  continually  assuring  the

powers that be that no one need fear any trouble from her quarter: for man is

only "pure reason." And therefore I will say, that philosophy in Germany has

more and more to learn not to be "pure reason": and it may well take as its

model "Schopenhauer the man." It is no less than a marvel that he shouldhave come to be this human kind of example: for he was beset, within and

without, by the most frightful dangers, that would have crushed and broken a

weaker nature. I think there was a strong likelihood of Schopenhauer the man

going under, and leaving at best a residue of "pure reason": and only "at

best"-it was more probable that neither man nor reason would survive. A

modern  Englishman  sketches  the  most  usual  danger  to  extraordinary  men

who  live  in  a  society  that  worships  the  ordinary,  in  this  manner:-"Such

uncommon characters are first cowed, then become sick and melancholy, and

then die. A Shelley could never have lived in England: a race of Shelleys

would have been impossible." Our H�lderlins and Kleists were undone by

their unconventionality, and were not strong enough for the climate of the so-

called  German  culture;  and  only  iron  natures  like  Beethoven,  Goethe,

Schopenhauer and Wagner could hold out against it. Even in them the effect

of this weary toiling and moiling is seen in many lines and wrinkles; their

breathing is harder and their voice is forced. The old diplomatist who had

only just seen and spoken to Goethe, said to a friend-"Voil� un homme qui a

eu de grands chagrins!" which Goethe translated to mean "That is a man who

has taken great pains in his life." And he adds, "If the trace of the sorrow and

activity we have gone through cannot be wiped from our features, it is no

wonder that all that survives of us and our struggles should bear the same

impress." And this is the Goethe to whom our cultured Philistines point as the

happiest of Germans, that they may prove their thesis, that it must be possible

to be happy among them-with the unexpressed corollary that no one can be

pardoned for feeling unhappy and lonely among them. Hence they push their

doctrine, in practice, to its merciless conclusion, that there is always a secret

guilt in isolation. Poor Schopenhauer had this secret guilt too in his heart, the

guilt of cherishing his philosophy more than his fellow-men; and he was so

unhappy as to have learnt from Goethe that he must defend his philosophy at

all costs from the neglect of his contemporaries, to save its very existence: for

there is a kind of Grand Inquisitor's Censure in which the Germans, according

to Goethe, are great adepts: it is called-inviolable silence. This much at least

was accomplished by it; the greater part of the first edition of Schopenhauer's

masterpiece had to be turned into waste paper. The imminent risk that his

great work would be undone, merely by neglect, bred in him a state of unrest-

perilous  and  uncontrollable;-for  no  single  adherent  of  any  note  presented

himself. It is tragic to watch his search for any evidence of recognition: and

his piercing cry of triumph at last, that he would now really be read (legor etlegar), touches us with a thrill of pain. All the traits in which we do not see

the  great  philosopher  show  us  the  suffering  man,  anxious  for  his  noblest

possessions;  he  was  tortured  by  the  fear  of  losing  his  little  property,  and

perhaps of no longer being able to maintain in its purity his truly antique

attitude towards philosophy. He often chose falsely in his desire to find real

trust and compassion in men, only to return with a heavy heart to his faithful

dog again. He was absolutely alone, with no single friend of his own kind to

comfort him; and between one and none there lies an infinity-as ever between

something  and  nothing.  No  one  who  has  true  friends  knows  what  real

loneliness means, though he may have the whole world in antagonism round

him. Ah, I see well ye do not know what isolation is! Whenever there are

great societies with governments and religions and public opinions where

there is a tyranny, in short, there will the lonely philosopher be hated: for

philosophy offers an asylum to mankind where no tyranny can penetrate, the

inner sanctuary, the centre of the heart's labyrinth: and the tyrants are galled

at it. Here do the lonely men lie hid: but here too lurks their greatest danger.

These men who have saved their inner freedom, must also live and be seen in

the  outer  world:  they  stand  in  countless  human  relations  by  their  birth,

position, education and country, their own circumstances and the importunity

of others: and so they are presumed to hold an immense number of opinions,

simply because these happen to prevail: every look that is not a denial counts

as an assent, every motion of the hand that does not destroy is regarded as an

aid. These free and lonely men know that they perpetually seem other than

they are. While they wish for nothing but truth and honesty, they are in a net

of misunderstanding; and that ardent desire cannot prevent a mist of false

opinions, of adaptations and wrong conclusions, of partial misapprehension

and  intentional  reticence,  from  gathering  round  their  actions,  And  there

settles  a  cloud  of  melancholy  on  their  brows  :  for  such  natures  hate  the

necessity of pretence worse than death : and the continual bitterness gives

them a threatening and volcanic character. They take revenge from time to

time  for  their  forced  concealment  and  self-restraint:  they  issue  from  their

dens with lowering looks: their words and deeds are explosive, and may lead

to their own destruction. Schopenhauer lived amid dangers of this sort. Such

lonely men need love, and friends, to whom they can be as open and sincere

as to themselves, and in whose presence the deadening silence and hypocrisy

may  cease.  Take  their  friends  away,  and  there  is  left  an  increasing  peril;

Heinrich von Kleist was broken by the lack of love, and the most terribleweapon against unusual men is to drive them into themselves; and then their

issuing forth again is a volcanic eruption. Yet there are always some demi-

gods  who  can  bear  life  under  these  fearful  conditions  and  can  be  their

conquerors: and if you would hear their lonely chant, listen to the music of

Beethoven. So the first danger in whose shadow Schopenhauer lived was-

isolation. The second is called-doubting of the truth. To this every thinker is

liable who sets out from the philosophy of Kant, provided he be strong and

sincere in his sorrows and his desires, and not a mere tinkling thought-box or

calculating machine. We all know the shameful state of things implied by this

last reservation, and I believe it is only a very few men that Kant has so

vitally affected as to change the current of their blood. To judge from what

one reads, there must have been a revolution in every domain of thought

since the work of this unobtrusive professor: I cannot believe it myself. For I

see men, though darkly, as themselves needing to be revolutionised, before

any "domains of thought" can be so. In fact, we find the first mark of any

influence Kant may have had on the popular mind, in a corrosive scepticism

and relativity. But it is only in noble and active spirits who could never rest in

doubt that the shattering despair of truth itself could take the place of doubt.

This was, for example, the effect of the Kantian philosophy on Heinrich von

Kleist. "It was only a short time ago," he writes in his poignant way, "that I

became  acquainted  with  the  Kantian  philosophy;  and  I  will  tell  you  my

thought, though I cannot fear that it will rack you to your inmost soul, as it

did  me.-We  cannot  decide,  whether  what  we  call  truth  is  really  truth,  or

whether it only seems so to us. If the latter, the truth that we amass here does

not exist after death, and all our struggle to gain a possession that may follow

us even to the grave is in vain. If the blade of this thought do not cut your

heart, yet laugh not at another who feels himself wounded by it in his Holy of

Holies. My one highest aim has vanished, and I have no more." Yes, when

will men feel again deeply as Kleist did, and learn to measure a philosophy

by  what  it  means  to  the  "Holy  of  Holies"?  And  yet  we  must  make  this

estimate of what Schopenhauer can mean to us, after Kant, as the first pioneer

to  bring  us  from  the  heights  of  sceptical  disillusionment  or  "critical"

renunciation,  to  the  greater  height  of  tragic  contemplation,  the  nocturnal

heaven with its endless crown of stars. His greatness is that he can stand

opposite the picture of life, and interpret it to us as a whole: while all the

clever people cannot escape the error of thinking one comes nearer to the

interpretation  by  a  laborious  analysis  of  the  colours  and  material  of  thepicture ; with the confession, probably, that the texture of the canvas is very

complicated, and the chemical composition of the colours undiscoverable.

Schopenhauer knew that one must guess the painter in order to understand

the picture. But now the whole learned fraternity is engaged on understanding

the colours and canvas, and not the picture: and only he who has kept the

universal panorama of life and being firmly before his eyes, will use the

individual sciences without harm to himself; for, without this general view as

a norm, they are threads that lead nowhere and only confuse still more the

maze of our existence. Here we see, as I said, the greatness of Schopenhauer,

that he follows up every idea, as Hamlet follows the Ghost, without allowing

himself  to  turn  aside  for  a  learned  digression,  or  be  drawn  away  by  the

scholastic  abstractions  of  a  rabid  dialectic.  The  study  of  the  minute

philosophers is only interesting for the recognition that they have reached

those stages in the great edifice of philosophy where learned disquisitions for

and against, where hair-splitting objections and counter-objections are the

rule: and for that reason they evade the demand of every great philosophy to

speak sub specie aeternitatis-"this is the picture of the whole of life: learn

thence the meaning of thine own life." And the converse: "read thine own

life, and understand thence the hieroglyphs of the universal life." In this way

must Schopenhauer's philosophy always be interpreted ; as an individualist

philosophy, starting from the single man, in his own nature, to gain an insight

into  his  personal  miseries,  and  needs,  and  limitations,  and  find  out  the

remedies that will console them: namely, the sacrifice of the ego, and its

submission  to  the  nobler  ends,  especially  those  of  justice  and  mercy.  He

teaches us to distinguish between the true and the apparent furtherance of

man's  happiness:  how  neither  the  attainment  of  riches,  nor  honour,  nor

learning, can raise the individual from his deep despair at his unworthiness;

and how the quest for these good things can only have meaning through a

universal end that transcends and explains them;-the gaining of power to aid

our  physical  nature  by  them  and,  as  far  as  may  be,  correct  its  folly  and

awkwardness. For one's self only, in the first instance: and finally, through

one's self, for all. It is a task that leads to scepticism: for there is so much to

be made better yet, in one and all! Applying this to Schopenhauer himself, we

come to the third and most intimate danger in which he lived, and which lay

deep in the marrow of his being. Every one is apt to discover a limitation in

himself, in his gifts of intellect as well as his moral will, that fills him with

yearning  and  melancholy;  and  as  he  strives  after  holiness  through  aconsciousness of sin, so, as an intellectual being, he has a deep longing after

the "genius" in himself. This is the root of all true culture; and if we say this

means the aspiration of man to be "born again" as saint and genius, I know

that one need not be a Buddhist to understand the myth. We feel a strong

loathing when we find talent without such aspiration, in the circle of the

learned, or among the so-called educated; for we see that such men, with all

their cleverness, are no aid but a hindrance to the beginnings of culture and

the blossoming of genius, the aim of all culture. There is a rigidity in them,

parallel to the cold arrogance of conventional virtue, which also remains at

the  opposite  pole  to  true  holiness.  Schopenhauer's  nature  contained  an

extraordinarily  dangerous  dualism.  Few  thinkers  have  felt  as  he  did  the

complete and unmistakable certainty of genius within them; and his genius

made him the highest of all promises,-that there could be no deeper furrow

than that which he was ploughing in the ground of the modern world. He

knew one half of his being to be fulfilled according to its strength, with no

other  need;  and  he  followed  with  greatness  and  dignity  his  vocation  of

consolidating his victory. In the other half there was a gnawing aspiration,

which we can understand, when we hear that he turned away with a sad look

from the picture of Rance, the founder of the Trappists, with the words: "That

is a matter of grace." For genius evermore yearns after holiness as it sees

further and more clearly from its watch-tower than other men, deep into the

reconciliation of Thought and Being, the kingdom of peace and the denial of

the will, and up to that other shore, of which the Indians speak. The wonder

is, that Schopenhauer's nature should have been so inconceivably stable and

unshakable that it could neither be destroyed nor petrified by this yearning.

Every one will understand this after the measure of his own character and

greatness: none of us will understand it in the fulness of its meaning. The

more one considers these three dangers, the more extraordinary will appear

his vigour in opposing them and his safety after the battle. True, he gained

many scars and open wounds: and a cast of mind that may seem somewhat

too  bitter  and  pugnacious.  But  his  single  ideal  transcends  the  highest

humanity in him. Schopenhauer stands as a pattern to men, in spite of all

those scars and scratches. We may even say, that what was imperfect and "all

too human" in him, brings us nearer to him as a man, for we see a sufferer

and a kinsman to suffering, not merely a dweller on the unattainable heights

of genius. These three constitutional dangers that threatened Schopenhauer,

threaten us all. Each one of us bears a creative solitude within himself, andhis consciousness of it forms an exotic aura of strangeness round him. Most

men cannot endure it, because they are slothful, as I said, and because their

solitude hangs round them a chain of troubles and burdens. No doubt, for the

man with this heavy chain, life loses almost everything that one desires from

it in youth-joy, safety, honour: his fellow-men pay him his due of-isolation!

The wilderness and the cave are about him, wherever he may live. He must

look to it that he be not enslaved and oppressed, and become melancholy

thereby. And let him surround himself with the pictures of good and brave

fighters such as Schopenhauer. The second danger, too, is not rare. Here and

there we find one dowered by nature with a keen vision ; his thoughts dance

gladly in the witches' Sabbath of dialectic; and if he uncautiously give his

talent the rein, it is easy to lose all humanity and live a ghostly life in the

realm of "pure reason": or through the constant search for the "pros and cons"

of  things,  he  may  go  astray  from  the  truth  and  live  without  courage  or

confidence, in doubt, denial and discontent, and the slender hope that waits

on disillusion: "No dog could live long thus!" The third danger is a moral or

intellectual hardening: man breaks the bond that united him to his ideal: he

ceases  to  be  fruitful  and  reproduce  himself  in  this  or  that  province,  and

becomes an enemy or a parasite of culture. The solitude of his being has

become an indivisible, unrelated atom, an icy stone. And one can perish of

this solitude as well as of the fear of it, of one's self as well as one's self-

sacrifice,  of  both  aspiration  and  petrifaction:  and  to  live  is  ever  to  be  in

danger.  Beside  these  dangers  to  which  Schopenhauer  would  have  been

constitutionally liable, in whatever century he had lived, there were also some

produced by his own time; and it is essential to distinguish between these two

kinds, in order to grasp the typical and formative elements in his nature. The

philosopher casts his eye over existence, and wishes to give it a new standard

value; for it has been the peculiar task of all great thinkers to be law-givers

for the weight and stamp in the mint of reality. And his task will be hindered

if the men he sees near him be a weakly and worm-eaten growth. To be

correct in his calculation of existence, the unworthiness of the present time

must be a very small item in the addition. The study of ancient or foreign

history is valuable, if at all, for a correct judgment on the whole destiny of

man; which must be drawn not only from an average estimate but from a

comparison of the highest destinies that can befall individuals or nations. The

present  is  too  much  with  us;  it  directs  the  vision  even  against  the

philosopher's will: and it will inevitably be reckoned too high in the finalsum. And so he must put a low figure on his own time as against others, and

suppress the present in his picture of life, as well as in himself; must put it

into the background or paint it over; a difficult, and almost impossible task.

The judgment of the ancient Greek philosophers on the value of existence

means so much more than our own, because they had the full bloom of life

itself  before  them,  and  their  vision  was  untroubled  by  any  felt  dualism

between  their  wish  for  freedom  and  beauty  on  the  grand  scale,  and  their

search after truth, with its single question "What is the real worth of life?

"Empedocles lived when Greek culture was full to overflowing with the joy

of life, and all ages may take profit from his words; especially as no other

great philosopher of that great time ventured to contradict them. Empedocles

is only the clearest voice among them-they all say the same thing, if a man

will  but  open  his  ears.  A  modern  thinker  is  always  in  the  throes  of  an

unfulfilled desire; he is looking for life,-warm, red life,-that he may pass

judgment on it: at any rate he will think it necessary to be a living man

himself, before he can believe in his power of judging. And this is the title of

the modern philosophers to sit among the great aiders of Life (or rather of the

will to live), and the reason why they can look from their own out-wearied

time and aspire to a truer culture, and a clearer explanation. Their yearning is,

however,  their  danger;  the  reformer  in  them  struggles  with  the  critical

philosopher. And whichever way the victory incline, it also implies a defeat.

How was Schopenhauer to escape this danger ? We like to consider the great

man as the noble child of his age, who feels its defects more strongly and

intimately than the smaller men: and therefore the struggle of the great man

against  his  age  is  apparently  nothing  but  a  mad  fight  to  the  death  with

himself. Only apparently, however: he only fights the elements in his time

that hinder his own greatness, in other words his own freedom and sincerity.

And so, at bottom, he is only an enemy to that element which is not truly

himself, the irreconcilable antagonism of the temporal and eternal in him.

The supposed "child of his age" proves to be but a step-child. From boyhood

Schopenhauer strove with his time, a false and unworthy mother to him, and

as soon as he had banished her, he could bring back his being to its native

health and purity. For this very reason we can use his writings as mirrors of

his time; it is no fault of the mirror if everything contemporary appear in it

stricken by a ravaging disease, pale and thin, with tired looks and hollow

eyes,-the step-child's sorrow made visible. The yearning for natural strength,

for a healthy and simple humanity, was a yearning for himself: and as soon ashe had conquered his time within him, he was face to face with his own

genius. The secret of nature's being and his own lay open, the step-mother's

plot to conceal his genius from him was foiled. And now he could turn a

fearless eye towards the question, "What is the real worth of life?" without

having  any  more  to  weigh  a  bloodless  and  chaotic  age  of  doubt  and

hypocrisy. He knew that there was something higher and purer to be won on

this earth than the life of his time, and a man does bitter wrong to existence

who only knows it and criticises it in this hateful form. Genius, itself the

highest product of life, is now summoned to justify life, if it can: the noble

creative soul must answer the question:-"Dost thou in thy heart say 'Yea!'

unto this existence? Is it enough for thee? Wilt thou be its advocate and its

redeemer? One true 'Yea' from thy lips, and the sorely accused life shall go

free." How shall he answer? In the words of Empedocles. 4

  The last hint may well remain obscure for a time: I have something more

easy to explain, namely how Schopenhauer can help us to educate ourselves

in opposition to our age, since we have the advantage of really knowing our

age, through him;-if it be an advantage! It may be no longer possible in a

couple, of hundred years. I sometimes amuse myself with the idea that men

may soon grow tired of books and their authors, and the savant of to-morrow

come to leave directions in his will that his body be burned in the midst of his

books, including of course his own writings. And in the gradual clearing of

the forests, might not our libraries be very reasonably used for straw and

brushwood? Most books are born from the smoke and vapour of the brain:

and to vapour and smoke may they well return. For having no fire within

themselves, they shall be visited with fire. And possibly to a later century our

own  may  count  as  the  "Dark  age,"  because  our  productions  heated  the

furnace  hotter  and  more  continuously  than  ever  before.  We  are  anyhow

happy  that  we  can  learn  to  know  our  time;  and  if  there  be  any  sense  in

busying ourselves with our time at all, we may as well do it as thoroughly as

we can, so that no one may have any doubt about it. The possibility of this we

owe to Schopenhauer. Our happiness would of course be infinitely greater, if

our inquiry showed that nothing so hopeful and splendid as our present epoch

had ever existed. There are simple people in some corner of the earth to-day-

perhaps in Germany-who are disposed to believe in all seriousness that the

world was put right two years ago,[1] and that all stern and gloomy views of

life are now contradicted by "facts." The foundation of the New German

Empire is, to them, the decisive blow that annihilates all the "pessimistic"philosophers,-no doubt of it. To judge the philosopher's significance in our

time, as an educator, we must oppose a widespread view like this, especially

common in our universities. We must say, it is a shameful thing that such

abominable flattery of the Time-Fetish should be uttered by a herd of so-

called reflective and honourable men; it is a proof that we no longer see how

far the seriousness of philosophy is removed from that of a newspaper. Such

men have lost the last remnant of feeling, not only for philosophy, but also

for religion, and have put in its place a spirit not so much of optimism as of

journalism, the evil spirit that broods over the day-and the daily paper. Every

philosophy  that  believes  the  problem  of  existence  to  be  shelved,  or  even

solved,  by  a  political  event,  is  a  sham  philosophy.  There  have  been

innumerable states founded since the beginning of the world; that is an old

story. How should a political innovation manage once and for all to make a

contented race of the dwellers on this earth? If any one believe in his heart

that this is possible, he should report himself to our authorities : he really

deserves to be Professor of Philosophy in a German university, like Harms in

Berlin, J�rgen Meyer in Bonn, and Carriere in Munich. We are feeling the

consequences of the doctrine, preached lately from all the housetops, that the

state is the highest end of man and there is no higher duty than to serve it: I

regard this not a relapse into paganism, but into stupidity. A man who thinks

state-service to be his highest duty, very possibly knows no higher one; yet

there are both men and duties in a region beyond,-and one of these duties,

that seems to me at least of higher value than state-service, is to destroy

stupidity in all its forms-and this particular stupidity among them. And I have

to do with a class of men whose teleological conceptions extend further than

the well-being of a state, I mean with philosophers-and only with them in

their relation to the world of culture, which is again almost independent of

the "good of the state." Of the many links that make up the twisted chain of

humanity, some are of gold and others of pewter. How does the philosopher

of  our  time  regard  culture?  Quite  differently,  I  assure  you,  from  the

professors  who  are  so  content  with  their  new  state.  He  seems  to  see  the

symptoms of an absolute uprooting of culture in the increasing rush and hurry

of life, and the decay of all reflection and simplicity. The waters of religion

are ebbing, and leaving swamps or stagnant pools : the nations are drawing

away in enmity again, and long to tear each other in pieces. The sciences,

blindly driving along, on a laisser faire system, without a common standard,

are splitting up, and losing hold of every firm principle. The educated classesare being swept along in the contemptible struggle for wealth. Never was the

world more worldly, never poorer in goodness and love. Men of learning are

no longer beacons or sanctuaries in the midst of this turmoil of worldliness;

they  themselves  are  daily  becoming  more  restless,  thoughtless,  loveless.

Everything bows before the coming barbarism, art and science included. The

educated men have degenerated into the greatest foes of education, for they

will  deny  the  universal  sickness  and  hinder  the  physician.  They  become

peevish, these poor nerveless creatures, if one speak of their weakness and

combat the shameful spirit of lies in them. They would gladly make one

believe that they have outstripped all the centuries, and they walk with a

pretence of happiness which has something pathetic about it, because their

happiness is so inconceivable. One would not even ask them, as Tannh�user

did Biterolf, "What hast thou, poor wretch, enjoyed!" For, alas! we know far

better ourselves, in another way. There is a wintry sky over us, and we dwell

on a high mountain, in danger and in need. Short-lived is all our joy, and the

sun's rays strike palely on our white mountains. Music is heard; an old man

grinds an organ, and the dancers whirl round, and the heart of the wanderer is

shaken within him to see it: everything is so disordered, so drab, so hopeless.

Even now there is a sound of joy, of clear thoughtless joy! but soon the mist

of evening closes round, the note dies away, and the wanderer's footsteps are

heard on the gravel; as far as his eye can reach there is nothing but the grim

and desolate face of nature. It may be one-sided, to insist only on the blurred

lines and the dull colours in the picture of modern life: yet the other side is no

more  encouraging,  it  is  only  more  disturbing.  There  is  certainly  strength

there, enormous strength; but it is wild, primitive and merciless. One looks on

with a chill expectancy, as though into the caldron of a witch's kitchen; every

moment there may arise sparks and vapour, to herald some fearful apparition.

For  a  century  we  have  been  ready  for  a  world-shaking  convulsion;  and

though we have lately been trying to set the conservative strength of the so-

called  national  state  against  the  great  modern  tendency  to  volcanic

destructiveness, it will only be, for a long time yet, an aggravation of the

universal unrest that hangs over us. We need not be deceived by individuals

behaving as if they knew nothing of all this anxiety: their own restlessness

shows how well they know it. They think more exclusively of themselves

than men ever thought before; they plant and build for their little day, and the

chase for happiness is never greater than when the quarry must be caught to-

day or to-morrow: the next day perhaps there is no more hunting. We live inthe Atomic Age, or rather in the Atomic Chaos. The opposing forces were

practically  held  together  in  mediaeval  times  by  the  Church,  and  in  some

measure  assimilated  by  the  strong  pressure  which  she  exerted.  When  the

common tie broke and the pressure relaxed, they rose once more against each

other.  The  Reformation  taught  that  many  things  were  "adiaphora"-

departments that needed no guidance from religion: this was the price paid

for its own existence. Christianity paid a similar one to guard itself against

the  far  more  religious  antiquity:  and  laid  the  seeds  of  discord  at  once.

Everything nowadays is directed by the fools and the knaves, the selfishness

of the money-makers and the brute forces of militarism. The state in their

hands makes a good show of reorganising everything, and of becoming the

bond that unites the warring elements; in other words, it wishes for the same

idolatry from mankind as they showed to the Church. And we shall yet feel

the consequences. We are even now on the ice-floes in the stream of the

Middle Ages : they are thawing fast, and their movement is ominous : the

banks are flooded, and giving way. The revolution, the atomistic revolution,

is  inevitable:  but  what  are  those  smallest  indivisible  elements  of  human

society? There is surely far more danger to mankind in transitional periods

like these than in the actual time of revolution and chaos; they are tortured by

waiting, and snatch greedily at every moment; and this breeds all kinds of

cowardice and selfishness in them: whereas the true feeling of a great and

universal need ever inspires men, and makes them better. In the midst of such

dangers, who will provide the guardians and champions for Humanity, for the

holy and inviolate treasure that has been laid up in the temples, little by little,

by countless generations? Who will set up again the Image of Man, when

men in their selfishness and terror see nothing but the trail of the serpent or

the cur in them, and have fallen from their high estate to that of the brute or

the automaton? There are three Images of Man fashioned by our modern

time, which for a long while yet will urge mortal men to transfigure their own

lives; they are the men of Rousseau, Goethe, and Schopenhauer. The first has

the greatest fire, and is most calculated to impress the people: the second is

only for the few, for those contemplative natures "in the grand style" who are

misunderstood by the crowd. The third demands the highest activity in those

who will follow it: only such men will look on that image without harm, for it

breaks the spirit of that merely contemplative man, and the rabble shudder at

it. From the first has come forth a strength that led and still leads to fearful

revolution: for in all socialistic upheavals it is ever Rousseau's man who isthe Typhoeus under the Etna. Oppressed and half crushed to death by the

pride  of  caste  and  the  pitilessness  of  wealth,  spoilt  by  priests  and  bad

education, a laughing-stock even to himself, man cries in his need on "holy

mother Nature," and feels suddenly that she is as far from him as any god of

the Epicureans. His prayers do not reach her; so deeply sunk is he in the

Chaos of the unnatural. He contemptuously throws aside all the finery that

seemed his truest humanity a little while ago-all his arts and sciences, all the

refinements of his life,-he beats with his fists against the walls, in whose

shadow he has degenerated, and goes forth to seek the light and the sun, the

forest and the crag. And crying out, "Nature alone is good, the natural man

alone  is  human,"  he  despises  himself  and  aspires  beyond  himself:  a  state

wherein the soul is ready for a fearful resolve, but calls the noble and the rare

as well from their utter depths. Goethe's man is no such threatening force; in

a certain sense he is a corrective and a sedative to those dangerous agitations

of which Rousseau's man is a prey. Goethe himself in his youth followed the

"gospel of kindly Nature" with all the ardour of his soul: his Faust was the

highest and boldest picture of Rousseau's man, so far at any rate as his hunger

for life, his discontent and yearning, his intercourse with the demons of the

heart could be represented. But what comes from these congregated storm-

clouds? Not a single lightning flash! And here begins the new Image of man

the man according to Goethe. One might have thought that Faust would have

lived a continual life of suffering, as a revolutionary and a deliverer, as the

negative  force  that  proceeds  from  goodness,  as  the  genius  of  ruin,  alike

religious and daemonic, in opposition to his utterly un-daemonic companion ;

though of course he could not be free of this companion, and had at once to

use and despise his evil and destructive scepticism-which is the tragic destiny

of all revolutionary deliverers. One is wrong, however, to expect anything of

the sort: Goethe's man here parts company with Rousseau's; for he hates all

violence, all sudden transition that is, all action: and the universal deliverer

becomes merely the universal traveller. All the riches of life and nature, all

antiquity-arts,  mythologies  and  sciences-pass  before  his  eager  eyes,  his

deepest desires are aroused and satisfied, Helen herself can hold him no more

and the moment must come for which his mocking companion is waiting. At

a fair spot on the earth, his flight comes to an end: his pinions drop, and

Mephistopheles is at his side. When the German ceases to be Faust, there is

no danger greater than of becoming a Philistine and falling into the hands of

the devil-heavenly powers alone can save him. Goethe's man is, as I said, thecontemplative man in the grand style, who is only kept from dying of ennui

by feeding on all the great and memorable things that have ever existed, and

by living from desire to desire. He is not the active man; and when he does

take a place among active men, as things are, you may be sure that no good

will come of it (think, for example, of the zeal with which Goethe wrote for

the stage!); and further, you may be sure that "things as they are" will suffer

no change. Goethe's man is a conciliatory and conservative spirit, though in

danger of degenerating into a Philistine, just as Rousseau's man may easily

become a Catiline. All his virtues would be the better by the addition of a

little brute force and elemental passion. Goethe appears to have seen where

the weakness and danger of his creation lay, as is clear from Jarno's word to

Wilhelm Meister: "You are bitter and ill-tempered-which is quite an excellent

thing: if you could once become really angry, it would be still better." To

speak plainly, it is necessary to become really angry in order that things may

be  better.  The  picture  of  Schopenhauer's  man  can  help  us  here.

Schopenhauer's man voluntarily takes upon himself the pain of telling the

truth: this pain serves to quench his individual will and make him ready for

the complete transformation of his being, which it is the inner meaning of life

to  realise.  This  openness  in  him  appears  to  other  men  to  be  an  effect  of

malice, for they think the preservation of their shifts and pretences to be the

first  duty  of  humanity,  and  any  one  who  destroys  their  playthings  to  be

merely  malicious.  They  are  tempted  to  cry  out  to  such  a  man,  in  Faust's

words to Mephistopheles:- "So to the active and eternal Creative force, in

cold  disdain  You  now  oppose  the  fist  infernal"-  and  he  who  would  live

according to Schopenhauer would seem to be more like a Mephistopheles

than a Faust-that is, to our weak modern eyes, which always discover signs of

malice in any negation. But there is a kind of denial and destruction that is

the  effect  of  that  strong  aspiration  after  holiness  and  deliverance,  which

Schopenhauer  was  the  first  philosopher  to  teach  our  profane  and  worldly

generation. Everything that can be denied, deserves to be denied; and real

sincerity means the belief in a state of things which cannot be denied, or in

which  there  is  no  lie.  The  sincere  man  feels  that  his  activity  has  a

metaphysical meaning. It can only be explained by the laws of a different and

a higher life; it is in the deepest sense an affirmation: even if everything that

he does seem utterly opposed to the laws of our present life. It must lead

therefore to constant suffering; but he knows, as Meister Eckhard did, that

"the quickest beast that will carry you to perfection is suffering." Every one, Ishould think, who has such an ideal before him, must feel a wider sympathy;

and he will have a burning desire to become a "Schopenhauer man";-pure and

wonderfully patient, on his intellectual side full of a devouring fire, and far

removed  from  the  cold  and  contemptuous  "neutrality"  of  the  so-called

scientific man; so high above any warped and morose outlook on life as to

offer  himself  as  the  first  victim  of  the  truth  he  has  won,  with  a  deep

consciousness  of  the  sufferings  that  must  spring  from  his  sincerity.  His

courage will destroy his happiness on earth, he must be an enemy to the men

he loves and the institutions in which he grew up, he must spare neither

person nor thing, however it may hurt him, he will be misunderstood and

thought an ally of forces that he abhors, in his search for righteousness he

will seem unrighteous by human standards: but he must comfort himself with

the  words  that  his  teacher  Schopenhauer  once  used:  "A  happy  life  is

impossible, the highest thing that man can aspire to is a heroic life; such as a

man  lives,  who  is  always  fighting  against  unequal  odds  for  the  good  of

others; and wins in the end without any thanks. After the battle is over, he

stands like the Prince in the re corvo of Gozzi, with dignity and nobility in his

eyes, but turned to stone. His memory remains, and will be reverenced as a

hero's; his will, that has been mortified all his life by toiling and struggling,

by evil payment and ingratitude, is absorbed into Nirvana." Such a heroic life,

with its full "mortification"-corresponds very little to the paltry ideas of the

people who talk most about it, and make festivals in memory of great men, in

the belief that a great man is great in the sense that they are small, either

through  exercise  of  his  gifts  to  please  himself  or  by  a  blind  mechanical

obedience to this inner force ; so that the man who does not possess the gift

or feel the compulsion has the same right to be small as the other to be great.

But "gift" and "compulsion" are contemptible words, mere means of escape

from an inner voice, a slander on him who has listened to the voice-the great

man; he least of all will allow himself to be given or compelled to anything:

for he knows as well as any smaller man how easily life can be taken and

how  soft  the  bed  whereon  he  might  lie  if  he  went  the  pleasant  and

conventional way with himself and his fellow-creatures: all the regulations of

mankind are turned to the end that the intense feeling of life may be lost in

continual distractions. Now why will he so strongly choose the opposite, and

try to feel life, which is the same as to suffer from life? Because he sees that

men will tempt him to betray himself, and that there is a kind of agreement to

draw him from his den. He will prick up his ears and gather himself together,and say, "I will remain mine own." He gradually comes to understand what a

fearful decision it is. For he must go down into the depths of being, with a

string of curious questions on his lips-"Why am I alive? what lesson have I to

learn from life? how have I become what I am, and why do I suffer in this

existence?" He is troubled, and sees that no one is troubled in the same way;

but rather that the hands of his fellow-men are passionately stretched out

towards the fantastic drama of the political theatre, or they themselves are

treading  the  boards  under  many  disguises,  youths,  men  and  graybeards,

fathers, citizens, priests, merchants and officials,-busy with the comedy they

are all playing, and never thinking of their own selves. To the question "To

what end dost thou live?" they would all immediately answer, with pride, "To

become a good citizen or professor or statesman,"-and yet they are something

which  can  never  be  changed:  and  why  are  they  just-this?  Ah,  and  why

nothing  better?  The  man  who  only  regards  his  life  as  a  moment  in  the

evolution of a race or a state or a science, and will belong merely to a history

of "becoming," has not understood the lesson of existence, and must learn it

over again. This eternal "becoming something" is a lying puppet-show, in

which man has forgot himself; it is the force that scatters individuality to the

four winds, the eternal childish game that the big baby time is playing in front

of us-and with us. The heroism of sincerity lies in ceasing to be the plaything

of  time.  Everything  in  the  process  of  "becoming"  is  a  hollow  sham,

contemptible and shallow: man can only find the solution of his riddle in

"being" something definite and unchangeable. He begins to test how deep

both "becoming" and "being" are rooted in him-and a fearful task is before

his soul; to destroy the first, and bring all the falsity of things to the light. He

wishes to know everything, not to feed a delicate taste, like Goethe's man, to

take delight, from a safe place, in the multiplicity of existence: but he himself

is the first sacrifice that he brings. The heroic man does not think of his

happiness or misery, his virtues or his vices, or of his being the measure of

things;  he  has  no  further  hopes  of  himself  and  will  accept  the  utter

consequences of his hopelessness. His strength lies in his self-forgetfulness:

if  he  have  a  thought  for  himself,  it  is  only  to  measure  the  vast  distance

between himself and his aim, and to view what he has left behind him as so

much dross. The old philosophers sought for happiness and truth, with all

their strength: and there is an evil principle in nature that not one shall find

that  which  he  cannot  help  seeking.  But  the  man  who  looks  for  a  lie  in

everything,  and  becomes  a  willing  friend  to  unhappiness,  shall  have  amarvellous disillusioning: there hovers near him something unutterable, of

which truth and happiness are but idolatrous images born of the night; the

earth loses her dragging weight, the events and powers of earth become as a

dream, and a gradual clearness widens round him like a summer evening. It is

as though the beholder of these things began to wake, and it had only been

the clouds of a passing dream that had been weaving about him. They will at

some time disappear: and then will it be day. 5

  But I have promised to speak of Schopenhauer, as far as my experience

goes, as an educator and it is far from being sufficient to paint the ideal

humanity which is the "Platonic idea" in Schopenhauer; especially as my

representation is an imperfect one. The most difficult task remains; to say

how a new circle of duties may spring from this ideal, and how one can

reconcile such a transcendent aim with ordinary action; to prove, in short,

that the ideal is educative. One might otherwise think it to be merely the

blissful  or  intoxicating  vision  of  a  few  rare  moments,  that  leaves  us

afterwards the prey of a deeper disappointment. It is certain that the ideal

begins to affect us in this way when we come suddenly to distinguish light

and darkness, bliss and abhorrence; this is an experience that is as old as

ideals themselves. But we ought not to stand in the doorway for long; we

should  soon  leave  the  first  stages,  and  ask  the  question,  seriously  and

definitely, "Is it possible to bring that incredibly high aim so near us, that it

should educate us, or 'lead us out' as well as lead us upward?"-in order that

the great words of Goethe be not fulfilled in our case-"Man is born to a state

of limitation: he can understand ends that are simple, present and definite,

and is accustomed to make use of means that are near to his hand; but as soon

as he comes into the open, he knows neither what he wishes nor what he

ought to do, and it is all one whether he be confused by the multitude of

objects or set beside himself by their greatness and importance. It is always

his misfortune to be led to strive after something which he cannot attain by

any ordinary activity of his own." The objection can be made with apparent

reason against Schopenhauer's man, that his greatness and dignity can only

turn our heads, and put us beyond all community with the active men of the

world:  the  common  round  of  duties,  the  noiseless  tenor  of  life  has

disappeared. One man may possibly get accustomed to living in a reluctant

dualism, that is, in a contradiction with himself;-becoming unstable, daily

weaker  and  less  productive:-while  another  will  renounce  all  action  on

principle, and scarcely endure to see others active. The danger is always greatwhen a man is too heavy-laden, and cannot really accomplish any duties.

Stronger natures may be broken by it; the weaker, which are the majority,

sink into a speculative laziness, and at last, from their laziness, lose even the

power of speculation. With regard to such objections, I will admit that our

work has hardly begun, and so far as I know, I only see one thing clearly and

definitely-that it is possible for that ideal picture to provide you and me with

a chain of duties that may be accomplished; and some of us already feel its

pressure. In order, however, to be able to speak in plain language of the

formula under which I may gather the new circle of duties, I must begin with

the following considerations. The deeper minds of all ages have had pity for

animals, because they suffer from life and have not the power to turn the

sting  of  the  suffering  against  themselves,  and  understand  their  being

metaphysically.  The  sight  of  blind  suffering  is  the  spring  of  the  deepest

emotion. And in many quarters of the earth men have supposed that the souls

of the guilty have entered into beasts, and that the blind suffering which at

first sight calls for such pity has a clear meaning and purpose to the divine

justice,-of punishment and atonement: and a heavy punishment it is, to be

condemned to live in hunger and need, in the shape of a beast, and to reach

no consciousness of one's self in this life. I can think of no harder lot than the

wild beast's; he is driven to the forest by the fierce pang of hunger, that

seldom leaves him at peace; and peace is itself a torment, the surfeit after

horrid food, won, maybe, by a deadly fight with other animals. To cling to

life, blindly and madly, with no other aim, to be ignorant of the reason, or

even  the  fact,  of  one's  punishment,  nay,  to  thirst  after  it  as  if  it  were  a

pleasure, with all the perverted desire of a fool-this is what it means to be an

animal.  If  universal  nature  leads  up  to  man,  it  is  to  show  us  that  he  is

necessary to redeem her from the curse of the beast's life, and that in him

existence can find a mirror of itself wherein life appears, no longer blind, but

in its real metaphysical significance. But we should consider where the beast

ends and the man begins-the man, the one concern of Nature. As long as any

one desires life as a pleasure in itself, he has not raised his eyes above the

horizon of the beast; he only desires more consciously what the beast seeks

by a blind impulse. It is so with us all, for the greater part of our lives. We do

not shake off the beast, but are beasts ourselves, suffering we know not what.

But there are moments when we do know; and then the clouds break, and we

see how, with the rest of nature, we are straining towards the man, as to

something that stands high above us. We look round and behind us, and fearthe sudden rush of light; the beasts are transfigured, and ourselves with them.

The enormous migrations of mankind in the wildernesses of the world, the

cities  they  found  and  the  wars  they  wage,  their  ceaseless  gatherings  and

dispersions and fusions, the doctrines they blindly follow, their mutual frauds

and deceits, the cry of distress, the shriek of victory-are all a continuation of

the beast in us: as if the education of man has been intentionally set back, and

his promise of self-consciousness frustrated; as if, in fact, after yearning for

man so long, and at last reaching him by her labour, Nature should now recoil

from him and wish to return to a state of unconscious instinct. Ah! she has

need of knowledge, and shrinks before the very knowledge she needs: the

flame flickers unsteadily and fears its own brightness, and takes hold of a

thousand  things  before  the  one  thing  for  which  knowledge  is  necessary.

There are moments when we all know that our most elaborate arrangements

are only designed to give us refuge from our real task in life; we wish to hide

our heads somewhere, as if our Argus-eyed conscience could not find us out;

we are quick to send our hearts on state-service, or money-making, or social

duties, or scientific work, in order to possess them no longer ourselves; we

are more willing and instinctive slaves of the hard day's work than mere

living requires, because it seems to us more necessary not to be in a position

to think. The hurry is universal, because every one is fleeing before himself;

its concealment is just as universal, as we wish to seem contented and hide

our wretchedness from the keener eyes; and so there is a common need for a

new carillon of words to hang in the temple of life, and peal for its noisy

festival.  We  all  know  the  curious  way  in  which  unpleasant  memories

suddenly throng on us, and how we do our best by loud talk and violent

gestures to put them out of our minds; but the gestures and the talk of our

ordinary life make one think we are all in this condition, frightened of any

memory or any inward gaze. What is it that is always troubling us? what is

the gnat that will not let us sleep ? There are spirits all about us, each moment

of life has something to say to us, but we will not listen to the spirit-voices.

When we are quiet and alone, we fear that something will be whispered in

our  ears,  and  so  we  hate  the  quiet,  and  dull  our  senses  in  society.  We

understand this sometimes, as I say, and stand amazed at the whirl and the

rush and the anxiety and all the dream that we call our life; we seem to fear

the  awakening,  and  our  dreams  too  become  vivid  and  restless,  as  the

awakening draws near. But we feel as well that we are too weak to endure

long those intimate moments, and that we are not the men to whom universalnature looks as her redeemers. It is something to be able to raise our heads

but for a moment and see the stream in which we are sunk so deep. We

cannot gain even this transitory moment of awakening by our own strength;

we must be lifted up-and who are they that will uplift us? The sincere men

who have cast out the beast, the philosophers, artists and saints. Nature-qu�

nunquam facit saltum-has made her one leap in creating them; a leap of joy,

as she feels herself for the first time at her goal, where she begins to see that

she must learn not to have goals above her, and that she has played the game

of transition too long. The knowledge transfigures her, and there rests on her

face the gentle weariness of evening that men call "beauty." Her words after

this transfiguration are as a great light shed over existence: and the highest

wish that mortals can reach is to listen continually to her voice with ears that

hear. If a man think of all that Schopenhauer, for example, must have heard

in  his  life,  he  may  well  say  to  himself-"The  deaf  ears,  the  feeble

understanding and shrunken heart, everything that I call mine, how I despise

them! Not to be able to fly but only to flutter one's wings! To look above

one's self and have no power to rise! To know the road that leads to the wide

vision of the philosopher, and to reel back after a few steps! Were there but

one day when the great wish might be fulfilled, how gladly would we pay for

it with the rest of life! To rise as high as any thinker yet into the pure icy air

of the mountain, where there are no mists and veils, and the inner constitution

of things is shown in a stark and piercing clarity! Even by thinking of this the

soul becomes infinitely alone; but were its wish fulfilled, did its glance once

fall straight as a ray of light on the things below, were shame and anxiety and

desire gone for ever-one could find no words for its state then, for the mystic

and tranquil emotion with which, like the soul of Schopenhauer, it would

look  down  on  the  monstrous  hieroglyphics  of  existence  and  the  petrified

doctrines  of  "becoming";  not  as  the  brooding  night,  but  as  the  red  and

glowing day that streams over the earth. And what a destiny it is only to

know  enough  of  the  fixity  and  happiness  of  the  philosopher  to  feel  the

complete  unfixity  and  unhappiness  of  the  false  philosopher,  'who  without

hope lives in desire': to know one's self to be the fruit of a tree that is too

much in the shade ever to ripen, and to see a world of sunshine in front,

where one may not go!" There were sorrow enough here, if ever, to make

such a man envious and spiteful: but he will turn aside, that he may not

destroy his soul by a vain aspiration; and will discover a new circle of duties.

I can now give an answer to the question whether it be possible to approachthe great ideal of Schopenhauer's man "by any ordinary activity of our own."

In the first place, the new duties are certainly not those of a hermit; they

imply rather a vast community, held together not by external forms but by a

fundamental idea, namely that of culture; though only so far as it can put a

single task before each of us-to bring the philosopher, the artist and the saint,

within and without us, to the light, and to strive thereby for the completion of

Nature.  For  Nature  needs  the  artist,  as  she  needs  the  philosopher,  for  a

metaphysical end, the explanation of herself, whereby she may have a clear

and  sharp  picture  of  what  she  only  saw  dimly  in  the  troubled  period  of

transition,-and so may reach self-consciousness. Goethe, in an arrogant yet

profound phrase, showed how all Nature's attempts only have value in so far

as the artist interprets her stammering words, meets her half-way, and speaks

aloud what she really means. "I have often said, and will often repeat," he

exclaims in one place, "the causa finalis of natural and human activity is

dramatic poetry. Otherwise the stuff is of no use at all." Finally, Nature needs

the saint. In him the ego has melted away, and the suffering of his life is,

practically,  no  longer  felt  as  individual,  but  as  the  spring  of  the  deepest

sympathy  and  intimacy  with  all  living  creatures:  he  sees  the  wonderful

transformation  scene  that  the  comedy  of  "becoming"  never  reaches,  the

attainment,  at  length,  of  the  high  state  of  man  after  which  all  nature  is

striving, that she may be delivered from herself. Without doubt, we all stand

in close relation to him, as well as to the philosopher and the artist: there are

moments, sparks from the clear fire of love, in whose light we understand the

word "I" no longer; there is something beyond our being that comes, for those

moments, to the hither side of it: and this is why we long in our hearts for a

bridge from here to there. In our ordinary state we can do nothing towards the

production of the new redeemer, and so we hate ourselves in this state with a

hatred that is the root of the pessimism which Schopenhauer had to teach

again to our age, though it is as old as the aspiration after culture.-Its root, not

its flower; the foundation, not the summit; the beginning of the road, not the

end: for we have to learn at some time to hate something else, more universal

than  our  own  personality  with  its  wretched  limitation,  its  change  and  its

unrest-and this will be when we shall learn to love something else than we

can  love  now.  When  we  are  ourselves  received  into  that  high  order  of

philosophers, artists and saints, in this life or a reincarnation of it, a new

object for our love and hate will also rise before us. As it is, we have our task

and our circle of duties, our hates and our loves. For we know that culturerequires us to make ready for the coming of the Schopenhauer man;-and this

is the "use" we are to make of him;-we must know what obstacles there are

and strike them from our path-in fact, wage unceasing war against everything

that  hindered  our  fulfilment,  and  prevented  us  from  becoming

Schopenhauer's men ourselves. 6

  It is sometimes harder to agree to a thing than to understand it; many will

feel this when they consider the proposition-"Mankind must toil unceasingly

to bring forth individual great men: this and nothing else is its task." One

would like to apply to society and its ends a fact that holds universally in the

animal  and  vegetable  world;  where  progress  depends  only  on  the  higher

individual  types,  which  are  rarer,  yet  more  persistent,  complex  and

productive. But traditional notions of what the end of society is, absolutely

bar the way. We can easily understand how in the natural world, where one

species passes at some point into a higher one, the aim of their evolution

cannot be held to lie in the high level attained by the mass, or in the latest

types developed;-but rather in what seem accidental beings produced here

and there by favourable circumstances. It should be just as easy to understand

that it is the duty of mankind to provide the circumstances favourable to the

birth of the new redeemer, simply because men can have a consciousness of

their object. But there is always something to prevent them. They find their

ultimate  aim  in  the  happiness  of  all,  or  the  greatest  number,  or  in  the

expansion  of  a  great  commonwealth.  A  man  will  very  readily  decide  to

sacrifice  his  life  for  the  state;  he  will  be  much  slower  to  respond  if  an

individual, and not a state, ask for the sacrifice. It seems to be out of reason

that one man should exist for the sake of another : "Let it be rather for the

sake of every other, or, at any rate, of as many as possible!" O upright judge!

As if it were more in reason to let the majority decide a question of value and

significance! For the problem is-"In what way may your life, the individual

life, retain the highest value and the deepest significance? and how may it

least be squandered? "Only by your living for the good of the rarest and most

valuable types, not for that of the majority,-who are the most worthless types,

taken as individuals. This way of thinking should be implanted and fostered

in every young man's mind: he should regard himself both as a failure of

Nature's handiwork and a testimony to her larger ideas. "She has succeeded

badly," he should say; "but I will do honour to her great idea by being a

means to its better success." With these thoughts he will enter the circle of

culture, which is the child of every man's self-knowledge and dissatisfaction.He will approach and say aloud: "I see something above me, higher and more

human than I: let all help me to reach it, as I will help all who know and

suffer as I do, that the man may arise at last who feels his knowledge and

love, vision and power, to be complete and boundless, who in his universality

is one with nature, the critic and judge of existence." It is difficult to give any

one  this  courageous  self-consciousness,  because  it  is  impossible  to  teach

love; from love alone the soul gains, not only the clear vision that leads to

self-contempt, but also the desire to look to a higher self which is yet hidden,

and strive upward to it with all its strength. And so he who rests his hope on a

future great man, receives his first "initiation into culture." The sign of this is

shame or vexation at one's self, a hatred of one's own narrowness, a sympathy

with  the  genius  that  ever  raises  its  head  again  from  our  misty  wastes,  a

feeling for all that is struggling into life, the conviction that Nature must be

helped in her hour of need to press forward to the man, however ill she seem

to prosper, whatever success may attend her marvellous forms and projects :

so that the men with whom we live are like the debris of some precious

sculptures, which cry out-"Come and help us! Put us together, for we long to

become  complete."  I  called  this  inward  condition  the  "first  initiation  into

culture." I have now to describe the effects of the "second initiation," a task

of greater difficulty. It is the passage from the inner life to the criticism of the

outer life. The eye must be turned to find in the great world of movement the

desire  for  culture  that  is  known  from  the  immediate  experience  of  the

individual; who must use his own strivings and aspirations as the alphabet to

interpret those of humanity. He cannot rest here either, but must go higher.

Culture  demands  from  him  not  only  that  inner  experience,  not  only  the

criticism of the outer world surrounding him, but action too to crown them

all,  the  fight  for  culture  against  the  influences  and  conventions  and

institutions where he cannot find his own aim,-the production of genius. Any

one  who  can  reach  the  second  step,  will  see  how  extremely  rare  and

imperceptible the knowledge of that end is, though all men busy themselves

with  culture  and  expend  vast  labour  in  her  service.  He  asks  himself  in

amazement-"Is  not  such  knowledge,  after  all,  absolutely  necessary?  Can

Nature be said to attain her end, if men have a false idea of the aim of their

own labour?" And any one who thinks a great deal of Nature's unconscious

adaptation of means to ends, will probably answer at once: "Yes, men may

think and speak what they like about their ultimate end, their blind instinct

will tell them the right road." It requires some experience of life to be able tocontradict this: but let a man be convinced of the real aim of culture-the

production of the true man and nothing else; let him consider that amid all the

pageantry and ostentation of culture at the present time the conditions for his

production are nothing but a continual "battle of the beasts": and he will see

that there is great need for a conscious will to take the place of that blind

instinct. There is another reason also;-to prevent the possibility of turning this

obscure impulse to quite different ends, in a direction where our highest aim

can no longer be attained. For we must beware of a certain kind of misapplied

and parasitical culture; the powers at present most active in its propagation

have other casts of thought that prevent their relation to culture from being

pure and disinterested. The first of these is the self-interest of the business

men. This needs the help of culture, and helps her in return, though at the

price of prescribing her ends and limits. And their favourite sorites is: "We

must have as much knowledge and education as possible; this implies as

great a need as possible for it, this again as much production, this again as

much  material  wealth  and  happiness  as  possible."-This  is  the  seductive

formula. Its preachers would define education as the insight that makes man

through and through a "child of his age" in his desires and their satisfaction,

and  gives  him  command  over  the  best  means  of  making  money.  Its  aim

would be to make "current" men, in the same sense as one speaks of the

"currency" in money ; and in their view, the more "current" men there are, the

happier the people. The object of modern educational systems is therefore to

make each man as "current" as his nature will allow him, and to give him the

opportunity for the greatest amount of success and happiness that can be got

from his particular stock of knowledge. He is required to have just so much

idea of his own value (through his liberal education) as to know what he can

ask of life; and he is assured that a natural and necessary connection between

"intelligence and property" not only exists, but is also a moral necessity. All

education is detested that makes for loneliness, and has an aim above money-

making,  and  requires  a  long  time:  men  look  askance  on  such  serious

education,  as  mere  "refined  egoism"  or  "immoral  Epicureanism."  The

converse of course holds, according to the ordinary morality, that education

must  be  soon  over  to  allow  the  pursuit  of  money  to  be  soon  begun,  and

should be just thorough enough to allow of much money being made. The

amount of education is determined by commercial interests. In short, "man

has a necessary claim to worldly happiness; only for that reason is education

necessary." There is, secondly, the self-interest of the state, which requiresthe greatest possible breadth and universality of culture, and has the most

effective weapons to carry out its wishes. If it be firmly enough established

not only to initiate but control education and bear its whole weight, such

breadth will merely profit the competition of the state with other states. A

"highly  civilised  state  "generally  implies,  at  the  present  time,  the  task  of

setting free the spiritual forces of a generation just so far as they may be of

use  to  the  existing  institutions,-as  a  mountain  stream  is  split  up  by

embankments and channels, and its diminished power made to drive mill-

wheels, its full strength being more dangerous than useful to the mills. And

thus  "setting  free"  comes  to  mean  rather  "chaining  up."  Compare,  for

example,  what  the  self-interest  of  the  state  has  done  for  Christianity.

Christianity is one of the purest manifestations of the impulse towards culture

and the production of the saint: but being used in countless ways to turn the

mills of the state authorities, it gradually became sick at heart, hypocritical

and degenerate, and in antagonism with its original aim. Its last phase, the

German Reformation, would have been nothing but a sudden flickering of its

dying  flame,  had  it  not  taken  new  strength  and  light  from  the  clash  and

conflagration of states. In the third place, culture will be favoured by all those

people who know their own character to be offensive or tiresome, and wish to

draw  a  veil  of  so-called  "good  form"  over  them.  Words,  gestures,  dress,

etiquette, and such external things, are meant to produce a false impression,

the inner side to be judged from the outer. I sometimes think that modern

men are eternally bored with each other and look to the arts to make them

interesting. They let their artists make savoury and inviting dishes of them;

they steep themselves in the spices of the East and West, and have a very

interesting aroma after it all. They are ready to suit all palates: and every one

will  be  served,  whether  he  want  something  with  a  good  or  bad  taste,

something sublime or coarse, Greek or Chinese, tragedy or gutter-drama. The

most  celebrated  chefs  among  the  moderns  who  wish  to  interest  and  be

interested at any price, are the French the worst are the Germans. This is

really more comforting for the latter, and we have no reason to mind the

French despising us for our want of interest, elegance and politeness, and

being reminded of the Indian who longs for a ring through his nose, and then

proceeds  to  tattoo  himself.  Here  I  must  digress  a  little.  Many  things  in

Germany have evidently been altered since the late war with France, and new

requirements for German culture brought over. The war was for many their

first venture into the more elegant half of the world: and what an admirablesimplicity the conqueror shows in not scorning to learn something of culture

from the conquered! The applied arts especially will be reformed to emulate

our more refined neighbours, the German house furnished like the French, a

"sound taste" applied to the German language by means of an Academy on

the French model, to shake off the doubtful influence of Goethe-this is the

judgment of our new Berlin Academician, Dubois-Raymond. Our theatres

have been gradually moving, in a dignified way, towards the same goal, even

the  elegant  German  savant  is  now  discovered-and  we  must  now  expect

everything that does not conform to this law of elegance, our music, tragedy

and philosophy to be thrust aside as un-German. But there were no need to

raise a ringer for German culture, did German culture (which the Germans

have yet to find) mean nothing but the little amenities that make life more

decorative-including the arts of the dancing-master and the upholsterer;-or

were  they  merely  interested  in  academic  rules  of  language  and  a  general

atmosphere  of  politeness.  The  late  war  and  the  self-comparison  with  the

French do not seem to have aroused any further desires, and I suspect that the

German has a strong wish for the moment to be free of the old obligations

laid on him by his wonderful gifts of seriousness and profundity. He would

much rather play the buffoon and the monkey, and learn the arts that make

life amusing. But the German spirit cannot be more dishonoured than by

being treated as wax for any elegant mould. And if, unfortunately, a good

many  Germans  will  allow  themselves  to  be  thus  moulded,  one  must

continually say to them, till at last they listen:-"The old German way is no

longer yours: it was hard, rough, and full of resistance; but it is still the most

valuable material-one which only the greatest modellers can work with, for

they alone are worthy to use it, What you have in you now is a soft pulpy

stuff:  make  what  you  will  out  of  it,-elegant  dolls  and  interesting  idols-

Richard Wagner's phrase will still hold good, 'The German is awkward and

ungainly when he wishes to be polite; he is high above all others, when he

begins to take fire.'" All the elegant people have reason to beware of this

German fire; it may one day devour them with all their wax dolls and idols.

The prevailing love of "good form" in Germany may have a deeper cause in

the breathless seizing at what the moment can give, the haste that plucks the

fruit too green, the race and the struggle that cut the furrows in men's brows

and stamp the same mark on all their actions. As if there were a poison in

them that would not let them breathe, they rush about in disorder, anxious

slaves of the "three m's," the moment, the mode and the mob: they see toowell their want of dignity and fitness, and need a false elegance to hide their

galloping consumption. The fashionable desire of "good form" is bound up

with a loathing of man's inner nature : the one is to conceal, the other to be

concealed.  Education  means  now  the  concealment  of  man's  misery  and

wickedness, his wild-beast quarrels, his eternal greed, his shamelessness in

fruition. In pointing out the absence of a German culture, I have often had the

reproach flung at me: "This absence is quite natural, for the Germans have

been too poor and modest up to now. Once rich and conscious of themselves,

our people will have a culture too." Faith may often produce happiness, yet

this  particular  faith  makes  me  unhappy,  for  I  feel  that  the  culture  whose

future  raises  such  hopes-the  culture  of  riches,  politeness,  and  elegant

concealments-is the bitterest foe of that German culture in which I believe.

Every  one  who  has  to  live  among  Germans  suffers  from  the  dreadful

grayness and apathy of their lives, their formlessness, torpor and clumsiness,

still  more  their  envy,  secretiveness  and  impurity:  he  is  troubled  by  their

innate  love  of  the  false  and  the  ignoble,  their  wretched  mimicry  and

translation of a good foreign thing into a bad German one. But now that the

feverish  unrest,  the  quest  of  gain  and  success,  the  intense  prizing  of  the

moment, is added to it all, it makes one furious to think that all this sickness

can never be cured, but only painted over, by such a "cult of the interesting."

And this among a people that has produced a Schopenhauer and a Wagner!

and will produce others, unless we are blindly deceiving ourselves; for should

not  their  very  existence  be  a  guarantee  that  such  forces  are  even  now

potential in the German spirit? Or will they be exceptions, the last inheritors

of the qualities that were once called German? I can see nothing to help me

here, and return to my main argument again, from which my doubts and

anxieties have made me digress. I have not yet enumerated all the forces that

help culture without recognising its end, the production of genius. Three have

been named; the self-interest of business, of the state, and of those who draw

the cloak of "good form" over them. There is fourthly the self-interest of

science, and the peculiar nature of her servants-the learned. Science has the

same relation to wisdom as current morality to holiness: she is cold and dry,

loveless, and ignorant of any deep feeling of dissatisfaction and yearning. She

injures her servants in helping herself, for she impresses her own character on

them and dries up their humanity. As long as we actually mean by culture the

progress of science, she will pass by the great suffering man and harden her

heart,  for  science  only  sees  the  problems  of  knowledge,  and  suffering  issomething alien and unintelligible to her world-though no less a problem for

that! If one accustom himself to put down every experience in a dialectical

form  of  question  and  answer,  and  translate  it  into  the  language  of  "pure

reason," he will soon wither up and rattle his bones like a skeleton. We all

know it: and why is it that the young do not shudder at these skeletons of

men, but give themselves blindly to science without motive or measure? It

cannot be the so-called "impulse to truth": for how could there be an impulse

towards a pure, cold and objectless knowledge? The unprejudiced eye can see

the real driving forces only too plainly. The vivisection of the professor has

much to recommend it, as he himself is accustomed to finger and analyse all

things-even the worthiest! To speak honestly, the savant is a complex of very

various impulses and attractive forces he is a base metal throughout. Take

first a strong and increasing desire for intellectual adventure, the attraction of

the new and rare as against the old and tedious. Add to that a certain joy in

nosing  the  trail  of  dialectic,  and  beating  the  cover  where  the  old  fox,

Thought, lies hid; the desire is not so much for truth as the chase of truth, and

the chief pleasure is in surrounding and artistically killing it. Add thirdly a

love of contradiction whereby the personality is able to assert itself against all

others: the battle's the thing, and the personal victory its aim,-truth only its

pretext. The impulse to discover "particular truths" plays a great part in the

professor, coming from his submission to definite ruling persons, classes,

opinions, churches, governments, for he feels it a profit to himself to bring

truth  to  their  side.  The  following  characteristics  of  the  savant  are  less

common, but still found.-Firstly, downrightness and a feeling for simplicity,

very valuable if more than a mere awkwardness and inability to deceive,

deception requiring some mother-wit.-(Actually, we may be on our guard

against too obvious cleverness and resource, and doubt the man's sincerity.)-

Otherwise this downrightness is generally of little value, and rarely of any

use  to  knowledge,  as  it  follows  tradition  and  speaks  the  truth  only  in

"adiaphora"; it being lazier to speak the truth here than ignore it. Everything

new means something to be unlearnt, and your downright man will respect

the ancient dogmas and accuse the new evangelist of failing in the sensus

recti. There was a similar opposition, with probability and custom on its side,

to the theory of Copernicus. The professor's frequent hatred of philosophy is

principally a hatred of the long trains of reasoning and artificiality of the

proofs. Ultimately the savants of every age have a fixed limit; beyond which

ingenuity is not allowed, and everything suspected as a conspirator againsthonesty.  Secondly,  a  clear  vision  of  near  objects,  combined  with  great

shortsightedness  for  the  distant  and  universal.  The  professor's  range  is

generally very small, and his eye must be kept close to the object. To pass

from a point already considered to another, he has to move his whole optical

apparatus. He cuts a picture into small sections, like a man using an opera-

glass in the theatre, and sees now a head, now a bit of the dress, but nothing

as a whole. The single sections are never combined for him, he only infers

their  connection,  and  consequently  has  no  strong  general  impression.  He

judges a literary work, for example, by certain paragraphs or sentences or

errors, as he can do nothing more; he will be driven to see in an oil painting

nothing but a mass of daubs. Thirdly, a sober conventionality in his likes and

dislikes. Thus he especially delights in history because he can put his own

motives into the actions of the past. A mole is most comfortable in a mole-

hill. He is on his guard against all ingenious and extravagant hypotheses; but

digs up industriously all the commonplace motives of the past, because he

feels  in  sympathy  with  them.  He  is  generally  quite  incapable  of

understanding and valuing the rare or the uncommon, the great or the real.

Fourthly,  a  lack  of  feeling,  which  makes  him  capable  of  vivisection.  He

knows nothing of the suffering that brings knowledge, and does not fear to

tread where other men shudder. He is cold and may easily appear cruel. He is

thought courageous, but he is not,-any more than the mule who does not feel

giddiness. Fifthly, diffidence, or a low estimate of himself. Though he live in

a miserable alley of the world, he has no sense of sacrifice or surrender; he

appears  often  to  know  in  his  inmost  heart  that  he  is  not  a  flying  but  a

crawling creature. And this makes him seem even pathetic. Sixthly, loyalty to

his teachers and leaders. From his heart he wishes to help them, and knows

he can do it best with the truth. He has a grateful disposition, for he has only

gained admittance through them to the high hall of science; he would never

have entered by his own road. Any man to-day who can throw open a new

province where his lesser disciples can work to some purpose, is famous at

once; so great is the crowd that presses after him. These grateful pupils are

certainly a misfortune to their teacher, as they all imitate him; his faults are

exaggerated in their small persons, his virtues correspondingly diminished.

Seventhly, he will follow the usual road of all the professors, where a feeling

for truth springs from a lack of ideas, and the wheel once started goes on.

Such  natures  become  compilers,  commentators,  makers  of  indices  and

herbaria;  they  rummage  about  one  special  department  because  they  havenever thought there are others. Their industry has something of the monstrous

stupidity of gravitation; and so they can often bring their labours to an end.

Eighthly, a dread of ennui. While the true thinker desires nothing more than

leisure, the professor fears it, not knowing how it is to be used. Books are his

comfort;  he  listens  to  everybody's  different  thoughts  and  keeps  himself

amused  all  day.  He  especially  chooses  books  with  a  personal  relation  to

himself, that make him feel some emotion of like or dislike; books that have

to do with himself or his position, his political, aesthetic, or even grammatical

doctrines; if he have mastered even one branch of knowledge, the means to

flap away the flies of ennui will not fail him. Ninthly, the motive of the

bread-winner, the "cry of the empty stomach," in fact. Truth is used as a

direct means of preferment, when she can be attained; or as a way to the good

graces of the fountains of honour-and bread. Only, however, in the sense of

the "particular truth": there is a gulf between the profitable truths that many

serve,  and  the  unprofitable  truths  to  which  only  those  few  people  devote

themselves whose motto is not ingenii largitor venter. Tenthly, a reverence

for their fellow-professors and a fear of their displeasure-a higher and rarer

motive than the last, though not uncommon. All the members of the guild are

jealously on guard, that the truth which means so much bread and honour and

position may really be baptized in the name of its discoverer. The one pays

the other reverence for the truth he has found, in order to exact the toll again

if he should find one himself. The Untruth, the Error is loudly exploded, that

the  workers  may  not  be  too  many;  here  and  there  the  real  truth  will  be

exploded to let a few bold and stiff-necked errors be on show for a time; there

is  never  a  lack  of  "moral  idiosyncrasies,"-formerly  called  rascalities.

Eleventhly, the "savant for vanity," now rather rare. He will get a department

for himself somehow, and investigate curiosities, especially if they demand

unusual expenditure, travel, research, or communication with all parts of the

world. He is quite satisfied with the honour of being regarded as a curiosity

himself,  and  never  dreams  of  earning  a  living  by  his  erudite  studies.

Twelfthly,  the  "savant  for  amusement."  He  loves  to  look  for  knots  in

knowledge and to untie them; not too energetically however, lest he lose the

spirit of the game. Thus he does not penetrate the depths, though he often

observes  something  that  the  microscopic  eyes  of  the  bread-and-butter

scientist never see. If I speak, lastly, of the "impulse towards justice" as a

further motive of the savant, I may be answered that this noble impulse, being

metaphysical in its nature, is too indistinguishable from the rest, and reallyincomprehensible to mortal mind; and so I leave the thirteenth heading with

the pious wish that the impulse may be less rare in the professor than it

seems. For a spark in his soul from the fire of justice is sufficient to irradiate

and purify it, so that he can rest no more and is driven for ever from the cold

or lukewarm condition in which most of his fellows do their daily work. All

these elements, or a part of them, must be regarded as fused and pounded

together, to form the Servant of Truth. For the sake of an absolutely inhuman

thing-mere purposeless, and therefore motiveless, knowledge-a mass of very

human little motives have been chemically combined, and as the result we

have the professor,-so transfigured in the light of that pure unearthly object

that the mixing and pounding which went to form him are all forgotten! It is

very curious. Yet there are moments when they must be remembered,-when

we have to think of the professor's significance to culture. Any one with

observation can see that he is in his essence and by his origin unproductive,

and has a natural hatred of the productive; and thus there is an endless feud

between the genius and the savant in idea and practice. The latter wishes to

kill Nature by analysing and comprehending it, the former to increase it by a

new living Nature. The happy age does not need or know the savant; the sick

and sluggish time ranks him as its highest and worthiest. Who were physician

enough  to  know  the  health  or  sickness  of  our  time?  It  is  clear  that  the

professor is valued too highly, with evil consequences for the future genius,

for whom he has no compassion, merely a cold, contemptuous criticism, a

shrug of the shoulders, as if at something strange and perverted for which he

has neither time nor inclination. And so he too knows nothing of the aim of

culture. In fact, all these considerations go to prove that the aim of culture is

most unknown precisely where the interest in it seems liveliest. The state may

trumpet as it will its services to culture, it merely helps culture in order to

help itself, and does not comprehend an aim that stands higher than its own

well-being or even existence. The business men in their continual demand for

education  merely  wish  for-business.  When  the  pioneers  of  "good  form"

pretend to be the real helpers of culture, imagining that all art, for example, is

merely to serve their own needs, they are clearly affirming themselves in

affirming culture. Of the savant enough has already been said. All four are

emulously thinking how they can benefit themselves with the help of culture,

but have no thoughts at all when their own interests are not engaged. And so

they have done nothing to improve the conditions for the birth of genius in

modern times; and the opposition to original men has grown so far that noSocrates could ever live among us, and certainly could never reach the age of

seventy. I remember saying in the third chapter that our whole modern world

was not so stable that one could prophesy an eternal life to its conception of

culture. It is likely that the next millennium may reach two or three new ideas

that might well make the hair of our present generation stand on end. The

belief  in  the  metaphysical  significance  of  culture  would  not  be  such  a

horrifying  thing,  but  its  effects  on  educational  methods  might  be  so.  It

requires a totally new attitude of mind to be able to, look away from the

present educational institutions to the strangely different ones that will be

necessary for the second or third generation, At present the labours of higher

education produce merely the savant or the official or the business man or the

Philistine  or,  more  commonly,  a  mixture  of  all  four;  and  the  future

institutions will have a harder task;-not in itself harder, as it is really more

natural, and so easier; and further, could anything be harder than to make a

youth into a savant against nature, as now happens?-But the difficulty lies in

unlearning what we know and setting up a new aim; it will be an endless

trouble to change the fundamental idea of our present educational system,

that has its roots in the Middle Ages and regards the mediaeval savant as the

ideal type of culture. It is already time to put these objects before us; for some

generation must begin the battle, of which a later generation will reap the

victory. The solitary man who has understood the new fundamental idea of

culture is at the parting of the ways; on the one he will be welcomed by his

age, laurels and rewards will be his, powerful parties will uphold him, he will

have as many in sympathy behind him as in front, and when the leader speaks

the word of deliverance, it will echo through all the ranks. The first duty is to

"fight in line," the second to treat as foes all who will not "fall in." On the

other way he will find fewer companions; it is steeper and more tortuous. The

travellers on the first road laugh at him, as his way is the more troublesome

and dangerous; and they try to entice him over. If the two ways cross, he is

ill-treated, cast aside or left alone. What significance has any particular form

of culture for these several travellers? The enormous throng that press to their

end on the first road, understand by it the laws and institutions that enable

them  to  go  forward  in  regular  fashion  and  rule  out  all  the  solitary  and

obstinate people who look towards higher and remoter objects. To the small

company on the other road it has quite a different office: they wish to guard

themselves, by means of a strong organisation, from being swept away by the

throng,  to  prevent  their  individual  members  from  fainting  on  the  way  orturning in spirit from their great task. These solitary men must finish their

work; that is why they should all hold together; and those who have their part

in the scheme will take thought to prepare themselves with ever-increasing

purity of aim for the birth of the genius, and ensure that the time be ripe for

him. Many are destined to help on the labour, even among the second-rate

talents, and it is only in submission to such a destiny that they can feel they

are living for a duty, and have a meaning and an object in their lives. But at

present these talents are being turned from the road their instinct has chosen

by the seductive tones of the "fashionable culture," that plays on their selfish

side, their vanities and weaknesses; and the time-spirit ever whispers in their

ears its flattering counsel:-"Follow me and go not thither! There you are only

servants and tools, overshadowed by higher natures with no scope for your

own, drawn by threads, hung with fetters, slaves and automatons. With me

you may enjoy your true personality, and be masters, your talents may shine

with their own light, and yourselves stand in the front ranks with an immense

following round you; and the acclamation of public opinion will rejoice you

more than a wandering breath of approval sent down from the cold ethereal

heights of genius." Even the best men are snared by such allurements, and the

ultimate difference comes not so much from the rarity and power of their

talent, as the influence of a certain heroic disposition at the base of them, and

an inner feeling of kinship with genius. For there are men who feel it as their

own misery when they see the genius in painful toil and struggle, in danger of

self-destruction, or neglected by the short-sighted selfishness of the state, the

superficiality of the business men, and the cold arrogance of the professors;

and I hope there may be some to understand what I mean by my sketch of

Schopenhauer's destiny, and to what end Schopenhauer can really educate. 7

  But setting aside all thoughts of any educational revolution in the distant

future;-what provision is required now, that our future philosopher may have

the best chance of opening his eyes to a life like Schopenhauer's-hard as it is,

yet  still  livable?  What,  further,  must  be  discovered  that  may  make  his

influence on his contemporaries more certain? And what obstacles must be

removed before his example can have its full effect and the philosopher train

another philosopher? Here we descend to be practical. Nature always desires

the greatest utility, but does not understand how to find the best and handiest

means to her end; that is her great sorrow, and the cause of her melancholy.

The impulse towards her own redemption shows clearly her wish to give men

a significant existence by the generation of the philosopher and the artist: buthow unclear and weak is the effect she generally obtains with her artists and

philosophers, and how seldom is there any effect at all ! She is especially

perplexed  in  her  efforts  to  make  the  philosopher  useful;  her  methods  are

casual and tentative, her failures innumerable; most of her philosophers never

touch  the  common  good  of  mankind  at  all.  Her  actions  seem  those  of  a

spendthrift; but the cause lies in no prodigal luxury, but in her inexperience.

Were she human, she would probably never cease to be dissatisfied with

herself and her bungling. Nature shoots the philosopher at mankind like an

arrow; she. does not aim, but hopes that the arrow will stick somewhere. She

makes countless mistakes, that give her pain. She is as extravagant in the

sphere of culture as in her planting and sowing. She fulfils her ends in a large

and clumsy fashion, using up far too much of her strength. The artist has the

same relation to the connoisseurs and lovers of his art as a piece of heavy

artillery to a flock of sparrows. It is a fool's part to use a great avalanche to

sweep away a little snow, to kill a man in order to strike the fly on his nose.

The artist and the philosopher are witnesses against Nature's adaptation of her

means, however well they may show the wisdom of her ends. They only

reach a few and should reach all-and even these few are not struck with the

strength they used when they shot. It is sad to have to value art so differently

as cause and effect; how huge in its inception, how faint the echo afterwards!

The artist does his work as Nature bids him, for the benefit of other men no

doubt of it; but he knows that none of those men will understand and love his

work as he understands and loves it himself. That lonely height of love and

understanding is necessary, by Nature's clumsy law, to produce a lower type;

the great and noble are used as the means to the small and ignoble. Nature is

a bad manager; her expenses are far greater than her profits: for all her riches

she must one day go bankrupt. She would have acted more reasonably to

make the rule of her household-small expense and hundredfold profit; if there

had  been,  for  example,  only  a  few  artists  with  moderate  powers,  but  an

immense number of hearers to appreciate them, stronger and more powerful

characters  than  the  artists  themselves;  then  the  effect  of  the  art-work,  in

comparison with the cause, might be a hundred-tongued echo. One might at

least expect cause and effect to be of equal power; but Nature lags infinitely

behind  this  consummation.  An  artist,  and  especially  a  philosopher,  seems

often  to  have  dropped  by  chance  into  his  age,  as  a  wandering  hermit  or

straggler cut off from the main body. Think how utterly great Schopenhauer

is, and what a small and absurd effect he has had! An honest man can feel nogreater shame at the present time than at the thought of the casual treatment

Schopenhauer has received and the evil powers that have up to now killed his

effect among men. First there was the want of readers,-to the eternal shame of

our cultivated age;-then the inadequacy of his first public adherents, as soon

as he had any; further, I think, the crassness of the modern man towards

books,  which  he  will  no  longer  take  seriously.  As  an  outcome  of  many

attempts to adapt Schopenhauer to this enervated age, the new danger has

gradually arisen of regarding him as an odd kind of pungent herb, of taking

him in grains, as a sort of metaphysical pepper. In this way he has gradually

become famous, and I should think more have heard his name than Hegel's;

and, for all that, he is still a solitary being, who has failed of his effect.-

Though the honour of causing the failure belongs least of all to the barking of

his literary antagonists; first because there are few men with the patience to

read them, and secondly, because any one who does, is sent immediately to

Schopenhauer himself; for who will let a donkey-driver prevent him from

mounting a fine horse, however much he praise his donkey? Whoever has

recognised Nature's unreason in our time, will have to consider some means

to help her; his task will be to bring the free spirits and the sufferers from this

age to know Schopenhauer; and make them tributaries to the flood that is to

overbear all the clumsy uses to which Nature even now is accustomed to put

her philosophers. Such men will see that the identical obstacles hinder the

effect of a great philosophy and the production of the great philosopher; and

so will direct their aims to prepare the regeneration of Schopenhauer, which

means that of the philosophical genius. The real opposition to the further

spread of his doctrine in the past, and the regeneration of the philosopher in

the future, is the perversity of human nature as it is; and all the great men that

are to be must spend infinite pains in freeing themselves from it. The world

they  enter  is  plastered  over  with  pretence-including  not  merely  religious

dogmas, but such juggling conceptions as "progress," "universal education,"

"nationalism," "the modern state" ; practically all our general terms have an

artificial  veneer  over  them  that  will  bring  a  clearer-sighted  posterity  to

reproach our age bitterly for its warped and stunted growth, however loudly

we  may  boast  of  our  "health."  The  beauty  of  the  antique  vases,  says

Schopenhauer, lies in the simplicity with which they express their meaning

and  object;  it  is  so  with  all  the  ancient  implements;  if  Nature  produced

amphorae, lamps, tables, chairs, helmets, shields, breastplates and the like,

they would resemble these. And, as a corollary, whoever considers how weall  manage  our  art,  politics,  religion  and  education-to  say  nothing  of  our

vases!-will  find  in  them  a  barbaric  exaggeration  and  arbitrariness  of

expression. Nothing is more unfavourable to the rise of genius than such

monstrosities. They are unseen and undiscoverable, the leaden weights on his

hand when he will set it to the plough; the weights are only shaken off with

violence, and his highest work must to an extent always bear the mark of it.

In considering the conditions that, at best, keep the born philosopher from

being oppressed by the perversity of the age, I am surprised to find they are

partly those in which Schopenhauer himself grew up. True, there was no lack

of opposing influences; the evil time drew perilously near him in the person

of a vain and pretentious mother. But the proud republican character of his

father rescued him from her and gave him the first quality of a philosopher-a

rude and strong virility. His father was neither an official nor a savant; he

travelled much abroad with his son,-a great help to one who must know men

rather  than  books,  and  worship  truth  before  the  state.  In  time  he  got

accustomed  to  national  peculiarities:  he  made  England,  France  and  Italy

equally his home, and felt no little sympathy with the Spanish character. On

the whole, he did not think it an honour to be born in Germany, and I am not

sure that the new political conditions would have made him change his mind.

He  held  quite  openly  the  opinion  that  the  state's  one  object  was  to  give

protection at home and abroad, and even protection against its "protectors,"

and to attribute any other object to it was to endanger its true end. And so, to

the  consternation  of  all  the  so-called  liberals,  he  left  his  property  to  the

survivors of the Prussian soldiers who fell in 1848 in the fight for order. To

understand the state and its duties in this single sense may seem more and

more henceforth the sign of intellectual superiority; for the man with the furor

philosophicus in him will no longer have time for the furor politicus and will

wisely keep from reading the newspapers or serving a party; though he will

not hesitate a moment to take his place in the ranks if his country be in real

need. All states are badly managed, when other men than politicians busy

themselves  with  politics;  and  they  deserve  to  be  ruined  by  their  political

amateurs. Schopenhauer had another great advantage-that he had never been

educated for a professor, but worked for some time (though against his will)

as a merchant's clerk, and through all his early years breathed the freer air of

a great commercial house. A savant can never become a philosopher: Kant

himself could not, but remained in a chrysalis stage to the end, in spite of the

innate force of his genius. Any one who thinks I do Kant wrong in saying thisdoes not know what a philosopher is-not only a great thinker, but also a real

man; and how could a real man have sprung from a savant? He who lets

conceptions, opinions, events, books come between himself and things, and is

born for history (in the widest sense), will never see anything at once, and

never be himself a thing to be "seen at once"; though both these powers

should  be  in  the  philosopher,  as  he  must  take  most  of  his  doctrine  from

himself and be himself the copy and compendium of the whole world. If a

man look at himself through a veil of other people's opinions, no wonder he

sees nothing but-those opinions. And it is thus that the professors see and

live. But Schopenhauer had the rare happiness of seeing the genius not only

in  himself,  but  also  outside  himself-in  Goethe;  and  this  double  reflection

taught him everything about the aims and culture of the learned. He knew by

this experience how the free strong man, to whom all artistic culture was

looking, must come to be born; and could he, after this vision, have much

desire to busy himself with the so-called "art," in the learned, hypocritical

manner of the moderns? He had seen something higher than that-an awful

unearthly judgment-scene in which all life, even the highest and completest,

was weighed and found too light; he had beheld the saint as the judge of

existence. We cannot tell how early Schopenhauer reached this view of life,

and came to hold it with such intensity as to make all his writings an attempt

to  mirror  it;  we  know  that  the  youth  had  this  great  vision,  and  can  well

believe it of the child. Everything that he gained later from life and books,

from all the realms of knowledge, was only a means of colour and expression

to him ; the Kantian philosophy itself was to him an extraordinary rhetorical

instrument for making the utterance of his vision, as he thought, clearer; the

Buddhist and Christian mythologies occasionally served the same end. He

had  one  task  and  a  thousand  means  to  execute  it;  one  meaning,  and

innumerable hieroglyphs to express it. It was one of the high conditions of his

existence that he really could live for such a task-according to his motto

vitam  impendere  vero-and  none  of  life's  material  needs  could  shake  his

resolution; and we know the splendid return he made his father for this. The

contemplative man in Germany usually pursues his scientific studies to the

detriment  of  his  sincerity,  as  a  "considerate  fool,"  in  search  of  place  and

honour,  circumspect  and  obsequious,  and  fawning  on  his  influential

superiors. Nothing offended the savants more than Schopenhauer's unlikeness

to them. 8

  These are a few of the conditions under which the philosophical geniuscan at least come to light in our time, in spite of all thwarting influences;-a

virility of character, an early knowledge of mankind, an absence of learned

education  and  narrow  patriotism,  of  compulsion  to  earn  his  livelihood  or

depend on the state,-freedom in fact, and again freedom; the same marvellous

and dangerous element in which the Greek philosophers grew up. The man

who will reproach him, as Niebuhr did Plato, with being a bad citizen, may

do so, and be himself a good one; so he and Plato will be right together!

Another may call this great freedom presumption; he is also right, as he could

not himself use the freedom properly if he desired it, and would certainly

presume too far with it. This freedom is really a grave burden of guilt; and

can only be expiated by great actions. Every ordinary son of earth has the

right of looking askance on such endowments; and may Providence keep him

from  being  so  endowed-burdened,  that  is,  with  such  terrible  duties!  His

freedom and his loneliness would be his ruin, and ennui would turn him into

a fool, and a mischievous fool at that. A father may possibly learn something

from this that he may use for his son's private education, though one must not

expect fathers to have only philosophers for their sons. It is possible that they

will  always  oppose  their  sons  becoming  philosophers,  and  call  it  mere

perversity; Socrates was sacrificed to the fathers' anger, for "corrupting the

youth,' and Plato even thought a new ideal state necessary to prevent the

philosophers' growth from being dependent on the fathers' folly. It looks at

present as though Plato had really accomplished something; for the modern

state counts the encouragement of philosophy as one of its duties and tries to

secure for a number of men at a time the sort of freedom that conditions the

philosopher.  But,  historically,  Plato  has  been  very  unlucky;  as  soon  as  a

structure  has  risen  corresponding  actually  to  his  proposals,  it  has  always

turned,  on  a  closer  view,  into  a  goblin-child,  a  monstrous  changeling;

compare the ecclesiastical state of the Middle Ages with the government of

the "God-born king" of which Plato dreamed! The modern state is furthest

removed from the idea of the Philosopher-king (Thank Heaven for that ! the

Christian  will  say);  but  we  must  think  whether  it  takes  that  very

"encouragement of philosophy" in a Platonic sense, I mean as seriously and

honestly  as  if  its  highest  object  were  to  produce  more  Platos.  If  the

philosopher seem, as usual, an accident of his time, does the state make it its

conscious business to turn the accidental into the necessary and help Nature

here also? Experience teaches us a better way-or a worse: it says that nothing

so stands in the way of the birth and growth of Nature's philosopher as thebad philosophers made "by order." A poor obstacle, isn't it? and the same that

Schopenhauer pointed out in his famous essay on University philosophy. I

return to this point, as men must be forced to take it seriously, to be driven to

activity by it; and I think all writing is useless that does not contain such a

stimulus to activity. And anyhow it is a good thing to apply Schopenhauer's

eternal theories once more to our own contemporaries, as some kindly soul

might think that everything has changed for the better in Germany since his

fierce diatribes. Unfortunately his work is incomplete on this side as well,

unimportant  as  the  side  may  be.  The  "freedom"  that  the  state,  as  I  said,

bestows on certain men for the sake of philosophy is, properly speaking, no

freedom at all, but an office that maintains its holder. The "encouragement of

philosophy" means that there are to-day a number of men whom the state

enables  to  make  their  living  out  of  philosophy;  whereas  the  old  sages  of

Greece were not paid by the state, but at best were presented, as Zeno was,

with  a  golden  crown  and  a  monument  in  the  Ceramicus.  I  cannot  say

generally whether truth is served by showing the way to live by her, since

everything depends on the character of the individual who shows the way. I

can imagine a degree of pride in a man saying to his fellow-men, "take care

of me, as I have something better to do-namely to take care of you." We

should not be angry at such a heightened mode of expression in Plato and

Schopenhauer;  and  so  they  might  properly  have  been  University

philosophers,-as  Plato,  for  example,  was  a  court  philosopher  for  a  while

without lowering the dignity of philosophy. But in Kant we have the usual

submissive professor, without any nobility in his relations with the state; and

thus he could not justify the University philosophy when it was once assailed.

If there be natures like Schopenhauer's and Plato's, which can justify it, I fear

they will never have the chance, as the state would never venture to give such

men these positions, for the simple reason that every state fears them, and

will  only  favour  philosophers  it  does  not  fear.  The  state  obviously  has  a

special fear of philosophy, and will try to attract more philosophers, to create

the impression that it has philosophy on its side,-because it has those men on

its side who have the title without the power. But if there should come one

who really proposes to cut everything to the quick, the state included, with

the  knife  of  truth,  the  state,  that  affirms  its  own  existence  above  all,  is

justified in banishing him as an enemy, just as it bans a religion that exalts

itself to be its judge. The man who consents to be a state philosopher, must

also consent to be regarded as renouncing the search for truth in all its secretretreats. At any rate, so long as he enjoys his position, he must recognise

something higher than truth the state. And not only the state, but everything

required by it for existence-a definite form of religion, a social system, a

standing army; a noli me tangere is written above all these things. Can a

University philosopher ever keep clearly before him the whole round of these

duties and limitations? I do not know. The man who has done so and remains

a state-official, is a false friend to truth; if he has not,-I think he is no friend

to truth either. But general considerations like these are always the weakest in

their influence on mankind. Most people will find it enough to shrug their

shoulders  and  say,  "As  if  anything  great  and  pure  has  ever  been  able  to

maintain itself on this earth without some concession to human vulgarity!

Would  you  rather  the  state  persecuted  philosophers  than  paid  them  for

official services? "Without answering this last question, I will merely say that

these "concessions" of philosophy to the state go rather far at present. In the

first place, the state chooses its own philosophical servants, as many as its

institutions require; it therefore pretends to be able to distinguish the good

and the bad philosophers, and even assumes there must be a sufficient supply

of good ones to fill all the chairs. The state is the authority not only for their

goodness but their numbers. Secondly, it confines those it has chosen to a

definite place and a definite activity among particular men; they must instruct

every  undergraduate  who  wants  instruction,  daily,  at  stated  hours.  The

question is whether a philosopher can bind himself, with a good conscience,

to have something to teach every day, to any one who wishes to listen. Must

he not appear to know more than he does, and speak, before an unknown

audience,  of  things  that  he  could  mention  without  risk  only  to  his  most

intimate friends? And above all, does he not surrender the precious freedom

of following his genius when and wherever it call him, by the mere fact of

being bound to think at stated times on a fixed subject? And before young

men, too! Is not such thinking in its nature emasculate? And suppose he felt

some day that he had no ideas just then-and yet must be in his place and

appear to be thinking What then? "But," one will say, "he is not a thinker but

mainly  a  depository  of  thought,  a  man  of  great  learning  in  all  previous

philosophies. Of these he can always say something that his scholars do not

know." This is actually the third, and the most dangerous, concession made

by philosophy to the state, when it is compelled to appear in the form of

erudition, as the knowledge (more specifically) of the history of philosophy.

The genius looks purely and lovingly on existence, like a poet, and cannotdive too deep into it;-and nothing is more abhorrent to him than to burrow

among  the  innumerable  strange  and  wrong-headed  opinions.  The  learned

history of the past was never a true philosopher's business, in India or Greece;

and a professor of philosophy who busies himself with such matters must be,

at  best,  content  to  hear  it  said  of  him,  "He  is  an  able  scholar,  antiquary,

philologist, historian,"-but never, "He is a philosopher." I said, "at best": for a

scholar  feels  that  most  of  the  learned  works  written  by  University

philosophers are badly done, without any real scientific power, and generally

are  dread-  fully  tedious.  Who  will  blow  aside,  for  example,  the  Lethean

vapour with which the history of Greek philosophy has been enveloped by

the dull though not very scientific works of Ritter, Brandis and Zeller? I, at

any rate, would rather read Diogenes Laertius than Zeller, because at least the

spirit of the old philosophers lives in Diogenes, but neither that nor any other

spirit in Zeller. And, after all, what does the history of philosophy matter to

our young men Are they to be discouraged by the welter of opinions from

having  any  of  their  own;  or  taught  to  join  the  chorus  that  approves  the

vastness  of  our  progress?  Are  they  to  learn  to  hate  or  perhaps  despise

philosophy?  One  might  expect  the  last,  knowing  the  torture  the  students

endure  for  their  philosophical  examinations,  in  having  to  get  into  their

unfortunate  heads  the  maddest  efforts  of  the  human  mind  as  well  as  the

greatest and profoundest. The only method of criticising a philosophy that is

possible and proves anything at all-namely to see whether one can live by it-

has never been taught at the universities; only the criticism of words, and

again words, is taught there. Imagine a young head, without much experience

of  life,  being  stuffed  with  fifty  systems  (in  the  form  of  words)  and  fifty

criticisms of them, all mixed up together,-what an overgrown wilderness he

will come to be, what contempt he will feel for a philosophical education! It

is, of course, not an education in philosophy at all, but in the art of passing a

philosophical examination: the usual result being the pious ejaculation of the

wearied examinee, "Thank God I am no philosopher, but a Christian and a

good citizen!" What if this cry were the ultimate object of the state, and the

"education" or leading to philosophy were merely a leading from philosophy?

We may well ask.-But if so, there is one thing to fear-that the youth may

some day find out to what end philosophy is thus mis-handled. "Is the highest

thing of all, the production of the philosophical genius, nothing but a pretext,

and the main object perhaps to hinder his production? And is Reason turned

to Unreason?" Then woe to the whole machinery of political and professorialtrickery!  Will  it  soon  become  notorious?  I  do  not  know;  but  anyhow

university philosophy has fallen into a general state of doubting and despair.

The cause lies partly in the feebleness of those who hold the chairs at present:

and if Schopenhauer had to write his treatise on university philosophy to-day,

he would find the club no longer necessary, but could conquer with a bulrush.

They are the heirs and successors of those slip-shod thinkers whose crazy

heads  Schopenhauer  struck  at:  their  childish  natures  and  dwarfish  frames

remind one of the Indian proverb: " men are born according to their deeds,

deaf,  dumb,  misshapen."  Those  fathers  deserved  such  sons,  "according  to

their deeds," as the proverb says. Hence the students will, no doubt, soon get

on without the philosophy taught at their university, just as those who are not

university men manage to do without it already. This can be tested from one's

own  experience:  in  my  student-days,  for  example,  I  found  the  university

philosophers very ordinary men indeed, who had collected together a few

conclusions  from  the  other  sciences,  and  in  their  leisure  hours  read  the

newspapers  and  went  to  concerts;  they  were  treated  by  their  academic

colleagues with politely veiled contempt. They had the reputation of knowing

very little, but of never being at a loss for obscure expressions to conceal

their ignorance. They had a preference for those obscure regions where a man

could not walk long with clear vision. One said of the natural sciences, "Not

one of them can fully explain to me the origin of matter; then what do I care

about them all?"- Another said of history, "It tells nothing new to the man

with  ideas":  in  fact,  they  always  found  reasons  for  its  being  more

philosophical to know nothing than to learn anything. If they let themselves

be drawn to learn, a secret instinct made them fly from the actual sciences

and found a dim kingdom amid their gaps and uncertainties. They "led the

way" in the sciences in the sense that the quarry "leads the way" for the

hunters who are behind him. Recently they have amused themselves with

asserting they are merely the watchers on the frontier of the sciences. The

Kantian doctrine is of use to them here, and they industriously build up an

empty scepticism on it, of which in a short time nobody will take any more

notice. Here and there one will rise to a little metaphysic of his own, with the

general accompaniment of headaches and giddiness and bleeding at the nose

After the usual ill-success of their voyages into the clouds and the mist, some

hard-headed young student of the real sciences will pluck them down by the

skirts, and their faces will assume the expression now habitual to them, of

offended dignity at being found out. They have lost their happy confidence,and not one of them will venture a step further for the sake of his philosophy.

Some used to believe they could find out new religions or reinstate old ones

by  their  systems.  They  have  given  up  such  pretensions  now,  and  have

become mostly mild, muddled folk, with no Lucretian boldness, but merely

some spiteful complaints of the "dead weight that lies on the intellects of

mankind"! No one can even learn logic from them now, and their obvious

knowledge of their own powers has made them discontinue the dialectical

disputations common in the old days. There is much more care and modesty,

logic and inventiveness, in a word, more philosophical method in the work of

the special sciences than in the so-called "philosophy," and every one will

agree with the temperate words of Bagehot[2] on the present system builders:

"Unproved abstract principles without number have been eagerly caught up

by sanguine men, and then carefully spun out into books and theories, which

were  to  explain  the  whole  world.  But  the  world  goes  clear  against  these

abstractions,  and  it  must  do  so,  as  they  require  it  to  go  in  antagonistic

directions.  The  mass  of  a  system  attracts  the  young  and  impresses  the

unwary; but cultivated people are very dubious about it. They are ready to

receive hints and suggestions, and the smallest real truth is ever welcome.

But a large book of deductive philosophy is much to be suspected. Who is not

almost sure beforehand that the premises will contain a strange mixture of

truth and error, and therefore that it will not be worth while to spend life in

reasoning  over  their  consequences?"  The  philosophers,  especially  in

Germany,  used  to  sink  into  such  a  state  of  abstraction  that  they  were  in

continual danger of running their heads against a beam; but there is a whole

herd of Laputan flappers about them to give them in time a gentle stroke on

their eyes or anywhere else. Sometimes the blows are too hard; and then

these  scorners  of  earth  forget  themselves  and  strike  back,  but  the  victim

always escapes them. " Fool, you do not see the beam," says the flapper; and

often the philosopher does see the beam, and calms down. These flappers are

the natural sciences and history; little by little they have so overawed the

German dream-craft which has long taken the place of philosophy, that the

dreamer would be only too glad to give up the attempt to run alone: but when

they unexpectedly fall into the others' arms, or try to put leading-strings on

them that they may be led themselves, those others flap as terribly as they

can, as if they would say, "This is all that is wanting,-that a philosophaster

like this should lay his impure hands on us, the natural sciences and history!

Away with him!" Then they start back, knowing not where to turn or to askthe  way.  They  wanted  to  have  a  little  physical  knowledge  at  their  back,

possibly  in  the  form  of  empirical  psychology  (like  the  Herbartians),  or

perhaps a little history; and then they could at least make a public show of

behaving scientifically, although in their hearts they may wish all philosophy

and all science at the devil. But granted that this herd of bad philosophers is

ridiculous-and who will deny it?-how far are they also harmful? They are

harmful  just  because  they  make  philosophy  ridiculous.  As  long  as  this

imitation-thinking continues to be recognised by the state, the lasting effect

of a true philosophy will be destroyed, or at any rate circumscribed; nothing

does this so well as the curse of ridicule that the representatives of the great

cause have drawn on them, for it attacks that cause itself. And so I think it

will encourage culture to deprive philosophy of its political and academic

standing, and relieve state and university of the task, impossible for them, of

deciding between true and false philosophy. Let the philosophers run wild,

forbid them any thoughts of office or civic position, hold them out no more

bribes,-nay, rather persecute them and treat them ill,-you will see a wonderful

result. They will flee in terror and seek a roof where they can, these poor

phantasms; one will become a parson, another a schoolmaster, another will

creep  into  an  editorship,  another  write  school-books  for  young  ladies'

colleges, the wisest of them will plough the fields, the vainest go to court.

Everything will be left suddenly empty, the birds flown: for it is easy to get

rid of bad philosophers,-one only has to cease paying them. And that is a

better plan than the open patronage of any philosophy, whatever it be, for

state reasons. The state has never any concern with truth, but only with the

truth useful to it, or rather, with anything that is useful to it, be it truth, half-

truth, or error. A coalition between state and philosophy has only meaning

when the latter can promise to be unconditionally useful to the state, to put its

well-being higher than truth. It would certainly be a noble thing for the state

to have truth as a paid servant; but it knows well enough that it is the essence

of truth to be paid nothing and serve nothing. So the state's servant turns out

to be merely "false truth," a masked actor who cannot perform the office

required from the real truth-the affirmation of the state's worth and sanctity.

When a mediaeval prince wished to be crowned by the Pope, but could not

get him to consent, he appointed an antipope to do the business for him. This

may serve up to a certain point ; but not when the modern state appoints an

"anti-philosophy" to legitimise it; for it has true philosophy against it just as

much as before, or even more so. I believe in all seriousness that it is to thestate's advantage to have nothing further to do with philosophy, to demand

nothing from it, and let it go its own way as much as possible. Without this

indifferent attitude, philosophy may become dangerous and oppressive, and

will  have  to  be  persecuted.-The  only  interest  the  state  can  have  in  the

university lies in the training of obedient and useful citizens; and it should

hesitate  to  put  this  obedience  and  usefulness  in  doubt  by  demanding  an

examination  in  philosophy  from  the  young  men.  To  make  a  bogey  of

philosophy may be an excellent way to frighten the idle and incompetent

from its study; but this advantage is not enough to counterbalance the danger

that this kind of compulsion may arouse from the side of the more reckless

and turbulent spirits. They learn to know about forbidden books, begin to

criticise their teachers, and finally come to understand the object of university

philosophy  and  its  examinations;  not  to  speak  of  the  doubts  that  may  be

fostered in the minds of young theologians, as a consequence of which they

are beginning to be extinct in Germany, like the ibexes in the Tyrol. I know

the objections that the state could bring against all this, as long as the lovely

Hegel-corn was yellowing in all the fields; but now that hail has destroyed

the crop and all men's hopes of it, now that nothing has been fulfilled and all

the barns are empty,-there are no more objections to be made, but rather

rejections of philosophy itself. The state has now the power of rejection; in

Hegel's time it only wished to have it-and that makes a great difference. The

state  needs  no  more  the  sanction  of  philosophy,  and  philosophy  has  thus

become superfluous to it. It will find advantage in ceasing to maintain its

professors, or (as I think will soon happen) in merely pretending to maintain

them; but it is of still greater importance that the university should see the

benefit of this as well. At least I believe the real sciences must see that their

interest lies in freeing themselves from all contact with sham science. And

further, the reputation of the universities hangs too much in the balance for

them not to welcome a severance from methods that are thought little of even

in academic circles. The outer world has good reason for its wide-spread

contempt of universities; they are reproached with being cowardly, the small

fearing the great, and the great fearing public opinion; it is said that they do

not lead the higher thought of the age but hobble slowly behind it, and cleave

no longer to the fundamental ideas of the recognised sciences. Grammar, for

example, is studied more diligently than ever without any one seeing the

necessity of a rigorous training in speech and writing. The gates of Indian

antiquity are being opened, and the scholars have no more idea of the mostimperishable  works  of  the  Indians-their  philosophies-than  a  beast  has  of

playing  the  harp;  though  Schopenhauer  thinks  that  the  acquaintance  with

Indian philosophy is one of the greatest advantages possessed by our century.

Classical antiquity is the favourite playground nowadays, and its effect is no

longer classical and formative; as is shown by the students, who are certainly

no models for imitation. Where is now the spirit of Friedrich August Wolf to

be  found,  of  whom  Franz  Passow  could  say  that  he  seemed  a  loyal  and

humanistic spirit with force enough to set half the world aflame? Instead of

that a journalistic spirit is arising in the university, often under the name of

philosophy; the smooth delivery-the very cosmetics of speech-with Faust and

Nathan the Wise for ever on the lips, the accent and the outlook of our worst

literary magazines and, more recently, much chatter about our holy German

music, and the demand for lectures on Schiller and Goethe,-all this is a sign

that the university spirit is beginning to be confused with the Spirit of the

Age. Thus the establishment of a higher tribunal, outside the universities, to

protect and criticise them with regard to culture, would seem a most valuable

thing, and as soon as philosophy can sever itself from the universities and be

purified from every unworthy motive or hypocrisy, it will be able to become

such a tribunal. It will do its work with- out state help in money or honours,

free from the spirit of the age as well as from any fear of it ; being in fact the

judge, as Schopenhauer was, of the so-called culture surrounding it And in

this way the philosopher can also be useful to the university, by refusing to be

a part of it, but criticising it from afar. Distance will lend dignity. But, after

all, what does the life of a state or the progress of universities matter in

comparison with the life of philosophy on earth! For, to say quite frankly

what I mean, it is infinitely more important that a philosopher should arise on

the earth than that a state or a university should continue. The dignity of

philosophy may rise in proportion as the submission to public opinion and the

danger  to  liberty  increase;  it  was  at  its  highest  during  the  convulsions

marking the fall of the Roman Republic, and in the time of the Empire, when

the names of both philosophy and history became ingrata principibus nomina.

Brutus shows its dignity better than Plato; his was a time when ethics cease to

have commonplaces. Philosophy is not much regarded now, and we may well

ask why no great soldier or statesman has taken it up; and the answer is that a

thin  phantom  has  met  him,  under  the  name  of  philosophy,  the  cautious

wisdom of the learned professor; and philosophy has soon come to seem

ridiculous to him. It ought to have seemed terrible; and men who are called toauthority  should  know  the  heroic  power  that  has  its  source  there.  An

American may tell them what a centre of mighty forces a great thinker can

prove on this earth. "Beware when the great God lets loose a thinker on this

planet,"  says  Emerson.[3]  "Then  all  things  are  at  risk.  It  is  as  when  a

conflagration has broken out in a great city, and no man knows what is safe,

or where it will end. There is not a piece of science, but its flank may be

turned  to-morrow;  there  is  not  any  literary  reputation,  not  the  so-called

eternal names of fame, that may not be revised and condemned. . . . The

things which are dear to men at this hour are so on account of the ideas which

have emerged on their mental horizon, and which cause the present order of

things as a tree bears its apples. A new degree of culture would instantly

revolutionise  the  entire  system  of  human  pursuits."  If  such  thinkers  are

dangerous, it is clear why our university thinkers are not dangerous; for their

thoughts bloom as peacefully in the shade of tradition "as ever tree bore its

apples." They do not frighten; they carry away no gates of Gaza; and to all

their  little  contemplations  one  can  make  the  answer  of  Diogenes  when  a

certain philosopher was praised: "What great result has he to show, who has

so long practised philosophy and yet has hurt nobody?" Yes, the university

philosophy should have on its monument, "It has hurt nobody." But this is

rather the praise one gives to an old woman than "to a goddess of truth; and it

is not surprising that those who know the goddess only as an old woman are

the less men for that, and are naturally neglected by the real men of power. If

this be the case in our time, the dignity of philosophy is trodden in the mire ;

and she seems herself to have become ridiculous or insignificant. All her true

friends are bound to bear witness against this transformation, at least to show

that it is merely her false servants in philosopher's clothing who are so. Or

better, they must prove by their own deed that the love of truth has itself awe

and power. Schopenhauer proved this and will continue to prove it, more and

more. 


          HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN, A BOOK FOR FREE SPIRITS

                    Translated by Helen Zimmern and Paul Cohn

                                      INTRODUCTION.

  Nietzsche's essay, Richard Wagner in Bayreuth, appeared in 1876, and his

next publication was his present work, which was issued in 1878.

  A comparison of the books will show that the two years of meditation

intervening had brought about a great change in Nietzsche's views, his styleof expressing them, and the form in which they were cast. The Dionysian,

overflowing with life, gives way to an Apollonian thinker with a touch of

pessimism. The long essay form is abandoned, and instead we have a series

of  aphorisms,  some  tinged  with  melancholy,  others  with  satire,  several,

especially towards the end, with Nietzschian wit at its best, and a few at the

beginning so very abstruse as to require careful study. Since the Bayreuth

festivals of 1876, Nietzsche had gradually come to see Wagner as he really

was. The ideal musician that Nietzsche had pictured in his own mind turned

out to be nothing more than a rather dilettante philosopher, an opportunistic

decadent  with  a  suspicious  tendency  towards  Christianity.  The  young

philosopher  thereupon  proceeded  to  shake  off  the  influence  which  the

musician had exercised upon him. He was successful in doing so, but not

without  a  struggle,  just  as  he  had  formerly  shaken  off  the  influence  of

Schopenhauer. Hence he writes in his autobiography: [1] "Human, all-too-

Human, is the monument of a crisis. It is entitled: 'A book for free spirits,'

and almost every line in it represents a victory—in its pages I freed myself

from everything foreign to my real nature. Idealism is foreign to me: the title

says, 'Where you see ideal things, I see things which are only human alas! all-

too-human!'  I  know  man  better—the  term  'free  spirit'  must  here  be

understood in no other sense than this: a freed man, who has once more taken

possession of himself." [1] Ecce Homo, p. 75. The form of this book will be

better understood when it is remembered that at this period Nietzsche was

beginning to suffer from stomach trouble and headaches. As a cure for his

complaints, he spent his time in travel when he could get a few weeks' respite

from his duties at Basel University; and it was in the course of his solitary

walks and hill-climbing tours that the majority of these thoughts occurred to

him and were jotted down there and then. A few of them, however, date

further back, as he tells us in the preface to the second part of this work.

Many of them, he says, occupied his mind even before he published his first

book,  The  Birth  of  Tragedy,  and  several  others,  as  we  learn  from  his

notebooks and posthumous writings, date from the period of the Thoughts out

of Season. It must be clearly understood, however, that Nietzsche's disease

must not be looked upon in the same way as that of an ordinary man. People

are inclined to regard a sick man as rancorous; but anyone who fights with

and  conquers  his  disease,  and  even  exploits  it,  as  Nietzsche  did,  benefits

thereby to an extraordinary degree. In the first place, he has passed through

several stages of human psychology with which a healthy man is entirelyunacquainted; e.g. he has learnt by introspection the spiteful and revengeful

spirit of the sick man and his religion. Secondly, in his moments of freedom

from pain and gloom his thoughts will be all the more brilliant. In support of

this last statement, one instance may be selected out of hundreds that could

be adduced. Heinrich Heine spent the greater part of his life in exile from his

native country, tortured by headaches, and finally dying in a foreign land as

the  result  of  a  spinal  disease.  His  splendid  works  were  composed  in  his

moments of respite from illness, and during the last years of his life, when his

health was at its worst, he gave to the world his famous Romancero. We

would  likewise  do  well  to  recollect  Goethe's  saying:  Zart  Gedicht,  wie

Regenbogen, Wird nur auf dunkelm Grund gezogen. [2] [2] "Tender poetry,

like rainbows, can appear only on a dark and sombre background."—J. M. K.

Thus neither the form of this book—so startling at first to those who have

been brought up in the traditions of our own school—nor the fact that the

writer was in poor health (the average Englishman may be reminded that

there may be mens nulla in corpore sano) should deter us from perusing it as

carefully as we can. We may be sure of an adequate reward; for here no

abstract  philosopher  is  discoursing,  no  harmless  dealer  in  "isms"  and

"ologies"—but a man of the world, who had previously to writing come into

contact with some of the best men and women of his time; who had travelled

a great deal, and especially in the south; and who had finally even reached the

much-beloved  home  of  all  great  Germans:  Ancient  Greece.  From  Greece

Nietzsche brought back his standard measure, his infallible scales, which may

be  compared  to  those  of  the  Goddess  of  Justice,  and  in  which  modern

institutions, parliaments, states, and religions were weighed by him, found

wanting, and severely censured. Is Hellenism, however, an ideal suitable for

everybody? Does not a commercial country like ours still stand in need of the

earnest  gloom  of  Puritanism  rather  than  of  the  dazzling  sun  of  Hellenic

beauty?  The  darker  and  more  strict  creed  has  at  least  the  advantage  of

keeping men in the narrow path leading to duty and honesty, and may help to

turn them away from the success-at-all-costs hunt; while, on the other hand,

the more human and beautiful ideal, if preached to the wrong congregation,

may destroy the smaller virtues of Christianity and render it impossible to

rear the higher virtues of Hellenism in its stead. The danger is worth pointing

out: nothing, indeed, could be more fatal than a proposal which the Editor of

this  series  has  had  from  an  American  publisher,  viz.,  to  bring  out  a

"Nietzsche in a Nutshell, so that the general public may know what it is allabout."  No;  it  might  be  better  that  business  people—the  less  educated  of

them,  at  all  events—should  not  know  what  it  is  all  about.  The  great

exhaustion, necessarily brought about by the modern commercial death-and-

life struggle for existence, is the worst possible condition in which a man can

read Nietzsche. The aphorisms in this book are essentially for an order of

minds which can afford otium; but sine dignitate if possible—for the British

"dignity" is another obstacle in the path leading to a complete understanding

of  our  author.  Indeed,  these  aphorisms  would  be  much  out  of  place,  and

might be quite false, if applied in other directions. Take, for example, No.

434, containing the now celebrated dictum that women always intrigue in

secret  against  the  higher  souls  of  their  husbands.  While  this  statement  is

correct as applied to artists, it is obviously not intended for business-men,

whose wives in many instances spur them on—not to philosophy or art, but

to money, comfort, and worldly success. But statesmen and politicians, who,

no  matter  what  may  be  thought  to  the  contrary,  require  new  ideas

occasionally,  will  find  much  to  interest  them  here.  They  seem  to  have  a

certain  difficulty  nowadays  in  meeting  the  argument  of  Socialism.  In

aphorism 451, Nietzsche gives them a hint. The governing classes, says he,

can, if they choose, treat all men as equals, and proclaim the establishment of

equal rights: so far a socialistic mode of thought which is based on justice is

possible; but, as has been said, only within the ranks of the governing classes,

which in this case practices justice with sacrifices and abnegations. On the

other hand, to demand equality of rights, as do the Socialists of the subject

caste, is by no means the outcome of justice, but of covetousness. If you

expose bloody pieces of flesh to a beast, and then withdraw them again until

it  finally  begins  to  roar,  do  you  think  that  the  roaring  implies  justice?

Theologians on the other hand, as may be expected, will find no such ready

help in their difficulties from Nietzsche. They must, on the contrary, be on

their guard against so alert an adversary—a duty which they are apparently

not going to shirk; for theologians are amongst the most ardent students of

Nietzsche in this country. Their attention may therefore be drawn to aphorism

630 of this book, dealing with convictions and their origin, which will no

doubt be successfully refuted by the defenders of the true faith. In fact, there

is not a single paragraph in the book that does not deserve careful study by all

serious thinkers. On the whole, however, this is a calm book, and those who

are accustomed to Nietzsche the out-spoken Immoralist, may be somewhat

astonished at the calm tone of the present volume. The explanation is thatNietzsche was now just beginning to walk on his own philosophical path. His

life-long aim, the uplifting of the type man, was still in view, but the way

leading towards it was once more uncertain. Hence the peculiarly calm, even

melancholic,  and  what  Nietzsche  himself  would  call  Apollonian,  tinge  of

many of these aphorisms, so different from the style of his earlier and later

writings. For this very reason, however, the book may appeal all the more to

English  readers,  who  are  of  course  more  Apollonian  than  Dionysian.

Nietzsche is feeling his way, and these aphorisms represent his first steps. As

such—besides  having  a  high  intrinsic  value  of  themselves—they  are

enormous  aids  to  the  study  of  his  character  and  temperament.  J.  M.

KENNEDY.

                                        PREFACE.

  1.

  I have been told frequently, and always with great surprise, that there is

something  common  and  distinctive  in  all  my  writings,  from  the  Birth  of

Tragedy to the latest published Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future. They

all contain, I have been told, snares and nets for unwary birds, and an almost

perpetual unconscious demand for the inversion of customary valuations and

valued  customs.  What?  Everything  only—human—all-too-human?  People

lay down my writings with this sigh, not without a certain dread and distrust

of  morality  itself,  indeed  almost  tempted  and  encouraged  to  become

advocates of the worst things: as being perhaps only the best disparaged? My

writings have been called a school of suspicion and especially of disdain,

more  happily,  also,  a  school  of  courage  and  even  of  audacity.  Indeed,  I

myself do not think that anyone has ever looked at the world with such a

profound suspicion; and not only as occasional Devil's Advocate, but equally

also, to speak theologically, as enemy and impeacher of God; and he who

realizes  something  of  the  consequences  involved,  in  every  profound

suspicion, something of the chills and anxieties of loneliness to which every

uncompromising  difference  of  outlook  condemns  him  who  is  affected

therewith, will also understand how often I sought shelter in some kind of

reverence  or  hostility,  or  scientifically  or  levity  or  stupidity,  in  order  to

recover from myself, and, as it were, to obtain temporary self-forgetfulness;

also why, when I did not find what I needed, I was obliged to manufacture it,

to counterfeit and to imagine it in a suitable manner (and what else have poets

ever done? And for what purpose has all the art in the world existed?). What I

always required most, however, for my cure and self-recovery, was the beliefthat I was not isolated in such circumstances, that I did not see in an isolated

manner—a magic suspicion of relationship and similarity to others in outlook

and desire, repose in the confidence of friendship, a blindness in both parties

without suspicion or note of interrogation, an enjoyment of foregrounds, and

surfaces of the near and the nearest, of all that has color, epidermis, and

outside appearance. Perhaps I might be reproached in this respect for much

"art"  and  fine  false  coinage;  for  instance,  for  voluntarily  and  knowingly

shutting my eyes to Schopenhauer's blind will to morality at a time when I

had  become  sufficiently  clear-sighted  about  morality;  also  for  deceiving

myself  about  Richard  Wagner's  incurable  romanticism,  as  if  it  were  a

beginning and not an end; also about the Greeks, also about the Germans and

their future—and there would still probably be quite a long list of such alsos?

Supposing however, that this were all true and that I were reproached with

good  reason,  what  do  you  know,  what  could  you  know  as  to  how  much

artifice of self-preservation, how much rationality and higher protection there

is in such self-deception, and how much falseness I still require in order to

allow myself again and again the luxury of my sincerity? . . . In short, I still

live; and life, in spite of ourselves, is not devised by morality; it demands

illusion, it lives by illusion . . . but—There! I am already beginning again and

doing what I have always done, old immoralist and bird-catcher that I am,—I

am talking un-morally, ultra-morally, "beyond good and evil "? . . .

  2.

  Thus then, when I found it necessary, I invented once on a time the "free

spirits," to whom this discouragingly encouraging book with the title Human,

all-too-Human, is dedicated. There are no such "free spirits" nor have there

been such, but, as already said, I then required them for company to keep me

cheerful  in  the  midst  of  evils  (sickness,  loneliness,  foreignness,—acedia,

inactivity) as brave companions and ghosts with whom I could laugh and

gossip when so inclined and send to the devil when they became bores, as

compensation for the lack of friends. That such free spirits will be possible

some day, that our Europe will have such bold and cheerful wights amongst

her sons of to-morrow and the day after to-morrow, actually and bodily, and

not merely, as in my case, as the shadows of a hermit's phantasmagoria—I

should  be  the  last  to  doubt  thereof.  Already  I  see  them  coming,  slowly,

slowly; and perhaps I am doing something to hasten their coming when I

describe in advance under what auspices I see them originate, and upon what

paths I see them come.  3.

  One may suppose that a spirit in which the type "free spirit" is to become

fully mature and sweet, has had its decisive event in a great emancipation,

and that it was all the more fettered previously and apparently bound forever

to its corner and pillar. What is it that binds most strongly? What cords are

almost unrendable? In men of a lofty and select type it will be their duties;

the reverence which is suitable to youth, respect and tenderness for all that is

time-honored and worthy, gratitude to the land which bore them, to the hand

which led them, to the sanctuary where they learnt to adore,—their most

exalted moments themselves will bind them most effectively, will lay upon

them the most enduring obligations. For those who are thus bound the great

emancipation comes suddenly, like an earthquake; the young soul is all at

once convulsed, unloosened and extricated—it does not itself know what is

happening.  An  impulsion  and  compulsion  sway  and  over-master  it  like  a

command; a will and a wish awaken, to go forth on their course, anywhere, at

any cost; a violent, dangerous curiosity about an undiscovered world flames

and flares in every sense. "Better to die than live here"—says the imperious

voice and seduction, and this "here," this "at home" is all that the soul has

hitherto loved! A sudden fear and suspicion of that which it loved, a flash of

disdain for what was called its "duty," a rebellious, arbitrary, volcanically

throbbing  longing  for  travel,  foreignness,  estrangement,  coldness,

disenchantment, glaciation, a hatred of love, perhaps a sacrilegious clutch and

look backwards, to where it hitherto adored and loved, perhaps a glow of

shame at what it was just doing, and at the same time a rejoicing that it was

doing it, an intoxicated, internal, exulting thrill which betrays a triumph—a

triumph? Over what? Over whom? An enigmatical, questionable, doubtful

triumph, but the first triumph nevertheless;—such evil and painful incidents

belong to the history of the great emancipation. It is, at the same time, a

disease which may destroy the man, this first outbreak of power and will to

self-decision, self-valuation, this will to free will; and how much disease is

manifested in the wild attempts and eccentricities by which the liberated and

emancipated one now seeks to demonstrate his mastery over things! He roves

about raging with unsatisfied longing; whatever he captures has to suffer for

the dangerous tension of his pride; he tears to pieces whatever attracts him.

With a malicious laugh he twirls round whatever he finds veiled or guarded

by  a  sense  of  shame;  he  tries  how  these  things  look  when  turned  upside

down. It is a matter of arbitrariness with him, and pleasure in arbitrariness, ifhe now perhaps bestow his favor on what had hitherto a bad repute,—if he

inquisitively  and  temptingly  haunt  what  is  specially  forbidden.  In  the

background of his activities and wanderings—for he is restless and aimless in

his course as in a desert—stands the note of interrogation of an increasingly

dangerous curiosity. "Cannot all valuations be reversed? And is good perhaps

evil? And God only an invention and artifice of the devil? Is everything,

perhaps, radically false? And if we are the deceived, are we not thereby also

deceivers? Must we not also be deceivers?"—Such thoughts lead and mislead

him more and more, onward and away. Solitude encircles and engirdles him,

always more threatening, more throttling, more heart-oppressing, that terrible

goddess and mater sæva cupidinum—but who knows nowadays what solitude

is? . . .

  4.

  From  this  morbid  solitariness,  from  the  desert  of  such  years  of

experiment,  it  is  still  a  long  way  to  the  copious,  overflowing  safety  and

soundness  which  does  not  care  to  dispense  with  disease  itself  as  an

instrument and angling-hook of knowledge;—to that mature freedom of spirit

which is equally self-control and discipline of the heart, and gives access to

many and opposed modes of thought;—to that inward comprehensiveness

and daintiness of superabundance, which excludes any danger of the spirit's

becoming enamored and lost in its own paths, and lying intoxicated in some

corner or other; to that excess of plastic, healing, formative, and restorative

powers, which is exactly the sign of splendid health, that excess which gives

the  free  spirit  the  dangerous  prerogative  of  being  entitled  to  live  by

experiments  and  offer  itself  to  adventure;  the  free  spirit's  prerogative  of

mastership! Long years of convalescence may lie in between, years full of

many-colored, painfully-enchanting magical transformations, curbed and led

by a tough will to health, which often dares to dress and disguise itself as

actual health. There is a middle condition therein, which a man of such a fate

never calls to mind later on without emotion; a pale, delicate light and a

sunshine-happiness  are  peculiar  to  him,  a  feeling  of  bird-like  freedom,

prospect,  and  haughtiness,  a  tertium  quid  in  which  curiosity  and  gentle

disdain  are  combined.  A  "free  spirit"—this  cool  expression  does  good  in

every condition, it almost warms. One no longer lives, in the fetters of love

and hatred, without Yea, without Nay, voluntarily near, voluntarily distant,

preferring to escape, to turn aside, to flutter forth, to fly up and away; one is

fastidious like everyone who has once seen an immense variety beneath him,—and one has become the opposite of those who trouble themselves about

things which do not concern them. In fact, it is nothing but things which now

concern the free spirit,—and how many things!—which no longer trouble

him!

  5.

  A step further towards recovery, and the free spirit again draws near to

life; slowly, it is true, and almost stubbornly, almost distrustfully. Again it

grows warmer around him, and, as it were, yellower; feeling and sympathy

gain depth, thawing winds of every kind pass lightly over him. He almost

feels as if his eyes were now first opened to what is near. He marvels and is

still; where has he been? The near and nearest things, how changed they

appear to him! What a bloom and magic they have acquired meanwhile! He

looks  back  gratefully,—grateful  to  his  wandering,  his  austerity  and  self-

estrangement,  his  far-sightedness  and  his  bird-like  flights  in  cold  heights.

What a good thing that he did not always stay "at home," "by himself," like a

sensitive, stupid tenderling. He has been beside himself, there is no doubt. He

now sees himself for the first time,—and what surprises he feels thereby!

What thrills unexperienced hitherto! What joy even in the weariness, in the

old illness, in the relapses of the convalescent! How he likes to sit still and

suffer, to practice patience, to lie in the sun! Who is as familiar as he with the

joy of winter, with the patch of sunshine upon the wall! They are the most

grateful animals in the world, and also the most unassuming, these lizards of

convalescents with their faces half-turned towards life once more:—there are

those amongst them who never let a day pass without hanging a little hymn

of praise on its trailing fringe. And, speaking seriously, it is a radical cure for

all  pessimism  (the  well-known  disease  of  old  idealists  and  falsehood-

mongers) to become ill after the manner of these free spirits, to remain ill a

good while, and then grow well (I mean "better") for a still longer period. It is

wisdom, practical wisdom, to prescribe even health for one's self for a long

time only in small doses.

  6.

  About this time it may at last happen, under the sudden illuminations of

still disturbed and changing health, that the enigma of that great emancipation

begins to reveal itself to the free, and ever freer, spirit,—that enigma which

had hitherto lain obscure, questionable, and almost intangible, in his memory.

If for a long time he scarcely dared to ask himself, "Why so apart? So alone?

denying everything that I revered? denying reverence itself? Why this hatred,this suspicion, this severity towards my own virtues?"—he now dares and

asks the questions aloud, and already hears something like an answer to them

—"Thou shouldst become master over thyself and master also of thine own

virtues. Formerly they were thy masters; but they are only entitled to be thy

tools  amongst  other  tools.  Thou  shouldst  obtain  power  over  thy  pro  and

contra,  and  learn  how  to  put  them  forth  and  withdraw  them  again  in

accordance with thy higher purpose. Thou shouldst learn how to take the

proper perspective of every valuation—the shifting, distortion, and apparent

teleology of the horizons and everything that belongs to perspective; also the

amount of stupidity which opposite values involve, and all the intellectual

loss with which every pro and every contra has to be paid for. Thou shouldst

learn how much necessary injustice there is in every for and against, injustice

as inseparable from life, and life itself as conditioned by the perspective and

its injustice. Above all thou shouldst see clearly where the injustice is always

greatest:—namely,  where  life  has  developed  most  punily,  restrictedly,

necessitously,  and  incipiently,  and  yet  cannot  help  regarding  itself  as  the

purpose and standard of things, and for the sake of self-preservation, secretly,

basely, and continuously wasting away and calling in question the higher,

greater, and richer,—thou shouldst see clearly the problem of gradation of

rank,  and  how  power  and  right  and  amplitude  of  perspective  grow  up

together.  Thou  shouldst——But  enough;  the  free  spirit  knows  henceforth

which "thou shalt" he has obeyed, and also what he can now do, what he only

now—may do. . . .

  7.

  Thus  doth  the  free  spirit  answer  himself  with  regard  to  the  riddle  of

emancipation, and ends therewith, while he generalizes his case, in order thus

to decide with regard to his experience. "As it has happened to me!" he says

to  himself,  "so  must  it  happen  to  everyone  in  whom  a  mission  seeks  to

embody itself and to 'come into the world.'" The secret power and necessity

of  this  mission  will  operate  in  and  upon  the  destined  individuals  like  an

unconscious pregnancy, long before they have had the mission itself in view

and have known its name. Our destiny rules over us, even when we are not

yet aware of it; it is the future that makes laws for our to-day. Granted that it

is the problem of the gradations of rank, of which we may say that it is our

problem,  we  free  spirits;  now  only  in  the  midday  of  our  life  do  we  first

understand what preparations, détours, tests, experiments, and disguises the

problem needed, before it was permitted to rise before us, and how we hadfirst to experience the most manifold and opposing conditions of distress and

happiness in soul and body, as adventurers and circumnavigators of the inner

world called "man," as surveyors of all the "higher" and the "one-above-

another," also called "man"—penetrating everywhere, almost without fear,

rejecting  nothing,  losing  nothing,  tasting  everything,  cleansing  everything

from all that is accidental, and, as it were, sifting it out—until at last we could

say, we free spirits, "Here—a new problem! Here a long ladder, the rungs of

which we ourselves have sat upon and mounted,—which we ourselves at

some time have been! Here a higher place, a lower place, an under-us, an

immeasurably long order, a hierarchy which we see; here—our problem!"

  8.

  No psychologist or augur will be in doubt for a moment as to what stage

of the development just described the following book belongs (or is assigned

to).  But  where  are  these  psychologists  nowadays?  In  France,  certainly;

perhaps in Russia; assuredly not in Germany. Reasons are not lacking why

the present-day Germans could still even count this as an honor to them—bad

enough, surely, for one who in this respect is un-German in disposition and

constitution! This German book, which has been able to find readers in a

wide circle of countries and nations—it has been about ten years going its

rounds—and must understand some sort of music and piping art, by means of

which even coy foreign ears are seduced into listening,—it is precisely in

Germany that this book has been most negligently read, and worst listened to;

what is the reason? "It demands too much," I have been told, "it appeals to

men free from the pressure of coarse duties, it wants refined and fastidious

senses,  it  needs  superfluity—superfluity  of  time,  of  clearness  of  sky  and

heart, of otium in the boldest sense of the term:—purely good things, which

we Germans of to-day do not possess and therefore cannot give." After such a

polite answer my philosophy advises me to be silent and not to question

further; besides, in certain cases, as the proverb points out, one only remains

a philosopher by being—silent. [3] Nice, Spring

  1886.

  [3] An allusion to the mediæval Latin distich: O si tacuisses, Philosophus

mansisses.—J. M. K.

                  FIRST DIVISION. FIRST AND LAST THINGS.

  1.

    Chemistry  of  Ideas  and  Sensations.—Philosophical  problems  adopt  in

almost all matters the same form of question as they did two thousand yearsago; how can anything spring from its opposite? for instance, reason out of

unreason,  the  sentient  out  of  the  dead,  logic  out  of  unlogic,  disinterested

contemplation out of covetous willing, life for others out of egoism, truth out

of error? Metaphysical philosophy has helped itself over those difficulties

hitherto  by  denying  the  origin  of  one  thing  in  another,  and  assuming  a

miraculous  origin  for  more  highly  valued  things,  immediately  out  of  the

kernel  and  essence  of  the  "thing  in  itself."  Historical  philosophy,  on  the

contrary,  which  is  no  longer  to  be  thought  of  as  separate  from  physical

science, the youngest of all philosophical methods, has ascertained in single

cases  (and  presumably  this  will  happen  in  everything)  that  there  are  no

opposites except in the usual exaggeration of the popular or metaphysical

point of view, and that an error of reason lies at the bottom of the opposition:

according  to  this  explanation,  strictly  understood,  there  is  neither  an

unegoistical action nor an entirely disinterested point of view, they are both

only  sublimations  in  which  the  fundamental  element  appears  almost

evaporated, and is only to be discovered by the closest observation. All that

we require, and which can only be given us by the present advance of the

single  sciences,  is  a  chemistry  of  the  moral,  religious,  æsthetic  ideas  and

sentiments, as also of those emotions which we experience in ourselves both

in the great and in the small phases of social and intellectual intercourse, and

even in solitude; but what if this chemistry should result in the fact that also

in this case the most beautiful colors have been obtained from base, even

despised materials? Would many be inclined to pursue such examinations?

Humanity likes to put all questions as to origin and beginning out of its mind;

must one not be almost dehumanized to feel a contrary tendency in one's self?

  2.

    Inherited  Faults  of  Philosophers.—All  philosophers  have  the  common

fault that they start from man in his present state and hope to attain their end

by an analysis of him. Unconsciously they look upon "man" as an æterna

veritas,  as  a  thing  unchangeable  in  all  commotion,  as  a  sure  standard  of

things. But everything that the philosopher says about man is really nothing

more than testimony about the man of a very limited space of time. A lack of

the historical sense is the hereditary fault of all philosophers; many, indeed,

unconsciously mistake the very latest variety of man, such as has arisen under

the influence of certain religions, certain political events, for the permanent

form  from  which  one  must  set  out.  They  will  not  learn  that  man  has

developed, that his faculty of knowledge has developed also; whilst for someof  them  the  entire  world  is  spun  out  of  this  faculty  of  knowledge.  Now

everything essential in human development happened in pre-historic times,

long before those four thousand years which we know something of; man

may  not  have  changed  much  during  this  time.  But  the  philosopher  sees

"instincts" in the present man and takes it for granted that this is one of the

unalterable facts of mankind, and, consequently, can furnish a key to the

understanding of the world; the entire teleology is so constructed that man of

the last four thousand years is spoken of as an eternal being, towards which

all  things  in  the  world  have  from  the  beginning  a  natural  direction.  But

everything has evolved; there are no eternal facts, as there are likewise no

absolute truths. Therefore, historical philosophizing is henceforth necessary,

and with it the virtue of diffidence.

  3.

    Appreciation of Unpretentious Truths.—It is a mark of a higher culture to

value the little unpretentious truths, which have been found by means of strict

method, more highly than the joy-diffusing and dazzling errors which spring

from metaphysical and artistic times and peoples. First of all one has scorn on

the lips for the former, as if here nothing could have equal privileges with

anything else, so unassuming, simple, bashful, apparently discouraging are

they,  so  beautiful,  stately,  intoxicating,  perhaps  even  animating,  are  the

others. But the hardly attained, the certain, the lasting, and therefore of great

consequence for all wider knowledge, is still the higher; to keep one's self to

that is manly and shows bravery, simplicity, and forbearance. Gradually not

only  single  individuals  but  the  whole  of  mankind  will  be  raised  to  this

manliness, when it has at last accustomed itself to the higher appreciation of

durable,  lasting  knowledge,  and  has  lost  all  belief  in  inspiration  and  the

miraculous  communication  of  truths.  Respecters  of  forms,  certainly,  with

their standard of the beautiful and noble, will first of all have good reasons

for  mockery,  as  soon  as  the  appreciation  of  unpretentious  truths,  and  the

scientific spirit, begin to obtain the mastery; but only because their eye has

either not yet recognized the charm of the simplest form, or because men

educated in that spirit are not yet completely and inwardly saturated by it, so

that they still thoughtlessly imitate old forms (and badly enough, as one does

who no longer cares much about the matter). Formerly the spirit was not

occupied with strict thought, its earnestness then lay in the spinning out of

symbols and forms. This is changed; that earnestness in the symbolical has

become the mark of a lower culture. As our arts themselves grow evermoreintellectual, our senses more spiritual, and as, for instance, people now judge

concerning what sounds well to the senses quite differently from how they

did a hundred years ago, so the forms of our life grow ever more spiritual, to

the  eye  of  older  ages  perhaps  uglier,  but  only  because  it  is  incapable  of

perceiving how the kingdom of the inward, spiritual beauty constantly grows

deeper and wider, and to what extent the inner intellectual look may be of

more  importance  to  us  all  than  the  most  beautiful  bodily  frame  and  the

noblest architectural structure.

  4.

    Astrology  and  the  Like.—It  is  probable  that  the  objects  of  religious,

moral, æsthetic and logical sentiment likewise belong only to the surface of

things, while man willingly believes that here, at least, he has touched the

heart of the world; he deceives himself, because those things enrapture him

so profoundly, and make him so profoundly unhappy, and he therefore shows

the same pride here as in astrology. For astrology believes that the firmament

moves round the destiny of man; the moral man, however, takes it for granted

that what he has essentially at heart must also be the essence and heart of

things.

  5.

    Misunderstanding  of  Dreams.—In  the  ages  of  a  rude  and  primitive

civilization man believed that in dreams he became acquainted with a second

actual world; herein lies the origin of all metaphysics. Without dreams there

could have been found no reason for a division of the world. The distinction,

too,  between  soul  and  body  is  connected  with  the  most  ancient

comprehension of dreams, also the supposition of an imaginary soul-body,

therefore the origin of all belief in spirits, and probably also the belief in

gods. "The dead continues to live, for he appears to the living in a dream":

thus men reasoned of old for thousands and thousands of years.

  6.

  The Scientific Spirit Partially but not Wholly Powerful.—The smallest

subdivisions of science taken separately are dealt with purely in relation to

themselves,—the  general,  great  sciences,  on  the  contrary,  regarded  as  a

whole,  call  up  the  question—certainly  a  very  non-objective  one

—"Wherefore? To what end?" It is this utilitarian consideration which causes

them to be dealt with less impersonally when taken as a whole than when

considered in their various parts. In philosophy, above all, as the apex of the

entire  pyramid  of  science,  the  question  as  to  the  utility  of  knowledge  isinvoluntarily  brought  forward,  and  every  philosophy  has  the  unconscious

intention of ascribing to it the greatest usefulness. For this reason there is so

much high-flying metaphysics in all philosophies and such a shyness of the

apparently unimportant solutions of physics; for the importance of knowledge

for life must appear as great as possible. Here is the antagonism between the

separate provinces of science and philosophy. The latter desires, what art

does, to give the greatest possible depth and meaning to life and actions; in

the former one seeks knowledge and nothing further, whatever may emerge

thereby. So far there has been no philosopher in whose hands philosophy has

not grown into an apology for knowledge; on this point, at least, everyone is

an optimist, that the greatest usefulness must be ascribed to knowledge. They

are all tyrannized over by logic, and this is optimism—in its essence.

  7.

  The  Kill-Joy  in  Science.—Philosophy  separated  from  science  when  it

asked the question, "Which is the knowledge of the world and of life which

enables man to live most happily?" This happened in the Socratic schools; the

veins  of  scientific  investigation  were  bound  up  by  the  point  of  view  of

happiness,—and are so still.

  8.

    Pneumatic Explanation of Nature.—Metaphysics explains the writing of

Nature,  so  to  speak,  pneumatically,  as  the  Church  and  her  learned  men

formerly did with the Bible. A great deal of understanding is required to

apply to Nature the same method of strict interpretation as the philologists

have now established for all books with the intention of clearly understanding

what the text means, but not suspecting a double sense or even taking it for

granted. Just, however, as with regard to books, the bad art of interpretation is

by no means overcome, and in the most cultivated society one still constantly

comes across the remains of allegorical and mystic interpretation, so it is also

with regard to Nature, indeed it is even much worse.

  9.

  The Metaphysical World.—It is true that there might be a metaphysical

world;  the  absolute  possibility  of  it  is  hardly  to  be  disputed.  We  look  at

everything through the human head and cannot cut this head off; while the

question remains, What would be left of the world if it had been cut off? This

is a purely scientific problem, and one not very likely to trouble mankind; but

everything  which  has  hitherto  made  metaphysical  suppositions  valuable,

terrible, delightful for man, what has produced them, is passion, error, andself-deception;  the  very  worst  methods  of  knowledge,  not  the  best,  have

taught  belief  therein.  When  these  methods  have  been  discovered  as  the

foundation of all existing religions and metaphysics, they have been refuted.

Then there still always remains that possibility; but there is nothing to be

done with it, much less is it possible to let happiness, salvation, and life

depend on the spider-thread of such a possibility. For nothing could be said

of  the  metaphysical  world  but  that  it  would  be  a  different  condition,  a

condition inaccessible and incomprehensible to us; it would be a thing of

negative qualities. Were the existence of such a world ever so well proved,

the  fact  would  nevertheless  remain  that  it  would  be  precisely  the  most

irrelevant of all forms of knowledge: more irrelevant than the knowledge of

the chemical analysis of water to the sailor in danger in a storm.

  10.

  The Harmlessness of Metaphysics in the Future.—Directly the origins of

religion, art, and morals have been so described that one can perfectly explain

them without having recourse to metaphysical concepts at the beginning and

in  the  course  of  the  path,  the  strongest  interest  in  the  purely  theoretical

problem of the "thing-in-itself" and the "phenomenon" ceases. For however it

may be here, with religion, art, and morals we do not touch the "essence of

the world in itself"; we are in the domain of representation, no "intuition" can

carry us further. With the greatest calmness we shall leave the question as to

how our own conception of the world can differ so widely from the revealed

essence  of  the  world,  to  physiology  and  the  history  of  the  evolution  of

organisms and ideas.

  11.

  Language as a Presumptive Science.—The importance of language for

the development of culture lies in the fact that in language man has placed a

world of his own beside the other, a position which he deemed so fixed that

he might therefrom lift the rest of the world off its hinges, and make himself

master of it. Inasmuch as man has believed in the ideas and names of things

as æternæ veritates for a great length of time, he has acquired that pride by

which  he  has  raised  himself  above  the  animal;  he  really  thought  that  in

language he possessed the knowledge of the world. The maker of language

was not modest enough to think that he only gave designations to things, he

believed rather that with his words he expressed the widest knowledge of the

things; in reality language is the first step in the endeavor after science. Here

also  it  is  belief  in  ascertained  truth,  from  which  the  mightiest  sources  ofstrength have flowed. Much later—only now—it is dawning upon men that

they  have  propagated  a  tremendous  error  in  their  belief  in  language.

Fortunately it is now too late to reverse the development of reason, which is

founded upon that belief. Logic, also, is founded upon suppositions to which

nothing in the actual world corresponds,—for instance, on the supposition of

the equality of things, and the identity of the same thing at different points of

time,—but that particular science arose out of the contrary belief (that such

things really existed in the actual world). It is the same with mathematics,

which  would  certainly  not  have  arisen  if  it  had  been  known  from  the

beginning that in Nature there are no exactly straight lines, no real circle, no

absolute standard of size.

  12.

  Dream and Culture.—The function of the brain which is most influenced

by sleep is the memory; not that it entirely ceases; but it is brought back to a

condition of imperfection, such as everyone may have experienced in pre-

historic times, whether asleep or awake. Arbitrary and confused as it is, it

constantly confounds things on the ground of the most fleeting resemblances;

but  with  the  same  arbitrariness  and  confusion  the  ancients  invented  their

mythologies, and even at the present day travelers are accustomed to remark

how  prone  the  savage  is  to  forgetfulness,  how,  after  a  short  tension  of

memory, his mind begins to sway here and there from sheer weariness and

gives forth lies and nonsense. But in dreams we all resemble the savage; bad

recognition  and  erroneous  comparisons  are  the  reasons  of  the  bad

conclusions,  of  which  we  are  guilty  in  dreams:  so  that,  when  we  clearly

recollect what we have dreamt, we are alarmed at ourselves at harboring so

much  foolishness  within  us.  The  perfect  distinctness  of  all  dream-

representations, which pre-suppose absolute faith in their reality, recall the

conditions  that  appertain  to  primitive  man,  in  whom  hallucination  was

extraordinarily  frequent,  and  sometimes  simultaneously  seized  entire

communities, entire nations. Therefore, in sleep and in dreams we once more

carry out the task of early humanity.

  13.

  The  Logic  of  Dreams.—In  sleep  our  nervous  system  is  perpetually

excited by numerous inner occurrences; nearly all the organs are disjointed

and in a state of activity, the blood runs its turbulent course, the position of

the  sleeper  causes  pressure  on  certain  limbs,  his  coverings  influence  his

sensations  in  various  ways,  the  stomach  digests  and  by  its  movements  itdisturbs other organs, the intestines writhe, the position of the head occasions

unaccustomed play of muscles, the feet, unshod, not pressing upon the floor

with the soles, occasion the feeling of the unaccustomed just as does the

different clothing of the whole body: all this, according to its daily change

and  extent,  excites  by  its  extraordinariness  the  entire  system  to  the  very

functions of the brain, and thus there-are a hundred occasions for the spirit to

be  surprised  and  to  seek  for  the  reasons  of  this  excitation;—the  dream,

however,  is  the  seeking  and  representing  of  the  causes  of  those  excited

sensations,—that  is,  of  the  supposed  causes.  A  person  who,  for  instance,

binds his feet with two straps will perhaps dream that two serpents are coiling

round his feet; this is first hypothesis, then a belief, with an accompanying

mental picture and interpretation—"These serpents must be the causa of those

sensations  which  I,  the  sleeper,  experience,"—so  decides  the  mind  of  the

sleeper.  The  immediate  past,  so  disclosed,  becomes  to  him  the  present

through his excited imagination. Thus everyone knows from experience how

quickly the dreamer weaves into his dream a loud sound that he hears, such

as the ringing of bells or the firing of cannon, that is to say, explains it from

afterwards so that he first thinks he experiences the producing circumstances

and then that sound. But how does it happen that the mind of the dreamer is

always so mistaken, while the same mind when awake is accustomed to be so

temperate, careful, and skeptical with regard to its hypotheses? so that the

first random hypothesis for the explanation of a feeling suffices for him to

believe immediately in its truth? (For in dreaming we believe in the dream as

if it were a reality, i.e. we think our hypothesis completely proved.) I hold,

that as man now still reasons in dreams, so men reasoned also when awake

through thousands of years; the first causa which occurred to the mind to

explain anything that required an explanation, was sufficient and stood for

truth. (Thus, according to travelers' tales, savages still do to this very day.)

This ancient element in human nature still manifests itself in our dreams, for

it is the foundation upon which the higher reason has developed and still

develops  in  every  individual;  the  dream  carries  us  back  into  remote

conditions of human culture, and provides a ready means of understanding

them better. Dream-thinking is now so easy to us because during immense

periods of human development we have been so well drilled in this form of

fantastic and cheap explanation, by means of the first agreeable notions. In so

far, dreaming is a recreation for the brain, which by day has to satisfy the

stern demands of thought, as they are laid down by the higher culture. Wecan at once discern an allied process even in our awakened state, as the door

and ante-room of the dream. If we shut our eyes, the brain produces a number

of impressions of light and color, probably as a kind of after-play and echo of

all those effects of light which crowd in upon it by day. Now, however, the

understanding, together with the imagination, instantly works up this play of

color,  shapeless  in  itself,  into  definite  figures,  forms,  landscapes,  and

animated groups. The actual accompanying process thereby is again a kind of

conclusion from the effect to the cause: since the mind asks, "Whence come

these impressions of light and color?" it supposes those figures and forms as

causes; it takes them for the origin of those colors and lights, because in the

daytime, with open eyes, it is accustomed to find a producing cause for every

color, every effect of light. Here, therefore, the imagination constantly places

pictures before the mind, since it supports itself on the visual impressions of

the day in their production, and the dream-imagination does just the same

thing,—that is, the supposed cause is deduced from the effect and represented

after the effect; all this happens with extraordinary rapidity, so that here, as

with the conjuror, a confusion of judgment may arise and a sequence may

look like something simultaneous, or even like a reversed sequence. From

these  circumstances  we  may  gather  how  lately  the  more  acute  logical

thinking, the strict discrimination of cause and effect has been developed,

when our reasoning and understanding faculties still involuntarily hark back

to those primitive forms of deduction, and when we pass about half our life in

this condition. The poet, too, and the artist assign causes for their moods and

conditions which are by no means the true ones; in this they recall an older

humanity and can assist us to the understanding of it.

  14.

    Co-Echoing.—All  stronger  moods  bring  with  them  a  co-echoing  of

kindred sensations and moods, they grub up the memory, so to speak. Along

with them something within us remembers and becomes conscious of similar

conditions and their origin. Thus there are formed quick habitual connections

of feelings and thoughts, which eventually, when they follow each other with

lightning speed, are no longer felt as complexes but as unities. In this sense

one  speaks  of  the  moral  feeling,  of  the  religious  feeling,  as  if  they  were

absolute  unities:  in  reality  they  are  streams  with  a  hundred  sources  and

tributaries. Here also, as so often happens, the unity of the word is no security

for the unity of the thing.

  15.  No Internal and External in the World.—As Democritus transferred the

concepts "above" and "below" to endless space where they have no sense, so

philosophers  in  general  have  transferred  the  concepts  "Internal"  and

"External" to the essence and appearance of the world; they think that with

deep feelings one can penetrate deeply into the internal and approach the

heart of Nature. But these feelings are only deep in so far as along with them,

barely  noticeable,  certain  complicated  groups  of  thoughts,  which  we  call

deep,  are  regularly  excited;  a  feeling  is  deep  because  we  think  that  the

accompanying thought is deep. But the "deep" thought can nevertheless be

very far from the truth, as, for instance, every metaphysical one; if one take

away from the deep feeling the commingled elements of thought, then the

strong feeling remains, and this guarantees nothing for knowledge but itself,

just  as  strong  faith  proves  only  its  strength  and  not  the  truth  of  what  is

believed in.

  16.

    Phenomenon and Thing-in-itself.—Philosophers are in the habit of setting

themselves before life and experience—before that which they call the world

of appearance—as before a picture that is once for all unrolled and exhibits

unchangeably  fixed  the  same  process,—this  process,  they  think,  must  be

rightly  interpreted  in  order  to  come  to  a  conclusion  about  the  being  that

produced  the  picture:  about  the  thing-in-itself,  therefore,  which  is  always

accustomed to be regarded as sufficient ground for the world of phenomenon.

On the other hand, since one always makes the idea of the metaphysical stand

definitely as that of the unconditioned, consequently also unconditioning, one

must  directly  disown  all  connection  between  the  unconditioned  (the

metaphysical world) and the world which is known to us; so that the thing-in-

itself  should  most  certainly  not  appear  in  the  phenomenon,  and  every

conclusion from the former as regards the latter is to be rejected. Both sides

overlook the fact that that picture—that which we now call human life and

experience—has  gradually  evolved,—nay,  is  still  in  the  full  process  of

evolving,—and therefore should not be regarded as a fixed magnitude from

which  a  conclusion  about  its  originator  might  be  deduced  (the  sufficing

cause) or even merely neglected. It is because for thousands of years we have

looked into the world with moral, æsthetic, and religious pretensions, with

blind inclination, passion, or fear, and have surfeited ourselves in the vices of

illogical  thought,  that  this  world  has  gradually  become  so  marvelously

motley, terrible, full of meaning and of soul, it has acquired color—but wewere  the  colorists;  the  human  intellect,  on  the  basis  of  human  needs,  of

human emotions, has caused this "phenomenon" to appear and has carried its

erroneous fundamental conceptions into things. Late, very late, it takes to

thinking, and now the world of experience and the thing-in-itself seem to it so

extraordinarily different and separated, that it gives up drawing conclusions

from the former to the latter—or in a terribly mysterious manner demands the

renunciation of our intellect, of our personal will, in order thereby to reach

the essential, that one may become essential. Again, others have collected all

the characteristic features of our world of phenomenon,—that is, the idea of

the world spun out of intellectual errors and inherited by us,—and instead of

accusing the intellect as the offenders, they have laid the blame on the nature

of things as being the cause of the hard fact of this very sinister character of

the world, and have preached the deliverance from Being. With all these

conceptions  the  constant  and  laborious  process  of  science  (which  at  last

celebrates its greatest triumph in a history of the origin of thought) becomes

completed in various ways, the result of which might perhaps run as follows:

—"That which we now call the world is the result of a mass of errors and

fantasies which arose gradually in the general development of organic being,

which are inter-grown with each other, and are now inherited by us as the

accumulated  treasure  of  all  the  past,—as  a  treasure,  for  the  value  of  our

humanity depends upon it. From this world of representation strict science is

really only able to liberate us to a very slight extent—as it is also not at all

desirable—inasmuch as it cannot essentially break the power of primitive

habits of feeling; but it can gradually elucidate the history of the rise of that

world as representation,—and lift us, at least for moments, above and beyond

the whole process. Perhaps we shall then recognize that the thing in itself is

worth a Homeric laugh; that it seemed so much, indeed everything, and is

really empty, namely, empty of meaning."

  17.

    Metaphysical  Explanations.—The  young  man  values  metaphysical

explanations, because they show him something highly significant in things

which  he  found  unpleasant  or  despicable,  and  if  he  is  dissatisfied  with

himself, the feeling becomes lighter when he recognizes the innermost world-

puzzle  or  world-misery  in  that  which  he  so  strongly  disapproves  of  in

himself. To feel himself less responsible and at the same time to find things

more interesting—that seems to him a double benefit for which he has to

thank  metaphysics.  Later  on,  certainly,  he  gets  distrustful  of  the  wholemetaphysical method of explanation; then perhaps it grows clear to him that

those results can be obtained equally well and more scientifically in another

way: that physical and historical explanations produce the feeling of personal

relief to at least the same extent, and that the interest in life and its problems

is perhaps still more aroused thereby.

  18.

    Fundamental Questions of Metaphysics.—When the history of the rise of

thought comes to be written, a new light will be thrown on the following

statement of a distinguished logician:—"The primordial general law of the

cognizant subject consists in the inner necessity of recognizing every object

in itself in its own nature, as a thing identical with itself, consequently self-

existing and at bottom remaining ever the same and unchangeable: in short,

in recognizing everything as a substance." Even this law, which is here called

"primordial,"  has  evolved:  it  will  someday  be  shown  how  gradually  this

tendency arises in the lower organisms, how the feeble mole-eyes of their

organizations at first see only the same thing,—how then, when the various

awakenings  of  pleasure  and  displeasure  become  noticeable,  various

substances are gradually distinguished, but each with one attribute, i.e. one

single relation to such an organism. The first step in logic is the judgment,—

the nature of which, according to the decision of the best logicians, consists

in belief. At the bottom of all belief lies the sensation of the pleasant or the

painful in relation to the sentient subject. A new third sensation as the result

of two previous single sensations is the judgment in its simplest form. We

organic beings have originally no interest in anything but its relation to us in

connection  with  pleasure  and  pain.  Between  the  moments  (the  states  of

feeling) when we become conscious of this connection, lie moments of rest,

of non-feeling; the world and everything is then without interest for us, we

notice no change in it (as even now a deeply interested person does not notice

when anyone passes him). To the plant, things are as a rule tranquil and

eternal, everything like itself. From the period of the lower organisms man

has  inherited  the  belief  that  similar  things  exist  (this  theory  is  only

contradicted by the matured experience of the most advanced science). The

primordial belief of everything organic from the beginning is perhaps even

this, that all the rest of the world is one and immovable. The point furthest

removed  from  those  early  beginnings  of  logic  is  the  idea  of  Causality,—

indeed we still really think that all sensations and activities are acts of the free

will;  when  the  sentient  individual  contemplates  himself,  he  regards  everysensation, every alteration as something isolated, that is to say, unconditioned

and  disconnected,—it  rises  up  in  us  without  connection  with  anything

foregoing or following. We are hungry, but do not originally think that the

organism must be nourished; the feeling seems to make itself felt without

cause and purpose, it isolates itself and regards itself as arbitrary. Therefore,

belief in the freedom of the will is an original error of everything organic, as

old  as  the  existence  of  the  awakenings  of  logic  in  it;  the  belief  in

unconditioned substances and similar things is equally a primordial as well as

an  old  error  of  everything  organic.  But  inasmuch  as  all  metaphysics  has

concerned itself chiefly with substance and the freedom of will, it may be

designated as the science which treats of the fundamental errors of mankind,

but treats of them as if they were fundamental truths.

  19.

    Number.—The  discovery  of  the  laws  of  numbers  is  made  upon  the

ground of the original, already prevailing error, that there are many similar

things (but in reality there is nothing similar), at least, that there are things

(but there is no "thing"). The supposition of plurality always presumes that

there is something which appears frequently,—but here already error reigns,

already we imagine beings, unities, which do not exist. Our sensations of

space and time are false, for they lead—examined in sequence—to logical

contradictions. In all scientific determinations we always reckon inevitably

with certain false quantities, but as these quantities are at least constant, as,

for instance, our sensation of time and space, the conclusions of science have

still perfect accuracy and certainty in their connection with one another; one

may continue to build upon them—until that final limit where the erroneous

original  suppositions,  those  constant  faults,  come  into  conflict  with  the

conclusions, for instance in the doctrine of atoms. There still we always feel

ourselves compelled to the acceptance of a "thing" or material "substratum"

that is moved, whilst the whole scientific procedure has pursued the very task

of resolving everything substantial (material) into motion; here, too, we still

separate with our sensation the mover and the moved and cannot get out of

this  circle,  because  the  belief  in  things  has  from  immemorial  times  been

bound  up  with  our  being.  When  Kant  says,  "The  understanding  does  not

derive its laws from Nature, but dictates them to her," it is perfectly true with

regard to the idea of Nature which we are compelled to associate with her

(Nature = World as representation, that is to say as error), but which is the

summing up of a number of errors of the understanding. The laws of numbersare entirely inapplicable to a world which is not our representation—these

laws obtain only in the human world.

  20.

  A Few Steps Back.—A degree of culture, and assuredly a very high one,

is  attained  when  man  rises  above  superstitious  and  religious  notions  and

fears, and, for instance, no longer believes in guardian angels or in original

sin, and has also ceased to talk of the salvation of his soul,—if he has attained

to this degree of freedom, he has still also to overcome metaphysics with the

greatest  exertion  of  his  intelligence.  Then,  however,  a  retrogressive

movement is necessary; he must understand the historical justification as well

as  the  psychological  in  such  representations,  he  must  recognize  how  the

greatest advancement of humanity has come therefrom, and how, without

such  a  retrocursive  movement,  we  should  have  been  robbed  of  the  best

products  of  hitherto  existing  mankind.  With  regard  to  philosophical

metaphysics,  I  always  see  increasing  numbers  who  have  attained  to  the

negative goal (that all positive metaphysics is error), but as yet few who

climb a few rungs backwards; one ought to look out, perhaps, over the last

steps of the ladder, but not try to stand upon them. The most enlightened only

succeed so far as to free themselves from metaphysics and look back upon it

with superiority, while it is necessary here, too, as in the hippodrome, to turn

round the end of the course.

  21.

    Conjectural Victory of Skepticism.—For once let the skeptical starting-

point be accepted,—granted that there were no other metaphysical world, and

all explanations drawn from metaphysics about the only world we know were

useless to us, in what light should we then look upon men and things? We

can think this out for ourselves, it is useful, even though the question whether

anything  metaphysical  has  been  scientifically  proved  by  Kant  and

Schopenhauer were altogether set aside. For it is quite possible, according to

historical probability, that some time or other man, as a general rule, may

grow skeptical; the question will then be this: What form will human society

take under the influence of such a mode of thought? Perhaps the scientific

proof  of  some  metaphysical  world  or  other  is  already  so  difficult  that

mankind  will  never  get  rid  of  a  certain  distrust  of  it.  And  when  there  is

distrust of metaphysics, there are on the whole the same results as if it had

been  directly  refuted  and  could  no  longer  be  believed  in.  The  historical

question with regard to an unmetaphysical frame of mind in mankind remainsthe same in both cases.

  22.

    Unbelief  in  the  "Monumentum  ære  Perennius."—An  actual  drawback

which accompanies the cessation of metaphysical views lies in the fact that

the individual looks upon his short span of life too exclusively and receives

no  stronger  incentives  to  build  durable  institutions  intended  to  last  for

centuries,—he himself wishes to pluck the fruit from the tree which he plants,

and therefore he no longer plants those trees which require regular care for

centuries,  and  which  are  destined  to  afford  shade  to  a  long  series  of

generations. For metaphysical views furnish the belief that in them the last

conclusive foundation has been given, upon which henceforth all the future

of mankind is compelled to settle down and establish itself; the individual

furthers his salvation, when, for instance, he founds a church or convent, he

thinks it will be reckoned to him and recompensed to him in the eternal life of

the soul, it is work for the soul's eternal salvation. Can science also arouse

such faith in its results? As a matter of fact, it needs doubt and distrust as its

most  faithful  auxiliaries;  nevertheless  in  the  course  of  time,  the  sum  of

inviolable  truths—those,  namely,  which  have  weathered  all  the  storms  of

skepticism, and all destructive analysis—may have become so great (in the

regimen of health, for instance), that one may determine to found thereupon

"eternal" works. For the present the contrast between our excited ephemeral

existence and the long-winded repose of metaphysical ages still operates too

strongly, because the two ages still stand too closely together; the individual

man himself now goes through too many inward and outward developments

for him to venture to arrange his own lifetime permanently, and once and for

all. An entirely modern man, for instance, who is going to build himself a

house,  has  a  feeling  as  if  he  were  going  to  immure  himself  alive  in  a

mausoleum.

  23.

  The  Age  of  Comparison.—The  less  men  are  fettered  by  tradition,  the

greater becomes the inward activity of their motives; the greater, again, in

proportion thereto, the outward restlessness, the confused flux of mankind,

the polyphony of strivings. For whom is there still an absolute compulsion to

bind  himself  and  his  descendants  to  one  place?  For  whom  is  there  still

anything  strictly  compulsory?  As  all  styles  of  arts  are  imitated

simultaneously, so also are all grades and kinds of morality, of customs, of

cultures. Such an age obtains its importance because in it the various views ofthe  world,  customs,  and  cultures  can  be  compared  and  experienced

simultaneously,—which was formerly not possible with the always localized

sway of every culture, corresponding to the rooting of all artistic styles in

place and time. An increased æsthetic feeling will now at last decide amongst

so  many  forms  presenting  themselves  for  comparison;  it  will  allow  the

greater number, that is to say all those rejected by it, to die out. In the same

way a selection amongst the forms and customs of the higher moralities is

taking place, of which the aim can be nothing else than the downfall of the

lower moralities. It is the age of comparison! That is its pride, but more justly

also its grief. Let us not be afraid of this grief! Rather will we comprehend as

adequately as possible the task our age sets us: posterity will bless us for

doing so,—a posterity which knows itself to be as much above the terminated

original national cultures as above the culture of comparison, but which looks

back with gratitude on both kinds of culture as upon antiquities worthy of

veneration.

  24.

  The  Possibility  of  Progress.—When  a  scholar  of  the  ancient  culture

forswears the company of men who believe in progress, he does quite right.

For the greatness and goodness of ancient culture lie behind it, and historical

education  compels  one  to  admit  that  they  can  never  be  fresh  again;  an

unbearable stupidity or an equally insufferable fanaticism would be necessary

to deny this. But men can consciously resolve to develop themselves towards

a new culture; whilst formerly they only developed unconsciously and by

chance, they can now create better conditions for the rise of human beings,

for their nourishment, education and instruction; they can administer the earth

economically as a whole, and can generally weigh and restrain the powers of

man. This new, conscious culture kills the old, which, regarded as a whole,

has led an unconscious animal and plant life; it also kills distrust in progress,

—progress is possible. I must say that it is over-hasty and almost nonsensical

to believe that progress must necessarily follow; but how could one deny that

it is possible? On the other hand, progress in the sense and on the path of the

old culture is not even thinkable. Even if romantic fantasy has also constantly

used  the  word  "progress"  to  denote  its  aims  (for  instance,  circumscribed

primitive national cultures), it borrows the picture of it in any case from the

past; its thoughts and ideas on this subject are entirely without originality.

  25.

  Private and Œcumenical Morality.—Since the belief has ceased that aGod  directs  in  general  the  fate  of  the  world  and,  in  spite  of  all  apparent

crookedness in the path of humanity, leads it on gloriously, men themselves

must set themselves œcumenical aims embracing the whole earth. The older

morality, especially that of Kant, required from the individual actions which

were desired from all men,—that was a delightfully naïve thing, as if each

one  knew  off-hand  what  course  of  action  was  beneficial  to  the  whole  of

humanity, and consequently which actions in general were desirable; it is a

theory like that of free trade, taking for granted that the general harmony

must result of itself according to innate laws of amelioration. Perhaps a future

contemplation of the needs of humanity will show that it is by no means

desirable that all men should act alike; in the interest of œcumenical aims it

might  rather  be  that  for  whole  sections  of  mankind,  special,  and  perhaps

under certain circumstances even evil, tasks would have to be set. In any

case, if mankind is not to destroy itself by such a conscious universal rule,

there must previously be found, as a scientific standard for œcumenical aims,

a knowledge of the conditions of culture superior to what has hitherto been

attained. Herein lies the enormous task of the great minds of the next century.

  26.

  Reaction as Progress.—Now and again there appear rugged, powerful,

impetuous, but nevertheless backward-lagging minds which conjure up once

more a past phase of mankind; they serve to prove that the new tendencies

against which they are working are not yet sufficiently strong, that they still

lack  something,  otherwise  they  would  show  better  opposition  to  those

exorcisers. Thus, for example, Luther's Reformation bears witness to the fact

that in his century all the movements of the freedom of the spirit were still

uncertain, tender, and youthful; science could not yet lift up its head. Indeed

the whole Renaissance seems like an early spring which is almost snowed

under again. But in this century also, Schopenhauer's Metaphysics showed

that even now the scientific spirit is not yet strong enough; thus the whole

mediaeval Christian view of the world and human feeling could celebrate its

resurrection  in  Schopenhauer's  doctrine,  in  spite  of  the  long  achieved

destruction of all Christian dogmas. There is much science in his doctrine,

but it does not dominate it: it is rather the old well-known "metaphysical

requirement"  that  does  so.  It  is  certainly  one  of  the  greatest  and  quite

invaluable  advantages  which  we  gain  from  Schopenhauer,  that  he

occasionally  forces  our  sensations  back  into  older,  mightier  modes  of

contemplating the world and man, to which no other path would so easilylead us. The gain to history and justice is very great,—I do not think that

anyone would so easily succeed now in doing justice to Christianity and its

Asiatic  relations  without  Schopenhauer's  assistance,  which  is  specially

impossible from the basis of still existing Christianity. Only after this great

success of justice, only after we have corrected so essential a point as the

historical mode of contemplation which the age of enlightenment brought

with it, may we again bear onward the banner of enlightenment, the banner

with the three names, Petrarch, Erasmus, Voltaire. We have turned reaction

into progress.

  27.

  A Substitute for Religion.—It is believed that something good is said of

philosophy when it is put forward as a substitute for religion for the people.

As a matter of fact, in the spiritual economy there is need, at times, of an

intermediary  order  of  thought:  the  transition  from  religion  to  scientific

contemplation is a violent, dangerous leap, which is not to be recommended.

To this extent the recommendation is justifiable. But one should eventually

learn that the needs which have been satisfied by religion and are now to be

satisfied  by  philosophy  are  not  unchangeable;  these  themselves  can  be

weakened and eradicated. Think, for instance, of the Christian's distress of

soul,  his  sighing  over  inward  corruption,  his  anxiety  for  salvation,—all

notions which originate only in errors of reason and deserve not satisfaction

but destruction. A philosophy can serve either to satisfy those needs or to set

them aside; for they are acquired, temporally limited needs, which are based

upon suppositions contradictory to those of science. Here, in order to make a

transition, art is far rather to be employed to relieve the mind over-burdened

with emotions; for those notions receive much less support from it than from

a metaphysical philosophy. It is easier, then, to pass over from art to a really

liberating philosophical science.

  28.

    Ill-famed  Words.—Away  with  those  wearisomely  hackneyed  terms

Optimism and Pessimism! For the occasion for using them becomes less and

less  from  day  to  day;  only  the  chatterboxes  still  find  them  so  absolutely

necessary. For why in all the world should anyone wish to be an optimist

unless he had a God to defend who must have created the best of worlds if he

himself be goodness and perfection,—what thinker, however, still needs the

hypothesis of a God? But every occasion for a pessimistic confession of faith

is also lacking when one has no interest in being annoyed at the advocates ofGod (the theologians, or the theologizing philosophers), and in energetically

defending  the  opposite  view,  that  evil  reigns,  that  pain  is  greater  than

pleasure, that the world is a bungled piece of work, the manifestation of an

ill-will to life. But who still bothers about the theologians now—except the

theologians? Apart from all theology and its contentions, it is quite clear that

the world is not good and not bad (to say nothing of its being the best or the

worst),  and  that  the  terms  "good"  and  "bad"  have  only  significance  with

respect to man, and indeed, perhaps, they are not justified even here in the

way they are usually employed; in any case we must get rid of both the

calumniating and the glorifying conception of the world.

  29.

    Intoxicated by the Scent of the Blossoms.—It is supposed that the ship of

humanity has always a deeper draught, the heavier it is laden; it is believed

that  the  deeper  a  man  thinks,  the  more  delicately  he  feels,  the  higher  he

values himself, the greater his distance from the other animals,—the more he

appears as a genius amongst the animals,—all the nearer will he approach the

real  essence  of  the  world  and  its  knowledge;  this  he  actually  does  too,

through science, but he means to do so still more through his religions and

arts. These certainly are blossoms of the world, but by no means any nearer

to the root of the world than the stalk; it is not possible to understand the

nature of things better through them, although almost everyone believes he

can. Error has made man so deep, sensitive, and inventive that he has put

forth such blossoms as religions and arts. Pure knowledge could not have

been capable of it. Whoever were to unveil for us the essence of the world

would give us all the most disagreeable disillusionment. Not the world as

thing-in-itself, but the world as representation (as error) is so full of meaning,

so deep, so wonderful, bearing happiness and unhappiness in its bosom. This

result  leads  to  a  philosophy  of  the  logical  denial  of  the  world,  which,

however, can be combined with a practical world-affirming just as well as

with its opposite.

  30.

  Bad Habits in Reasoning.—The usual false conclusions of mankind are

these: a thing exists, therefore it has a right to exist. Here there is inference

from the ability to live to its suitability; from its suitability to its rightfulness.

Then: an opinion brings happiness; therefore it is the true opinion. Its effect is

good; therefore it is itself good and true. To the effect is here assigned the

predicate beneficent, good, in the sense of the useful, and the cause is thenfurnished with the same predicate good, but here in the sense of the logically

valid. The inversion of the sentences would read thus: an affair cannot be

carried through, or maintained, therefore it is wrong; an opinion causes pain

or excites, therefore it is false. The free spirit who learns only too often the

faultiness of this mode of reasoning, and has to suffer from its consequences,

frequently gives way to the temptation to draw the very opposite conclusions,

which,  in  general,  are  naturally  just  as  false:  an  affair  cannot  be  carried

through,  therefore  it  is  good;  an  opinion  is  distressing  and  disturbing,

therefore it is true.

  31.

  The Illogical Necessary.—One of those things that may drive a thinker

into despair is the recognition of the fact that the illogical is necessary for

man, and that out of the illogical comes much that is good. It is so firmly

rooted  in  the  passions,  in  language,  in  art,  in  religion,  and  generally  in

everything  that  gives  value  to  life,  that  it  cannot  be  withdrawn  without

thereby hopelessly injuring these beautiful things. It is only the all-too-naïve

people who can believe that the nature of man can be changed into a purely

logical one; but if there were degrees of proximity to this goal, how many

things would not have to be lost on this course! Even the most rational man

has need of nature again from time to time, i.e. his illogical fundamental

attitude towards all things.

  32.

  Injustice Necessary.—All judgments on the value of life are illogically

developed, and therefore unjust. The inexactitude of the judgment lies, firstly,

in the manner in which the material is presented, namely very imperfectly;

secondly, in the manner in which the conclusion is formed out of it; and

thirdly, in the fact that every separate element of the material is again the

result  of  vitiated  recognition,  and  this,  too,  of  necessity.  For  instance,  no

experience of an individual, however near he may stand to us, can be perfect,

so that we could have a logical right to make a complete estimate of him; all

estimates  are  rash,  and  must  be  so.  Finally,  the  standard  by  which  we

measure, our nature, is not of unalterable dimensions,—we have moods and

vacillations,  and  yet  we  should  have  to  recognize  ourselves  as  a  fixed

standard in order to estimate correctly the relation of anything whatever to

ourselves.  From  this  it  will,  perhaps,  follow  that  we  should  make  no

judgments at all; if one could only live without making estimations, without

having likes and dislikes! For all dislike is connected with an estimation, aswell as all inclination. An impulse towards or away from anything without a

feeling that something advantageous is desired, something injurious avoided,

an impulse without any kind of conscious valuation of the worth of the aim

does not exist in man. We are from the beginning illogical, and therefore

unjust  beings,  and  can  recognize  this;  it  is  one  of  the  greatest  and  most

inexplicable discords of existence.

  33.

  Error  About  Life  necessary  for  Life.—Every  belief  in  the  value  and

worthiness of life is based on vitiated thought; it is only possible through the

fact  that  sympathy  for  the  general  life  and  suffering  of  mankind  is  very

weakly developed in the individual. Even the rarer people who think outside

themselves do not contemplate this general life, but only a limited part of it.

If one understands how to direct one's attention chiefly to the exceptions,—I

mean to the highly gifted and the rich souls,—if one regards the production

of  these  as  the  aim  of  the  whole  world-development  and  rejoices  in  its

operation, then one may believe in the value of life, because one thereby

overlooks the other men—one consequently thinks fallaciously. So too, when

one directs one's attention to all mankind, but only considers one species of

impulses in them, the less egoistical ones, and excuses them with regard to

the other instincts, one may then again entertain hopes of mankind in general

and believe so far in the value of life, consequently in this case also through

fallaciousness of thought. Let one, however, behave in this or that manner:

with such behavior one is an exception amongst men. Now, most people bear

life  without  any  considerable  grumbling,  and  consequently  believe  in  the

value of existence, but precisely because each one is solely self-seeking and

self-affirming,  and  does  not  step  out  of  himself  like  those  exceptions;

everything extra-personal is imperceptible to them, or at most seems only a

faint  shadow.  Therefore  on  this  alone  is  based  the  value  of  life  for  the

ordinary everyday man, that he regards himself as more important than the

world. The great lack of imagination from which he suffers is the reason why

he cannot enter into the feelings of other beings, and therefore sympathizes as

little as possible with their fate and suffering. He, on the other hand, who

really could sympathize therewith, would have to despair of the value of life;

were  he  to  succeed  in  comprehending  and  feeling  in  himself  the  general

consciousness of mankind, he would collapse with a curse on existence; for

mankind  as  a  whole  has  no  goals,  consequently  man,  in  considering  his

whole course, cannot find in it his comfort and support, but his despair. If, inall that he does, he considers the final aimlessness of man, his own activity

assumes in his eyes the character of wastefulness. But to feel one's self just as

much wasted as humanity (and not only as an individual) as we see the single

blossom of nature wasted, is a feeling above all other feelings. But who is

capable of it? Assuredly only a poet, and poets always know how to console

themselves.

  34.

  For Tranquility.—But does not our philosophy thus become a tragedy?

Does not truth become hostile to life, to improvement? A question seems to

weigh upon our tongue and yet hesitate to make itself heard: whether one can

consciously remain in untruthfulness? or, supposing one were obliged to do

this,  would  not  death  be  preferable?  For  there  is  no  longer  any  "must";

morality, in so far as it had any "must" or "shalt," has been destroyed by our

mode of contemplation, just as religion has been destroyed. Knowledge can

only allow pleasure and pain, benefit and injury to subsist as motives; but

how will these motives agree with the sense of truth? They also contain errors

(for,  as  already  said,  inclination  and  aversion,  and  their  very  incorrect

determinations,  practically  regulate  our  pleasure  and  pain).  The  whole  of

human life is deeply immersed in untruthfulness; the individual cannot draw

it up out of this well, without thereby taking a deep dislike to his whole past,

without  finding  his  present  motives—those  of  honor,  for  instance—

inconsistent, and without opposing scorn and disdain to the passions which

conduce to happiness in the future. Is it true that there remains but one sole

way of thinking which brings after it despair as a personal experience, as a

theoretical  result,  a  philosophy  of  dissolution,  disintegration,  and  self-

destruction? I believe that the decision with regard to the aftereffects of the

knowledge will be given through the temperament of a man; I could imagine

another after-effect, just as well as that one described, which is possible in

certain natures, by means of which a life would arise much simpler, freer

from emotions than is the present one, so that though at first, indeed, the old

motives of passionate desire might still have strength from old hereditary

habit, they would gradually become weaker under the influence of purifying

knowledge. One would live at last amongst men, and with one's self as with

Nature, without praise, reproach, or agitation, feasting one's eyes, as if it were

a play, upon much of which one was formerly afraid. One would be free from

the emphasis, and would no longer feel the goading, of the thought that one is

not only nature or more than nature. Certainly, as already remarked, a goodtemperament would be necessary for this, an even, mild, and naturally joyous

soul, a disposition which would not always need to be on its guard against

spite and sudden outbreaks, and would not convey in its utterances anything

of a grumbling or sudden nature,—those well-known vexatious qualities, of

old dogs and men who have been long chained up. On the contrary, a man

from whom the ordinary fetters of life have so far fallen that he continues to

live only for the sake of ever better knowledge must be able to renounce

without envy and regret: much, indeed almost everything that is precious to

other  men,  he  must  regard  as  the  all-sufficing  and  the  most  desirable

condition;  the  free,  fearless  soaring  over  men,  customs,  laws,  and  the

traditional valuations of things. The joy of this condition he imparts willingly,

and he has perhaps nothing else to impart,—wherein, to be sure, there is more

privation and renunciation. If, nevertheless, more is demanded from him, he

will point with a friendly shake of his head to his brother, the free man of

action,  and  will  perhaps  not  conceal  a  little  derision,  for  as  regards  this

"freedom" it is a very peculiar case.

            SECOND DIVISION. THE HISTORY OF THE MORAL

                                    SENTIMENTS.

  35.

    Advantages  of  Psychological  Observation.—That  reflection  on  the

human,  all-too-human—or,  according  to  the  learned  expression,

psychological observation—is one of the means by which one may lighten

the  burden  of  life,  that  exercise  in  this  art  produces  presence  of  mind  in

difficult circumstances, in the midst of tiresome surroundings, even that from

the most thorny and unpleasant periods of one's own life one may gather

maxims and thereby feel a little better: all this was believed, was known in

former centuries. Why was it forgotten by our century, when in Germany at

least, even in all Europe, the poverty of psychological observation betrays

itself by many signs? Not exactly in novels, tales, and philosophical treatises,

—they are the work of exceptional individuals,—rather in the judgments on

public events and personalities; but above all there is a lack of the art of

psychological analysis and summing-up in every rank of society, in which a

great deal is talked about men, but nothing about man. Why do we allow the

richest and most harmless subject of conversation to escape us? Why are not

the  great  masters  of  psychological  maxims  more  read?  For,  without  any

exaggeration, the educated man in Europe who has read La Rochefoucauld

and his kindred in mind and art, is rarely found, and still more rare is he whoknows them and does not blame them. It is probable, however, that even this

exceptional reader will find much less pleasure in them than the form of this

artist should afford him; for even the clearest head is not capable of rightly

estimating the art of shaping and polishing maxims unless he has really been

brought up to it and has competed in it. Without this practical teaching one

deems  this  shaping  and  polishing  to  be  easier  than  it  is;  one  has  not  a

sufficient perception of fitness and charm. For this reason the present readers

of maxims find in them a comparatively small pleasure, hardly a mouthful of

pleasantness, so that they resemble the people who generally look at cameos,

who praise because they cannot love, and are very ready to admire, but still

more ready to run away.

  36.

    Objection.—Or should there be a counter-reckoning to that theory that

places  psychological  observation  amongst  the  means  of  charming,  curing,

and relieving existence? Should one have sufficiently convinced one's self of

the  unpleasant  consequences  of  this  art  to  divert  from  it  designedly  the

attention of him who is educating himself in it? As a matter of fact, a certain

blind  belief  in  the  goodness  of  human  nature,  an  innate  aversion  to  the

analysis  of  human  actions,  a  kind  of  shamefacedness  with  respect  to  the

nakedness of the soul may really be more desirable for the general well-being

of a man than that quality, useful in isolated cases, of psychological sharp-

sightedness; and perhaps the belief in goodness, in virtuous men and deeds,

in an abundance of impersonal goodwill in the world, has made men better

inasmuch as it has made them less distrustful. When one imitates Plutarch's

heroes with enthusiasm, and turns with disgust from a suspicious examination

of the motives for their actions, it is not truth which benefits thereby, but the

welfare of human society; the psychological mistake and, generally speaking,

the  insensibility  on  this  matter  helps  humanity  forwards,  while  the

recognition of truth gains more through the stimulating power of hypothesis

than  La  Rochefoucauld  has  said  in  his  preface  to  the  first  edition  of  his

"Sentences et maximes morales." . . . "Ce que le monde nomme vertu n'est

d'ordinaire qu'un fantôme formé par nos passions, à qui on donne un nom

honnête pour faire impunément ce qu'on veut" La Rochefoucauld and those

other French masters of soul-examination (who have lately been joined by a

German,  the  author  of  Psychological  Observations)  [4]  resemble  good

marksmen who again and again hit the bull's-eye; but it is the bull's-eye of

human nature. Their art arouses astonishment; but in the end a spectator whois not led by the spirit of science, but by humane intentions, will probably

execrate  an  art  which  appears  to  implant  in  the  soul  the  sense  of  the

disparagement and suspicion of mankind [4] Dr. Paul Rée.—J. M. K.

  37.

      Nevertheless.—However  it  may  be  with  reckoning  and  counter-

reckoning, in the present condition of philosophy the awakening of moral

observation is necessary. Humanity can no longer be spared the cruel sight of

the psychological dissecting-table with its knives and forceps. For here rules

that science which inquires into the origin and history of the so-called moral

sentiments, and which, in its progress, has to draw up and solve complicated

sociological problems:—the older philosophy knows the latter one not at all,

and has always avoided the examination of the origin and history of moral

sentiments on any feeble pretext. With what consequences it is now very easy

to see, after it has been shown by many examples how the mistakes of the

greatest  philosophers  generally  have  their  starting-point  in  a  wrong

explanation of certain human actions and sensations, just as on the ground of

an erroneous analysis—for instance, that of the so-called unselfish actions—a

false  ethic  is  built  up;  then,  to  harmonize  with  this  again,  religion  and

mythological confusion are brought in to assist, and finally the shades of

these dismal spirits fall also over physics and the general mode of regarding

the  world.  If  it  is  certain,  however,  that  superficiality  in  psychological

observation has laid, and still lays, the most dangerous snares for human

judgments and conclusions, then there is need now of that endurance of work

which does not grow weary of piling stone upon stone, pebble on pebble;

there is need of courage not to be ashamed of such humble work and to turn a

deaf ear to scorn. And this is also true,—numberless single observations on

the human and all-too-human have first been discovered, and given utterance

to, in circles of society which were accustomed to offer sacrifice therewith to

a clever desire to please, and not to scientific knowledge,—and the odor of

that old home of the moral maxim, a very seductive odor, has attached itself

almost inseparably to the whole species, so that on its account the scientific

man involuntarily betrays a certain distrust of this species and its earnestness.

But it is sufficient to point to the consequences, for already it begins to be

seen what results of a serious kind spring from the ground of psychological

observation. What, after all, is the principal axiom to which the boldest and

coldest thinker, the author of the book On the Origin of Moral Sensations, [5]

has attained by means of his incisive and decisive analyses of human actions?"The moral man," he says, "is no nearer to the intelligible (metaphysical)

world than is the physical man." This theory, hardened and sharpened under

the hammer-blow of historical knowledge, may some time or other, perhaps

in some future period, serve as the axe which is applied to the root of the

"metaphysical need" of man,—whether more as a blessing than a curse to the

general welfare it is not easy to say, but in any case as a theory with the most

important consequences, at once fruitful and terrible, and looking into the

world with that Janus-face which all great knowledge possesses. [5] Dr. Paul

Rée.—J. M. K.

  38.

  How  far  Useful.—It  must  remain  forever  undecided  whether

psychological observation is advantageous or disadvantageous to man; but it

is certain that it is necessary, because science cannot do without it. Science,

however, has no consideration for ultimate purposes, any more than Nature

has,  but  just  as  the  latter  occasionally  achieves  things  of  the  greatest

suitableness without intending to do so, so also true science, as the imitator of

nature in ideas, will occasionally and in many ways further the usefulness and

welfare of man,—but also without intending to do so. But whoever feels too

chilled by the breath of such a reflection has perhaps too little fire in himself;

let him look around him meanwhile and he will become aware of illnesses

which have need of ice-poultices, and of men who are so "kneaded together"

of heat and spirit that they can hardly find an atmosphere that is cold and

biting enough. Moreover, as individuals and nations that are too serious have

need of frivolities, as others too mobile and excitable have need occasionally

of heavily oppressing burdens for the sake of their health, should not we, the

more  intellectual  people  of  this  age,  that  grows  visibly  more  and  more

inflamed, seize all quenching and cooling means that exist, in order that we

may at least remain as constant, harmless, and moderate as we still are, and

thus, perhaps, serve some time or other as mirror and self-contemplation for

this age?

  39.

  The  Fable  of  Intelligible  Freedom.—The  history  of  the  sentiments  by

means  of  which  we  make  a  person  responsible  consists  of  the  following

principal phases. First, all single actions are called good or bad without any

regard  to  their  motives,  but  only  on  account  of  the  useful  or  injurious

consequences which result for the community. But soon the origin of these

distinctions is forgotten, and it is deemed that the qualities "good" or "bad"are contained in the action itself without regard to its consequences, by the

same error according to which language describes the stone as hard, the tree

as green,—with which, in short, the result is regarded as the cause. Then the

goodness or badness is implanted in the motive, and the action in itself is

looked upon as morally ambiguous. Mankind even goes further, and applies

the predicate good or bad no longer to single motives, but to the whole nature

of an individual, out of whom the motive grows as the plant grows out of the

earth. Thus, in turn, man is made responsible for his operations, then for his

actions,  then  for  his  motives,  and  finally  for  his  nature.  Eventually  it  is

discovered that even this nature cannot be responsible, inasmuch as it is an

absolutely  necessary  consequence  concreted  out  of  the  elements  and

influences of past and present things,—that man, therefore, cannot be made

responsible  for  anything,  neither  for  his  nature,  nor  his  motives,  nor  his

actions,  nor  his  effects.  It  has  therewith  come  to  be  recognized  that  the

history of moral valuations is at the same time the history of an error, the

error of responsibility, which is based upon the error of the freedom of will.

Schopenhauer thus decided against it: because certain actions bring ill humor

("consciousness of guilt") in their train, there must be a responsibility; for

there would be no reason for this ill humor if not only all human actions were

not done of necessity,—which is actually the case and also the belief of this

philosopher,—but man himself from the same necessity is precisely the being

that  he  is  which  Schopenhauer  denies.  From  the  fact  of  that  ill  humor

Schopenhauer thinks he can prove a liberty which man must somehow have

had, not with regard to actions, but with regard to nature; liberty, therefore, to

be thus or otherwise, not to act thus or otherwise. From the esse, the sphere of

freedom  and  responsibility,  there  results,  in  his  opinion,  the  operari,  the

sphere of strict causality, necessity, and irresponsibility. This ill humor is

apparently directed to the operari,—in so far it is erroneous,—but in reality it

is directed to the esse, which is the deed of a free will, the fundamental cause

of the existence of an individual, man becomes that which he wishes to be,

his will is anterior to his existence. Here the mistaken conclusion is drawn

that  from  the  fact  of  the  ill  humor,  the  justification,  the  reasonable

admissableness  of  this  ill  humor  is  presupposed;  and  starting  from  this

mistaken conclusion, Schopenhauer arrives at his fantastic sequence of the

so-called  intelligible  freedom.  But  the  ill  humor  after  the  deed  is  not

necessarily reasonable, indeed it is assuredly not reasonable, for it is based

upon  the  erroneous  presumption  that  the  action  need  not  have  inevitablyfollowed. Therefore, it is only because man believes himself to be free, not

because he is free, that he experiences remorse and pricks of conscience.

Moreover, this ill humor is a habit that can be broken off; in many people it is

entirely absent in connection with actions where others experience it. It is a

very changeable thing, and one which is connected with the development of

customs and culture, and probably only existing during a comparatively short

period of the world's history. Nobody is responsible for his actions, nobody

for his nature; to judge is identical with being unjust. This also applies when

an  individual  judges  himself.  The  theory  is  as  clear  as  sunlight,  and  yet

everyone prefers to go back into the shadow and the untruth, for fear of the

consequences.

  40.

  The Super-Animal.—The beast in us wishes to be deceived; morality is a

lie of necessity in order that we may not be torn in pieces by it. Without the

errors which lie in the assumption of morality, man would have remained an

animal. Thus, however, he has considered himself as something higher and

has laid strict laws upon himself. Therefore he hates the grades which have

remained nearer to animalness, whereby the former scorn of the slave, as a

not-yet-man, is to be explained as a fact.

  41.

  The Unchangeable Character.—That the character is unchangeable is not

true in a strict sense; this favorite theory means, rather, that during the short

lifetime of an individual the new influencing motives cannot penetrate deeply

enough to destroy the ingrained marks of many thousands of years. But if one

were to imagine a man of eighty thousand years, one would have in him an

absolutely changeable character, so that a number of different individuals

would gradually develop out of him. The shortness of human life misleads us

into forming many erroneous ideas about the qualities of man.

  42.

  The Order of Possessions and Morality.—The once-accepted hierarchy of

possessions, according as this or the other is coveted by a lower, higher, or

highest egoism, now decides what is moral or immoral. To prefer a lesser

good (for instance, the gratification of the senses) to a more highly valued

good (for instance, health) is accounted immoral, and also to prefer luxury to

liberty. The hierarchy of possessions, however, is not fixed and equal at all

times; if anyone prefers vengeance to justice he is moral according to the

standard of an earlier civilization, but immoral according to the present one.To be "immoral," therefore, denotes that an individual has not felt, or not felt

sufficiently strongly, the higher, finer, spiritual motives which have come in

with  a  new  culture;  it  marks  one  who  has  remained  behind,  but  only

according to the difference of degrees. The order of possessions itself is not

raised and lowered according to a moral point of view; but each time that it is

fixed it supplies the decision as to whether an action is moral or immoral.

  43.

  Cruel People as Those who have Remained Behind.—People who are

cruel  nowadays  must  be  accounted  for  by  us  as  the  grades  of  earlier

civilizations which have survived; here are exposed those deeper formations

in  the  mountain  of  humanity  which  usually  remain  concealed.  They  are

backward people whose brains, through all manner of accidents in the course

of inheritance, have not been developed in so delicate and manifold a way.

They show us what we all were and horrify us, but they themselves are as

little responsible as is a block of granite for being granite. There must, too, be

grooves and twists in our brains which answer to that condition of mind, as in

the form of certain human organs there are supposed to be traces of a fish-

state. But these grooves and twists are no longer the bed through which the

stream of our sensation flows.

  44.

    Gratitude and Revenge.—The reason why the powerful man is grateful is

this: his benefactor, through the benefit he confers, has mistaken and intruded

into the sphere of the powerful man,—now the latter, in return, penetrates

into the sphere of the benefactor by the act of gratitude. It is a milder form of

revenge. Without the satisfaction of gratitude, the powerful man would have

shown himself powerless, and would have been reckoned as such ever after.

Therefore every society of the good, which originally meant the powerful,

places gratitude amongst the first duties.—Swift propounded the maxim that

men were grateful in the same proportion as they were revengeful.

  45.

  The Twofold Early History of Good and Evil.—The conception of good

and evil has a twofold early history, namely, once in the soul of the ruling

tribes and castes. Whoever has the power of returning good for good, evil for

evil,  and  really  practices  requital,  and  who  is,  therefore,  grateful  and

revengeful, is called good; whoever is powerless, and unable to requite, is

reckoned  as  bad.  As  a  good  man  one  is  reckoned  among  the  "good,"  a

community which has common feelings because the single individuals arebound to one another by the sense of requital. As a bad man one belongs to

the "bad," to a party of subordinate, powerless people who have no common

feeling. The good are a caste, the bad are a mass like dust. Good and bad

have for a long time meant the same thing as noble and base, master and

slave.  On  the  other  hand,  the  enemy  is  not  looked  upon  as  evil,  he  can

requite. In Homer the Trojan and the Greek are both good. It is not the one

who injures us, but the one who is despicable, who is called bad. Good is

inherited in the community of the good; it is impossible that a bad man could

spring  from  such  good  soil.  If,  nevertheless,  one  of  the  good  ones  does

something which is unworthy of the good, refuge is sought in excuses; the

guilt is thrown upon a god, for instance; it is said that he has struck the good

man with blindness and madness.— Then in the soul of the oppressed and

powerless. Here every other man is looked upon as hostile, inconsiderate,

rapacious, cruel, cunning, be he noble or base; evil is the distinguishing word

for man, even for every conceivable living creature, e.g. for a god; human,

divine, is the same thing as devilish, evil. The signs of goodness, helpfulness,

pity,  are  looked  upon  with  fear  as  spite,  the  prelude  to  a  terrible  result,

stupefaction  and  outwitting,—in  short,  as  refined  malice.  With  such  a

disposition in the individual a community could hardly exist, or at most it

could exist only in its crudest form, so that in all places where this conception

of good and evil obtains, the downfall of the single individuals, of their tribes

and races, is at hand.—Our present civilization has grown up on the soil of

the ruling tribes and castes.

  46.

    Sympathy Stronger than Suffering.—There are cases when sympathy is

stronger than actual suffering. For instance, we are more pained when one of

our friends is guilty of something shameful than when we do it ourselves. For

one  thing,  we  have  more  faith  in  the  purity  of  his  character  than  he  has

himself; then our love for him, probably on account of this very faith, is

stronger  than  his  love  for  himself.  And  even  if  his  egoism  suffers  more

thereby  than  our  egoism,  inasmuch  as  it  has  to  bear  more  of  the  bad

consequences of his fault, the un-egoistic in us—this word is not to be taken

too seriously, but only as a modification of the expression—is more deeply

wounded by his guilt than is the un-egoistic in him.

  47.

      Hypochondria.—There are people who become hypochondriacal through

their sympathy and concern for another person; the kind of sympathy whichresults  therefrom  is  nothing  but  a  disease.  Thus  there  is  also  a  Christian

hypochondria, which afflicts those solitary, religiously-minded people who

keep constantly before their eyes the sufferings and death of Christ.

  48.

  Economy of Goodness.—Goodness and love, as the most healing herbs

and powers in human intercourse, are such costly discoveries that one would

wish as much economy as possible to be exercised in the employment of

these balsamic means; but this is impossible. The economy of goodness is the

dream of the most daring Utopians.

  49.

    Goodwill.—Amongst  the  small,  but  countlessly  frequent  and  therefore

very effective, things to which science should pay more attention than to the

great, rare things, is to be reckoned goodwill; I mean that exhibition of a

friendly disposition in intercourse, that smiling eye, that clasp of the hand,

that  cheerfulness  with  which  almost  all  human  actions  are  usually

accompanied. Every teacher, every official, adds this to whatever is his duty;

it is the perpetual occupation of humanity, and at the same time the waves of

its light, in which everything grows; in the narrowest circle, namely, within

the family, life blooms and flourishes only through that goodwill. Kindliness,

friendliness, the courtesy of the heart, are ever-flowing streams of un-egoistic

impulses, and have given far more powerful assistance to culture than even

those much more famous demonstrations which are called pity, mercy, and

self-sacrifice. But they are thought little of, and, as a matter of fact, there is

not  much  that  is  un-egoistic  in  them.  The  sum  of  these  small  doses  is

nevertheless mighty, their united force is amongst the strongest forces. Thus

one finds much more happiness in the world than sad eyes see, if one only

reckons rightly, and does not forget all those moments of comfort in which

every day is rich, even in the most harried of human lives.

  50.

  The Wish to arouse Pity.—In the most remarkable passage of his auto-

portrait (first printed in

  1658), La Rochefoucauld assuredly hits the nail on the head when he

warns all sensible people against pity, when he advises them to leave that to

those orders of the people who have need of passion (because it is not ruled

by  reason),  and  to  reach  the  point  of  helping  the  suffering  and  acting

energetically  in  an  accident;  while  pity,  according  to  his  (and  Plato's)

judgment, weakens the soul. Certainly we should exhibit pity, but take goodcare not to feel it, for the unfortunate are so stupid that to them the exhibition

of  pity  is  the  greatest  good  in  the  world.  One  can,  perhaps,  give  a  more

forcible warning against this feeling of pity if one looks upon that need of the

unfortunate not exactly as stupidity and lack of intellect, a kind of mental

derangement  which  misfortune  brings  with  it  (and  as  such,  indeed,  La

Rochefoucauld appears to regard it), but as something quite different and

more serious. Observe children, who cry and scream in order to be pitied, and

therefore wait for the moment when they will be noticed; live in intercourse

with the sick and mentally oppressed, and ask yourself whether that ready

complaining and whimpering, that making a show of misfortune, does not, at

bottom, aim at making the spectators miserable; the pity which the spectators

then exhibit is in so far a consolation for the weak and suffering in that the

latter recognize therein that they possess still one power , in spite of their

weakness,  the  power  of  giving  pain.  The  unfortunate  derives  a  sort  of

pleasure  from  this  feeling  of  superiority,  of  which  the  exhibition  of  pity

makes him conscious; his imagination is exalted, he is still powerful enough

to  give  the  world  pain.  Thus  the  thirst  for  pity  is  the  thirst  for  self-

gratification, and that, moreover, at the expense of his fellow-men; it shows

man in the whole inconsiderateness of his own dear self, but not exactly in

his "stupidity," as La Rochefoucauld thinks, In society-talk three-fourths of

all  questions  asked  and  of  all  answers  given  are  intended  to  cause  the

interlocutor a little pain; for this reason so many people pine for company; it

enables them to feel their power. There is a powerful charm of life in such

countless  but  very  small  doses  in  which  malice  makes  itself  felt,  just  as

goodwill, spread in the same way throughout the world, is the ever-ready

means of healing. But are there many honest people who will admit that it is

pleasing  to  give  pain?  that  one  not  infrequently  amuses  one's  self—and

amuses one's self very well—in causing mortifications to others, at least in

thought, and firing off at them the grape-shot of petty malice? Most people

are  too  dishonest,  and  a  few  are  too  good,  to  know  anything  of  this

pudendum; these will always deny that Prosper Mérimée is right when he

says, "Sachez aussi qu'il n'y a rien de plus commun que de faire le mal pour

le plaisir de le faire."

  51.

  How Appearance becomes Actuality.—The actor finally reaches such a

point that even in the deepest sorrow he cannot cease from thinking about the

impression  made  by  his  own  person  and  the  general  scenic  effect;  forinstance, even at the funeral of his child, he will weep over his own sorrow

and its expression like one of his own audience. The hypocrite, who always

plays one and the same part, ceases at last to be a hypocrite; for instance,

priests,  who  as  young  men  are  generally  conscious  or  unconscious

hypocrites, become at last natural, and are then really without any affectation,

just priests; or if the father does not succeed so far, perhaps the son does, who

makes use of his father's progress and inherits his habits. If anyone long and

obstinately  desires  to  appear  something,  he  finds  it  difficult  at  last  to  be

anything else. The profession of almost every individual, even of the artist,

begins with hypocrisy, with an imitating from without, with a copying of the

effective.  He  who  always  wears  the  mask  of  a  friendly  expression  must

eventually obtain a power over well-meaning dispositions without which the

expression of friendliness is not to be compelled,—and finally, these, again,

obtain a power over him, he is well-meaning.

  52.

  The Point of Honor in Deception.—In all great deceivers one thing is

noteworthy, to which they owe their power. In the actual act of deception,

with all their preparations, the dreadful voice, expression, and mien, in the

midst  of  their  effective  scenery  they  are  overcome  by  their  belief  in

themselves; it is this, then, which speaks so wonderfully and persuasively to

the spectators. The founders of religions are distinguished from those great

deceivers in that they never awake from their condition of self-deception; or

at  times,  but  very  rarely,  they  have  an  enlightened  moment  when  doubt

overpowers them; they generally console themselves, however, by ascribing

these enlightened moments to the influence of the Evil One. There must be

self-deception in order that this and that may produce great effects. For men

believe in the truth of everything that is visibly, strongly believed in.

  53.

  The Nominal Degrees of Truth.—One of the commonest mistakes is this:

because someone is truthful and honest towards us, he must speak the truth.

Thus the child believes in its parents' judgment, the Christian in the assertions

of the Founder of the Church. In the same way men refuse to admit that all

those things which men defended in former ages with the sacrifice of life and

happiness were nothing but errors; it is even said, perhaps, that they were

degrees of the truth. But what is really meant is that when a man has honestly

believed in something, and has fought and died for his faith, it would really

be too unjust if he had only been inspired by an error. Such a thing seems acontradiction  of  eternal  justice;  therefore  the  heart  of  sensitive  man  ever

enunciates against his head the axiom: between moral action and intellectual

insight there must absolutely be a necessary connection. It is unfortunately

otherwise; for there is no eternal justice.

  54.

    Falsehood.—Why  do  people  mostly  speak  the  truth  in  daily  life?—

Assuredly not because a god has forbidden falsehood. But, firstly, because it

is more convenient, as falsehood requires invention, deceit, and memory. (As

Swift says, he who tells a lie is not sensible how great a task he undertakes;

for  in  order  to  uphold  one  lie  he  must  invent  twenty  others.)  Therefore,

because it is advantageous in upright circumstances to say straight out, "I

want this, I have done that," and so on; because, in other words, the path of

compulsion and authority is surer than that of cunning. But if a child has been

brought up in complicated domestic circumstances, he employs falsehood,

naturally and unconsciously says whatever best suits his interests; a sense of

truth and a hatred of falsehood are quite foreign and unknown to him, and so

he lies in all innocence.

  55.

  Throwing  Suspicion  on  Morality  for  Faith's  Sake.—No  power  can  be

maintained when it is only represented by hypocrites; no matter how many

"worldly" elements the Catholic Church possesses, its strength lies in those

still numerous priestly natures who render life hard and full of meaning for

themselves, and whose glance and worn bodies speak of nocturnal vigils,

hunger, burning prayers, and perhaps even of scourging; these move men and

inspire them with fear. What if it were necessary to live thus? This is the

terrible question which their aspect brings to the lips. Whilst they spread this

doubt they always uprear another pillar of their power; even the free-thinker

does not dare to withstand such unselfishness with hard words of truth, and to

say, "Thyself deceived, deceive not others!" Only the difference of views

divides them from him, certainly no difference of goodness or badness; but

men generally treat unjustly that which they do not like. Thus we speak of the

cunning and the infamous art of the Jesuits, but overlook the self-control

which every individual Jesuit practices, and the fact that the lightened manner

of life preached by Jesuit books is by no means for their benefit, but for that

of the laity. We may even ask whether, with precisely similar tactics and

organization, we enlightened ones would make equally good tools, equally

admirable through self-conquest, indefatigableness, and renunciation.  56.

  Victory of Knowledge over Radical Evil.—It is of great advantage to him

who  desires  to  be  wise  to  have  witnessed  for  a  time  the  spectacle  of  a

thoroughly evil and degenerate man; it is false, like the contrary spectacle,

but  for  whole  long  periods  it  held  the  mastery,  and  its  roots  have  even

extended and ramified themselves to us and our world. In order to understand

ourselves we must understand it; but then, in order to mount higher we must

rise above it. We recognize, then, that there exist no sins in the metaphysical

sense; but, in the same sense, also no virtues; we recognize that the entire

domain  of  ethical  ideas  is  perpetually  tottering,  that  there  are  higher  and

deeper conceptions of good and evil, of moral and immoral. He who does not

desire much more from things than a knowledge of them easily makes peace

with his soul, and will make a mistake (or commit a sin, as the world calls it)

at the most from ignorance, but hardly from covetousness. He will no longer

wish  to  excommunicate  and  exterminate  desires;  but  his  only,  his  wholly

dominating ambition, to know as well as possible at all times, will make him

cool and will soften all the savageness in his disposition. Moreover, he has

been freed from a number of tormenting conceptions, he has no more feeling

at the mention of the words "punishments of hell," "sinfulness," "incapacity

for good," he recognizes in them only the vanishing shadow-pictures of false

views of the world and of life.

  57.

  Morality as the Self-Disintegration of Man.—A good author, who really

has his heart in his work, wishes that someone could come and annihilate him

by representing the same thing in a clearer way and answering without more

ado the problems therein proposed. The loving girl wishes she could prove

the  self-sacrificing  faithfulness  of  her  love  by  the  unfaithfulness  of  her

beloved. The soldier hopes to die on the field of battle for his victorious

fatherland; for his loftiest desires triumph in the victory of his country. The

mother gives to the child that of which she deprives herself—sleep, the best

food,  sometimes  her  health  and  fortune.  But  are  all  these  unegoistic

conditions?  Are  these  deeds  of  morality  miracles,  because,  to  use

Schopenhauer's expression, they are "impossible and yet performed"? Is it not

clear  that  in  all  four  cases  the  individual  loves  something  of  himself,  a

thought, a desire, a production, better than anything else of himself; that he

therefore  divides  his  nature  and  to  one  part  sacrifices  all  the  rest?  Is  it

something entirely different when an obstinate man says, "I would rather beshot than move a step out of my way for this man"? The desire for something

(wish, inclination, longing) is present in all the instances mentioned; to give

way to it, with all its consequences, is certainly not "un-egoistic."—In ethics

man does not consider himself as individuum but as dividuum.

  58.

  What One may Promise.—One may promise actions, but no sentiments,

for these are involuntary. Whoever promises to love or hate a person, or be

faithful to him forever, promises something which is not within his power; he

can certainly promise such actions as are usually the results of love, hate, or

fidelity, but which may also spring from other motives; for many ways and

motives  lead  to  one  and  the  same  action.  The  promise  to  love  someone

forever is, therefore, really: So long as I love you I will act towards you in a

loving way; if I cease to love you, you will still receive the same treatment

from me, although inspired by other motives, so that our fellow-men will still

be deluded into the belief that our love is unchanged and ever the same. One

promises, therefore, the continuation of the semblance of love, when, without

self-deception, one speaks vows of eternal love.

  59.

  Intellect and Morality.—One must have a good memory to be able to

keep a given promise. One must have a strong power of imagination to be

able to feel pity. So closely is morality bound to the goodness of the intellect.

  60.

  To  Wish  for  Revenge  and  to  Take  Revenge.—To  have  a  revengeful

thought and to carry it into effect is to have a violent attack of fever, which

passes off, however,—but to have a revengeful thought without the strength

and courage to carry it out is a chronic disease, a poisoning of body and soul

which we have to bear about with us. Morality, which only takes intentions

into account, considers the two cases as equal; usually the former case is

regarded as the worse (because of the evil consequences which may perhaps

result from the deed of revenge). Both estimates are short-sighted.

  61.

  The Power of Waiting.—Waiting is so difficult that even great poets have

not disdained to take incapability of waitingas the motive for their works.

Thus Shakespeare in Othello or Sophocles in Ajax, to whom suicide, had he

been able to let his feelings cool down for one day, would no longer have

seemed necessary, as the oracle intimated; he would probably have snapped

his fingers at the terrible whisperings of wounded vanity, and said to himself,"Who has not already, in my circumstances, mistaken a fool for a hero? Is it

something  so  very  extraordinary?"  On  the  contrary,  it  is  something  very

commonly human; Ajax might allow himself that consolation. Passion will

not wait; the tragedy in the lives of great men frequently lies not in their

conflict with the times and the baseness of their fellow-men, but in their

incapacity of postponing their work for a year or two; they cannot wait. In all

duels advising friends have one thing to decide, namely whether the parties

concerned can still wait awhile; if this is not the case, then a duel is advisable,

inasmuch as each of the two says, "Either I continue to live and that other

man must die immediately, or vice versa." In such case waiting would mean a

prolonged suffering of the terrible martyrdom of wounded honor in the face

of the insulter, and this may entail more suffering than life is worth.

  62.

    Reveling  in  Vengeance.—Coarser  individuals  who  feel  themselves

insulted, make out the insult to be as great as possible, and relate the affair in

greatly exaggerated language, in order to be able to revel thoroughly in the

rarely awakened feelings of hatred and revenge.

  63.

  The Value of Disparagement.—In order to maintain their self-respect in

their own eyes and a certain thoroughness of action, not a few men, perhaps

even the majority, find it absolutely necessary to run down and disparage all

their acquaintances. But as mean natures are numerous, and since it is very

important whether they possess that thoroughness or lose it, hence——

  64.

  The Man in a Passion.—We must beware of one who is in a passion

against us as of one who has once sought our life; for the fact that we still live

is due to the absence of power to kill,—if looks would suffice, we should

have been dead long ago. It is a piece of rough civilization to force someone

into silence by the exhibition of physical savageness and the inspiring of fear.

That cold glance which exalted persons employ towards their servants is also

a  relic  of  that  caste  division  between  man  and  man,  a  piece  of  rough

antiquity;  women,  the  preservers  of  ancient  things,  have  also  faithfully

retained this survival of an ancient habit.

  65.

  Whither  Honesty  Can  Lead.—Somebody  had  the  bad  habit  of

occasionally talking quite frankly about the motives of his actions, which

were as good and as bad as the motives of most men. He first gave offence,then  aroused  suspicion,  was  then  gradually  excluded  from  society  and

declared a social outlaw, until at last justice remembered such an abandoned

creature, on occasions when it would otherwise have had no eyes, or would

have  closed  them.  The  lack  of  power  to  hold  his  tongue  concerning  the

common secret, and the irresponsible tendency to see what no one wishes to

see—himself—brought him to a prison and an early death.

  66.

    Punishable, but Never Punished.—Our crime against criminals lies in the

fact that we treat them like rascals.

  67.

  Sancta  Simplicitas  of  Virtue.—Every  virtue  has  its  privileges;  for

example, that of contributing its own little faggot to the scaffold of every

condemned man,

  68.

  Morality and Consequences.—It is not only the spectators of a deed who

frequently judge of its morality or immorality according to its consequences,

but the doer of the deed himself does so. For the motives and intentions are

seldom sufficiently clear and simple, and sometimes memory itself seems

clouded by the consequences of the deed, so that one ascribes the deed to

false motives or looks upon unessential motives as essential. Success often

gives an action the whole honest glamour of a good conscience; failure casts

the shadow of remorse over the most estimable deed. Hence arises the well-

known practice of the politician, who thinks, "Only grant me success, with

that I bring all honest souls over to my side and make myself honest in my

own eyes." In the same way success must replace a better argument. Many

educated  people  still  believe  that  the  triumph  of  Christianity  over  Greek

philosophy is a proof of the greater truthfulness of the former,—although in

this case it is only the coarser and more powerful that has triumphed over the

more spiritual and delicate. Which possesses the greater truth may be seen

from  the  fact  that  the  awakening  sciences  have  agreed  with  Epicurus'

philosophy  on  point  after  point,  but  on  point  after  point  have  rejected

Christianity.

  69.

  Love and Justice.—Why do we over-estimate love to the disadvantage of

justice, and say the most beautiful things about it, as if it were something

very much higher than the latter? Is it not visibly more stupid than justice?

Certainly, but precisely for that reason all the pleasanter for everyone. It isblind, and possesses an abundant cornucopia, out of which it distributes its

gifts to all, even if they do not deserve them, even if they express no thanks

for them. It is as impartial as the rain, which, according to the Bible and

experience,  makes  not  only  the  unjust,  but  also  occasionally  the  just  wet

through to the skin.

  70.

    Execution.—How is it that every execution offends us more than does a

murder?  It  is  the  coldness  of  the  judges,  the  painful  preparations,  the

conviction that a human being is here being used as a warning to scare others.

For  the  guilt  is  not  punished,  even  if  it  existed—it  lies  with  educators,

parents,  surroundings,  in  ourselves,  not  in  the  murderer—I  mean  the

determining circumstances.

  71.

    Hope.—Pandora brought the box of ills and opened it. It was the gift of

the gods to men, outwardly a beautiful and seductive gift, and called the

Casket of Happiness. Out of it flew all the evils, living winged creatures,

thence they now circulate and do men injury day and night. One single evil

had not yet escaped from the box, and by the will of Zeus Pandora closed the

lid and it remained within. Now forever man has the casket of happiness in

his  house  and  thinks  he  holds  a  great  treasure;  it  is  at  his  disposal,  he

stretches out his hand for it whenever he desires; for he does not know the

box which Pandora brought was the casket of evil, and he believes the ill

which remains within to be the greatest blessing,—it is hope. Zeus did not

wish man, however much he might be tormented by the other evils, to fling

away his life, but to go on letting himself be tormented again and again.

Therefore he gives man hope,—in reality it is the worst of all evils, because it

prolongs the torments of man.

  72.

  The Degree of Moral Inflammability Unknown.—According to whether

we  have  or  have  not  had  certain  disturbing  views  and  impressions—for

instance, an unjustly executed, killed, or martyred father; a faithless wife; a

cruel hostile attack—it depends whether our passions reach fever heat and

influence our whole life or not. No one knows to what he may be driven by

circumstances, pity, or indignation; he does not know the degree of his own

inflammability.  Miserable  little  circumstances  make  us  miserable;  it  is

generally not the quantity of experiences, but their quality, on which lower

and higher man depends, in good and evil.  73.

  The Martyr in Spite of Himself.—There was a man belonging to a party

who was too nervous and cowardly ever to contradict his comrades; they

made  use  of  him  for  everything,  they  demanded  everything  from  him,

because he was more afraid of the bad opinion of his companions than of

death itself; his was a miserable, feeble soul. They recognized this, and on the

ground of these qualities they made a hero of him, and finally even a martyr.

Although the coward inwardly always said No, with his lips he always said

Yes, even on the scaffold, when he was about to die for the opinions of his

party; for beside him stood one of his old companions, who so tyrannized

over  him  by  word  and  look  that  he  really  suffered  death  in  the  most

respectable manner, and has ever since been celebrated as a martyr and a

great character.

  74.

  The Every-day Standard.—One will seldom go wrong if one attributes

extreme actions to vanity, average ones to habit, and petty ones to fear.

  75.

    Misunderstanding Concerning Virtue.—Whoever has known immorality

in connection with pleasure, as is the case with a man who has a pleasure-

seeking  youth  behind  him,  imagines  that  virtue  must  be  connected  with

absence of pleasure.—Whoever, on the contrary, has been much plagued by

his passions and vices, longs to find in virtue peace and the soul's happiness.

Hence it is possible for two virtuous persons not to understand each other at

all.

  76.

  The Ascetic.—The ascetic makes a necessity of virtue.

  77.

  Transferring Honor from the Person To the Thing.—Deeds of love and

sacrifice for the benefit of one's neighbor are generally honored, wherever

they are manifested. Thereby we multiply the valuation of things which are

thus loved, or for which we sacrifice ourselves, although perhaps they are not

worth much in themselves. A brave army is convinced of the cause for which

it fights.

  78.

  Ambition a Substitute for the Moral Sense.—The moral sense must not be

lacking  in  those  natures  which  have  no  ambition.  The  ambitious  manage

without  it,  with  almost  the  same  results.  For  this  reason  the  sons  ofunpretentious, unambitious families, when once they lose the moral sense,

generally degenerate very quickly into complete scamps.

  79.

  Vanity Enriches.—How poor would be the human mind without vanity!

Thus, however, it resembles a well-stocked and constantly replenished bazaar

which attracts buyers of every kind. There they can find almost everything,

obtain  almost  everything,  provided  that  they  bring  the  right  sort  of  coin,

namely admiration.

  80.

  Old Age and Death.—Apart from the commands of religion, the question

may well be asked, Why is it more worthy for an old man who feels his

powers decline, to await his slow exhaustion and extinction than with full

consciousness to set a limit to his life? Suicide in this case is a perfectly

natural, obvious action, which should justly arouse respect as a triumph of

reason, and did arouse it in those times when the heads of Greek philosophy

and the sturdiest patriots used to seek death through suicide. The seeking, on

the contrary, to prolong existence from day to day, with anxious consultation

of doctors and painful mode of living, without the power of drawing nearer to

the actual aim of life, is far less worthy. Religion is rich in excuses to reply to

the demand for suicide, and thus it ingratiates itself with those who wish to

cling to life.

  81.

  Errors of the Sufferer and the Doer.—When a rich man deprives a poor

man  of  a  possession  (for  instance,  a  prince  taking  the  sweetheart  of  a

plebeian), an error arises in the mind of the poor man; he thinks that the rich

man must be utterly infamous to take away from him the little that he has.

But the rich man does not estimate so highly the value of a single possession,

because he is accustomed to have many; hence he cannot imagine himself in

the poor man's place, and does not commit nearly so great a wrong as the

latter supposes. They each have a mistaken idea of the other. The injustice of

the powerful, which, more than anything else, rouses indignation in history, is

by no means so great as it appears. Alone the mere inherited consciousness of

being a higher creation, with higher claims, produces a cold temperament,

and  leaves  the  conscience  quiet;  we  all  of  us  feel  no  injustice  when  the

difference is very great between ourselves and another creature, and kill a fly,

for instance, without any pricks of conscience. Therefore it was no sign of

badness in Xerxes (whom even all Greeks describe as superlatively noble)when he took a son away from his father and had him cut in pieces, because

he had expressed a nervous, ominous distrust of the whole campaign; in this

case the individual is put out of the way like an unpleasant insect; he is too

lowly to be allowed any longer to cause annoyance to a ruler of the world.

Yes, every cruel man is not so cruel as the ill-treated one imagines; the idea

of pain is not the same as its endurance. It is the same thing in the case of

unjust  judges,  of  the  journalist  who  leads  public  opinion  astray  by  small

dishonesties. In all these cases cause and effect are surrounded by entirely

different groups of feelings and thoughts; yet one unconsciously takes it for

granted  that  doer  and  sufferer  think  and  feel  alike,  and  according  to  this

supposition we measure the guilt of the one by the pain of the other.

  82.

  The Skin of the Soul.—As the bones, flesh, entrails, and blood-vessels are

enclosed within a skin, which makes the aspect of man endurable, so the

emotions and passions of the soul are enwrapped with vanity,—it is the skin

of the soul.

  83.

  The Sleep of Virtue.—When virtue has slept, it will arise again all the

fresher.

  84.

  The Refinement of Shame.—People are not ashamed to think something

foul, but they are ashamed when they think these foul thoughts are attributed

to them.

  85.

  Malice is Rare.—Most people are far too much occupied with themselves

to be malicious.

  86.

  The Tongue in the Balance.—We praise or blame according as the one or

the other affords more opportunity for exhibiting our power of judgment.

  87.

  St. Luke xviii.

  14, improved.—He that humbleth himself wishes to be exalted.

  88.

  The Prevention of Suicide.—There is a certain right by which we may

deprive a man of life, but none by which we may deprive him of death; this is

mere cruelty.

  89.    Vanity.—We care for the good opinion of men, firstly because they are

useful to us, and then because we wish to please them (children their parents,

pupils their teachers, and well-meaning people generally their fellow-men).

Only where the good opinion of men is of importance to someone, apart from

the advantage thereof or his wish to please, can we speak of vanity. In this

case the man wishes to please himself, but at the expense of his fellow-men,

either  by  misleading  them  into  holding  a  false  opinion  about  him,  or  by

aiming at a degree of "good opinion" which must be painful to everyone else

(by arousing envy). The individual usually wishes to corroborate the opinion

he holds of himself by the opinion of others, and to strengthen it in his own

eyes;  but  the  strong  habit  of  authority—a  habit  as  old  as  man  himself—

induces many to support by authority their belief in themselves: that is to say,

they accept it first from others; they trust the judgment of others more than

their own. The interest in himself, the wish to please himself, attains to such a

height  in  a  vain  man  that  he  misleads  others  into  having  a  false,  all  too

elevated estimation of him, and yet nevertheless sets store by their authority,

—thus  causing  an  error  and  yet  believing  in  it.  It  must  be  confessed,

therefore,  that  vain  people  do  not  wish  to  please  others  so  much  as

themselves, and that they go so far therein as to neglect their advantage, for

they often endeavor to prejudice their fellow-men unfavorably, inimicably,

enviously, consequently injuriously against themselves, merely in order to

have pleasure in themselves, personal pleasure.

  90.

  The Limits of Human Love.—A man who has declared that another is an

idiot and a bad companion, is angry when the latter eventually proves himself

to be otherwise.

  91.

  Moralité  Larmoyante.—What  a  great  deal  of  pleasure  morality  gives!

Only think what a sea of pleasant tears has been shed over descriptions of

noble and unselfish deeds! This charm of life would vanish if the belief in

absolute irresponsibility were to obtain supremacy.

  92.

  The Origin of Justice.—Justice (equity) has its origin amongst powers

which are fairly equal, as Thucydides (in the terrible dialogue between the

Athenian  and  Melian  ambassadors)  rightly  comprehended:  that  is  to  say,

where there is no clearly recognizable supremacy, and where a conflict would

be useless and would injure both sides, there arises the thought of coming toan understanding and settling the opposing claims; the character of exchange

is the primary character of justice. Each party satisfies the other, as each

obtains what he values more than the other. Each one receives that which he

desires, as his own henceforth, and whatever is desired is received in return.

Justice, therefore, is recompense and exchange based on the hypothesis of a

fairly  equal  degree  of  power,—thus,  originally,  revenge  belongs  to  the

province of justice, it is an exchange. Also gratitude.—Justice naturally is

based on the point of view of a judicious self-preservation, on the egoism,

therefore,  of  that  reflection,  "Why  should  I  injure  myself  uselessly  and

perhaps not attain my aim after all?" So much about the origin of justice.

Because man, according to his intellectual custom, has forgotten the original

purpose of so-called just and reasonable actions, and particularly because for

hundreds  of  years  children  have  been  taught  to  admire  and  imitate  such

actions, the idea has gradually arisen that such an action is un-egoistic; upon

this idea, however, is based the high estimation in which it is held: which,

moreover, like all valuations, is constantly growing, for something that is

valued highly is striven after, imitated, multiplied, and increases, because the

value of the output of toil and enthusiasm of each individual is added to the

value of the thing itself. How little moral would the world look without this

forgetfulness! A poet might say that God had placed forgetfulness as door-

keeper in the temple of human dignity.

  93.

  The  Right  of  the  Weaker.—When  anyone  submits  under  certain

conditions to a greater power, as a besieged town for instance, the counter-

condition is that one can destroy one's self, burn the town, and so cause the

mighty one a great loss. Therefore there is a kind of equalization here, on the

basis of which rights may be determined. The enemy has his advantage in

maintaining it. In so far there are also rights between slaves and masters, that

is, precisely so far as the possession of the slave is useful and important to his

master. The right originally extends so far as one appears to be valuable to

the other, essentially unlosable, unconquerable, and so forth. In so far the

weaker one also has rights, but lesser ones. Hence the famous unusquisque

tantum  juris  habet,  quantum  potentia  valet  (or  more  exactly,  quantum

potentia valere creditur).

  94.

  The Three Phases of Hitherto Existing Morality.—It is the first sign that

the animal has become man when its actions no longer have regard only tomomentary  welfare,  but  to  what  is  enduring,  when  it  grows  useful  and

practical; there the free rule of reason first breaks out. A still higher step is

reached when he acts according to the principle of honor; by this means he

brings himself into order, submits to common feelings, and that exalts him

still higher over the phase in which he was led only by the idea of usefulness

from a personal point of view; he respects and wishes to be respected, i.e. he

understands usefulness as dependent upon what he thinks of others and what

others think of him. Eventually he acts, on the highest step of the hitherto

exiting morality, according to his standard of things and men; he himself

decides  for  himself  and  others  what  is  honorable,  what  is  useful;  he  has

become the law-giver of opinions, in accordance with the ever more highly

developed idea of what is useful and honorable. Knowledge enables him to

place  that  which  is  most  useful,  that  is  to  say  the  general,  enduring

usefulness,  above  the  personal,  the  honorable  recognition  of  general,

enduring  validity  above  the  momentary;  he  lives  and  acts  as  a  collective

individual.

  95.

  The  Morality  of  the  Mature  Individual.—The  impersonal  has  hitherto

been looked upon as the actual distinguishing mark of moral action; and it

has been pointed out that in the beginning it was in consideration of the

common good that all impersonal actions were praised and distinguished. Is

not an important change in these views impending, now when it is more and

more  recognized  that  it  is  precisely  in  the  most  personal  possible

considerations  that  the  common  good  is  the  greatest,  so  that  a  strictly

personal action now pest illustrates the present idea of morality, as utility for

the mass? To make a whole personality out of ourselves, and in all that we do

to keep that personality's highest good in view, carries us further than those

sympathetic emotions and actions for the benefit of others. We all still suffer,

certainly, from the too small consideration of the personal in us; it is badly

developed,—let us admit it; rather has our mind been forcibly drawn away

from it and offered as a sacrifice to the State, to science, or to those who

stand in need of help, as if it were the bad part which must be sacrificed. We

are still willing to work for our fellow-men, but only so far as we find our

own  greatest  advantage  in  this  work,  no  more  and  no  less.  It  is  only  a

question of what we understand as our advantage; the unripe, undeveloped,

crude individual will understand it in the crudest way.

  96.  Custom  and  Morality.—To  be  moral,  correct,  and  virtuous  is  to  be

obedient  to  an  old-established  law  and  custom.  Whether  we  submit  with

difficulty  or  willingly  is  immaterial,  enough  that  we  do  so.  He  is  called

"good"  who,  as  if  naturally,  after  long  precedent,  easily  and  willingly,

therefore,  does  what  is  right,  according  to  whatever  this  may  be  (as,  for

instance, taking revenge, if to take revenge be considered as right, as amongst

the ancient Greeks). He is called good because he is good "for something";

but as goodwill, pity, consideration, moderation, and such like, have come,

with the change in manners, to be looked upon as "good for something," as

useful, the good-natured and helpful have, later on, come to be distinguished

specially as "good." (In the beginning other and more important kinds of

usefulness  stood  in  the  foreground.)  To  be  evil  is  to  be  "not  moral"

(immoral), to be immoral is to be in opposition to tradition, however sensible

or  stupid  it  may  be;  injury  to  the  community  (the  "neighbor"  being

understood thereby) has, however, been looked upon by the social laws of all

different ages as being eminently the actual "immorality," so that now at the

word "evil" we immediately think of voluntary injury to one's neighbor. The

fundamental antithesis which has taught man the distinction between moral

and immoral, between good and evil, is not the "egoistic" and "unegoistic,"

but  the  being  bound  to  the  tradition,  law,  and  solution  thereof.  How  the

tradition has arisen is immaterial, at all events without regard to good and evil

or any immanent categorical imperative, but above all for the purpose of

preserving  a  community,  a  generation,  an  association,  a  people;  every

superstitious custom that has arisen on account of some falsely explained

accident, creates a tradition, which it is moral to follow; to separate one's self

from it is dangerous, but more dangerous for the community than for the

individual (because the Godhead punishes the community for every outrage

and every violation of its rights, and the individual only in proportion). Now

every  tradition  grows  continually  more  venerable,  the  farther  off  lies  its

origin, the more this is lost sight of; the generation paid it accumulates from

generation to generation, the tradition at last becomes holy and excites awe;

and thus in any case the morality of piety is a much older morality than that

which requires un-egoistic actions.

  97.

  Pleasure in Traditional Custom.—An important species of pleasure, and

therewith  the  source  of  morality,  arises  out  of  habit.  Man  does  what  is

habitual to him more easily, better, and therefore more willingly; he feels apleasure therein, and knows from experience that the habitual has been tested,

and  is  therefore  useful;  a  custom  that  we  can  live  with  is  proved  to  be

wholesome  and  advantageous  in  contrast  to  all  new  and  not  yet  tested

experiments. According to this, morality is the union of the pleasant and the

useful;  moreover,  it  requires  no  reflection.  As  soon  as  man  can  use

compulsion, he uses it to introduce and enforce his customs; for in his eyes

they  are  proved  as  the  wisdom  of  life.  In  the  same  way  a  company  of

individuals compels each single one to adopt the same customs. Here the

inference  is  wrong;  because  we  feel  at  ease  with  a  morality,  or  at  least

because we are able to carry on existence with it, therefore this morality is

necessary, for it seems to be the only possibility of feeling at ease; the ease of

life seems to grow out of it alone. This comprehension of the habitual as a

necessity of existence is pursued even to the smallest details of custom,—as

insight  into  genuine  causality  is  very  small  with  lower  peoples  and

civilizations,  they  take  precautions  with  superstitious  fear  that  everything

should  go  in  its  same  groove;  even  where  custom  is  difficult,  hard,  and

burdensome, it is preserved on account of its apparent highest usefulness. It is

not  known  that  the  same  degree  of  well-being  can  also  exist  with  other

customs, and that even higher degrees may be attained. We become aware,

however, that all customs, even the hardest, grow pleasanter and milder with

time, and that the severest way of life may become a habit and therefore a

pleasure.

  98.

  Pleasure and Social Instinct.—Out of his relations with other men, man

obtains a new species of pleasure in addition to those pleasurable sensations

which he derives from himself; whereby he greatly increases the scope of

enjoyment. Perhaps he has already taken too many of the pleasures of this

sphere from animals, which visibly feel pleasure when they play with each

other,  especially  the  mother  with  her  young.  Then  consider  the  sexual

relations, which make almost every female interesting to a male with regard

to pleasure, and vice versa. The feeling of pleasure on the basis of human

relations  generally  makes  man  better;  joy  in  common,  pleasure  enjoyed

together  is  increased,  it  gives  the  individual  security,  makes  him  good-

tempered, and dispels mistrust and envy, for we feel ourselves at ease and see

others at ease. Similar manifestations of pleasure awaken the idea of the same

sensations, the feeling of being like something; a like effect is produced by

common  sufferings,  the  same  bad  weather,  dangers,  enemies.  Upon  thisfoundation is based the oldest alliance, the object of which is the mutual

obviating  and  averting  of  a  threatening  danger  for  the  benefit  of  each

individual. And thus the social instinct grows out of pleasure.

  99.

  The  Innocent  Side  of  So-Called  Evil  Actions.—All  "evil"  actions  are

prompted by the instinct of preservation, or, more exactly, by the desire for

pleasure  and  the  avoidance  of  pain  on  the  part  of  the  individual;  thus

prompted, but not evil. "To cause pain per se" does not exist, except in the

brains  of  philosophers,  neither  does  "to  give  pleasure  per  se"  (pity  in

Schopenhauer's meaning). In the social condition before the State we kill the

creature, be it ape or man, who tries to take from us the fruit of a tree when

we are hungry and approach the tree, as we should still do with animals in

inhospitable  countries.  The  evil  actions  which  now  most  rouse  our

indignation, are based upon the error that he who causes them has a free will,

that he had the option, therefore, of not doing us this injury. This belief in

option arouses hatred, desire for revenge, spite, and the deterioration of the

whole imagination, while we are much less angry with an animal because we

consider it irresponsible. To do injury, not from the instinct of preservation,

but as requital, is the consequence of a false judgment and therefore equally

innocent. The individual can in the condition which lies before the State, act

sternly and cruelly towards other creatures for the purpose of terrifying, to

establish his existence firmly by such terrifying proofs of his power. Thus act

the  violent,  the  mighty,  the  original  founders  of  States,  who  subdue  the

weaker to themselves. They have the right to do so, such as the State still

takes for itself; or rather, there is no right that can hinder this. The ground for

all  morality  can  only  be  made  ready  when  a  stronger  individual  or  a

collective  individual,  for  instance  society  or  the  State,  subdues  the  single

individuals,  draws  them  out  of  their  singleness,  and  forms  them  into  an

association.  Compulsion  precedes  morality,  indeed  morality  itself  is

compulsion for a time, to which one submits for the avoidance of pain. Later

on it becomes custom,—later still, free obedience, and finally almost instinct,

—then, like everything long accustomed and natural, it is connected with

pleasure—and is henceforth called virtue.

  100.

    Shame.—Shame  exists  everywhere  where  there  is  a  "mystery";  this,

however, is a religious idea, which was widely extended in the older times of

human  civilization.  Everywhere  were  found  bounded  domains  to  whichaccess was forbidden by divine right, except under certain conditions; at first

locally, as, for example, certain spots that ought not to be trodden by the feet

of  the  uninitiated,  in  the  neighborhood  of  which  these  latter  experienced

horror and fear. This feeling was a good deal carried over into other relations,

for instance, the sex relations, which, as a privilege and ± ´ÅÄ¿½ of riper

years,  had  to  be  withheld  from  the  knowledge  of  the  young  for  their

advantage, relations for the protection and sanctification of which many gods

were  invented  and  were  set  up  as  guardians  in  the  nuptial  chamber.  (In

Turkish  this  room  is  on  this  account  called  harem,  "sanctuary,"  and  is

distinguished with the same name, therefore, that is used for the entrance

courts of the mosques.) Thus the kingdom is as a centre from which radiate

power and glory, to the subjects a mystery full of secrecy and shame, of

which many aftereffects may still be felt among nations which otherwise do

not by any means belong to the bashful type. Similarly, the whole world of

inner conditions, the so-called "soul," is still a mystery for all who are not

philosophers,  after  it  has  been  looked  upon  for  endless  ages  as  of  divine

origin and as worthy of divine intercourse; according to this it is an ± ´ÅÄ¿½

and arouses shame.

  101.

  Judge Not.—In considering earlier periods, care must be taken not to fall

into unjust abuse. The injustice in slavery, the cruelty in the suppression of

persons and nations, is not to be measured by our standard. For the instinct of

justice was not then so far developed. Who dares to reproach the Genevese

Calvin with the burning of the physician Servet? It was an action following

and resulting from his convictions, and in the same way the Inquisition had a

good right; only the ruling views were false, and produced a result which

seems hard to us because those views have now grown strange to us. Besides,

what is the burning of a single individual compared with eternal pains of hell

for almost all! And yet this idea was universal at that time, without essentially

injuring by its dreadfulness the conception of a God. With us, too, political

sectarians are hardly and cruelly treated, but because one is accustomed to

believe in the necessity of the State, the cruelty is not so deeply felt hereas it

is where we repudiate the views. Cruelty to animals in children and Italians is

due to ignorance, i.e. the animal, through the interests of Church teaching,

has been placed too far behind man. Much that is dreadful and inhuman in

history, much that one hardly likes to believe, is mitigated by the reflection

that  the  one  who  commands  and  the  one  who  carries  out  are  differentpersons,—the  former  does  not  behold  the  right  and  therefore  does  not

experience  the  strong  impression  on  the  imagination;  the  latter  obeys  a

superior  and  therefore  feels  no  responsibility.  Most  princes  and  military

heads,  through  lack  of  imagination,  easily  appear  hard  and  cruel  without

really being so. Egoism is not evil, because the idea of the "neighbor"—the

word is of Christian origin and does not represent the truth—is very weak in

us; and we feel ourselves almost as free and irresponsible towards him as

towards plants and stones. We have yet to learn that others suffer, and this

can never be completely learnt.

  102.

  "Man always Acts Rightly."—We do not complain of nature as immoral

because it sends a thunderstorm and makes us wet,—why do we call those

who injure us immoral? Because in the latter case we take for granted a free

will  functioning  voluntarily;  in  the  former  we  see  necessity.  But  this

distinction is an error. Thus we do not call even intentional injury immoral in

all circumstances; for instance, we kill a fly unhesitatingly and intentionally,

only because its buzzing annoys us; we punish a criminal intentionally and

hurt him in order to protect ourselves and society. In the first case it is the

individual who, in order to preserve himself, or even to protect himself from

worry, does intentional injury; in the second case it is the State. All morals

allow intentional injury in the case of necessity, that is, when it is a matter of

self-preservation! But these two points of view suffice to explain all evil

actions committed by men against men, we are desirous of obtaining pleasure

or avoiding pain; in any case it is always a question of self-preservation.

Socrates and Plato are right: whatever man does he always does well, that is,

he does that which seems to him good (useful) according to the degree of his

intellect, the particular standard of his reasonableness.

  103.

  The Harmlessness of Malice.—The aim of malice is not the suffering of

others  in  itself,  but  our  own  enjoyment;  for  instance,  as  the  feeling  of

revenge,  or  stronger  nervous  excitement.  All  teasing,  even,  shows  the

pleasure it gives to exercise our power on others and bring it to an enjoyable

feeling of preponderance. Is it immoral to taste pleasure at the expense of

another's pain? Is malicious joy [6] devilish, as Schopenhauer says? We give

ourselves pleasure in nature by breaking off twigs, loosening stones, fighting

with wild animals, and do this in order to become thereby conscious of our

strength.  Is  the  knowledge,  therefore,  that  another  suffers  through  us,  thesame thing concerning which we otherwise feel irresponsible, supposed to

make us immoral? But if we did not know this we would not thereby have the

enjoyment  of  our  own  superiority,  which  can  only  manifest  itself  by  the

suffering of others, for instance, in teasing. All pleasure per se is neither good

nor evil; whence should come the decision that in order to have pleasure

ourselves we may not cause displeasure to others? From the point of view of

usefulness  alone,  that  is,  out  of  consideration  for  the  consequences,  for

possible displeasure, when the injured one or the replacing State gives the

expectation of resentment and revenge: this only can have been the original

reason  for  denying  ourselves  such  actions.  Pity  aims  just  as  little  at  the

pleasure of others as malice at the pain of others per se. For it contains at

least two (perhaps many more) elements of a personal pleasure, and is so far

self-gratification; in the first place as the pleasure of emotion, which is the

kind of pity that exists in tragedy, and then, when it impels to action, as the

pleasure of satisfaction in the exercise of power. If, besides this, a suffering

person is very dear to us, we lift a sorrow from ourselves by the exercise of

sympathetic  actions.  Except  by  a  few  philosophers,  pity  has  always  been

placed very low in the scale of moral feelings, and rightly so. [6] This is the

untranslatable word Schadenfreude, which means joy at the misfortune of

others.—J. M. K.

  104.

    Self-Defense.—If self-defense is allowed to pass as moral, then almost all

manifestations of the so-called immoral egoism must also stand; men injure,

rob, or kill in order to preserve or defend themselves, to prevent personal

injury; they lie where cunning and dissimulation are the right means of self-

preservation. Intentional injury, when our existence or safety (preservation of

our comfort) is concerned, is conceded to be moral; the State itself injures,

according to this point of view, when it punishes. In unintentional injury, of

course, there can be nothing immoral, that is ruled by chance. Is there, then, a

kind  of  intentional  injury  where  our  existence  or  the  preservation  of  our

comfort is not concerned? Is there an injuring out of pure malice, for instance

in cruelty? If one does not know how much an action hurts, it is no deed of

malice;  thus  the  child  is  not  malicious  towards  the  animal,  not  evil;  he

examines and destroys it like a toy. But do we ever know entirely how an

action  hurts  another?  As  far  as  our  nervous  system  extends  we  protect

ourselves from pain; if it extended farther, to our fellow-men, namely, we

should do no one an injury (except in such cases as we injure ourselves,where we cut ourselves for the sake of cure, tire and exert ourselves for the

sake of health). We conclude by analogy that something hurts somebody, and

through  memory  and  the  strength  of  imagination  we  may  suffer  from  it

ourselves. But still what a difference there is between toothache and the pain

(pity) that the sight of toothache calls forth! Therefore, in injury out of so-

called  malice  the  degree  of  pain  produced  is  always  unknown  to  us;  but

inasmuch as there is pleasure in the action (the feeling of one's own power,

one's own strong excitement), the action is committed, in order to preserve

the comfort of the individual, and is regarded, therefore, from a similar point

of view as defense and falsehood in necessity. No life without pleasure; the

struggle for pleasure is the struggle for life. Whether the individual so fights

this fight that men call him good, or so that they call him evil, is determined

by the measure and the constitution of his intellect.

  105.

    Recompensing  Justice.—Whoever  has  completely  comprehended  the

doctrine  of  absolute  irresponsibility  can  no  longer  include  the  so-called

punishing and recompensing justice in the idea of justice, should this consist

of giving to each man his due. For he who is punished does not deserve the

punishment, he is only used as a means of henceforth warning away from

certain actions; equally so, he who is rewarded does not merit this reward, he

could not act otherwise than he did. Therefore the reward is meant only as an

encouragement to him and others, to provide a motive for subsequent actions;

words of praise are flung to the runners on the course, not to the one who has

reached the goal. Neither punishment nor reward is anything that comes to

one as one's own; they are given from motives of usefulness, without one

having a right to claim them. Hence we must say, "The wise man gives no

reward because the deed has been well done," just as we have said, "The wise

man does not punish because evil has been committed, but in order that evil

shall not be committed." If punishment and reward no longer existed, then the

strongest motives which deter men from certain actions and impel them to

certain  other  actions,  would  also  no  longer  exist;  the  needs  of  mankind

require their continuance; and inasmuch as punishment and reward, blame

and  praise,  work  most  sensibly  on  vanity,  the  same  need  requires  the

continuance of vanity.

  106.

  At  the  Waterfall.—In  looking  at  a  waterfall  we  imagine  that  there  is

freedom of will and fancy in the countless turnings, twistings, and breakingsof  the  waves;  but  everything  is  compulsory,  every  movement  can  be

mathematically calculated. So it is also with human actions; one would have

to  be  able  to  calculate  every  single  action  beforehand  if  one  were  all-

knowing; equally so all progress of knowledge, every error, all malice. The

one  who  acts  certainly  labors  under  the  illusion  of  voluntariness;  if  the

world's  wheel  were  to  stand  still  for  a  moment  and  an  all-knowing,

calculating reason were there to make use of this pause, it could foretell the

future of every creature to the remotest times, and mark out every track upon

which that wheel would continue to roll. The delusion of the acting agent

about  himself,  the  supposition  of  a  free  will,  belongs  to  this  mechanism

which still remains to be calculated.

  107.

    Irresponsibility and Innocence.—The complete irresponsibility of man for

his actions and his nature is the bitterest drop which he who understands must

swallow if he was accustomed to see the patent of nobility of his humanity in

responsibility and duty. All his valuations, distinctions, disinclinations, are

thereby  deprived  of  value  and  become  false,—his  deepest  feeling  for  the

sufferer and the hero was based on an error; he may no longer either praise or

blame, for it is absurd to praise and blame nature and necessity. In the same

way as he loves a fine work of art, but does not praise it, because it can do

nothing for itself; in the same way as he regards plants, so must he regard his

own  actions  and  those  of  mankind.  He  can  admire  strength,  beauty,

abundance,  in  themselves;  but  must  find  no  merit  therein,—the  chemical

progress and the strife of the elements, the torments of the sick person who

thirsts after recovery, are all equally as little merits as those struggles of the

soul and states of distress in which we are torn hither and thither by different

impulses until we finally decide for the strongest as we say (but in reality it is

the  strongest  motive  which  decides  for  us).  All  these  motives,  however,

whatever fine names we may give them, have all grown out of the same root,

in which we believe the evil poisons to be situated; between good and evil

actions there is no difference of species, but at most of degree. Good actions

are sublimated evil ones; evil actions are vulgarized and stupefied good ones.

The single longing of the individual for self-gratification (together with the

fear of losing it) satisfies itself in all circumstances: man may act as he can,

that is as he must, be it in deeds of vanity, revenge, pleasure, usefulness,

malice,  cunning;  be  it  in  deeds  of  sacrifice,  of  pity,  of  knowledge.  The

degrees of the power of judgment determine whither anyone lets himself bedrawn through this longing; to every society, to every individual, a scale of

possessions  is  continually  present,  according  to  which  he  determines  his

actions  and  judges  those  of  others.  But  this  standard  changes  constantly;

many  actions  are  called  evil  and  are  only  stupid,  because  the  degree  of

intelligence which decided for them was very low. In a certain sense, even,

all actions are still stupid; for the highest degree of human intelligence which

can now be attained will assuredly be yet surpassed, and then, in a retrospect,

all our actions and judgments will appear as limited and hasty as the actions

and judgments of primitive wild peoples now appear limited and hasty to us.

To recognize all this may be deeply painful, but consolation comes after:

such pains are the pangs of birth. The butterfly wants to break through its

chrysalis:  it  rends  and  tears  it,  and  is  then  blinded  and  confused  by  the

unaccustomed light, the kingdom of liberty. In such people as are capable of

such  sadness—and  how  few  are!—the  first  experiment  made  is  to  see

whether mankind can change itself from a moral into a wise mankind. The

sun of a new gospel throws its rays upon the highest point in the soul of each

single individual, then the mists gather thicker than ever, and the brightest

light and the dreariest shadow lie side by side. Everything is necessity—so

says the new knowledge, and this knowledge itself is necessity. Everything is

innocence,  and  knowledge  is  the  road  to  insight  into  this  innocence.  Are

pleasure,  egoism,  vanity  necessary  for  the  production  of  the  moral

phenomena  and  their  highest  result,  the  sense  for  truth  and  justice  in

knowledge; were error and the confusion of the imagination the only means

through which mankind could raise itself gradually to this degree of self-

enlightenment  and  self-liberation—who  would  dare  to  undervalue  these

means? Who would dare to be sad if he perceived the goal to which those

roads led? Everything in the domain of morality has evolved, is changeable,

unstable, everything is dissolved, it is true; but everything is also streaming

towards one goal. Even if the inherited habit of erroneous valuation, love and

hatred, continue to reign in us, yet under the influence of growing knowledge

it will become weaker; a new habit, that of comprehension, of not loving, not

hating, of over-looking, is gradually implanting itself in us upon the same

ground, and in thousands of years will perhaps be powerful enough to give

humanity the strength to produce wise, innocent (consciously innocent) men,

as  it  now  produces  unwise,  guilt-conscious  men,—that  is  the  necessary

preliminary step, not its opposite.

                    THIRD DIVISION. THE RELIGIOUS LIFE.  108.

  The Double Fight Against Evil.—When misfortune overtakes us we can

either pass over it so lightly that its cause is removed, or so that the result

which it has on our temperament is altered, through a changing, therefore, of

the evil into a good, the utility of which is perhaps not visible until later on.

Religion and art (also metaphysical philosophy) work upon the changing of

the temperament, partly through the changing of our judgment on events (for

instance, with the help of the phrase "whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth"),

partly  through  the  awakening  of  a  pleasure  in  pain,  in  emotion  generally

(whence the tragic art takes its starting-point). The more a man is inclined to

twist  and  arrange  meanings  the  less  he  will  grasp  the  causes  of  evil  and

disperse them; the momentary mitigation and influence of a narcotic, as for

example in toothache, suffices him even in more serious sufferings. The more

the dominion of creeds and all arts dispense with narcotics, the more strictly

men attend to the actual removing of the evil, which is certainly bad for

writers of tragedy; for the material for tragedy is growing scarcer because the

domain of pitiless, inexorable fate is growing ever narrower,—but worse still

for the priests, for they have hitherto lived on the narcotisation of human

woes.

  109.

    Sorrow is Knowledge.—How greatly we should like to exchange the false

assertions of the priests, that there is a god who desires good from us, a

guardian and witness of every action, every moment, every thought, who

loves us and seeks our welfare in all misfortune,—how greatly we would like

to exchange these ideas for truths which would be just as healing, pacifying

and  beneficial  as  those  errors!  But  there  are  no  such  truths;  at  most

philosophy  can  oppose  to  them  metaphysical  appearances  (at  bottom  also

untruths).  The  tragedy  consists  in  the  fact  that  we  cannot  believe  those

dogmas of religion and metaphysics, if we have strict methods of truth in

heart  and  brain:  on  the  other  hand,  mankind  has,  through  development,

become so delicate, irritable and suffering, that it has need of the highest

means of healing and consolation; whence also the danger arises that man

would  bleed  to  death  from  recognized  truth,  or,  more  correctly,  from

discovered error. Byron has expressed this in the immortal lines:— Sorrow is

knowledge: they who know the most Must mourn the deepest o'er the fatal

truth, The Tree of Knowledge is not that of Life. For such troubles there is no

better help than to recall the stately levity of Horace, at least for the worsthours and eclipses of the soul, and to say with him: . . . quid æternis minorem

consiliis animum fatigas? cur non sub alta vel platano vel hac pinu jacentes.

[7] [7] Why harass with eternal designs a mind too weak to compass them?

Why do we not, as we lie beneath a lofty plane-tree or this pine [drink while

we may]? Hor., Odes II. ii.

  11-14.

  —J. M. K. But assuredly frivolity or melancholy of every degree is better

than  a  romantic  retrospection  and  desertion  of  the  flag,  an  approach  to

Christianity in any form; for according to the present condition of knowledge

it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  approach  it  without  hopelessly  soiling  our

intellectual conscience and giving ourselves away to ourselves and others.

Those pains may be unpleasant enough, but we cannot become leaders and

educators  of  mankind  without  pain;  and  woe  to  him  who  would  wish  to

attempt this and no longer have that clear conscience!

  110.

  The Truth in Religion.—In the period of rationalism justice was not done

to the importance of religion, of that there is no doubt, but equally there is no

doubt  that  in  the  reaction  that  followed  this  rationalism  justice  was  far

overstepped; for religions were treated lovingly, even amorously, and, for

instance, a deeper, even the very deepest, understanding of the world was

ascribed to them; which science has only to strip of its dogmatic garment in

order to possess the "truth" in unmythical form. Religions should, therefore,

—this was the opinion of all opposers of rationalism,—sensu allegorico, with

all consideration for the understanding of the masses, give utterance to that

ancient wisdom which is wisdom itself, inasmuch as all true science of later

times has always led up to it instead of away from it, so that between the

oldest wisdom of mankind and all later harmonies similarity of discernment

and a progress of knowledge—in case one should wish to speak of such a

thing—rests not upon the nature but upon the way of communicating it. This

whole conception of religion and science is thoroughly erroneous, and none

would still dare to profess it if Schopenhauer's eloquence had not taken it

under its protection; this resonant eloquence which, however, only reached its

hearers a generation later. As surely as from Schopenhauer's religious-moral

interpretations  of  men  and  the  world  much  may  be  gained  for  the

understanding  of  the  Christian  and  other  religions,  so  surely  also  is  he

mistaken about the value of religion for knowledge. Therein he himself was

only  a  too  docile  pupil  of  the  scientific  teachers  of  his  time,  who  all