  2. The biographical sources of Suidas.

  3. The source of Aristotle's works.

  4. The poetical contests.

  M  In  connection  with  this  he  writes  :  "  These  themes  constitute

approximately my principal subjects of study. Incidentally I must point out

that I wrote the Fontes Laertii as a background to the third lecture. From the

first I began the study of this subject purely from inclination, and as early as

my first term in Leipzig I began collecting a fair amount of material for it. I

also talked a good deal to Ritschl about it, with the result that one day he

asked me very mysteriously whether I would undertake an inquiry into the

Fontes Laertii provided I received a certain stimulus from another direction.

For a long time I puzzled over the meaning of these words, until by a sudden

inspiration I began to feel certain that the next theme to be proposed by the

University for a prize essay would be this very subject. On the morning when

the subject of the theme was published, I hurried to Kintschy and eagerly

snatched at a copy of the Leipziger Nachrichten : as I expected, my eye fell

on the words ' De Fontibus Laertii.' During the time that followed, I was

occupied almost day and night with the problems appertaining to this subject

; combination followed combination, until finally, in the Christmas holidays,

which I employed to make a recapitulation of all the results I had attained

hitherto,  I  suddenly  realised  that  a  certain  relation  existed  between  the

question of Suidas and Laertius. The evening on which this idea occurred to

me, I marvelled at the curious fact that I should have been led, as it were by

some  sure  instinct,  to  make  my  way  as  an  investigator  first  through  the

sources of Suidas and then through those of Laertius, so as suddenly to get

the key to both questions in my hand. The more quickly and energetically I

pressed my scheme forward from day to day, the more difficult it became for

me to make up my mind to work out my results. Time pressed ever more

threateningly, and yet the lovely months of the summer passed away in the

most pleasant enjoyment in the company of my friend Rohde ; indeed, fresh

scientific interests even began to occupy my mind and force me to prolonged

reflection. The most important of these was the question of Homer, towards

which I had sailed under full canvas in my last lecture to my Club. Finally,

when I had not an hour to spare, I sat down to my Laertius essay, and wrote

my results down as simply and as clearly as possible. The terrible 31st of

July, 1867, dawned ; I drove my spurs into my steed with all my might, and

got so far that on the evening of that day, at ten o'clock, I was able to runround to Rohde in the dark and rainy night with my completed manuscript. I

found my friend ready, waiting for me, and with wine and glasses prepared

for my refreshment."

  His last year (1866 1867) in Leipzig was certainly the most enjoyable of

all for my brother. How often has he not told me of wonderful fairy-like

rowing parties up the river to Connewitz, of splendid evenings at the Club

with his companions Roscher, Romundt, Windisch, and Kleinpaul ; but above

all of his intercourse with Rohde, with whom in his last year in Leipzig he

had contracted a deep friendship. On many points they did not agree at all : "

As soon, however, as the conversation sunk into the depths, their discordant

opinions  subsided  and  complete  and  quiet  harmony  resounded."  It  was

delightful to hear my brother and Rohde speak of their Leipzig reminiscences

in later years. Rohde could imitate the Leipzig dialect so comically in the

midst of his poetical descriptions that he made us die of laughter. The two

friends did a lot of riding and pistol shooting in those days. They had taken

riding lessons at Herr Bieler's School, which stood exactly opposite Ritschl's

College. In later years a young scholar told me how profoundly Nietzsche

and  Rohde  had  impressed  their  fellow-students  in  those  days.  When  they

entered Ritschl's College, beaming with intellect, health and youthful spirits,

dressed for riding and with their stocks in their hands, they were stared at

with open-eyed wonder " as two young gods." All who remember this period

recollect Nietzsche as a wonderful young man, and do not fail to refer to a

certain austere chastity about him which always made Rohde compare him

with  the  magnificent  youths  whom  Adalbert  Stifter  depicts  so

sympathetically. Twenty-three years later, in a letter to Overbeck, Rohde said

that  Nietzsche  at  that  time  seemed  to  him  "  a  splendid  man  and  a  new

revelation of humanity ! "

  As soon as the prize essay was delivered, my brother arranged a holiday

tour with Rohde into the Bohmer Wald, where they had all kinds of romantic

and amusing experiences. One or two notes about the journey are still extant,

as  well  as  all  kinds  of  comic  quotations  from  the  Visitors'  Books  at  the

various  places  of  interest.  I  shall  only  give  one  example  of  these,  which

Rohde said afterwards had been written by my brother and which was aimed

at him (Rohde), because he had felt a great admiration for two charming

young  ladies  belonging  to  a  party  of  extremely  unsympathetic  fellow-

travellers  :  "  In  the  Bible  stands  the  order  That  we  all  must  love  our

neighbour.  Yet  you  Holy  Book  distorters  Only  love  your  neighbours'daughters ! "

  He concluded the tour by a visit to Meiningen, where the " Musicians of

the Future " were holding a musical festival for four days. " The abbe Liszt

presided  ;  this  school  has  plunged  passionately  into  Schopenhauer  ;  a

symphonic composition by Hans von Billow, called Nirvana, was provided

with a programme containing a number of quotations from Schopenhauer.

The music, however, was horrible. On the other hand, Liszt, in one of his

own sacred compositions, had struck the character of the Indian Nirvana to

perfection, more particularly in his Beatitudes."

  When he returned to Naumburg we spent an extraordinarily jolly time

during  the  last  weeks  of  the  summer,  at  the  end  of  which  my  brother

straightway threw himself into a new philosophical theme " Concerning the

apocryphal writings of Democritus." This essay was intended to form one of

a cycle of compositions by Ritschl's special Leipzig pupils, which was to be

presented to him as a testimonial ; but, as Fritz wrote to Baron von Gersdorff,

"Fate intervened."

                      CHAPTER XII A YEAR'S SOLDIERING

  As I have already said, my brother had frequently applied to the army

officials to serve, and on each occasion he had been found strong, healthy,

and fit, though he had been rejected owing to his extreme short-sightedness.

He accordingly began to think that he would be exempt from military service.

When, however, on the 30th September, 1867, he set out in good spirits to the

Philological Congress at Halle, on the Saale, he met Colonel von Jagemann

on the platform at the station. This officer, who was commanding a division

of the Fourth Horse Artillery, then stationed at Naumburg, informed him that

a new regulation had just been passed, according to which young men who

were both healthy, and otherwise fit for service, would be compelled to enter

the army if the number of their glasses did not exceed 8. Now it happened

that  on  the  occasion  of  his  last  application  in  Naumburg,  on  the  26th

September, Fritz had worn No. 8 glasses. This number was much too weak

for his eyes, but the authorities had not examined his sight at all, but only his

pince-nez.  And  thus  Fate  intervened.  He  was  suddenly  declared  fit  for

service, and was obliged to make up his mind to enter the army as soon as

possible. He naturally wanted to serve in a University town. Von Jagemann

accordingly  advised  him  to  proceed  quietly  on  his  journey  to  Halle,  and

promised him that he would in the meanwhile prepare a form, in which he

would state that Fritz desired to serve in Berlin, owing to the nature of hisstudies, and that there was nothing to prevent him from doing so. With this

certificate in his possession my brother went to Berlin on 4th October, in

order to present himself to one of the Guard Regiments. Unfortunately all

these were full to overflowing with volunteers, and it had been decided not to

accept any more. He was therefore obliged to return to Naumburg in order to

serve  there,  despite  the  fact  that  service  in  the  Horse  Artillery  was  very

arduous. The only thing that induced him to take the step was the riding,

which he had already practised in Leipzig, and enjoyed very much.

  The contrast between his time in Leipzig, with its scientific and artistic

joys, and its happy companionship with the friends whose leader he was, and

the hard period of service in the Artillery, was terrible. I must confess that

when in the early dawn I saw my brother, dressed in his drill clothes, go to

his horse in the Artillery Barracks, I felt positively humiliated. As a matter of

fact he only had to see to his horse himself for the first six weeks, after which

he was able to keep a servant, who saved him the most unpleasant side of his

duties. My brother, however, managed the change and the difficulties of the

situation with courage and humour, a fact which is brought out very vividly

in  a  letter  to  Rohde.  After  having  described  his  visit  to  the  Philological

Congress of Halle, he continues : "Daily, yea, hourly, we waited in Halle for

good old Ritschl's arrival. He had promised to come, but was prevented by

the bad weather. How we longed for his presence, more particularly I who

owed him so much ! It is thanks to him that I am now in possession of the

whole of the Rhinisches Museum, without having done anything for it as yet,

and constrained, moreover, to the absolute impossibility of doing anything

for its Index for many a day to come. I did not apply the first few weeks after

our return to this labour of duty, but worked in the most cheerful manner

upon my essay on Democritus, which was destined to be written in honorem.

Thus  the  draft,  at  all  events,  is  ready,  although  in  order  to  demonstrate

carefully  all  my  mad  assertions,  and  to  complete  the  construction  of  the

whole, a lot still remains to be done far too much, indeed, for one who in

other directions is extremely busy.

  " Now you will naturally enquire : if he does not smoke, if he does not

play, if he neither compiles an index, nor completes his essay on Democritus,

nor makes researches about Laertius and Suidas, what is he doing ? "He is

drilling.

  " Yes, my dear friend, if ever the spirit leads you early one morning

somewhere  between  five  and  six  o'clock,  to  Naumburg,  and  accidentallyguides your steps to me: do not be overcome by the spectacle which will

present itself to your senses. Suddenly you will breathe the air of stables. In

the dim light of a lantern you will perceive a few forms. Scraping, neighing

and brushing will go on all round you, and in the midst of it all, in the habit

of a stable boy, actively engaged in removing unmentionable and undesirable

matter from the place, or busy grooming a horse with a curry-comb I shudder

at the sight of this instrument you will, upon my word, see myself. A few

hours later you will perceive two horses galloping round the ring, not without

riders, and one of these will look remarkably like your friend. He rides his

fiery prancing steed, and hopes one day to be able to ride well, although, or

rather precisely because, he rides for the present on a rug, with spurs and

without stirrups, but without a riding whip. He was also compelled quickly to

forget all he had learnt in the Leipzig Biding School, and above all to acquire

with all possible despatch a more certain and more regimental seat. At other

times  he  stands  diligently  and  attentively  beside  a  large  gun,  and  fetches

shells from the limber, or cleans out the barrel with a cleaning rod, or carries

out minute calculations. But above all he has a good deal to learn.

  " I assure you that my philosophy now has ample opportunities of being

of practical service to me. I have not for a moment felt depressed, but on the

contrary I have often smiled as though I were living in a fairy tale. At times

too  when  I  am  concealed  beneath  the  belly  of  my  steed  I  whisper,  '

Schopenhauer, help! ' and when, exhausted and covered with perspiration, I

return home, I am refreshed by the sight of the picture which stands on my

writing table, or I throw open the Parerga, which, together with Byron, is

more sympathetic than ever to me."

    Meanwhile a great joy. about which he writes to Gersdorff, was awaiting

the young warrior : " This summer, the last that is to say, the second which I

have spent in Leipzig, kept me very busy. You know that I worked hard at the

prize essay, De Fontibus Laertii Diogenes. I have succeeded every bit as well

as I hoped ; quite a number of excellent, and to some extent important that is

to  say,  important  in  our  opinion  results  have  come  of  it,  and  finally  the

longed-for verdict of the Faculty has been pronounced. Will you allow me to

quote you a few lines out of Ritschl's judicium concerning it ? I am very

pleased about it, because it will encourage me to continue along a road from

which scepticism at times sorely tempted me to diverge. Well, then, after the

mention of my name and my motto and this judgment was pronounced before

the crowded hall. Unfortunately, I was not able to be present, and this wasparticularly painful to me because the Philological Club wished to give me,

their Founder and Ex-President, a symposium, at Simmer's, to which dear old

Ritschl had promised to come.

    Throughout the whole of the winter Fritz endeavoured to combine his

military service with his scientific work, but he gradually perceived that the

double task was almost impossible. To his friend Rohde he complains : "

Miserable man, I say to myself, you have not two hours to spare in the whole

day and even these you must sacrifice to Mars, who otherwise refuses to

grant you your lieutenant's commission. Ah, my dear friend, what a child of

misfortune  is  a  horse-artillery  man  when  he  has  literary  tastes  into  the

bargain. Our old god of War loved young women, not shrivelled old Muses.

A bombardier, who often enough in his barrack room sits upon a dirty stool

meditating upon Deruocritean problems, while his boots are being polished

for him, is really a paradox, on whom the gods must look with scorn."

  The work which he tried to do in spite of all this did not satisfy him. From

the end of January to the end of February I was away from Naumburg, and

when I returned I found my brother in a thoroughly miserable mood. He

greatly missed the friends with whom he used to share his philosophical and

philological studies ; for in accordance with the promise he had made to our

deceased  Aunt  Rosalie,  he  could  not  discuss  Schopenhauer  with  me.  We

therefore  arranged  that  his  friends  should  visit  him  either  at  Easter  or

Whitsuntide. " If only the spring would come round ! " he exclaimed with a

sigh.

  In winter, service in the Horse Artillery is very arduous. Fritz fulfilled his

duties,  however,  with  great  zeal,  and  on  all  sides,  from  the  captain  and

lieutenant down to the non-commissioned officers, one heard only praise of

him. I would not dare swear that the praise of the non-commissioned officers

was quite impartial. Fritz always treated them to breakfast, a thing which very

much warmed their hearts and prompted them to pay the gentleman volunteer

many a compliment, though sometimes in a rather comical manner. When,

for  instance,  one  of  them  was  explaining  for  the  hundredth  time  the

construction of the gun to a bombardier, who had already served two years,

he concluded with the following words : " You blockhead, you are really too

stupid for words, even the volunteer Nietzsche has already understood it." As

the non-commissioned officer added quickly, '' to whom I only explained it

once," it was rather a left-handed compliment.

  One  evening,  while  my  mother  and  I  were  at  a  friend's  house,  thelieutenant of my brother's company came to us in a rather agitated frame of

mind, and told us that Fritz had fainted twice during the hour of instruction.

We hurried home and found him very ill and weak. Two days previously he

had failed in attempting to mount his horse (one of the most restive and fiery

animals in the battery). He had given his chest a severe blow on the pommel

of the saddle, and had felt a sharp twitching pain in his left side. Nevertheless

he had quietly gone on riding, and had endured the increasing agony for two

whole days. On the evening of the second day, however, he had fallen down

in those fainting fits, and on the following day he lay tortured with the most

terrible pains, with a high temperature, and could not even move. The doctors

declared that he had torn two muscles in his chest by the blow on the saddle.

In consequence of this the whole system of muscles and tissues was inflamed,

and serious suppuration set in through the bleeding of the severed muscles.

My brother suffered incredible torture, had to he helped in rising and in lying

down, and grew so weak that, when at last he did get up, he had to learn to

walk again.

  Gradually  his  condition  improved,  his  youthful  strength  overcame  the

illness, and with great eagerness he plunged once more into his manifold

philological and other studies. He felt so happy and strong that he forgot the

suppurating wound which the accident had left behind.

  Finally,  however,  it  was  discovered  that  the  wound  would  not  close

because the ribs themselves had been grazed by the blow against the saddle.

His  military  doctors  began  to  feel  rather  uneasy,  and  had  fears  of  an

operation. They therefore advised my brother to go to the famous surgeon,

Volkmann,  of  Halle,  who,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  at  first  made  a  very

unfavourable diagnosis of the wound. My brother then went to the brine baths

of Wittekind, close to Halle, in order to place himself in Volkmann's hands.

The  healing  process  was  somewhat  painful,  but  after  three  weeks  of

applications of iodine and of taking the waters, etc., the wound was healed

without an operation becoming necessary. All that remained was a deep scar

above the bone, where the wound had been, which for five months had given

my  brother  such  endless  pain  and  us  such  great  trouble.  It  was  only

afterwards that Volkmann informed us that the suppuration had gone so far

that he had at first feared it had attacked the lungs, in which case a recovery

would  have  been  out  of  the  question.  He  congratulated  my  brother  very

heartily upon his thorough good health, and upon the excellence and purity of

his blood. It was only thanks to this that his dangerous wound had healed sowell. His stay at the brine baths of Wittekind had, even in respect of the

people he met there, turned out exceedingly pleasant, and he returned very

much refreshed from his visit. In the midst of his philological studies my

brother was busy throughout the spring with plans for the future. As the next

step to be taken was to get his Doctor's Degree, he thought of using his work

on  Democritus  for  this  purpose,  as  the  testimonial  to  Ritschl  had  fallen

through. Those who were to join with him in this testimonial had devoted

their work to other ends also. With regard to his Doctor's thesis he writes to

Erwin Rohde : " As a matter of fact both my essay on Democritus and that on

Homer are too good for this purpose ; that is to say, I should like to lay them

by, so as to be able to work them out at my leisure, a thing that I shall be able

to  do  perhaps  in  the  Quartier  Latin  ;  but  I  should  not  care  to  spoil  this

beautiful material by tearing it to bits. Both these themes, moreover, are too

long-winded and too German for a thesis. Now it happens that for some time

I have had a philosophical scheme (i.e., to write on the concept of the organic

since the time of Kant), and I have indeed collected enough material for the

task. On the whole, however, this theme does not suit the object in view,

more particularly if one does not want to set to work in a more frivolous spirit

than a butterfly. In the end, therefore, I shall have to treat a narrower, more

definite, philological question."

  The first notes of the philosophical essay, " Teleology since Kant," with

which my brother had been busy during the March and April after his illness,

are still in existence.

  It is possible that the stimulus to this work was derived by him from

Albert Lange's History of Materialism, which he read as it appeared in 1866,

and studied afresh in February, 1868. At that time he thought very highly of

the work, and wrote to Gersdorff about it as follows : "It is a book which

gives very much more than its title promises, and one can read it through

again and again as a real treasure."

  After taking his Doctor's Degree, his idea was to become a Privat Dozent

(fellow), a plan to which he sought to persuade even Erwin Rohde: " By-the-

bye, dear friend, let me implore you sincerely to keep your eyes fixed upon

the thought of entering an academic career ; for some day, at all events, you

will have to come to a sound resolution on this matter. It is not needful in our

case to indulge in any anxious self-examination on this point. We must do it

simply because we cannot do anything else, because we have no other fitting

career before us, because, moreover, we have left the paths which might haveled to other more useful posts, and because, finally, we have no other means

of applying our accumulation of powers and opinions usefully to our fellow-

creatures, save by this road. Lastly, we should not live only for ourselves. Let

us, in our own way, see to it that young philologists are reared with the

necessary  scepticism,  free  from  pedantry,  and  the  over-valuation  of  their

profession, and behave as genuine promoters of classical studies. Soyons de

noire siecle, as the French say a standpoint which no one forgets more easily

than the skilled philologist."

  My brother had a horror of " those notorious State Examinations that

jading  of  the  memory,  of  the  powers  of  production,  of  individual

development, that instrument of a superannuated Government which ordains

that everything should be levelled." "I am quite convinced," he writes in a

letter to Rohde, ' ' that I shall never pass this examination, because I shall

never be able to do it. Therefore let us strike this also out of the programme

of our ' music of the future ' : surely it is not essential to our University

career."

  At  the  beginning  of  August  he  writes  with  the  high  spirits  of  a

convalescent : " To-day I am able to congratulate both yourself and myself

you as the happy and much admired winner in the academic race, myself as

one who is at last convalescent and of whom the angels sing : " ' Quite

rescued is that noble bone His rib from evil's way ; No longer does it strive

alone To suppurate away.' "

  He then tells his friend that they are both marked out by Dame Fortune to

be Privat Dozenten in Kiel and Leipzig respectively, and are awaited in those

cities  ;  then  he  continues  jokingly  :  "  But  nothing  must  prevent  us  from

spending a year together in Paris : after which each of us will be allowed to

disseminate  optional  false  doctrines,  at  optional  Universities,  to  optional

suckling souls." He regarded his student life as ended. Perhaps it would be as

well at this point to look back at my brother's University studies. From the

evidence of his lecture note-books during the six terms constituting his life as

a student, he attended the following lectures : In Bonn, winter 18641865 :

Politics by Sybel, History of German Art by Springer, Michael Angelo's Life

and Works by Springer, Plautus' Miles Gloriosus by Ritschl, Church History

by Kraft, The Gospel of St. John by Schlottmann. Summer, 1865 : General

History  of  Philosophy  by  Schaarschmidt,  Archaeology  by  Jahn,  Latin

Grammar by Ritschl, History of German Literature by Springer. In addition

to these he attended Ritschl' s courses on Philology, Jahn's on Archaeology,and Springer's on The History of Art. In Leipzig, winter 1865 1866 : Latin

Epigraphy  by  Ritschl,  History  of  Greek  Tragedy  and  Introduction  to

Aeschylus,  The  Seven  Against  Thebes  by  Ritschl,  History  of  Greek

Literature by Curtius, First Principles of Practical Politics as an Introduction

to the Science of Statecraft and Law by Eoscher. Winter, 1866 1867 : Greek

Grammar by Curtius, Interpretation of the Fragments of the Greek Lyricists

by Curtius, Greek Palseography by Tischendorff, Latin Grammar by Ritschl.

Summer, 1867 : Latin Grammar by Ritschl. From the beginning of his second

term at Leipzig he was a member of the Philological Class. It is quite possible

that in addition to the above he attended other lectures, 'as some of his lecture

note-books  may  have  gone  astray.  This  at  least  is  certain,  that  the  most

important part of his studies from the period of his Leipzig student days did

not consist in his attendance at lecture but rather in his private work at home

work which he continued during his military service and more particularly

during his illness after his severe accident.

  Fritz  still  had  to  take  great  care  of  himself  and  could  not  think  of

resuming  his  military  duties.  Although  he  had  really  only  completed  five

months training he was entered as having done his military service on the 1st

of April, and also received the rank of Lieutenant of Reserve on condition

that  he  served  one  month  in  the  spring  in  order  to  acquire  the  necessary

knowledge for commanding a battery. At the close of his military year he

allowed  himself  to  be  photographed  in  a  more  or  less  burlesque  military

attitude with a drawn sword in his hand, an act which was later to lead to

many a joke and many a misunderstanding.

    August, 1868, brought the long expected visit of his friend Erwin Rohde.

On the 8th October, looking back upon the whole year and especially this

visit, my brother writes : " Now that I have to look back upon a whole year so

full of changes, a year packed with pleasant and unpleasant emotions, ascetic

and eudaemonistic experiences, a year begun in the stable, continued on the

sick bed, and completed with the servile work of an index ; now that I can

count up the good moments, the beautiful hopes and the peaceful hours of

reflection this year has brought, I think again with profound delight of the

sensations  of  those  refreshing  days  during  which  we  were  together  in

August."

  During the whole of September Fritz was busily engaged upon the Index,

which I have already mentioned often enough, and which was to be made for

the  Rheinisches  Museum,  after  twenty-four  years  of  publication  a  workwhich had been handed over to him through Ritschl's recommendation and in

which he allowed me to have a share. We used to grow so cheerful over the

task, that people passing by our veranda can certainly never have imagined

that we were engaged upon such scholarly and tedious work.

  Thus  Fritz  was  able  to  bring  this  year  of  military  service  cheerfully,

energetically and courageously to a close, though it had been a heavy twelve

months during which his life had at one moment hung by a single hair. But

strangely  enough  this  serious  illness,  despite  its  danger,  had  brought  my

brother a valuable present : six whole months of perfect liberty, during which

he  was  thrown  entirely  upon  his  own  resources  without  being  influenced

either by the University, its teachers, or its lectures, free from being obliged

to squander his time either on studies or in intercourse which was of no use to

him, and unencumbered by the oppressive military service, able to live for

himself alone and his own special aspirations. How eagerly did he now turn

to  philosophical  problems  and  how  soon  was  even  his  philological  work

involuntarily given a philosophical background ! Can it be that a man always

has  the  experience  which  is  typical  of  himself  ?  For,  once  again  in  my

brother's life, illness appears as the great liberator from an oppressive yoke,

as the cruel and dangerous guide to " Nietzsche with himself alone."

                            CHAPTER XIII INFLUENCES

  AN important question which recurs under the most different forms and

in connection with the most different men and books, in all that has been

written about my brother, is that concerning the personalities and literature

which exercised an influence over him during his youth, and later in life. This

is certainly a question of the utmost subtlety, which it is extremely difficult to

answer,  and  which  cannot  be  dealt  with  exhaustively  here.  Who  can  tell

accurately all that has ever exercised any influence or made an impression

upon a young soul ? It is like trying to analyse the human body into parts in

order to discover accurately what was the result of atmospheric, solar, or

nutritive influences in it, and to deduce there from the exact extent of the

individual energy for growth ; for it is all these things together that have

conduced to the development, the bloom, and the prosperity of the human

body. For a whole surging world of spiritual influences storms upon the fiery

young spirit, more particularly when it is animated by a profound thirst for

knowledge, as was that of my brother, who hastened towards these influences

with open arms. He did not, however, allow them to overpower him without

showing some resistance ; he tested the spiritual tendencies of his age, andthose he selected and rejected are certainly characteristic, as is also the time

during which he allowed them to rule him, the strength with which they did

so, and the precise period at which the mature spirit threw off these trammels

in order to seek its own individual path.

  Those  who  study  my  brother's  life  carefully  will  be  surprised  at  the

number of writers of the past and present of whom he already had a very

sound knowledge before his twentieth year, when he became a University

student. Professor Max Heinze once expressed his astonishment at the really

extraordinary range of his information at that time. " Where on earth did he

find time to acquire it ? " he cried, and we both came to the conclusion that it

was Pforta, with its strict division of time, and the use of it, which had given

him the chance of plunging so deeply into these multifarious interests. But

this left unexplained his perspicacity, and his judgment with regard to the

most remarkable and generally unknown books which he found entirely of

his own accord. It would be an interesting task to make a collection of the

works for which my brother so early in life felt the warmest interest and read

with passionate love. These books were my brother's teachers and educators,

and out of all these elements he derived the strength which helped the great

proud tree to grow, that to-day we recognise as his personality. My brother

was very fond of talking about all those men and works that had had an

influence upon him. He was quite at one with Goethe on this point. " People

are always talking about originality. But what does that mean ? If I could

only  say  how  much  I  was  indebted  to  my  great  predecessors  and

contemporaries, there would be little left over." If in later years my brother

laid stress with a certain pride upon his own importance and the originality of

his  treatment  of  certain  problems,  it  was  only  in  self-defence  against  the

malevolent misunderstandings of his fellow-countrymen. Moreover, from the

results of his philosophy we gather that it is not the novelty of the thought

upon which he insists so much as upon the effects of the union of an original

personality with this thought.

  The  strongest  influences  which  came  into  his  life  sprang  from  three

different  sources  :  first,  the  study  of  antiquity,  in  which  connection  the

important part played by classical history and archaeology in my brother's

development  cannot  be  overrated  ;  secondly,  Schopenhauer,  of  whom  we

have already heard ; and finally Richard Wagner, whom we shall mention for

the first time in this chapter.

  The influence of antiquity that is to say, of Hellenism was the first toaffect him, and lasted the longest, and even when the values of ancient Home

took the front rank, his old yearning "which with the power of an instinct

leads our senses and our desires like a charming fairy conductress to the

Greeks " remained with him. Certainly one of the most important starting

points for my brother's interest in psychological and scientific problems was

his admiration for this wonderful people, the Greeks, who though so small in

numbers were able to win the most prominent place in the history of intellect

and  of  art.  He  tried  to  find  the  roots  of  the  power  which  gave  birth  to

Hellenism, and made it the ruler of our culture. In any case it was the love of

Grecian antiquity which led him to philology, though he was able to adduce

other subtle and convincing reasons for the choice of this study. The most

profound  reason  of  all,  however,  was  (as  I  know  from  many  an  intimate

conversation  with  him)  that  philology  was  precisely  the  science  which

allowed him the most profound intercourse with the spirit of antiquity. But

his sole object was the hope of ultimately obtaining a general view of the

whole  of  it,  and  philology,  with  its  excellent  method,  was  to  him  only  a

means to an end. Thus it was always a painful experience to him to meet

among his fellow students with any philological pedantry. In the spring of

1867  he  writes  to  Baron  von  Gersdorff  :  "It  cannot  be  denied  that  the

inspiring  general  view  of  antiquity  is  entirely  absent  in  the  majority  of

philologists because they stand too near the picture and examine a mere spot

of  paint  instead  of  admiring,  and,  what  is  more,  enjoying,  the  great

outstanding features of the whole canvas. When, I ask, have we ever had,

even for one moment, that pure joy in our studies of antiquity of which we

unfortunately so often talk ? "

  In  his  attitude  towards  philology  he  very  early  showed  independence.

Encouraged  by  Ritschl,  by  his  success  in  philological  work,  and  by  his

lectures  before  his  Philological  Club,  and  spurred  on  by  the  general

recognition he received, my brother, as we gather from all his notes on the

subject,  threw  himself  with  tremendous  zeal  into  the  study  of  philology.

Nevertheless, from the beginning of the year 1866 to the autumn of 1868 we

find a host of notes which prove how sceptical was his attitude towards the

whole of philogical study as it was then pursued ; and we see how again and

again he puts this question to himself in his solitude : "Are the present objects

of  philology  worth  all  the  lives  and  intellectual  strength  which  are  being

applied to their pursuit ? " The only answer all my brother's capacities and

aspirations could have given to this question would have been a flat negative.It is therefore almost touching to see what he made out of this dry science,

how he extended it, how he deepened it and brought it into relation with

infinitely lofty and great missions, in order to elevate it to some vital object,

so that he himself could endure its study. For instance, he writes : "In what

does the fruitfulness of philology lie, which can reconcile us to some extent

to yield to it and become reconciled with the study of it ? Some seeds must

certainly have sprouted from all the infinite industry and pains expended in

its service ! It is fruitful wherever its study is concerned with general human

problems. Thus its most glorious triumph is in the critical comparison of

languages, if viewed from a philosophical point of view."

  One might ask how my brother ever lighted upon philology at all, and

why, despite all his doubts on the subject, he remained faithful to this study. I

have  already  suggested  that  the  deepest  reason  was  certainly  his

prepossession in favour of antiquity, while, as former chapters have shown,

the  exceptionally  perfect  philological  schooling  provided  by  Pforta  taught

him so soon to master the instrument that philology lays in one's hand, that he

came  to  regard  this  science  as  a  counter-agent  to  his  thirst  for  universal

knowledge. Henri Lichtenherger l very rightly says that : " The chief one was

beyond  doubt  the  desire  to  be  '  Master  '  of  a  well-defined  speciality.

Nietzsche was well aware of the amount of danger that lay in the desire for

universal culture He came to understand early in life that if he acquired a

superficial knowledge of every science without having the courage to limit

his curiosity, he would infallibly become a dilettante. Now, his scrupulous

and conscientious nature could never be satisfied with a heap of incomplete

and  badly  digested  knowledge.  From  his  early  youth  he  felt  an  aversion

which continued to increase from ' the representative of modern education,'

the  journalist,  '  the  literary  man  who  is  nothing,  but  represents  almost

everything, who plays the part of connoisseur, and who, in all modesty, sees

that  he  gets  all  that  money,  glory,  and  honour  that  belong  to  the  real

connoisseur.'  The  knowledge  he  wished  to  acquire  was  the  real,  solid

knowledge of the ' master ' who, in a restricted sphere, arrives at definite

results ; it was his ambition to become a good workman in some corner of the

vast field of science. From this point of view philology attracted him by the

rigour of its method, by the minuteness of its detailed researches, by that

dryness  and  sterility  which  made  it  an  unpopular  subject  with  the  great

public.

  "What further pleased him in philology was that it was ' out of season,' 'un-present  '  (unzeitgemdss)  to  use  the  expression  which  he  himself

popularised. The vulgar mob usually reproaches the antiquary with losing his

time in studying far-off things, something dead and useless, instead of giving

his attention to questions of the day. Now, Nietzsche is grateful to philology,

just  because  it  is  not  a  utilitarian  science,  but  rather  an  occupation  for

aristocrats, mandarins of the spirit ; he is grateful to it because it exacts from

its followers meditation, silence, judicious and patient slowness : all of which

are unknown to the busy, hustling, superficial man of the present day."

  Many years later when my brother had long given up his Philological

Professorship he writes of it in warm acknowledgment : " Philology is that

venerable art which exacts from its followers one thing above all to step to

one side, to leave themselves spare moments, to grow silent, to become slow

the leisurely art of the goldsmith and of the connoisseur applied to language :

an art which has nothing to do but carry out fine careful work, and attains

nothing if not lento. For this very reason philology is now more desirable

than  ever  before  ;  for  this  very  reason  it  is  the  highest  attraction  and

incitement in an age of ' work ' : that is to say, of haste, of unseemly and

immoderate hurry-scurry, which is intent upon ' getting things done ' at once,

even every book, whether old or new. Philology itself, perhaps, will not get

things  done  so  hurriedly  :  it  teaches  how  to  read  well  :  i.e.,  slowly,

profoundly, with consideration for that which is to follow, and that which is

past, the mental doors ajar, with delicate fingers and eyes."

  I believe that my brother was most attached to philology when he was a

soldier in Naumburg, when it must to some extent have been a comfort to

him in the midst of duties which lay so remote from his intellect. And when

the  joyful  feeling  of  convalescence  was  combined  with  his  return  to

philological  study,  my  brother  certainly  believed  himself  that  he  was  a

philologist heart and soul. When, however, in the autumn of 1868 he returned

to Leipzig, which was then in the very vortex of philological activity, and

found his friend Rohde very shabbily attacked, philologists and philology

struck him in a somewhat different light. Any disrespectful treatment of his

friends or of their intellectual work was more painful to him than if the attack

had been levelled at him personally. In a letter to Rohde he says : "Now that I

have once more seen the teeming brood of philologists of our day at close

quarters, now that I have observed daily the whole of the mole-hill activity,

and the animals with their cheek-pouches full, their eyes blinded, rejoicing

over the captured worm and showing absolute indifference to the true and thepressing problems of life ; now that I have seen these things not only in the

young  brood  but  in  their  elders  as  well,  I  become  ever  more  clearly

convinced that we two, if we wish to remain true to our genius, will not be

able to pursue our life task without many a conflict and many an obstacle.

When the philologist and the man cannot be completely one, the whole tribe

above mentioned gapes in wonder at the miracle ; it grows angry and finally

scratches, growls and bites. You have an example of this in yourself. For I am

quite  certain  on  this  point,  that  the  trick  you  have  been  played  was  not

directed particularly at your work but at your person ; and I also foster the

definite hope very soon to have a foretaste of that which awaits me in this

infernal atmosphere."

  Tip to that time, however, his superiors and fellow students at Leipzig

had been very friendly to him. According to the testimony of Hitachi's wife

he had the general reputation of being as genial as he was clever, and in

addition to this was regarded as an extraordinarily gifted philologist.

  His attitude to Schopenhauer was just as independent as his attitude to

philology, although in the case of this philosopher there was an extra element

of personal feeling and admiration. Schopenhauer was not a book for him,

but a friend. He was already dead when my brother first learnt to know his

work, otherwise he would have gone to him immediately to greet him as a

friend and father ; for during the whole of his childhood and youth he had

yearned for the paternal friend he had missed so bitterly through our father's

all too early death, and whose place our grandfather was only temporarily

able to fill in his early years. And it was for this reason that he always sought

to form a mental image of Schopenhauer the man, which was very different

from the one his disciples had of him. "How can these shallow-pates, these

watery intellects, know anything of Schopenhauer the man ! " he often cried

in indignation.

  Even  during  the  period  of  his  most  whole-hearted  enthusiasm  for

Schopenhauer, he did not accept all his views without criticism. A fragment

of  a  "criticism  of  Schopenhauer's  philosophy"  is  very  important  in  this

respect.  As  early  as  the  autumn  of  the  year  1867  his  critical  faculty  was

already secretly at work upon the doctrines of the revered philosopher, even

though his respect forbade him to speak his views aloud. If the time at which

these notes were written were not fixed beyond a doubt, nobody would ever

have dreamt of attributing them to this early period during which he was

apparently  such  an  uncritical  believer  in  his  master  ;  but  from  internalevidence they would be placed in a later period, when he was beginning to

grow  estranged  from  Schopenhauer.  In  after  years,  when  he  wrote  fresh

prefaces to previously published works, my brother frequently referred to

these fundamental views and feelings which were only expressed later, and

by so doing incurred the superficial reproach of ignorant critics that he ante-

dated opinions of his later period by reading them into earlier works. His

manuscripts in this and many other cases prove the reverse. It is characteristic

of my brother's development, that almost all his ideas began to be formed

exceedingly early in life, though they found expression in his works only

very much later, after they had for a long while lain concealed beneath floods

of other interests or beneath delicate scruples.

  In order to understand my brother in this respect it must be remembered

that two natural bents, which generally stand opposed to each other, were

united in him to form a beautiful harmony, namely, a warm poetical sensitive

heart,  inclined  to  reverence,  and  a  sharp,  critical  ruthless  understanding

ploughing only towards truth. But his warmness of heart preponderated and

his almost painful scruples urged him in many respects to the most extreme

reserve.

  In order to understand my brother and his relations with his friends it is

necessary to bear these two tendencies of his in mind. He was not blind to the

qualities of his friends - the word " Friend " was so holy in his eyes that in his

letters to them, and in his attitude towards the outer world, the only thing he

revealed  was  his  transfiguring  love  ;  for  he  would  completely  stifle  all

criticism,  and  only  allow  this  to  find  expression  when  it  was  no  longer

possible to conceal his inner change. But, oh! what pain his warm, reverent

heart had to suffer when his relentless love of Truth lifted the veil from his

friends or his ideals then his friendships often came to a sad end.

  On his return to Leipzig my brother absolutely refused to resume any of

the ties of student life. The most dreadful feature of his existence there was

the hotel cooking, which in those days must have been really shocking. Even

in the year 1888 he writes : "It was through the cooking in vogue at Leipzig,

for  instance,  together  with  my  first  study  of  Schopenhauer  (1865)  that  I

earnestly renounced my ' "Will to Live.' To spoil one's stomach by absorbing

.  insufficient  nourishment  this  problem  seemed  to  my  mind  solved  with

admirable  felicity  by  the  above-mentioned  cookery."  In  the  holidays  he

always used to bring home fresh complaints about the uninviting food. After

having spent a whole year in Naumburg with our dear mother (this was thelongest period he had ever spent with us at home since his childhood) he felt

he had become too pampered ever again to be able to endure hotel food. He

therefore engaged some rather luxurious rooms in the Lessing Strasse and

boarded with the family of one of the Professors. At the end of October,

1868, he wrote to Erwin Rohde as follows : "I have come back to Leipzig

with  utterly  different  views  and  have  completely  doffed  the  garb  of  the

student  and  all  the  life  connected  with  it.  A  friendly  spirit,  through  the

medium of the excellent Windisch, helped me to find a home which, up to the

present, satisfies my needs and prevents a relapse into student unrest, together

with all the restaurant and theatre fever which it involves. My rooms are at

the entrance of the Lessing Strasse in a garden there ; they have a really

charming and varied prospect and give me the pleasure of being able to sit

within my own four walls of an evening and to warm myself at the brazier of

philology."

  This was indeed a great thing for Fritz, who formerly felt the desire of

frittering away all his evenings at the theatre.

    Moreover, this winter he wished more than ever before to be a " society

man,"  and  therefore  paid  a  number  of  calls.  above  all,  however,  he

concentrated his attention upon preparing for his academic career, and tried to

find out whether he really was suited to become a University lecturer. He

describes one of these attempts to his friend Rohde as follows : " The first

lecture  of  our  Philological  Club  this  term  was  fixed  to  take  place  in  the

evening  and  I  was  courteously  approached  and  asked  whether  I  would

undertake it. I who stand in need of opportunities for practice in academic

work was only too glad to accept on the spot and was delighted on entering

Zaspel's to see a black mass of about forty people. I had charged Romundt to

keep an eye upon me so as to be able to tell me afterwards how the theatrical

side, i.e., the delivery, voice, style and arrangement went, and what effect

they had upon the audience. I spoke quite extempore, and had only a very

diminutive slip of paper to assist me, and my subject, you must remember,

was The Satires of Varro and Menippus the Cynic : and behold everything

was good! I shall be able to enter an academic career after all ! " I ought to

tell you that until Easter I intend to go through with all the annoyances of

habilitation  and  at  the  same  time  to  take  my  Doctor's  Degree.  I  shall  be

allowed to do this, all that is required being a special permit, as I have not the

usual five years course behind me. Now the formality of habilitation and the

work it entails are quite distinct ; but I think it only right that when I havethrown the fetters from my hands I should do some travelling about the world

for the last time as a private person ! Oh, dear friend, my feelings will be

those of a bridegroom, joy and vexation mixed, humour, Menippus."

  As a matter of fact, although he does not admit it to Rohde, he often went

to the theatre and to concerts, subscribed to many entertainments and at times

wrote  criticisms  of  concerts  and  lectures  for  the  Deutsche  AUgemeine

Zeitung. about one of these concerts he wrote to Rohde at the end of October

: " This evening I was at the Ruterpe Society, which has started its winter

concerts, and I refreshed myself with the prelude to Tristan und Isolde as well

as the overture to the Meistersinyer. I cannot get myself to regard this music

coldly and critically ; every tissue and every nerve vibrates in me, and for a

long  time  I  have  not  had  such  an  enduring  feeling  of  rapture  as  when

listening to the last-mentioned overture. My permanent seat as a subscriber is

surrounded  by  critical  spirits  :  immediately  in  front  of  me  there  sits

Gernsdorff, the abomination I have spoken to you about ; on my left Dr. Paul,

the present hero of the Tageblatt ; two places to the right of me is my friend

Stede, who turns out critical opinions for the Musical Journal ; it is a thorny

corner, and when we four all shake our heads together, it means disaster."

  It  will  readily  be  understood  that  my  brother,  with  his  profound

admiration for Richard Wagner, was very keen to become acquainted with

the latter 's relatives in Leipzig. As early as the beginning of October he had

written to Rohde from Naumburg : " I have one woman more particularly in

view,  of  whom  wonderful  things  have  been  told  me  ;  she  is  the  wife  of

Professor  Brockhaus  and  a  sister  of  Richard  "Wagner's,  and  my  friend

Windisch, who has just called upon me, gave me a surprising account of her

capacities. What pleases me about all this is that it confirms Schopenhauer's

theory of heredity. Wagner's other sister, who was formerly an actress in

Dresden, is also said to have been a very distinguished woman."

  The circumstances of his first visit to the Brockhaus's and the feeling he

had on that occasion are described in a letter to his dear friend Rohde on the

9th of November, 1868 : " When I reached home yesterday I found a card

addressed  to  me  with  this  note  upon  it  :  'Do  you  wish  to  make  the

acquaintance of Richard Wagner ? If so meet me at a quarter to four in the

Theatre Cafe, Windisch.' This news I can assure you so turned my head, that I

quite forgot what I was doing before it came, and was thoroughly bewildered.

  " I naturally ran thither and found my friend, who gave me a lot of fresh

information.  Wagner  had  come  to  Leipzig  to  his  relatives  in  the  strictestincognito ; the press had no inkling of his visit, and all Brockhaus's servants

were as dumb as graves in livery. Now Wagner's sister Frau Brockhaus, that

well informed and clever woman, had introduced her brother to her friend

Frau Ritschl, and on this occasion she was able proudly to boast of the friend

to the brother and of the brother to the friend, the lucky creature ! Wagner

played the Meisterlied, which you must know, to Frau Ritschl, and this good

lady told him that she already knew the song very well, mea opera. Imagine

Wagner's joy and surprise ! And with the utmost readiness in the world he

declared his willingness to meet me incognito. I was to be invited on Friday

evening. Windisch, however, explained that I was engaged by my official

duties and obligations ; Saturday afternoon was accordingly fixed. Windisch

and I ran to the Brockhaus's, found the Professor's family, but no Wagner. He

had just gone out with an enormous hat on his huge head. It was thus that I

made the acquaintance of the excellent family and received a kind invitation

for Sunday evening.

  " On this day I felt as though I were in fairyland, and you must allow that

in view of the inaccessibility of the great man, the circumstances leading up

to this acquaintance were somewhat extraordinary.

  " As I was under the impression that a large company of guests were

likely to be there, I decided to dress very ceremoniously, and was glad that

my  tailor  had  promised  me  a  new  dress  suit  precisely  for  the  Sunday  in

question. It was a beastly day with continual showers of ram and snow ; one

shuddered at the thought of going out into the open, and I was therefore very

glad when little Roscher paid me a visit in the afternoon to tell me something

about  the  Eleatics  ....  It  was  getting  dark,  the  tailor  did  not  turn  up,  and

Roscher left me. I accompanied him, called on the tailor myself and found his

minions busily engaged on my clothes, which they promised to send round in

three-quarters of an hour.

  " I went home in a jolly mood, looked in at Kintschy's on the way, read

the Kladderadatsch, and was particularly amused to find a paragraph saying

that Wagner was in Switzerland and that a fine house was being built for him

in  Munich,  while  I  knew  all  the  while  that  I  was  going  to  see  him  that

evening  and  that  the  day  before  he  had  received  a  letter  from  the  little

monarch addressed to ' The Great German Tone-poet, Richard Wagner.' " But

at home there was no tailor awaiting me, so I sat down to read the report of

the Eudokia at my ease, but kept on being disturbed at intervals by a shrill

sound which seemed to come from the distance. At last I felt certain thatsomeone was standing at the old iron gate ; it was shut, as was also the door

of the house. I shouted across the garden to the man to enter : but it was

impossible to make oneself heard through the pouring rain. The whole house

was  disturbed,  the  door  was  ultimately  opened  for  him,  and  an  old  man

bearing a parcel was ushered in. It was half -past six ; time for me to dress

and make ready, as I lived rather far from the centre of the town. It was all

right, the man had my things. I tried them on, and they fitted. But what was

this strange development ? The man actually presented me with a bill ! I took

it politely ; but he declared that he must be paid on delivery. I was surprised,

and explained that I had nothing to do with him as the mere servant of my

tailor, but that my dealings were with his master to whom I had given the

order. The man grew ever more pressing as did also the time ; I snatched at

the things and began to put them on. He snatched them too and did all he

could  to  prevent  me  from  dressing.  What  with  violence  on  my  part  and

violence on his there was soon a scene, and all the time I was fighting in my

shirt, as I wished to get the new trousers on.

  " At last, after a display of dignity, solemn threats, the utterance of curses

on my tailor and his minions' minion, and vows of vengeance, the little man

vanishes  with  my  clothes.  End  of  the  Second  Act.  I  sat  on  my  sofa  and

meditated while I contemplated a black coat and wondered whether it would

be good enough for Richard.

  " Outside the rain was pouring.

  " It was a quarter past seven : I had promised to meet Windisch at half-

past seven at the Theatre Cafe. I plunged into the dark and rainy night, in a

beatific mood ; for happiness is favourable to everything, even the scene with

the tailor's man had something tremendous, something out of the way about

it.

  " At last we entered Frau Brockhaus's exceedingly comfortable drawing

room. There was nobody there save the most intimate members of the family,

Richard  and  us  two  I  was  introduced  to  Wagner  and  muttered  a  few

respectful words to him ; he asked minute questions as to how I had become

so well acquainted with his music, complained bitterly about the way all his

operas  were  produced  with  the  exception  of  the  famous  Munich

performances, and made considerable fun of the conductors, who tried to

encourage their orchestras in friendly tones as follows : ' Gentlemen, now let

it be a little more passionate ! Dear friends, just a trifle more passion, please !

' Wagner was very fond of imitating the Leipzig dialect.  " Now let me give you a brief account of what happened that evening ;

really the joys experienced were of such a rare and stimulating nature that

even to-day I am not back in my old humdrum existence again, but can think

of nothing better to do than to come to you, my dear friend, and tell you these

wonderful  tidings.  Wagner  played  to  us  before  and  after  supper,  and  got

through every one of the more important passages of the Meistcrsinger. He

imitated all the voices and was in very high spirits. He is, by-the-bye, an

extraordinarily  active  and  fiery  man.  He  speaks  very  quickly,  shows

considerable wit, and can make a private company of the sort assembled on

that evening quite jolly. I managed to have a somewhat lengthy talk with him

about Schopenhauer. Oh, you will understand what a joy it was for me to

hear him speak with such indescribable warmth of our master, what a lot he

owed  to  him,  how  he  was  the  only  philosopher  who  had  recognised  the

essence of music ! Then he inquired as to how the Professors were disposed

towards him ; laughed a good deal at the Philosophers' Congress at Prague,

and spoke of the ' philosophical journeymen.' Later on he read me a piece out

of the autobiography he is now writing, a thoroughly amusing scene from his

Leipzig student days which I still cannot think of without a laugh. He writes

extraordinarily well and intellectually. At the close of the evening when we

were both ready to go he shook my hand very warmly, and kindly asked me

to visit him in order that we might have some music and philosophy together.

He also left it to me to make his music known to his sister and his relations, a

duty which I undertook very solemnly to fulfil. You will hear more about this

when I have succeeded in looking at this evening more objectively and from

a greater distance. For the time being, a hearty farewell and best wishes for

your health."

  In  his  personal  acquaintance  with  Richard  Wagner  my  brother  came

under the strongest influence which was ever exercised over him. Ever since

the publication of Billow's piano arrangement of Tristan und Isolde, many

years previously, he had been a passionate admirer of Wagner's music, even

though  he  rejected  TannMuser,  Lohengrin,  and  Die  Walkire.  But  when

Wagner, the man, came before him with all the fascination of his strong will,

he felt at once that he was in the presence of a person who in his volitional

power was of all his contemporaries most like himself. My brother was the

first person who, with one enthusiastic impulse, loved both Schopenhauer

and  Wagner,  and  he  was  the  first  of  that  band  of  young  men,  who  now

number so many, who write the two names side by side upon their banner.                            CHAPTER XIV THE CALLING

  WHEN my brother had returned to Leipzig in the autumn of 1868 I began

to read Schopenhauer's works in secret, as I felt that I was old enough to do

so.  Although  Fritz  may  not  have  intended  it  he  had  already  indirectly

prepared me for this study; nevertheless the great philosopher exercised an

enormous power over my inmost spiritual life. In him I found a philosophical

confirmation  of  the  ideal  which  in  my  early  youth  I  had  with  passionate

religious  feeling  already  conceived  as  my  goal,  i.e.,  personal  salvation

through renunciation and sacrifice for others. Now my feelings were stronger

than ever, and I could not go far enough in this direction. When my brother

paid us a short visit between autumn and Christmas, it struck him that my

opinions on many subjects were very different from what they had been ; but

he was positively moved, when, in the days preceding Christmas, our dear

mother being busy with preparations for the festival, I confided my inmost

feelings to him, as they reminded him so much of his own profound emotions

when he had first learned to know Schopenhauer three years before. Of these

sensations of his, however, I knew nothing then, for at that time I had not

seen his Leipzig Memoirs of the years 1865 1867. His subsequent experience,

however, led him to warn me against an excess of feeling in this matter, and

to try and revive in me the happy mood which was in keeping with our youth.

But this fresh basis to the feelings we had in common was a new bond which

united us, although my brother understood perfectly well that, as a Christian,

my understanding of Schopenhauer was very different from his ; for instance,

I scarcely realised Schopenhauer's atheism at all.

  Thus in spite of Schopenhauer these holidays were as pleasant and as

happy as ever. Fritz's visit to France gave rise to endless jokes and chaff. But

suddenly, at the end of the Christmas holidays, he was called to Leipzig. His

departure was clothed in unusual mystery. He set off in great haste and came

back in the evening with an extraordinary light in his eyes. He was quite

changed after this excursion ; references to his Paris trip were no longer met

with a cheerful smile, but at most with a deep sigh : " Oh, Lizzie, life is really

hard ! " I did not understand the reason of this, as only just lately he had

confided to me his happier view of life as compared with Schopenhauer's

pessimism. What then had happened ? Was Fritz hopelessly in love, and had

he met with difficulties about the betrothal ? " What did you do in Leipzig ? "

I asked him one day with some caution. "I went for a walk," he replied.

"Alone?" I inquired. " Oh, Lizzie ! " cried Fritz. " What a poor joke ! Do youimagine I am going to get engaged ? God forbid ! "

  No, in this direction there was little hope ; since Fritz had learnt to know

and  honour  Schopenhauer  he  had  often  expressed  most  dreadful  views

against women, views which left me utterly amazed. As a matter of fact he

did keep rather aloof from women, though he was full of the tenderest regard

for them. These extraordinary views of his, therefore, seemed to be directed

at a perfectly abstract being who had nothing whatever to do with us as a sex.

The fact that he spoke of his highly honoured friend, Frau Ritschl, in terms of

the highest admiration was perfectly conceivable in connection with such a

distinguished woman ; but even in other respects his really fervent reverence

for women was not at all in keeping with a disciple of Schopenhauer. I well

remember his anger when on one occasion some one dared to express a doubt

as to whether Hedwig Raabe, who was worshipped by the people of Leipzig,

and whom he himself adored at a distance as a " fair angel," was really and

truly an angel in character and manner of life.

  At the beginning of January my brother returned to Leipzig and wrote to

us in his usual strain, save for one wonderful letter in which he sent us his

New Year's wishes, despite the fact that we had spent New Year's Eve and

the beginning of the New Year together. In this letter he even referred once or

twice to his Paris trip. On the 2nd of February he came to Naumburg for our

mother's birthday. When the crowd of visitors began to arrive he called me

secretly into the dining-room. " Lizzie, you can keep a secret, can't you ? " he

began rather excitedly. " Of course, you know I can," I replied, somewhat

hurt, for indeed, rather than divulge one word of any confidence of his I

should have allowed myself to be torn in pieces. " "Well, then, listen, I am to

be made a Professor of Bale University.' " Oh, Fritz, you must be joking ! " I

cried breathlessly, " that is impossible ! " But no, it was quite possible. It was

really true. I was bound to believe it. Fritz described the whole affair to me

later on.

  Dr. Wilhelm Vischer, the President of the Board at Bale, and the Head of

the Education Department there, had read several articles written by Fritz and

had formed a very favourable opinion of him. Of my brother's works the

following had been printed in the Rheinisches Museum : " Concerning the

history of the collected fragments of Theognis," " Simonides' Ode on Danae "

and the long essay "De Laertii Diogenis fontibus," which ran through several

numbers. When, therefore, a Professorship for Classical Philology became

vacant  in  Bale,  Tischer  applied  to  Ritschl  and  inquired  whether  Herr  Fr.Nietzsche, who impressed him as being the product of a very good school,

would not be fit for the post. Ritschl summoned my o brother to Leipzig,

discussed the matter with him, and then wrote a very enthusiastic letter to

Bale in which he did not conceal the fact that my brother had not yet taken

his Doctor's Degree, much less had he been " habilitated," and added that he

was at that very moment busy with both. Prom a later letter of Ritschl's dated

11th January, 1869, the following passage has kindly been put at my disposal

: " What more can I say ? The bulk of his studies lay in the direction of the

history  of  Greek  literature  (the  exegetic  and  critical  treatment  of  authors

naturally included), with perhaps special attention, as it seems to me, to the

history  of  Greek  philosophy.  But  I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  if

practical demands had to be met, he would, with his great gifts, be able to

work up other departments of knowledge with conspicuous success. For he

will always be able to do anything he wants to do."

  As others were applying for the post and had found supporters in Bale,

the matter lay in abeyance, and there was considerable doubt for some time as

to whether he would be appointed. On the day previous to my brother's visit

to us, he had received a letter in which everything seemed to be turning in his

favour, but he wished to announce the news of the negotiations to our mother

only when the definite engagement had been made, and that is why he first

confided in me alone.

  It seems to me, when I look back, as if in the year preceding 1870 a

University Professor was a much more glorious being than he is to-day. All

matters connected with the University and the quarrels between Professors

then  excited  quite  a  different  interest  from  what  they  do  now,  and  were

regarded  even  by  the  non-academic  world  as  very  important.  A  young

University  Professor  was  one  of  the  favourite  figures  in  novels  :  he  was

always noble and knew an infinite number of things, while he was always

loved and worshipped in secret by the high-born heroine. Of course I had

never doubted for an instant that my brother was an ideal man, but that he

should now, before the whole world, have turned into one of the favourite

figures of romance, and this at the age of twenty-four, struck me as rather

marvellous. The most incredible part of it all was, however, that Fritz seemed

actually on the road to a brilliant career. None of us had dreamt of this being

possible. In this respect he was always cheerfully indifferent, and this spirit

was naturally infectious. Indeed, to be quite honest, Fritz and I regarded the

making of a career as something not quite respectable, as it seemed to us tobe associated with a certain modicum of back-bone-lessness ; and now this

kind  of  good  fortune  had  come  without  Fritz's  having  made  the  slightest

effort to obtain it. The 2nd of February was always a particularly pleasant

memory to all three of us. Our dear mother had not the remotest idea what to

make of us. As they say in the old German children's game " We ate not,

neither did we drink," and we gave the most confused and cryptic replies to

all questions. Fortunately, at the end of two days the solution of the problem

arrived  and  Fritz  sent  us  a  visiting  card  :  FRIEDRICH  NIETZSCHE,

Professor of Classical Philology in the University of Bale. (Stipend 3,000

francs.) Our dear mother's joy and surprise defy description, and the fairy

story  grew  more  and  more  wonderful.  Everybody  (even  the  papers)  were

astonished at this Professor of twenty-four . From al sides praise, honour, and

appreciation resounded over Fritz, to such an extent indeed that he felt it was

really too much of a good thing, and he wrote quite angrily once : " What,

pray, is this marvel that has happened ? Why, there is only one Professor

more in the world, that's all." From the very first, in this matter of his calling,

my brother had shown no vain joy and contentedness. " A great trick has been

played upon me," he wrote to Rohde, "and our plans for Paris have been

blown into thin air. With them too have gone my fairest hopes." And later on

he  writes  :  "  I  have  not  told  you  anything  of  the  first  production  of  the

Meistersinger in Dresden, of this great artistic orgy which the winter brought

me. God knows I must have a great deal of the musician about me, for during

the whole of that time I was deeply conscious of being suddenly at home, and

in my element, and regarded my other occupations as a distant mist from

which I had been delivered. Now a deep heavy mist of this nature once more

looms  before  me.  I  have  announced  two  lectures  for  the  summer  term  ;

private  :  '  The  History  of  Greek  Lyric  Poetry,  with  the  interpretation  of

selected passages ' ; public : ' Method and Sources of the History of Greek

Literature.'  In  addition  to  this  I  have  to  give  the  whole  of  the  Greek

instruction to the Sixth Form here, while the philological classes will take up

a lot of my time and give me a great deal of trouble. But above all I dread that

solitude. At the present moment I am living a very distracted life, ay, seeking

for pleasure in a desperate Carnival before the Ash Wednesday of my calling

of Philistinism. I feel it deeply, but none of my acquaintances here notice

anything. They allow themselves to be bewildered by the title Professor, and

imagine that I am the happiest man under the sun."

  This premature call to his profession threw an enormous burden of workupon my poor brother's shoulders. Fortunately he did not need to prepare his

Doctor's thesis, for at a sitting of the Faculty of Leipzig University it was

decided that the essays which he had already written, and which had been

published in the Rheinisches Museum, were ample qualifications for granting

him  the  Doctor's  Degree,  and  that  an  oral  examination  would  not  be

necessary. One of the Professors had remarked jokingly, " We cannot, indeed,

examine one of our colleagues." All this was brought to his knowledge, with

a good deal besides, by Ritschl. On the 23rd March, 1869, my brother was

unanimously granted the degree of Doctor without examination. (Rector : B.

B.  Bruckner,  Professor  of  Theology.  Vice-  Chancellor  :  O.  L.  Erdmann,

Professor of Chemistry. Dean : G. Hankel, Professor of Physics.) Instead of

the usual wording of the Doctor's Degree the concluding lines read differently

If, however, he had been spared his Doctor's thesis, the dreadful Index to the

twenty-four volumes of the Rheinisches Museum remained to be completed. I

offered my services as I had done in the previous autumn, and this time was

eagerly given a share in the heavy work. Fritz worked out the whole, I cut up

the strips and distributed the various references among the different divisions,

arranged them in alphabetical order, and stuck them in their proper sequence.

Fritz praised me very highly, and declared that I did the thing as well as a

student who had already studied philology for several terms, a compliment

which made me feel very proud and happy.

  We often laughed to tears over the work, and I still wonder what there

was  that  was  really  funny  in  it.  Fritz  had  the  most  delightful  and  most

infectious laugh of anybody I have ever known, and since he had grown to

manhood he was very fond of laughing. He declared that in this respect he

had a great deal of lost ground to recover, because as a child and as a boy he

had laughed so little. And what extremely childish jokes would provoke his

mirth my translations from the Latin, for instance ! I only knew a very little

Latin, and used to help myself out of any difficulties through the very often

deceptive  similarity  of  sound  with  the  French.  When,  therefore,  in  our

collaboration, I translated either a sentence or a longer passage, and imposed

some  sort  of  sense  upon  the  whole  a  meaning  which  was  often  very  far

removed from the right one, Fritz would laugh in the most hearty manner,

and declare that I read Latin as though it were a cuneiform inscription out of

which scholars were able to decipher the most contradictory meanings. Or,

amid  constant  interruptions  of  boisterous  laughter,  we  would  rehearse

together  the  scene  of  the  first  student  presenting  himself  at  my  brother'slectures.  On  these  occasions  I  would  pronounce  the  most  idiotic  Latin

speeches, introducing every time a new variation ; and Fritz assured me that

later on, when the students at Bale really did present themselves, he had had

the greatest difficulty in keeping serious, because he could not help thinking

of my nonsensical Latin speeches.

  Now  and  again  he  would  play  a  little  trick  upon  me,  For  instance,  I

remember how one day when I was particularly busy he called out to me, "

Bring me the references to Bellum Civile!" I made a hasty search for this

particular division, but could not find the small reference strips. "You must

have  got  them  yourself,"  I  said.  "  No.  I  am  sure  you  still  have  them."  I

returned to the search feverishly but they had vanished absolutely vanished !

" You must have them ! " Fritz cried, with imperturbable calm. At last by

chance I happened to pass a mirror, and to my surprise saw myself decorated

with  a  sort  of  Red  Indian  coiffure  of  strips  of  paper.  While  I  had  been

doubled up over my work Fritz had stuck the strips of paper like rays round

my head, on to the ribbon in my hair. " Fritz ! " I exclaimed indignantly, "

how can you expect your students to respect you if you are capable of such

babyish tricks as this ! " He laughed heartily at my indignation. He had no

fear of not being respected and in this he was right, for from his childhood

onwards  he  had  possessed  a  certain  graceful  and  natural  dignity  which

impressed even the coarsest and most uneducated mind.

  But a very different fear oppressed his young heart, and that was the

thought of the uncompromising, predestined path which lay before him, and

which, however brilliant it might appear, he could not face without a certain

painful feeling of resignation. The following notes, written in March, 1869,

clearly  show  us  what  his  feelings  were  :  "It  has  always  seemed  to  me

worthwhile to consider the particular way in which anyone is led nowadays

to the study of classical philology. For it appears to me that I am only uttering

a  truism  when  I  say  that  one  or  two  other  sciences,  in  their  blooming

youthfulness and extraordinary productive powers, have a greater right to the

fresh vigour of striving talent than our science of philology, which, though it

does indeed stride forward very gallantly, does as a matter of fact reveal a

good deal of the faded features of antiquity. Of course I do not speak of those

natures who are attracted to this calling by mere material interests, while even

those others who are drawn into it like passive instruments in the hand of the

philological teacher have very little in them which pleases me. Many among

them go to philology merely to exercise a pedagogic gift which is inborn inthem ; but, even to these, science is no more than an effective instrument, and

not the serious aim of their lives, pursued with ardour and devotion. There is

a small community which delights with artistic satisfaction in the beauty of

the Hellenic world of form, and a still smaller body of men for whom the

thinkers of antiquity are still problems, and are not by any means the final

word on all problems. I have no right to associate myself exclusively with

any one of these classes ; for, the path which led me to philology is just as far

removed from that of practical prudence and low egoism, as it is from that

along which the enthusiastic love of antiquity marches torch in hand. To say

this is no easy matter ; but it is honest.

  "  Maybe  I  do  not  belong  in  any  way  at  all  to  that  specific  type  of

philologist on whose brows Nature has written in letters of brass that they are

philologists,  and  who,  with  the  ingenuousness  of  children,  unhesitatingly

pursue their appointed path. Now and again one meets with such philological

demi-gods, and then one perceives how fundamentally different everything is

which  is  created  by  instinct  and  natural  forces,  from  that  which  is  the

outcome of instruction, reflection and perhaps also of resignation.

  "I  will  not  say  that  I  belong  merely  and  solely  to  these  '  resigned  '

philologists ; but when I remember how I was led from art to philosophy,

from philosophy to science, and then again to this much narrower domain, it

almost seems to be an act of deliberate renunciation.

  " I ought to bear in mind that a man of twenty-four already has the most

important things of his life behind him, even though he may bring forth only

in later years that which makes his life worth living. For it is within this

period  of  years  more  or  less  that  the  young  soul  appropriates  everything

typical from out all the events and experiences, whether of life or of thought

which come its way ; and it can never again emerge from the world of these

typical experiences. When in later years this idealising glance has vanished

from our eyes, we stand in the fetters of that world of typical experiences

which we received as the legacy of our youth."

  If I look back upon that month of March, 1869, and ask myself and all his

friends  what  the  general  opinion  on  my  brother  was  when  as  a  man  of

twenty-four he responded to the summons to become Professor of Classical

Philology at Bale University, every one replies : first and foremost, that he

was  looked  upon  as  one  of  Ritschl's  best  pupils,  as  one  of  the  most

distinguished exponents of classical antiquity with a brilliant career before

him, and, secondly, as an ardent votary of both "Wagner and Schopenhauer.No one suspected how independent my brother's attitude was towards his

chosen science and towards his educators and his ideals. And he deceived

both himself and us, when he let himself pass as a " follower " of anybody as

this naturally led one to suppose that he shared all the views of the ideals he

worshipped.

  And thus, what with work and preparations for his new post, the end of

the winter and the hour of his departure came all too soon. The last days were

very grave ones for Fritz and myself. Sadly we looked back upon the sunny

days of our childhood ; we recalled the innumerable happy hours we had

spent  together,  we  thought  of  my  brother's  boyhood  and  of  all  the  many

aspirations  that  had  animated  it.  And  then  we  remembered  the  delightful

freedom of his student life, of the faithful friends who had worked shoulder

to shoulder with him, and of those lofty ideals to which hitherto he had been

able to aspire with absolute freedom of spirit and with all the impetuosity of

youth.  Everything  that  I  have  recorded  in  the  preceding  pages  passed  in

procession before our minds but now the glorious dream of youth was over.

Farewell to Freedom ! Solemnly and seriously the official duties drew near

with  all  their  honours  and  heavy  responsibilities.  How  much  freedom  of

choice had he not to give up in his twenty-fourth year ! Tremulously we

looked  into  the  future,  which  lay  before  us  like  a  mysterious  shadow  of

gigantic  dimensions,  and  our  warm  young  hearts  shuddered.  On  the  last

evening before his departure he wrote to Baron Carl von Gersdorff ; and with

this letter we also must take leave of my brother's cloudless and sunny youth.

  " My dear friend, the last hour has come, the last evening which for a

while I shall spend at home. To-morrow morning early I go out into the great

world, to enter a new and untried profession in an atmosphere heavy and

oppressive with duty and work. Once more I must take leave of everyone; the

golden  time  of  free  and  unconstrained  activity,  in  which  every  instant  is

sovereign, in which the joys of art and the world are spread out before us as a

mere spectacle in which we scarcely participate this time is irrevocably over

for  me  ;  now  the  inexorable  goddess  '  Daily  Duty  '  rules  supreme.  '

Bemooster Bursclie zieh' ich aus ! ' (' As a moss-grown student I go out into

the world'). But you know the poignant Student Song! Yes, Yes ! ' Muss

selber nun Philistersein ! ' (' I, too, must be a Philistine now ! ')- Someday or

another this line always comes true. One cannot with impunity take up posts

and honours the only question is, are the fetters of iron or of thread ? And

there is that pluck in me which one day, perhaps, will enable me to burst mybonds, and venture into this precarious life from a different direction, and in a

different  way.  As  yet  I  see  no  sign  of  the  inevitable  humpback  of  the

professor.  May  Zeus  and  all  the  Muses  preserve  me  from  becoming  a

Philistine, a man of the herd. But I can hardly see how I should be able to

become one, seeing that I am not one. It is true I stand in greater danger of

becoming another kind of Philistine, a Philistine of the ' Specialist ' species ;

for it is only too natural that the daily task, and the unremitting concentration

of one's thought upon certain subjects and problems, should somewhat blunt

the free receptivity of the mind, and undermine the philosophical sense. But I

flatter myself that I shall be able to confront this peril with more calm and

security than the majority of philologists; philosophical seriousness is already

too deeply-rooted in me ; the true and essential problems of life and thought

have  been  too  clearly  revealed  to  me  by  that  great  mystagogue,

Schopenhauer, to allow of my ever being obliged to dread such a disgraceful

defection  from  the  '  idea.'  To  infuse  this  new  blood  into  my  science,  to

communicate  to  my  pupils  that  Schopenhauerian  earnestness  which  is

stamped on the brow of the sublime man such is my desire, such is my proud

hope.  I  should  like  to  be  something  more  than  a  mere  trainer  of  capable

philologists  :  the  present  generation  of  teachers,  the  care  of  the  growing

younger generation all this is in my mind. If we must live, let us at least do so

in such wise that others may bless our life as a priceless treasure, once we

have been happily delivered from its toils."

              PART IV THE UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR 1869-1876

                                  CHAPTER XV BALE

  EARLY  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  April,  1869,  my  brother  left

Naumburg for Bale, his future home. It was a fresh and pleasant morning,

and through our surging tears, which our pride alone helped us to restrain, we

watched his powerful young form vanish in the old-fashioned fly that bore

him thence. Even the coachman, who had once driven our parents to their

wedding,  smiled  feelingly  at  the  stately  young  Professor,  and  seemed  to

regard it as an honour to be allowed to drive him to the station. The fact that

our Fritz had such a dignified mien, and that his professorial gravity became

him so naturally despite his youth, atoned for a good deal as far as I and my

mother were concerned. At all events, he had taken great pains in choosing

his new outfit, to select only those styles and materials which would give him

an elderly appearance ; he absolutely repudiated anything in the way of a

youthful or smart cut, and he approved only of those clothes, fashions andhats  which  were  patronised  by  elderly  men.  These  clothes  suited  him

admirably, in spite of his twenty four years, and they must certainly have

been in keeping with the conditions at Bale.

  He reached Bale on the 20th April in order to assume his position as a

Professor  there.  On  the  following  day  he  sent  us  a  short  account  of  his

journey  :  "  A  week  ago  yesterday  I  left  Naumburg,  and  reached  Bale

yesterday. I arrived at Cologne at about 11 p.m. on the first day, which was

by far the most insufferable that I have ever spent. On Tuesday evening I left

for Bonn, and spent Wednesday there in the most agreeable fashion, looking

up old associations and meeting new acquaintances. I spent the whole of

Thursday on the steamer in beautiful spring weather, and landed late in the

evening at Biebrich, not far from Mayence, whence I travelled by train to

Wiesbaden. I explored this place on the following day, and cannot say that it

attracted me much. In the afternoon I left for Heidelberg. And in the evening,

when the light was at its best, I visited the famous castle ruin with its lovely

surroundings. I met a few Leipzig acquaintances here, and spent Saturday at a

simple  but  good  local  inn,  where  I  worked  at  my  inaugural  address.  My

intention was to travel direct to Bale on Sunday ; a quarter of an hour before

reaching Karlsruhe, however, I changed my mind ; for a number of young

men who were going to hear the Meistcrsinger at Karlsruhe had entered my

compartment, and as I could not resist this temptation, I alighted at the next

station, had my ticket extended over the next day, and refreshed myself in the

evening by hearing an excellent performance of my favourite opera. Thus I

took leave of German soil. On Monday, at p.m., I reached Bale, and put up at

the ' Krone.' " At present I am installed in the temporary lodgings of which I

can give you no better description than the one you have already had from

Vischer. They are somewhat uninviting, but rejoice in the advantage of being

only about twenty paces away from the place where I shall ultimately live."

  Later on he called these first lodgings either the " Cave " or the " servants'

hall." For he had once intended to engage a servant, as at that time he did not

like to perform certain trifling domestic duties himself. Indeed, his short-

sightedness  may  have  made  him  essentially  unfit  for  such  things.  Very

shortly after he had been elected to Bale, he wrote to us from Leipzig : "

Meanwhile you can do me a great service, by looking out for a servant whom

I might take with me to Bale. My wants and special conditions are as follows

: The man must not be too young, and he must be clean and honest. If he has

been  a  soldier,  all  the  better.  I  loathe  the  vulgar  dialect  of  Naumburg.Anything in the way of crass imbecility I could not abide. There is nothing to

prevent him from practising his trade while he is with me, provided it be a

clean and fragrant one."

  After considering the matter more carefully, however, it was thought that

a servant would only prove to be an extra source of annoyance, and thus all

that remained of the whole plan, as my brother humorously remarked, was

the servant's room which Fritz was obliged to use as his own quarters for two

months.

  In those days it was extremely difficult to find pleasant furnished rooms

in Bale. Everyone seemed disinclined to admit strangers into their homes ;

every family seemed to be actuated by the one wish to be left alone. It was

for this reason that the town was in those days an extraordinary large one in

proportion  to  the  numbers  of  its  inhabitants.  In  the  spring  of  1869  the

authorities were engaged upon demolishing the city wall, laying out gardens,

and  throwing  gate  and  door  open  to  the  new  age.  My  brother  always

expressed his delight at having known good old Bale ; he declared that by

this means he had been allowed a deeper insight into the Middle Ages. The

whole community at Bale, with its deeply -rooted customs and usages, was

particularly pleasing to us Prussians, used as we were to seeing the cultured

classes among us move from place to place, and easily adapt themselves to

different habits. Bale's magnificent ancient houses, with their quaint ghost

stories, reminiscent of old myths forgotten long ago ; its staunchly united

families who all paraded to church on the best of terms on Sundays ; its old

servants who worked in the same families from one generation to another ;

the old fashioned way in which its inhabitants greeted one another in their

low-  German  dialect  all  this  struck  us  as  belonging  to  an  age  long  since

buried in oblivion.

  From the earliest times, Bale has been both a rich and beneficent city,

striving in every possible way to improve its excellent public institutions, and

to  promote  art  and  science.  My  brother  always  thought  that  the

extraordinarily large sums spent by this little town on educational work were

deserving of the highest credit. That is why he says in one of his unpublished

notes : "I am quite well aware of what kind of place this is in which I am to

hold these lectures i.e., a city which, in a manner so lavish as to be quite out

of proportion to its size, and by comparison, a shameful rebuke to much

larger cities, endeavours to promote the culture and education of its citizens.

Thus, I certainly am not at fault when I assume that in a place where so muchmore is done for these things than elsewhere, they will also be much more

thought about."

  On all sides my brother aroused the deepest interest. A letter sent from

Leipzig by Privy Councillor Ritschl which culminated in the sentence, " In a

word, Nietzsche is a genius," had roused the most extraordinary expectations,

and, like all strong praise, also provoked some suspicion.

  On the 28th of May he delivered his inaugural address, and concluded

with a small tribute to philology, in which he invoked his listeners to show

some gratitude to this science, and with a few personal remarks introducing

himself  to  his  new  fellow-citizens  of  Bale.  His  listeners  attended  to  his

discourse  with  the  greatest  interest.  His  melodious  voice,  the  graceful

movements of his powerful frame, his noble features, his gleaming eyes all

this together exercised a peculiar spell over the assembled audience. Musing

deeply, the worthy councillors and professors walked homeward. What had

they just heard? A young scholar discussing the very justification of his own

science in a cool and philosophically critical spirit! A man able to impart so

much artistic glamour to his subject, that philology, that once stale and arid

study, suddenly struck them and they were certainly not impressionable men

as the messenger of the gods : " and just as the Muses descended upon the

dull and tormented Bosotian peasants, so philology comes into a world full of

gloomy colours and pictures, full of the deepest, most incurable woes, and

speaks to men comfortingly of the beautiful and brilliant godlike figures of a

distant, blue, and happy fairyland."

  " We have indeed got hold of a rare bird, Herr Ratsherr," said one of these

gentlemen to his companion, and the latter heartily agreed, for my brother's

appointment had been chiefly his doing. Even in Leipzig it was reported that

Fritz's  inaugural  address  had  created  an  extraordinary  impression.  Jacob

Burchhardt had said : " Nietzsche is as much an artist as a scholar." Privy

Councillor Ritschl told me of this himself, and then he added with a smile : "I

always  said  so;  he  can  make  his  scientific  discourses  as  palpitatingly

interesting as a Frenchman does his novels."

  After this start, he wrote to us : " In addition to this the people are well-

disposed towards me, and whoever had any misgivings on my assuming my

post at this place, has either had to bow to the inevitable, or has felt the

grounds for these misgivings vanish upon becoming better acquainted with

me. In this respect my inaugural address was very important. I delivered it

before  an  exceptionally  crowded  hall  only  a  day  or  two  ago,  and  choseHomer's personality as my subject. The people here were convinced of a

good many things, thanks to this inaugural address, and I see clearly now that

my position has been rendered secure by means of it. ... I have fixed my

lecture-hour in the morning, every week-day between seven and eight, and

am well satisfied with this kind of work. One also becomes inured to the

drawback of having only eight people in one's audience, seeing that they,

together with one Divinity student, make up the whole number of those who

have  entered  for  the  philological  course.  In  the  school  I  rejoice  in  the

possession of an intelligent class, and natter myself that, though I may not be

a good schoolmaster, I am at any rate not a bad one either."

  My  brother  had  his  Homer  address  printed  for  private  presentation  at

Christmas, 1869, and sent it to me with the following lines : " Devoid of dress

and cover, see ! This brand-new booklet comes to thee. But let Jakobi once

bestow His skill upon it till it glow In splendid bindings I surmise 'Twill win

some favour in thine eyes. Upon the polished table-top To place it, and when

questions pop Then, with a proud indifference you'll confess : 'Twas dedicate

to me, the Index-scribleress ! " ' The little book itself contained the following

hearty  dedication  in  print  :  "  To  my  dear  and  only  sister  Elizabeth,  the

industrious helpmate on the stubble-field of philology."

  Over  leaf,  at  the  back  of  this  printed  dedication,  stood  the  following

verses addressed to my brother's friends : " In Bale I stand, nor fear, nor faint,

But lonely God may hear my plaint And Homer, Homer ! crying loud, I

ceaselessly annoy the crowd. To church or home their way they win And

drown with laughter all my din.

  Such things no longer damp my mood : The public, always kind and

good, Listens to my Homeric roar, Yet keeps as patient as before. For this

surpassing  graciousness  My  thanks  in  print  I  here  express."  a  In  his

references to my help, my brother meant the work I had done with him on the

compilation  of  the  index  to  the  twenty-two  volumes  of  the  Rheinisches

Museum, which I had to complete, as it was unfinished when my brother

went  to  Bale.  Later  on,  Fritz  himself  did  some  work  on  the  indices  to

volumes 23 to 25.

  This dedication is an example of how intensely grateful my brother was

for any help he received. Gratitude, of which his friend Wilhelm had already

made special mention in referring to him, remained throughout his life his

chief characteristic. His friends must certainly feel the same as I do about this

matter. When, now, we go through the old letters and book-dedications, weask  ourselves,  what  were  the  services  for  which  so  much  gratitude  is

expressed ? Very often they consisted of quite insignificant trifles, or, as a

rule,  little  acts  of  assistance  which  were  the  greatest  joy  to  one.  But  my

brother transfigured all such things into deeds of personal self-sacrifice. I

must therefore warn the reader against drawing any conclusions whatever

from such excessive expressions of thanks and praise. Although, as the result

of my brother's encomiums, I was for a long time supposed to be the only

compiler of the index, the work I did, despite the fact that it was arduous and

took up a good deal of my time, entailed only a small amount of individual

talent or knowledge.

  Contrary to my desire, this private impression of the Homer address, with

its dedication to me, fell into the hands of the University circles of Leipzig,

and somewhat scandalised them. Probably, however, it was not the dedication

alone which roused the narrow hearts of these philologists to suspicion ; for

the regular, common or garden philologist must have felt an ominous shudder

on reading one or two of the passages in the address itself. Must not the

following  words  have  sounded  rather  discordant  to  their  ears  ?  :  "  It  is

becoming even in a philologist to formulate the object of his ambition and the

road thither in a short and condensed article of faith ; and I suggest that this

be done by transforming a saying of Seneca's as follows : These words should

imply that all philological work should be embraced and bounded in by a

philosophical outlook, in which everything isolated and particular is got rid

of  as  something  reprehensible,  and  only  that  which  is  whole  and  unified

remains."

  Some time elapsed before my brother felt quite at home in Bale. Much as

the exclusive and soundly established life of the community pleased him, and

high as his esteem was for the men and women of Bale (" they all have the

courage still to be original characters," he said), it was just as difficult for him

as for them to make new friends. He met with much kindness in Bale, and

always acknowledged it with the utmost gratitude ; but, during the first year

of his Professorship, he suffered greatly from solitude. What he lacked was

the  familiar  mate  with  whom  he  could  daily  exchange  the  most  personal

thoughts. Even his journeys through the glorious country of Switzerland did

not comfort him then ; they only succeeded in making him yearn the more for

the old friends. Towards the middle of July, 1869, he wrote to Erwin Rohde:

"My dear friend, do you know what ' Bindlitag ' (Travelling-bag day) means

at Bale? Everybody straps up his bag and runs to the railway station ; for fourweeks  the  University  and  all  the  schools  have  a  holiday,  and  the

meteorologists  of  Bale  declare  that  during  this  period  it  is  physically

impossible to remain in Bale. The cry is therefore, ' Out into the wide world !

' But whither ? To my surprise I observe that the great ice-clad mountains do

not attract me so much after all ; and I should love to visit the delightful hill-

country  of  Bavaria  and  Bohemia  again,  if  only  I  could  do  so  in  your

company, dear friend."

  And, at the end of the holidays, on the 18th August, he writes : " The last

day of the holidays. Dead and buried old feelings come to life again. I feel

just like a fourth-form boy who becomes sentimental and writes poems about

the ephemeral character of earthly bliss, when he hears the clock strike the

last hour of the last day of the holidays. Oh, dear friend, what a small amount

of  joy  I  have  in  this  world,  and  what  a  lot  of  my  own  smoke  I  have  to

consume  !  How  unsatisfactory  letters  are  !  Incidentally,  I  discovered  the

following beautiful passage in old Goethe yesterday : ' How precious is the

dear and certain speech Of the immediate friend ! The Solitary, Bobbed of its

power benign, sinks into gloom ; Too slowly ripen, then locked in his breast,

Thought and each firm resolve ; but in the presence Of the beloved friend

they leap to life.' " l And, to his friend Baron von Gersdorff, he writes : " Oh,

and how much one needs the consciousness of having real friends ! At times

solitude is far too dreadful." Still fate offered him a splendid substitute : it

had  led  him  into  the  neighbourhood  of  that  sublime  genius,  to  whom,

henceforward, he was going to erect altars in his heart, which he was to adorn

with  all  the  most  glorious  blooms  of  his  intellect,  and  honour  with  the

sacrificial offerings of self-denial.

    TOCFCHAPTER XVI TRIBSCHEN

  " IN addition to this I have found a man who has revealed to me, as no

other man could, the image of that which Schopenhauer calls ' the genius,'

and who is thoroughly permeated by that wonderfully profound philosophy.

This man is no other than Richard Wagner, about whom you need not take

for granted any opinion which you may find in the press or in the writings of

musical experts, etc. No one can know him or judge him, because the whole

world stands upon a basis different from his, and is not familiar with his

atmosphere.  He  is  ruled  by  such  an  absolute  kind  of  ideality,  by  such

profound and touching humanity, and by such a lofty and serious interest in

life, that at his side I feel in the presence of the divine."

  Thus does my brother describe his impressions and feelings after his firstvisit to Richard Wagner, in a letter written in August, 1869, to Baron von

Gersdorff.

  On the Saturday before Whitsuntide, the 15th of May, 1869, he went for

the first time to the Lake of Lucerne, in order to spend a few days at Tell's

Chapel. At Lucerne he wondered for some time whether he might dare to

respond to an invitation given him in the previous autumn, and visit Richard

Wagner at his country house, Tribschen. It was a beautiful spring morning ;

full  of  hesitation  he  walked  along  romantic  paths  to  the  pretty  house  of

Tribschen, which stands in a beautifully isolated position between the water

and the mountains, at the foot of Mount Pilatus, near the Lake of Lucerne.

When he reached the country house he stood for some while quite still in

front of it, and heard sounds coming from it as of a sad chord repeated again

and again. At last a servant came out of the garden and said to him that Herr

Wagner would be at work until p.m., and no one was allowed to disturb him.

My brother then resolved at least to send up his card. Whereupon Wagner

quickly sent the servant to inquire whether the Professor was the same Herr

Nietzsche  whom  Wagner  had  met  at  his  sister's,  the  wife  of  Professor

Brockhaus,  in  Leipzig.  On  receiving  a  reply  in  the  affirmative,  Wagner

invited my brother to lunch. Unfortunately he had to decline the invitation, as

he  already  had  an  engagement  which  he  felt  compelled  to  keep  at  Tell's

Chapel. He was therefore asked to spend the following Monday at Tribschen.

He  writes  in  his  notes,  "Meanwhile  spent  a  jolly  time  with  Ofenbriggen,

Loretius, Exner and his sister, at the Pension Imhof." On Whit-Monday he

drove to Lucerne, went to Tribschen, and there, in the company of Richard

Wagner and Frau Cosima Wagner, spent the first of those lovely days which

later were to prove the joy of his soul and a solace in his loneliness. Wagner

presented him with his photograph, accompanied him back as far as his inn,

and  begged  him  most  warmly  to  repeat  his  visit.  Concerning  all  this  my

brother wrote to Erwin Rohde : " Wagner is really all that we hoped he would

be : a lavish, rich, and great mind, an energetic character, and a wonderfully

charming  personality,  possessed  of  the  strongest  will-power,  etc.  I  must

close, otherwise I should sing a pa3an."

  Very shortly afterwards, Frau Cosima invited him to Tribschen on the

occasion of Wagner's birthday, but he did violence to his heart and declined

the invitation "as a virtuous and dutiful University Professor," as he wrote at

the time. But he moaned : " An official post is indeed an extraordinary thing !

" and " I see very clearly how even the most desirable of occupations maybecome a fetter at which spirits like us tug impatiently." Instead of going to

Tribschen, he wrote Wagner a letter of respectful congratulations, to which

he received a most hearty reply, and an invitation to spend the following

week-end at the composer's house. My brother naturally accepted this second

invitation for the 5th and 6th June, 1869, with great eagerness ; and wrote to

us as follows concerning it : " One is supremely comfortable at Tribschen ;

we  have  the  most  lively  and  entertaining  time  together  there  a  delightful

family circle, quite removed from the ordinary trivialities of society." Out of

consideration for his colleagues he returned to Bale very early on the Monday

morning ; and sometime later he heard that during that night a son had been

born to Wagner an event which both regarded as a very fortunate omen for

their friendship.

  After the summer holidays, "Wagner and my brother saw a great deal of

each other and were always corresponding ; and, now, if my brother ever felt

oppressed  by  his  loneliness,  the  thought  of  a  coming  visit  to  Tribschen

always  cheered  him.  At  the  beginning  of  September,  he  writes  to  Erwin

Rohde  :  "By-the-bye,  I  also  have  my  Italy,  just  as  you  have;  the  one

difference being that the only time I can keep for enjoying it, consists of my

Saturdays and Sundays. This Italy is called Tribschen, and I am already quite

at home there. Just recently I have paid four visits there in quick succession,

and a letter takes wing in the same direction almost every week. During my

first  night  at  Tribschen,  a  little  boy  called  Siegfried  was  born.  On  the

occasion of my last visit there, Wagner had just completed his composition of

Siegfried, and was full of the most exuberant sense of his artistic strength."

  In all his letters my brother urged his friends to study Wagner's writings ;

he assisted them with his own knowledge of the matter wherever he could,

and endeavoured to awaken their warmest feelings for Wagner. His reverent

heart soon led them to an attitude of reverence as well. Still he did not limit

his propaganda to the narrow circle of his friends alone, and to this day I

cannot help smiling at the thought that in his passionate admiration for his

hero, he almost succeeded in inducing the Grand-Duchess Constantine to pay

a  visit  to  Tribschen.  At  that  time,  this  would  have  been  considered  an

altogether unprecedented act ; for, although Wagner enjoyed the patronage of

King Ludwig II., he was not yet received at the Courts of the Princes and

Princesses. The Grand-Duchess (a former pupil of our father's) spent one day

in Bale in July, 1869 ; my brother, notified beforehand, had met her at the

railway station, accompanied her through the city, and spent a most pleasantevening  with  her  at  her  hotel.  She  was  unusually  musical  and  therefore

understood more about Wagner's greatness than did the public of the time.

  Wagner lived a very lonely life with his family in Tribschen ; for he was

greatly  misunderstood,  and  kept  very  isolated  from  the  world.  I  do  not

believe that anyone in Lucerne had a notion of his fame, save perhaps an

amiable couple, Count B. and his wife, who, owing to family business, were

obliged to stay there for a while. Apart from these, the various hotel-keepers

alone had some sort of dim idea that this Herr Wagner must be someone

remarkable ; for, once, a king had remained incognito at Lucerne, evidently

only for the purpose of visiting the mysterious man, and again and again

gentlemen of very distinguished appearance had visited Tribschen, of whom

it had been whispered afterwards that they were princes and high dignitaries.

Taking everything into consideration, it seemed advisable to treat a man who

could receive such guests, with respect.

  Even Wagner used to complain bitterly at times about his isolation, and

referred my brother to the Unique as his greatest consolation. My brother's

friends, Professor Rohde and Baron von Gersdorff, were received in a very

friendly manner. Later on, Wagner said to me : " Your brother is a member of

the Tribschen household, and his friends are my friends," and on another

occasion : "Your brother and his friends belong to an absolutely new and

wonderful  order  of  men,  in  the  possibility  of  whose  existence  I  never

believed before."

    Thanks  to  all  the  delightful  hours  and  days  they  spent  together  far

removed  from  the  outer  world,  a  very  deep  and  strong  friendship  had

gradually grown up between Wagner, Frau Cosima, and my brother. They all

shared each other's experiences, pleasant or unpleasant, great or small, and

they  all  suffered  together  through  the  premature  productions  of  the

Rheingold,  and  the  Walkure  at  Munich,  and  through  all  the  indiscreet

publications and malicious attacks on the master. But they rejoiced, too, with

all their hearts, at the progress of his great works, the Gotterdammerung and

the " Autobiography." Both "Wagner and his wife manifested the greatest

interest  in  my  brother's  inaugural  address,  and  in  two  lectures  which  he

delivered in Bale before mixed audiences, and which had caused somewhat

of  a  sensation.  The  three  addresses:  "  Homer  and  Classical  Philology,"  "

Greek Musical Drama," and "Socrates and Tragedy," were most eagerly read

and discussed at Tribschen. Then there were also stories told about the simple

daily  events  in  the  life  at  Tribschen,  particularly  of  the  delightful  pranksplayed by the dear little rascals who constituted the junior portion of the

establishment, and who were always a source of great joy to their elders. Fritz

became a thorough lover of children an accomplishment for which he had

never before had either the opportunity or the talent. When Christmas, 1869,

came round, he undertook to purchase in Bale the greater part of the presents

for Tribschen not only Direr etchings, antique treasures and costly art- works

for the household, but also dolls and model theatres and other toys. Frau

Cosima was always very shamefaced when she approached my brother with

fresh requests, and used to declare that the master would have been quite

indignant if he had known she bothered my brother with such matters. She

said that she found the courage for demanding these favours only in trying to

forget that my brother was a Professor, a Doctor, and a Philologist, and in

remembering that he was twenty -five. Moreover, in view of his unpractical

nature, she tried to make things as easy as possible for him, and told him to

present little tickets in the shops, containing the most exhaustive descriptions

of what was required. But Fritz did not take his task too lightly ; he not only

inspected the art-works, books and other things which he understood, very

critically, but he proceeded in the same fashion with the toys of which his

knowledge was much less complete. For instance, in regard to the actors for

the toy-theatre, he protested that the king's appearance was not sufficiently

realistic, and that the devil was not as black as he ought to be ; he also formed

his own opinion as to the dress of a certain Christmas angel, which he could

nowhere discover in Bale, decked in the orthodox heavenly way, and which

he was therefore obliged to order from Paris.

  He  spent  the  most  enjoyable  holidays  at  Tribschen  during  Christmas,

1869 and 1870. During the Christmas festival the good old country house was

always transformed into a lovely fairy palace in which the happy children

joyfully, and the adults somewhat sadly, forgot both space and time. Presents

were given and taken all round, and objects of beauty, of interest, and even

more substantial tokens of friendship then exchanged hands. For instance, my

brother  received  a  beautiful  large  octavo  edition  of  Montaigne  from  Frau

Cosima. For years he had had an excellent German edition in his possession ;

and, as he had already received La Kochefoucauld, Yauvenargues and La

Bruyere from me, he then had the greater number of his favourite novelists in

good editions on his shelves. Stendhal's Promenades dans Rome was only

added  to  his  collection  later  on,  and  he  came  across  this  book  quite

accidentally at an antiquary's. Strange to say, this author was not known toWagner and his circle.

  But Fritz was entrusted with tasks of a very varied character by the master

; for Wagner was then engaged upon the writing of his " Autobiography," of

which only twelve copies were to be printed for private circulation.

  He laid the whole matter confidently in my brother's hands, and Fritz saw

to the printing in Bale. At the beginning, Fritz took charge of all the proof-

corrections. Wagner soon found, however, that this was too much for his

friend, with all his official duties, and undertook the task himself. But my

brother was still allowed to inspect both the manuscript and the proofs.

  At  Christmas,  1869,  the  "  Homer  "  address  was  printed  for  private

circulation  at  the  same  printers,  and  later  on,  in  1871,  the  lecture  on  "

Socrates and Greek Tragedy," already referred to, was also printed there. The

manuscript of this lecture had already been sent to Tribschen in February,

1870, and it caused somewhat of a sensation in the Wagner household. In it

my brother for the first time elaborated " in a manner a little more precise "

the substance of the original discourse, which consisted of his thoughts on the

destruction of the ancient Dionysian tragedy through the rationalistic spirit of

Socrates and Euripides. The master informed him that, after he had read it

aloud, it took him some time to calm down his wife.

  " I, for my part, cry out to you : ' It is as you say ! ' You have hit the right

nail on the head ; you have called attention to the exact point with perfect

accuracy, and I cannot help looking forward with admiration to the further

development of your ideas with which you will confute the prejudices of

vulgar dogmatism. Nevertheless, I am somewhat anxious about you ; and

from the bottom of my heart I trust that you will not come to grief. That is

why I would fain advise you not to expound your unacceptable views any

longer in short treatises which, owing to unfortunate scruples, are, I think,

calculated to produce a superficial effect. But if, as I believe, you are so

deeply steeped in your ideas, gather them together in a much more extensive

work. Then you will most certainly find the proper expressions for Socrates'

and Plato's divine errors, which were of so overwhelmingly creative a nature,

as to force us to worship even when we are in the very act of turning our

backs on them. Oh, friend ! where can we find the sacred words to express

what  we  feel  when  we  contemplate  those  incomprehensibly  harmonious

creatures from the standpoint of our world ! And how high our hopes and

thoughts of ourselves should be when we realise deeply and clearly that we

are able to do things nay, that we shall and must do things that were denied tothem ! "

  With all due reverence, my brother must certainly have smiled a little on

receiving the above advice ; for, for many years, a whole host of aesthetic

problems and replies to problems had been fermenting in his mind, and he

had  availed  himself  of  public  lectures  only  in  order  to  elaborate  small

portions of the general outlook which was to be expounded in a large work

dealing with the Greeks. But one is pleased to be influenced a little, one is

pleased to be criticised a little, by others, when one stands still hesitatingly

before  the  accomplishment  of  a  great  work.  It  is  very  characteristic  that

Wagner, despite his intimate intercourse with my brother, could have fallen

into the error of supposing that these short lectures were to a certain extent

merely preliminary surveys of the ground, and that he did not realise that they

might  be  only  a  small  portion  of  a  general  conclusion,  which  had  been

arrived at by years of study and much silent thought. Similar errors were

subsequently made by other people, for communicative as my brother was in

his daily intercourse with his friends, he spoke of his great new thoughts and

plans,  even  to  his  friends,  only  when  they  had  grown  ripe  in  solitude.

Whether  he  ever  discussed  his  private  plans  in  response  to  Wagner's

suggestion to collect all his new ideas together in a book, or whether he still

thought it was too early to do so, I cannot now ascertain, as the majority of

his letters to Wagner seem to have been lost. Probably, in keeping with the

friendly relations of those days, he wrote expressing in the warmest manner

his gratitude to Wagner for his kind advice.

  In addition to this, the surprise and joy over the novelty and audacity of

my brother's writings produced an agreeable result. Frau Cosima wrote : "

The work you sent, and our discussion of it, marked a turning-point in the

general  spirit  prevailing  at  Tribschen.  "We  were  so  doleful  that  we  even

ceased from reading of an evening ; the pilgrimage which you induced us to

take into the most beautiful age of man had such a beneficial effect upon us

that,  on  the  following  morning,  the  master  created  the  bright  theme  of

Siegfried,  to  an  accompaniment  of  the  boldest  and  most  frivolous  violin

virtuoso on the Rhine, and listening to which, the Rhine Daughters, with

joyful  hope,  let  their  motif  resound  far  and  wide.  (The  overture  to  the

Gotterdammerung after Brunnhilde's and Siegfried's departure)."

  This  mutually  refreshing  influence,  this  reciprocal  effect  of  two  great

spirits one upon the other, which filled each with such lofty hopes for the

future,  is  certainly  the  most  exalting  and  most  stirring  testimony  of  theprofound  friendship  that  prevailed  between  them  during  the  days  at

Tribschen.

  The  Wagners  found  Tribschen  almost  more  cosy  in  winter  than  in

summer. I, for my part, saw it only when it was decked in its most beautiful

spring or summer garb. The first time I went there was at the end of July,

1870. I was staying with some Bale friends at their country house in Lucerne,

on the other side of the lake immediately opposite Tribschen, and, with the

view of being introduced to "Wagner, I was fetched by my brother and Hans

Richter in a small boat and rowed across the lake. On the second occasion,

which was in the spring of 1871, I got to know more of Tribschen, as I stayed

there for many days with my brother.

  The whole of Tribschen, together with its inmates, was a charming idyll;

at the head, the ideal couple, then the beautiful children with all their wealth

of imagination and resource in queer ideas and games ; the worthy servant

Jacob,  who  at  every  fresh  leave-taking  would  withdraw  his  hand  for  an

instant and pretend to decline the proffered tip, saying as he did so, "But,

Professor, you are welcome to all my services"; and the old angular house

which, with its simple garden and grounds, took its place so unpretentiously

and naturally in the glorious landscape everything was so harmonious and yet

so rare. The house itself was not arranged and furnished in a manner befitting

its style, hut in accordance with the taste of a Paris furnishing firm, who had

been somewhat lavish in their use of pink satin and little Cupids. Thus, I have

retained the most unpleasant remembrance of the inside of the simple old

house.  But  its  inmates  and  the  surrounding  country  reconciled  me  to  the

amazing style indoors and made the latter seem almost picturesque.

  I can still remember the last evening I spent there ; the sun was just

setting,  but  the  moon  already  stood  full  and  bright  over  the  luminous

snowfields of Mount Titus. And, as the light of the sun gradually waned and

surrendered the earth to the pallid glow of the moon, and the lake and the

picturesquely  shaped  and  sharply  outlined  mountains  grew  ever  more

delicate, more diaphanous and more transparent, and seemed as it were to

grow  every  minute  more  ghost-like,  our  animated  conversation  gradually

subsided, and we all sank into dreamy silence.

  We  four  (really  five)  were  wandering  along  the  so  called  Rauberweg

close to the lake. In front walked Frau Cosima and my brother the former

dressed  in  a  pink  cashmere  gown  with  broad  revers  of  real  lace  which

reached down to the hem of the garment ; on her arm there hung a largeTuscan hat trimmed with a crown of pink roses, and behind her paced a

dignified, heavy and gigantic, coal-black Newfoundland dog, "Kuss." Then

followed  Wagner  and  myself  Wagner  being  attired  in  a  Flemish  painter's

costume, consisting of a black velvet coat, black satin knickers, black silk

stockings, a light blue satin cravat tied in a rich bow, with a piece of his fine

linen and lace shirt showing below, and a painter's tam-o'-shanter on his head,

which  at  that  time  was  covered  with  luxuriant  brown  hair.  I  can  still

remember  quite  vividly  how  the  shafts  of  light  coming  through  the  trees

caught each of us in turn, as we walked silently along, looking out across the

silvery lake. "We listened to the soft murmur of the water as the diminutive

breakers lapped against the bank, and every one of us must have heard the

song of his own thoughts out of the sweet monotonous melody, as out of the

sound of a magic horn.

  The aim of our walk was to reach the "Hermitage," a house built of bark,

which stood on the highest point in the property, and from which one could

get a delightful view, in the almost daylight brilliance of the moon, across the

lake and the chain of mountains encircling it. Gradually the spell of silence

was broken ; Wagner, Cosima and my brother began to speak of the tragedy

of human life, of the Greeks, the Germans, of plans and aspirations. Never

either  before  or  afterwards  have  I  heard  such  wonderful  harmony  in  the

conversation of three such different people. Everyone had his own "colour,"

his own theme, and brought it forward with all his power and yet what a

perfect harmony the whole produced ! Each of these original natures was at

its best, glowed with its own inner light, and yet threw no shadow upon the

others.  about  this  time  Cosima  wrote  to  my  brother  :  "  and  when  I

contemplate our peaceful existence which, in view of the Master's genius,

may well be called sublime, and feel at the same time that the sufferings we

have previously endured are indelibly stamped on our souls, I say to myself

that the greatest joy on earth is a vision, and that this vision has fallen to the

lot of us poor creatures."

  Yes, Tribschen was a blessed isle, and whoever has known it, thinks of it

with a profound regret. In the year 1888, shortly before his breakdown, my

brother wrote in Ecce Homo : " As I am speaking here of the recreations of

my life, I feel I must express a word or two of gratitude for that which has

refreshed me by far the most heartily and most profoundly.

  This,  without  the  slightest  doubt,  was  my  intimate  relationship  with

Richard Wagner. All my other relationships with men I treat quite lightly :but I would not have the days I spent at Tribschen those days of confidence,

of cheerfulness, of sublime flashes, and of profound moments blotted from

my life at any price. I know not what Wagner may have been for others ; but

no cloud ever darkened our sky."

              CHAPTER XVII OFFICIAL DUTIES AND THE WAR

  MY brother's official work kept him very busy ; for he did not take things

easily ; he even offered to replace those teachers who at times happened to be

too indisposed to attend to their duties, and gave endless private instruction to

impecunious students who were not sufficiently prepared for examinations.

Professor  E.  Eucken,  who  was  his  colleague  at  this  time,  describes  my

brother  as  the  most  amiable  examiner  he  had  ever  met.  He  was  most

zealously intent on turning his lectures and class-hoars to account, both for

his pupils' sake and his own. At the beginning of June, 1869, my brother

wrote to Rohde as follows: "Here in Bale everything is going splendidly.

Lectures every morning at 7 a.m. (treating of AEschylus's Choephorie, and

the history of Greek lyrics, and every Monday I hold a Philological class."

And later on he writes : " I am well satisfied with my academic post. The

students  have  faith  in  me,  and  I  do  my  best  to  advise  them,  not  only  in

philologicis.  Moreover,  I  already  have  the  pleasure  of  knowing  that  at

Michaelmas three of my pupils will, in accordance with my advice, go to

Leipzig ; and they are the three best. As to my lectures for the next few years,

I have resolved upon the plan of reading all that which I want to learn more

thoroughly and must learn. Obviously it will be I who will draw the greatest

profit from the arrangement. My Choephorce and my classes on the Lyricists

are, much to my delight, leading to very good work, in any case very much

better than I could have expected. Next term I shall lecture on the history of

pre-Platonic  philosophy  and  Latin  grammar,  and  my  classes  will  be  on

Hesiod's Erga."

    Concerning his teaching of Greek he writes : " I am now doing Plato with

an  intelligent  class,  and  I  lead  the  happy  youths  through  the  tangle  of

philosophical questions with a gentle hand that is to say, just sufficiently

profoundly to whet their appetite. I have also gone to the trouble of instituting

extempore  exercises  in  Greek  for  the  sake  of  improving  the  students'

grammatical knowledge." And this he continued until the end of 1875.

  Whether my brother was a good teacher or not, I cannot say. Not long

ago,  however,  the  Frankfurter  Zeitung  published  the  following  very  fine

description of his Greek classes, written by one of his pupils at Bale : "Nietzsche was reading the lyrical anthology and the philosophers with us

Lower Sixth Form boys. The inner freedom and superiority of his nature, his

intercourse with the older students, as well as his own education at Pforta,

resulted in the young Professor's extending his school programme unusually

far beyond its limits. He always expected us to be capable of an independent

treatment and mastery of the material he set before us. At times, we boys who

were quite untrained in philosophy were unable to follow the line of thought

in the laboriously translated text and in the mind of its congenial interpreter,

especially as our class, owing to a previous provisional arrangement, had

remained backward in Greek. But the powerful and sterling personality of our

teacher, of whose commanding intellectual gifts we were thoroughly aware,

never allowed us to lose courage. His severe sense of justice was always able

to distinguish accurately between the limits of goodwill and idle carelessness,

and not one of our favourite schoolboy tricks passed undetected by him. I

remember, for instance, that on one occasion one of us (he is now discharging

his duties as a highly-respected principal of a training college), who had not

prepared his work well, was called upon shortly before the end of the lesson

to construe a certain sentence. Standing up, and with apparent eagerness for

the task, he recited the Greek text which he had to construe, as slowly as he

could until the bell rang. With a view to making assurance double sure, be

read yet one more sentence, and tben confidently stopped. Nietzsche did not

move. Our schoolfellow's brow grew wet with perspiration. ' Professor,' he

stammered, 'have you not perhaps overlooked the bell that has just rung ? '

Nietzsche looked straight at him for a moment, and then, without moving a

muscle, corrected him by saying : ' You mean to say, I did not hear it,' and

then left the room. On the following day he began his lesson by turning to the

same pupil and saying smartly, 'Now, Sir, you construe.' The most exemplary

discipline  always  prevailed  in  Nietzsche's  classes,  and  this  even  extended

over the preceding and subsequent intervals. Although no word of blame or

ill-humour ever fell from our teacher's lips, we had the greatest respect for

him.  He  had  an  incredibly  painful  and  mortifying  way  of  dealing  with  a

guilty pupil. With stony silence he would leave the lad who had not prepared

his lesson well to stammer forth his own public exposure, and, after a short

palpitating pause, he would conclude the matter with a sharp ironical ' Keally

! ' or ' Indeed ! ' That was the extremest form of reproof with him just as his

praise never exceeded a short semi-audible ' Good.' But what would many of

us even the least industrious of our number not have given for these fourletters ! Difficult as were the lessons we used to have with Nietzsche, we

regarded it as a distinction that he left so much to our own intelligence, and

like  most  youths  our  sensitiveness  was  sufficiently  strong  to  make  us

conscious of the violence he was forced to do to his high-soaring intellect on

our  account.  We  shared  the  students'  enthusiastic  admiration  of  their

Professor, who was only a little older than they were themselves. We read

everything  he  published,  and  were  infected  with  his  wild  enthusiasm  for

Wagner, which at that time was being applied to the creation of The Birth of

Tragedy. This young Hotspur, who, thanks to his noble appearance, was a

conspicuous figure, who attracted one through the charm of his manner, and

was intimate with the best of men, Jacob Burckhardt and Richard Wagner

(who lived in Tribschen), reached his zenith very early in life."

  Scarcely a year after his call to Bale, i.e., in March, 1870, he was made a

regular Professor. All his friends and relatives thought he was making his

way uncommonly quickly, to be a regular University Professor at twenty-five

and a half. It was really amazing ! Gradually, too, he began to feel more at

home at Bale, his complaints about his solitude ceased, and Bale was spoken

of with all manner of friendly praise. Everybody, moreover, was very kind to

him, and his colleagues especially, all of whom were so much older than he,

constantly gave proofs of their recognition and esteem for his gifts. This was

very  gratifying  to  the  youthful  Professor,  and  he  gratefully  returned  their

consideration and respect. He always spoke of them as his " distinguished

colleagues,"  and  was  overjoyed  at  their  acumen.  He  laid  particular  stress

upon his intercourse with the art-historian Jacob Burckhardt, and regarded it

as a piece of extraordinary good fortune to have made his acquaintance and to

have become his friend. After having been in Bale only eight weeks, the

young Professor was able to write : " From the start I got into close touch

with that intellectual oddity Jacob Burckhardt, and I am delighted about it,

for we have discovered a marvellous similarity in our assthetic paradoxes."

Their  close  relationship  was  occasioned  to  some  extent  by  the  peculiar

circumstance that both of them, in accordance with their duties, had not only

to deliver lectures at the University, but also to give lessons lasting altogether

six hours a week to the Sixth Form of the school an arrangement that dated

from the time when this form constituted an actual part of Bale University.

During the intervals between the classes held at the school, and the lectures

delivered  at  the  University,  both  of  them  liked  to  retire  to  the  beautiful

cloisters of the cathedral, which stands quite close to the two institutions.While they walked to and fro together, they would often indulge in the most

animated conversations, now serious, and now frivolous (for often a loud

laugh  would  be  heard  coming  from  their  direction),  and  it  was  in  this

confidential  exchange  of  opinions  that  they  gradually  realised,  ever  more

vividly, that ''wonderful similarity," not only in their aesthetic, but also in

their scientific and educational views, which sometimes revealed itself even

in the discussion of the most exalted problems.

  My brother was among the most enthusiastic followers of Burckhardt's

course on the history of Greek culture ; for a whole term he tried to attend

these  lectures,  at  which  a  number  of  elderly  Bale  gentlemen  used  to  be

present,  although  he  was  unfortunately  not  able  to  do  so  regularly.

Concerning the effect of these and other lectures of Burckhardt's, my brother

said : " One could see in every cultured citizen of Bale the fact that he had

been born in Jacob Burckhardt's city."

  With  regard  to  his  friendly  relations  with  Burckhardt  it  should  not,

however, be forgotten that my brother was 26 years Burckhardt's junior, and

that he therefore regarded him more in the light of a respected teacher than of

a friend on an equal footing. In spite of everything, therefore, he still lacked

the opportunity for quiet confidential chats in which he could express his

private feelings even about Bale and its inhabitants. That is why he looked

forward so anxiously to my mother's and my visit to Bale in the spring of

1870.

  At Easter, 1870, the three of us went to the Lake of Geneva, where we

spent a lovely time at the Pension Ketterer in Clarens-au-Basset. My mother

and I then stayed a few weeks in Bale with the view of spending our Whitsun

holidays in the Bernese Oberland and on the Lake of Lucerne, with Fritz and

his friend Erwin. It was a real pleasure-trip, for we had fine weather and were

all in the best of spirits, as may be seen from the hilarious mood reflected in

the doggerel verses my brother wrote at the time.

  In the middle of June, our mother went back to Germany in order to be at

the bedside of one of her sisters, who had fallen ill. In accordance with my

brother's pressing entreaty, I remained behind in Bale, little dreaming of what

great events were going to upset the beautiful tours we had planned for the

summer holidays. On the 19th of July, war was declared between France and

Germany, and from that day onwards the most incredible confusion prevailed

in Bale. German and French travellers poured in from all sides, on their way

to  join  their  regiments  at  home.  For  a  whole  week  it  seemed  almostimpossible for the incoming crowds to get even a night's shelter in Bale. The

railway stations were chock-full night after night, and those people who were

unable to endure the suffocating air, would hire flies for the whole night. My

brother concludes a letter to our mother in the following sorrowful terms:

"We were living so happily in the evening glow of peace ! Now the ghastly

storm-cloud has burst . . . (After all, I am very sorry to be a Swiss ! For our

culture is involved. And to this end, no sacrifice can be too great. Confound

this ill-omened French Tiger !).'' Yes, he was very sad about it ; but it was no

good, he could not join his native country's troops ; for previous to accepting

his Professorship at Bale, he had been obliged to become a naturalised Swiss

subject. In order to console himself, and also with the view of recovering

from the results of a severe sprain in his ankle, he resolved to go to Mt.

Axenstein, and he asked me to accompany him. It was almost impossible at

that time to send a girl alone amid the confusion on the German railway lines.

All the trains were requisitioned for troops, and it was only by a stroke of

good  fortune  that  one  was  conveyed  any  distance  at  all.  After  leaving

beautiful  Mt.  Axenstein,  in  the  company  of  a  landscape  painter  called

Mosengel we went to the Maderaner Thai, which had been recommended to

us  on  all  sides  as  being  very  lovely.  Meanwhile  my  brother  had  quite

recovered from his sprained ankle. In this beautifully secluded valley my

brother wrote an essay on "The Dionysian Outlook on the World," and I

remember that, while he was reading it aloud to me, he was interrupted by the

firing of a gun. "What's the matter?" cried the tourists in all directions. The

proprietor of our pension, a doctor, who had studied in Germany, was the

cause of the noise. Out of sympathy for the Germans among his guests he had

had a salute fired, and a flag hoisted above his roof, whereupon he cried : " A

great and magnificent victory to Germany ! '' A German telegram had at last

penetrated even into our solitary part of the world, and it bore the news of "

Weissenburg and Worth," although it also mentioned " terrible losses." My

brother grew very pale. For a long while he walked to and fro with the painter

Mosengel,  who  was  a  native  of  Hamburg,  and  then  came  to  me  very

solemnly. I guessed what he was going to say, and tears had already gathered

in my eyes. "What would you do, now, Lizzie, if you were a man ? ' ' '

Naturally, I should go to the war, neither would it matter for me, Fritz ; but

you ! " and I sobbed with all my heart. He then proceeded to point out to me

that, at any rate, it was his bounden duty to try at least to go to the war as a

soldier ; and in the event of his not being allowed to do this by the Swissauthorities, for Switzerland was neutral, he and Mosengel would go to the

seat of war as ambulance attendants. Thereupon we immediately returned to

Bale, for my brother, through the agency of Privy Councillor Yischer, had

already addressed his request to the Board of Education at Bale, and a rough

draft of this letter to Vischer is still extant. It reads as follows : " In view of

the  present  state  of  affairs  in  Germany,  you  will  not  be  surprised  at  my

request to be allowed to discharge my duty towards my native land. It is with

this object that I appeal to you in order through your kind mediation to solicit

a  leave  of  absence,  for  the  last  weeks  of  the  summer  term,  from  the

honourable Board of Education at Bale. My health has now so far improved

that I could without any fear of the consequences help my fellow-countrymen

either as a soldier or as an ambulance attendant. The fact that I too should

desire to throw my small mite of personal capacity into the alms box of my

Fatherland will appear to no one so natural and just as to a Swiss Board of

Education. Although I am not unaware of the exalted nature of the duties I

have to perform at Bale, in the face of Germany's awful cry that each should

do his German duty, I confess that I could allow myself to be bound by my

obligation to Bale University only through painful compulsion, and, even so,

I should feel that my work would be of little value. And I should like to see

the  Swiss  who  would  consent  to  being  kept  to  his  post  under  similar

circumstances ..."

  (This last sentence was crossed through in the draft).

  He was duly granted the leave hie asked for, but only to serve as an

ambulance attendant ; he would have much preferred to go as a combatant.

On  the  12th  August,  we  went  to  Lindau,  met  our  friend  Mosengel,  the

painter, there, and on the following day proceeded to Erlangen, where both

my  brother  and  his  friend  proposed  to  train  for  ambulance  service.  A

paragraph in the Augsburger Allgemeine Zeitung had brought Erlangen to

their notice. Our journey from Lindau to this town has remained indelibly

stamped  upon  my  memory.  Fritz  was  in  splendid  condition,  radiant  with

health, and overflowing with life and the lust of action. As a matter of fact, he

was full of that spirit peculiar to the recruit, and in him it was all the more

delightful as it was beautified by his intellect. We even sang ; none of the

ordinary war-songs, but one which my brother had only just come across

while  reading  the  paper  in  the  railway  carriage,  and  which  he  had

immediately set to music.

  Finally we all grew so excited and exultant that we laughed until wecried. Of course, we were very much ashamed of ourselves, and thought our

behaviour quite unsuited to the occasion and to the serious state of affairs.

Every time the train stopped, and this happened again and again, for we were

travelling  in  the  most  erratic  fashion,  one  of  us  would  cry  "Order  !  "

whereupon we would all sit as stiff and as solemn as idols; but as soon as the

train started off again, the fun was renewed. Ah ! youth, health, the lust of

action and the consciousness of coming dangers all these things are quick to

create an exultant mood, more particularly when circumstances make such a

mood unbecoming. Meanwhile, however, something happened which made

us very anxious and at which we were deeply moved. The train stopped for

some time outside Ulm, and we saw a company of soldiers, obviously men of

the  reserve,  marching  towards  the  city.  Solemnly  and  determinedly  they

strode  along,  singing  as  they  went,  with  deep  manly  voices,  the  famous

Lutheran hymn: " Eine feste Burg ist unser Gott." And we felt distinctly that,

despite the distress and even death which stood before them they hore in their

breasts the firm conviction that " Das Ecich muss uns dock bleiben."

  In Erlangen, however, the really serious and painful side of life began.

Already, some sixty miles down the line, at Nordlingen, we had seen that a

number of carriages full of wounded soldiers had been added to our train.

When therefore, in Erlangen, we saw the wounded and even the dying being

borne from the carriages in litters and stretchers, we felt quite crushed at the

thought  of  having  been  led  but  a  little  while  previously  to  such  childish

frivolity through our exuberant spirits.

  In Erlangen my brother entered for a course of medicine and surgery at

the Eed Cross Society there. He showed great ability for the work, and was

just as eager at it as he was conscientious, so much so, indeed, that at the end

of three days he was already entrusted with the special care of two Prussians

and  two  Turcos.  In  his  lectures  on  Nietzsche  a  certain  Professor  of

Philosophy  at  Freiburg  said  very  aptly  :  "  Of  course,  he  did  the  work

excellently ; for he was much too proud to do anything at all unless he did it

really well." After he had been trained as a nurse, he was sent by the above-

mentioned society, as a person to be trusted, at the head of an ambulance-

corps to the seat of war. He was entrusted with large sums of money and a

whole host of personal messages, and thus he had to find his way across the

battle-fields from hospital to hospital and from ambulance to ambulance, in

order to succour the wounded and the dying, and to take the last words of

farewell  and  of  remembrance  from  dying  lips.  What  my  brother  with  hissympathetic heart must have suffered in those days beggars description ; for

many  months  afterwards  he  used  to  think  he  heard  the  groans  and  the

plaintive cries of pain of the poor wounded men of whom he had seen such

numbers. During the first two or three years that followed the war, he was

scarcely able to speak about it, and once when Rohde complained in Fritz's

presence  that  he  had  heard  so  little  of  his  friend's  experiences  as  an

ambulance nurse, my brother ejaculated painfully: " I cannot speak of such

things, it is impossible ; one must endeavour to banish such memories from

one's mind ! " And it was only many years later, while on a walk in the

neighbourhood of Naumburg, when he had changed some of his views, that

he told me of the following incident : On a certain evening at the close of a

very heavy day with the wounded, and " with his heart well-nigh broken with

pity,"  he  happened  to  enter  a  small  town  which  lay  on  one  of  the  chief

military roads. As he turned the corner of a large stone wall and continued his

way for a second or two, he suddenly heard a roaring noise as of thunder, and

a  magnificent  cavalry  regiment  gloriously  expressive  of  the  courage  and

exuberant strength of a people flew by him like a luminous stormcloud. The

thundering  din  waxed  louder  and  louder,  and  behold!  his  "  own  beloved

regiment of horse-artillery dashed forward at full speed, oh, how he ached at

not being able to jump on a horse, and at being obliged to remain inactive by

the stone wall ! At last came the infantry, advancing at the double ! The

men's  eyes  were  aflame,  and  their  feet  struck  the  hard  road  like  mighty

hammer-strokes. And while this procession passed before him, on its way to

war and perhaps to death, so wonderful in its vital strength and formidable

courage, and so perfectly symbolic of a race that will conquer and prevail, or

perish in the attempt " then," said he, "I felt for the first time, dear sister, that

the strongest and highest Will to Life does not find expression in a miserable

struggle  for  existence,  but  in  a  Will  to  War,  a  Will  to  Power,  a  Will  to

Overpower ! But," he continued after a while, " I also felt what a good thing

it is that Woden lays a hard heart in the breasts of commanding generals,

otherwise how could they bear the awful responsibility of sending thousands

to death in order to raise their people and themselves to dominion."

  "Woden had not, however, laid a hard heart in my brother's breast, and

that is why Richard Wagner had already done his utmost to restrain him from

any  participation  in  the  war.  He  declared  that  my  brother's  profoundly

sensitive nature would be ill able to endure the sight of such horrors. On the

13th September, my brother tells " the dear and honoured master " why hewas so quickly driven away from his Samaritan duties on the battle-field after

only four weeks' service.

  "  My  activities  have  met  with  a  temporary  check,  and  unfortunately

through illness. My multifarious messages and duties led me as far as the

neighbourhood of Metz ; I and my very worthy friend Mosengel found it

possible to deliver the greater part of the messages and gifts entrusted to us

into  the  hands  or  ears  of  their  proper  recipients  quite  nicely.  At  Arssur-

Moselle, we undertook the cure of the wounded, and returned with a batch of

these to Germany. With these, three days and three nights in the midst of

seriously wounded men, we reached the uttermost limit of our exertions. I

had a ghastly cattletruck in which there lay six severely wounded men, and I

was the only person there to give them their food, to bandage their wounds,

and to see to them generally. All of them had bones broken, many had four

wounds, and in addition to that I observed that two had hospital gangrene.

The fact that I was able to endure these pestilential vapours, and could even

sleep  and  eat,  now  seems  to  me  quite  miraculous.  But,  scarcely  had  I

delivered my batch of charges up to the hospital at Karlsruhe, when I too

began to show signs of serious illness. With great difficulty I was able to

reach Erlangen in order to report upon various matters to my society there ;

then I went to bed, where I lie to this day. A very capable doctor declared my

case to be one of severe dysentery and diphtheria. But strong measures were

used against both of these infectious diseases, and I am now able to report

good  progress.  I  have  thus  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  two  ill-famed

lazaretto  epidemics,  and  they  have  both  done  so  much  to  weaken  and  to

reduce me in a short time, that for a while I must give up all thought of

continuing my duties at the front, and must think only of my health. And

thus, after having tried for the short space of four weeks to work for the

general  good,  I  am  already  thrown  hack  upon  myself,  and  am  utterly

wretched ! As to Germany's victories, I would prefer not to speak of them ;

they are merely inscriptions of fire on the wall, understanded of all peoples."

  This illness gravely undermined my brother's health, and is the first cause

of his subsequent terrible condition. Until that time, as he himself declared,

he had had the constitution of a bear, and even his short-sightedness, which

he  had  inherited  from  our  father,  had  not  been  the  cause  of  any  special

trouble. Still, the accidents which he had in his youth the blow against the

saddle-pommel  when  he  was  a  trooper  in  an  artillery  regiment,  and  the

number of sprains he sustained in his ankles, are all to be ascribed only to hisextreme  short-sightedness.  He  could  not  measure  distances.  But  what  he

rejoiced  in  above  all,  until  this  time,  was  the  possession  of  a  thoroughly

sound stomach; though, thanks to the extraordinarily severe drugs which he

took for the treatment of his diphtheria and dysentery at Erlangen, this organ

was  sadly  deteriorated.  In  order,  however,  to  be  able  to  carry  out  his

incredibly profuse and profoundly intellectual productions without fatigue,

and to be able to overcome his sensitive nature, his body, and particularly his

brain, required to be well nourished. Owing to his bad digestion, which was

the  result  of  the  strong  drugs  he  had  taken,  the  nutritive  process  was  no

longer as perfect as it used to be. Our mother used to say in later years that

she was only surprised that he did not die from the effects of the strong

medicines he had taken. In addition to all this, it should be observed that my

brother, as the result of the training he had received in the use of drugs for his

work in the field ambulance, now took to administering " cures " to himself a

habit which did not tend to improve his debilitated stomach. Nevertheless, his

constitution was so sound that, if only at this juncture he had resolved to take

a complete rest for a year, and had made a long sojourn somewhere in the

south where he would have abjured all drugs, there can be no doubt that he

would have entirely recovered from the violent physical and spiritual shock

which he had sustained during the war. As it was, however, his stern sense of

duty in regard to his profession, and his love of the science he practised,

made him hurry to his post when he had but half recovered ; for, trusting to

his powerful constitution, he was already back in Bale at the end of October,

and seeking recovery from all his ills in study. How much he then expected

of himself may be gathered from a letter which he wrote to Gersdorff : " With

genuine eagerness I have plunged into the sciences ; and now my regular

professional work has begun afresh. My only wish is that my health may

improve.  But  my  whole  body  has  suffered  terrifically  from  the  attack  of

dysentery and has not by any means recovered what it lost. I was welcomed

back to Bale with great friendliness. . . . The new term began as usual with an

inundation of work which was enough to make one lose one's head. This term

I shall give two new courses of lectures treating respectively of Greek metre

and rhythm (according to my own system), and of Hesiod. In addition to this

I have my philological classes, and also the Greek classes to be held at the

school, where I propose to study .Aeschylus's Orestean Tetralogy. Besides

these duties I also have Council, Faculty, and Library meetings to attend,

together with many functions of a more social nature. ..."  Other work had also been left seriously in arrears through the interruption

of the war-god, and thus he was simply overwhelmed by all be had to do. But

what harassed him most of all, were his painful recollections of all he had

seen. On the 12th of December he wrote to Gersdorff : " If one would avoid

losing all courage, one must not think of these horrible things any longer. I

will, however, write to you now, in the hope aye even under the assumption

that you have bravely and happily escaped all these terrible dangers like a

favourite of Mars though not with any fresh love for him."

  My brother did not seem to be a favourite of the god of war ; for on every

occasion when, either directly or indirectly, he plunged into the service of the

sword-clashing deity, the latter, by means of a severe illness, scared him back

to the sciences.

    CHAPTER XVIII THE GENESIS OF " THE BIRTH OF TRAGEDY "

  As I have already said, my brother spent the Christmas of 1870 with the

Wagners at Tribschen. He presented Wagner with that favourite old etching

of Direr's, " The Knight, the Devil and Death," and Frau Cosima with the

essay  "  Concerning  the  Dionysian  Outlook  on  the  World,"  written  in  the

Maderaner Thai. The three essays, " Greek Musical Drama," " Socrates and

Tragedy," and " Concerning the Dionysian Outlook on the World," which

during the year 1870 were presented to his friends in a private edition, are the

first  outward  signs  of  his  new  conception  of  Greek  antiquity  and  of  that

abundance  of  aesthetic  problems  "  which  for  years  already  had  been

fermenting  in  his  mind,"  and  the  wealth  of  which  made  him  hesitate  to

publish them.

  In the spring of 1870 he writes to his friend Erwin about it as follows : "I

now have the best hopes for my philology ; but I must allow myself plenty of

time. Step by step, and almost faint-hearted with surprise, I am nearing a

general conception of Greek antiquity." Very shortly afterwards, he writes to

say that he is completing the programme of the work on Laertius for the

school,  that  he  has  just  written  a  Latin  address  in  honour  of  Professor

Gerlach's fiftieth anniversary as a teacher, and that he intends to finish certain

other philological work in May. He then continues : " If I can get any more

short essays ready (dealing with old material), I shall collect them all into the

form of a book, in regard to which fresh ideas are continually coming to me. I

fear that it will not give one the impression of being a philological work ; but

who can contradict his own nature ? Now begins for me a period of attack,

after I have for some time evoked moderate approbation through going aboutin the old familiar carpet slippers. The theme and title of the coming book is '

Socrates and Instinct.' "

  In July and August, 1870, before and after the outbreak of the war, he was

deeply absorbed in his new problems. It is true that his departure for the seat

of war interrupted the actual elaboration of his views in writing, but it did not

interfere with the work going on in his mind, and directly after his return

from the front, when he had scarcely recovered from his illness, he was once

more most deeply immersed in these thoughts. The fact that his first plan was

to write a much more exhaustive book may be seen from the abundance of

half- and fully-completed notes on the subject which have been published

since his death. If, however, in the end this small book, this torso of a great

art-work,  was  all  that  was  published,  it  showed  what  a  great  sacrificial

offering of self-abnegation my brother made to his friend Richard Wagner.

  It had always been his deepest wish to be able to do something decisive

for  Wagner  ;  his  object  was  to  elevate  the  whole  of  the  "Wagnerian

movement  to  a  higher  plane,  and  he  thought  there  was  no  better  way  of

attaining this end than by associating "Wagner's art with the highest and best

form of all art Hellenic art. A start which was as bold as it was strange !

Neither his artistic instinct, nor his philologist's conscience allowed him to do

this  in  a  large  book  on  Greece  ;  but  inasmuch  as  he  limited  himself  to

fundamental artistic problems, which were to be elucidated by an appeal to

the Greek spirit, it was possible to associate the Greeks with the new art.

  It is only now, after the publication of his writings of that period, that we

can  see  how  absolutely  the  conclusions  he  arrived  at  through  his  general

conception of Hellenism, disagreed with those of Wagner's art. I can well

imagine,  how  often,  in  those  days,  he  must  have  laid  exhaustive  and

magnificent passages reluctantly aside passages which, now reveal so clearly

to us Nietzsche as he really was, unalloyed and true. It was these conflicting

feelings  that  rendered  the  conclusion  of  his  work  and  its  publication  so

difficult to him. After having finished the book he wrote to Erwin Rohde,

towards the beginning of 1872, as follows : " No one has any idea of the way

in which such a book comes into being, of the trouble and care to which one

is put in order to keep one's self to this extent free from all the other ideas and

notions  that  press  in  upon  one  from  all  sides,  and  of  the  courage  of  the

conception  and  the  boldness  of  its  development  ;  but  what  people  will

perhaps suspect least of all is the colossal mission I felt I had to fulfil in

regard to Wagner, and which, as a matter of fact, has caused me the deepestqualms."

  In any case, thanks to his self-sacrifice and self restraint, he attained that

to which he aspired ; for owing to The Birth of Tragedy, a much deeper

conception of Wagnerian art, as resuscitated Dionysian art, was called into

existence. From that time forward new hopes were connected with the name

of  Wagner  hopes  that  gazed  into  new  distances,  and  which  in  the  early

'seventies animated and enraptured vast numbers of the cultured youths of

Germany. But the most delighted of all over the whole affair was Richard

Wagner himself. Before my brother led him to regard the matter in this light,

it  had  never  occurred  to  him  to  consider  the  Apollonian  and  Dionysian

problem as a principle of art.

  Leo Berg in his Charakteristiken gives a very apt description of Nietzsche

as he was at this time. " In those days he was the finest type of a young

German, full of gratitude and pious feeling, full of ardent passion for his gods

and heroes ; an artist through and through, who could not show his reverence

for  a  thing  otherwise  than  by  beautifying  and  transfiguring  it  that  is,  by

idealising it. He was also full of that artist's irony which secretly converts

everyone from whom it takes a gift into one who receives a gift, and which,

in the act of fervently kissing the right hand from which it has taken a silver

piece, presses a gold piece into the left hand ! "

  It is possible to follow the genesis of The Birth of Tragedy quite clearly

from his notes written between the autumn of 1869 to November, 1871. He

meditated upon the problems of this enigmatical book amid the most varied

circumstances, even in the midst of war, " beneath the walls of Metz." In

January, 1871, he collected the ideas together almost exactly in the form in

which  they  now  stand;  but  in  the  middle  of  his  work  he  was  suddenly

interrupted. His health, which had been very unsteady since his return to

Bale, began to decline visibly. His premature return to his post was beginning

to pay him out. He got jaundice, inflammation of the bowels followed, and in

addition  to  this  he  was  terribly  tormented  by  insomnia.  Professor

Liebermeister,  who  had  already  shown  some  displeasure  when  he  had

resumed  work  so  prematurely  at  the  University,  now  insisted  upon  his

availing himself of a long leave to go to the Italian lakes, and prescribed " the

cheerful young sister " as a nurse and as a travelling companion. At first Fritz

had not written with any anxiety about his health ; he was, however, so weak

that when, owing to some reason or other, he was told that I could not come

and another plan was laid before him, he fainted. The doctor wrote a secondtime, and then only did we begin to think that his indisposition must be of a

serious nature.

  I therefore set out from Naumburg in the middle of the night to join him,

when the thermometer registered several degrees below freezing point. The

first day we only reached Fliielen, because the stage-coach, the running of

which the heavy falls of snow had interrupted for a whole fortnight, could

resume its regular service only on the following morning. In our hotel we

came  across  Mazzini,  who,  under  the  assumed  name  of  Mr.  Brown,  was

travelling in the company of a young man. My brother was too unwell to care

to strike up any acquaintance and to speak French on his journey. I, however,

was only too ready to do so, more particularly as this noble fugitive, bowed

down with age and sorrow, who could enter the fatherland he loved so deeply

only in secret and under an assumed name, struck me as an extraordinarily

stirring figure. The whole of this journey across St. Gothard in tiny little

sleighs  built  to  carry  only  two  persons,  was  undertaken  in  such  beautiful

weather that the gloomy scenery as well as the winter landscape of gold, blue

and  white,  struck  us  as  indescribably  beautiful.  The  intellectual

companionship of Mazzini, who graciously joined the two of us at all the

stations, and an accident which terrified us while we were descending the zig-

zag road leading from the dizzy heights of the St. Gothard into the valley of

Tremola, as if on wings (a small sleigh immediately in front of us fell with its

passengers,  coachman  and  horse,  more  than  200  feet  into  the  depths  ;

fortunately  no  one  was  hurt,  thanks  to  the  soft  snow)  all  these  things

combined lent this journey a peculiar and never-to-be-forgotten charm. The

following phrase of Goethe's, which Mazzini repeatedly quoted in his foreign

accent to the young man who accompanied him, became thenceforward a

favourite life maxim with my brother and myself : " Get rid of compromise

and  live  resolutely  in  that  which  is  whole,  full  and  beautiful."  Mazzini's

farewell words were very touching. He asked me whither we were bound. I

replied, " For Lugano, which from all accounts is a sort of Paradise." He

smiled, sighed a little and said : " For youth Paradise is everywhere."

  We reached Lugano on the 12th of February, and we had good weather

and pleasant company. I would refer more especially to the brother of the

great Field Marshal Moltke, his wife, and his two delightful young daughters.

"We saw a good deal of this distinguished family, and my brother showed the

most lively interest in talking with, the clever couple. At times, too, he would

read them some of his manuscripts, for instance, " Concerning the GreekState," a part of The Birth of Tragedy, which was only published twenty-five

years later. I remember how pleased Fritz was at the time with the shrewd

comments of Herr von Moltke. Thanks to him we also heard a good deal

about the events of the war, as well as about what was going on behind the

scenes.

  The whole of this holiday proved very beneficial to my brother. Owing to

the continual fine weather, we spent a great deal of our time in the open, and

as the company present, though large, was made up of people who were

tolerably well suited to each other, the evenings were very pleasant too. There

was  a  good  deal  of  music  ;  performances  were  given,  and  drawing-room

games were played. Fritz entered into it all quite heartily, and was so amused

and amusing, particularly in the games, that an elderly lady who had often

expressed her astonishment at this full-fledged Professor of not quite twenty-

seven, once exclaimed admiringly: "To-day, Herr Professor, you are not even

twenty-six, but only fourteen years of age ! " Fritz, however, merely replied

as he had often done before, that he had been a much too serious child, and

that in the matter of laughing and merriment he had to recover a deal of lost

time.

  I can still remember several pleasant excursions we made, and one which

we undertook to Mt. Ere" remains quite vividly impressed upon my mind.

about ten or twelve of us had laid ourselves down on the summit, and my

brother, who was in the centre of the party, a little higher than the rest of us,

drew a copy of Faust from his pocket, and read a few scenes as for instance:

"Released from ice are brooks and rivers)" while our eyes wandered over the

magnificent  spring  landscape,  and  grew  intoxicated  with  the  overflowing

riches of the world. At last he let the book drop, and with his melodious voice

began to discourse upon what he had just read and upon the things around us,

just as if we had shed all our empty northern narrowness and pettiness, had

grown worthy of higher feelings and higher aims, and with greater courage

and  lighter  wings,  could  now,  with  all  our  energy,  ascend  to  the  highest

pinnacle to meet the sun. "We all felt in a very exalted mood, and one of the

ladies afterwards said to me with some emotion : "I shall never forget that ; it

was indeed a real Sermon on the Mount."

  What happy and cloudless days were these three weeks in Lugano all

around us we had the scent of violets, the sunshine, and the beautiful air of

the  mountains  and  of  spring  !  I  can  still  remember  how  we  joked  and

laughed; with wanton spirits we participated even in the fun of the carnival.At Mid-Lent we were invited by an Italian nobleman to Ponte Tresa. When I

now recollect how we Germans from the Hotel du Pare danced together and

with the Italians on the open market-place there (I can still see Fritz quite

vividly in my mind's eye, merrily dancing around dance), the whole thing

strikes me as a real carnival dream.

  But, as had too often been the case already, this happy time ended in

sadness  :  Herr  von  Moltke,  who  had  been  held  in  such  high  esteem  by

everybody,  caught  cold  while  taking  a  trip  on  the  lake,  developed

inflammation of the lungs and, to the general dismay of all our party, died.

  During the whole sojourn, my brother wrote a good deal of The Birth of

Tragedy, and read me several passages of it aloud. On the 10th of April we

returned to Bale, and here the writing continued, and also, to a still greater

degree, the process of weeding out. On the 2Gth the manuscript was sent to a

publisher.  When  quite  a  young  Professor  in  Leipzig,  Fritz  had  made  the

acquaintance of the head of the firm of Engelmann, who had shown himself

well pleased with the young scholar and had rashly offered to publish his first

book for him, little dreaming that this amiable young man, who seemed so

certain to become a credit to his calling, would one day present him with a

questionable monster of a book. "We called the new book " The Centaurs," in

accordance with a suggestion my brother made in the following remark : "

Science, Art and Philosophy are now growing so closely side by side in me

that one day I shall certainly bring forth centaurs." The rough draft of my

brother's letter to Herr Engelmann is still in existence ; it reads : " You were

once kind enough to offer to become my publisher, and I should like to know

whether the book I am sending you to-day does not meet with your approval.

I  have  written  a  pamphlet  which  ought  to  represent  about  90  pages  of

letterpress, to which I have given the title "Music and Tragedy "; and I now

send you the MS. of the beginning of it. As you will see, I have attempted to

explain the phenomenon of Greek Tragedy in a completely novel way, and

have disregarded altogether its philological aspect in order to keep in view

only the aesthetic questions involved. The real object of the book is, however,

to throw light upon Richard Wagner, the extraordinary enigma of our age, in

his relation to Greek Tragedy. I venture to predict that all the last part cannot

fail to create somewhat of a stir among the whole of our musical public, and

if I compare it with what has been said recently about the same problem by -

such men as Hanslick and others, and may be allowed to draw any conclusion

from the effect which certain of its passages have made upon my friends, Icannot help believing that the more profound among the reading public will

be interested in the work. In order to make myself quite clear to the general

reader I have taken particular pains that the explanation should be as lucid

and as good in style as it can be made.

  " I should like the work to be produced as nearly as possible in the form

of an elegant scientific pamphlet, and in the event of your accepting it from

me, I would request you kindly to publish it in accordance with this desire.

To enter into detail, for the purpose of such a pamphlet, I may say that I

prefer German type, and even large German type. I also like a large octavo

page, which must on no account contain more than 28 to 32 lines, and the

paper must be good. If by any chance you would be prepared to undertake

this publication for me, I should be glad if you would send me a sample of

the type and paper chosen, as also your suggestions as to terms."

  My brother had to wait a long time for a reply, and then he heard from a

friend that Herr Engelmann, somewhat perplexed by the whole affair, had

asked the advice of an expert, and that both had spoken about the pamphlet

rather doubtfully. Fritz then demanded back the manuscript, which at that

time bore the title, " Music and Tragedy," although, in the end, Engelmann

declared himself ready to publish it. My brother wanted, however, to let the

matter of the publication stand over for a while ; for new ideas were already

filling his head ideas which were afterwards to find expression in The Future

of our Educational Institutions.

  In  accordance  with  my  brother's  pressing  wish,  I  remained  in  Bale

throughout the spring, and also joined him in the summer holidays, which we

spent together in the Bernese Oberland. During the whole of this period, Fritz

spoke with great animation about the abundance of new ideas which were

forming in his mind in regard to our present civilisation, and a struggle he

wished to begin against it with the view of establishing a new standpoint in

culture. " Fritz," I said one day, " you are preaching very wonderful sermons

to the German nation." He laughed and replied : " "Well, yes, something of

the sort is what I shall ultimately do." The Commune and the burning of the

Louvre upset him terribly, and may have called into being many of these new

ideas about the strange symptoms of our culture. Overcome by the news of it,

Jacob Burckhardt and my brother hastened to each other, missed each other,

and when finally they did meet, could only shake hands and were not able to

speak for tears. In June, 1871, Fritz writes to Baron von Gersdorff : " In

addition to the war of nations, we have been terrified by that internationalhydra which suddenly showed its frightful head, as the harbinger of very

different wars in the future. If we could only talk things over together, we

should agree as to how clearly that terrible apparition betrays the appalling

infirmity which lies at the root of our modern life yea, as a matter of fact, at

the root of the whole of ancient Christian Europe and its social organisation,

and above all of the whole of Latin civilisation, and realise how each one of

us, with all our past, is responsible for such horrors coming into being. We

should therefore be very far from imputing the crime of this struggle against

culture, with a lofty sense of self-esteem, to those unhappy wretches alone. I

know what it means, the war against culture. For some time after I heard of

the burning of the Louvre, I felt absolutely crushed, and was overcome with

sorrow  and  doubt.  The  whole  of  our  scientific  and  philosopho-artistic

existence struck me as an absurdity, if one single day sufficed to exterminate

the  magnificent  treasures  of  art  yea,  whole  periods  of  art.  With  fervent

conviction I clung to the metaphysical value of art, which cannot be with us

for the sake of wretched man, but which has a higher mission to fulfil. But

even in the greatest paroxysm of my grief I could not get myself to throw a

single stone at those sacrilegious knaves who, to my mind, are simply active

bearers of a burden of guilt which is universal and which gives one much

food for thought."

  He concludes his letter by asking Gersdorff to visit him, which the latter

did in July, 1871.

  We spent a lovely time with him in Gimmelwald near Mirren. Fritz was

very  happy  to  have  his  friend  with  him  again  after  almost  five  years  of

separation, and to feel himself just as closely bound to him as before, and just

as  united  in  regard  to  all  the  great  aims  of  life.  It  seems  to  me

characteristically " German " on the part of Fritz, that all the time he was

really so happy at heart, he composed two poems on " Melancholy." On the

18th September he wrote to his friend, who had then returned home : " I

thank  you  once  more  for  your  visit  ;  nothing  more  delightful  and  more

comforting could have happened to me this summer. Once again we have

drawn the net of culture over both our heads, and it will be difficult to disturb

the united course of our best aspirations. You have left a most favourable

impression  upon  all.  Frau  Wagner  has  written  to  me  about  you,  and  she

expressed herself as very pleased and grateful ; Burckhardt and Vischer send

you their kindest regards. In short Bale is a place after my own heart, my

friends are content with Bale, and Bale is content with my friends."  In October, 1871, my brother had two exceedingly pleasant meetings with

Rohde and Gersdorff, first in Leipzig and then in Naumburg ; and a very

comical photograph taken in a booth at the Leipzig fair has immortalised

these happy days. On my brother's birthday, the 15th of October, the two

friends came to Naumburg with all kinds of presents, both comic and serious.

  Fritz was delighted. With these merry youthful spirits, that transfigured

even the most sober and abstract things, one could allow oneself a fairly

strong dose of Schopenhauerian Pessimism.

  The  three  friends  jokingly  remarked  that  some  good-natured  demons,

who were favourable to friendship, had made their time together particularly

happy  and  cheerful  that  autumn.  When  he  returned  to  Bale  my  brother

therefore suggested to them that, out of consideration for the kind endeavours

of these demons, each of the friends should, in his respective quarters, present

a thank-offering to them : " On the evening of Monday next at 10 p.m. we

shall perform the rite as follows : Each one of us shall take a glass of dark red

wine, empty half of it out into the street while pronouncing Latin words and

shall then drink the remaining half ! "

  This  thank-offering,  which  was  intended  far  more  as  a  tribute  to

friendship than as a mark of attention to the hypothetical demons, and which

was to unite the friends, so grateful for the bond that joined them, for one

moment in one thought, has always seemed to me profoundly affecting. My

brother's share in the ceremony was performed in Jacob Burckhardt's study ;

and it struck me as very amusing that this lonely oddity should join in this

ultra- juvenile ceremony of consecration. They poured two large tumblers of

deep red wine into the street ; and Fritz declared afterwards that if they had

done this in the Middle Ages, they would certainly have been arraigned for

practising black magic.

  During their stay in Leipzig, the two friends, Rohde and Gersdorff, took

my brother to Fritzsch the bookseller, who was Wagner's publisher, in order

to offer him the manuscript of The Birth of Tragedy. At last, in November,

Fritzsch accepted the work, and my brother wrote very joyfully to Gersdorff

as follows: " I was reminded most vividly of our stay in Leipzig today, and in

some respects I feel able to say in the words of the old song that I now add

the  happy  beginning  to  the  happy  end.  To-day,  only  to-day,  Fritzsch  the

worthy publisher, answered the request which I put to him when we were in

Leipzig together ! And that is why I feel I must send you the news to-day. For

it was you and Rohde who took me in body and spirit to the worthy Fritzsch :a deed which I have not ceased to extol to this moment. It was not his fault

that his reply took such a long time to reach me. He sent the manuscript to an

expert as soon as he received it, and the gentleman in question dawdled over

it until the 16th November. . . . Well, they have decided to produce it in

exactly the same style as Wagner's Bestimmung der Oper. Rejoice with me !

There will be a nice space available for a beautiful vignette. Let your artistic

friend (Eau) know this, and give him my kindest regards into the bargain."

  Before the work had begun printing, my brother wrote and added the

present  final  section,  in  which  he  directly  refers  to  Wagnerian  art.  In

December, 1871, he wrote to Rohde about it as follows : " The whole of the

last section, which you have not yet read, will certainly surprise you ; I have

dared much, and may be allowed with great point to cry aloud to myself :

animam salvavi. And that is why I think only with great satisfaction of the

work, and do not feel concerned at its having turned out to be as provocative

as possible, nor have any qualms as to the cry of indignation which will be

raised in some quarters when it is published."

  In the last days of the year 1871 The Birth of Tragedy out of the Spirit of

Music appeared and copies were sent to all my brother's friends. All of them

greeted the firstborn with the most solemn feelings. Gersdorff resolved to

celebrate its baptism, but his plan was never carried out. "With his heart full

of emotion my brother wrote in his own copy : "Bale, New Year's Day, 1872.

    Schaff, das Tagwerk meiner Hcinde Grosser Geist, dass ich's vollende ! "

l

                          CHAPTER XIX THE FIRST BOOK

  MY brother called The Birth of Tragedy out of the Spirit of Music a

youthful work, " full of youthful courage and melancholy." In it he described

the interaction of the Apollonian and Dionysian spirits with which the whole

of the future development of Art is bound up, and which is to be regarded as

the  cause  of  the  tragic  wisdom  of  the  Greeks  and  of  its  imperishable

monument, Greek tragedy. It is very significant that my brother should have

tried to connect his Schopenhauerian and Wagnerian views with the Hellenic

world ; for the contemplation of this sublime world, the height of whose

culture and beauty has never been attained since, remained throughout his life

the one confirmation of his loftiest hopes that a superior culture an ideal state

of mankind consisting of a union of culture and nature was no empty dream,

but a possibility which had yet to be realised.

  My brother certainly understood the Greeks in a manner very differentfrom that in which even Goethe and Winckelmann had depicted them. Only

through the discovery of the real import of the Dionysian spirit were we

vouchsafed that profound insight into the most subterranean depths of the

Greek soul, and that is why my brother might well be allowed to write with

justifiable assurance in The Twilight of the Idols (1888) : " I was the first

who, in order to understand the ancient, still rich and even superabundant

Hellenic instinct, took that marvellous phenomenon, which bears the name of

Dionysus, seriously : it can be explained only as a manifestation of excessive

energy.  Anyone  who  has  studied  the  Greeks,  as  that  most  profound  of

modern connoisseurs of their culture, Jacob Burckhardt of Bale, had done,

must have realised at once that something had been achieved by means of this

interpretation. And in his ' Cultur der Griechen ' Burckhardt inserted a special

chapter on the phenomenon in question. If you would like a glimpse of the

other side, you have only to refer to the almost laughable poverty of instinct

among German philologists when they approach the Dionysian question. The

celebrated Lobeck, especially who, with the venerable assurance of a worm

dried up between books, crawled into this world of mysterious states, and

succeeded  in  convincing  himself  that  he  was  scientific,  whereas  he  was

simply  revoltingly  superficial  and  childish  Lobeck,  with  all  the  pomp  of

profound erudition, gave us to understand that, as a matter of fact, there was

nothing at all in all these curiosities."

    Whereas, theretofore, we had been taught to regard the Greeks to some

extent  as  a  people  of  unceasing  cheerfulness,  the  author  of  The  Birth  of

Tragedy  now  suddenly  vouchsafed  us  a  view  of  appalling  depth  into  the

Hellenic soul which, quivering from extreme tension and from its excess of

power,  and  full  of  political  and  artistic  passion  and  jealousy,  sought  to

transfigure the Dionysian by means of the Apollonian element.

  "  To  become  Apollonian  means,  to  break  one's  will  to  immensity,  to

multifariousness, to uncertainty and to the horrible by a will to moderation,

simplicity, order, rule and concept. Intemperance, wildness, the Asiatic spirit,

lie at the base of the Greek soul. The courage of the Greek consists in his

struggle with his Asiatic nature. Beauty was not given him, any more than

logic and the naturalness of his morals were it was conquered, willed, fought

for it constitutes his triumph."

  My brother describes this triumph even over suffering more clearly still in

1886, and showed to what extent the Greeks understood "how to explain

suffering as a blessing, and poison as a food. . . . They suffer as severely asthey possibly can ; but they react against this suffering only by manifesting

all the more pleasure in the creation and discussion of things which do man

good.

  They are a people most sensitive to suffering, but their plastic power in

the use of pain is extraordinary. To this power also belongs moderation in the

feeling of resentment under pain, and in wallowing in pain : hence they felt

impelled to a triumphant attitude as a remedy."

  I do not think that the Greeks were ever before understood as sufferers in

this way as sufferers despite their superabundant energy in all walks of life.

In  any  case,  it  was  on  this  account  that  the  conclusion  of  The  Birth  of

Tragedy, as I can well remember, caused such a profound impression. In the

passage in question my brother depicts a stranger who, on entering Athens, is

intoxicated by the uninterrupted flow of beauty on all sides, and cries out:

"Blessed race of Hellenes! How great Dionysus must be among you, when

the Delian god deems such charms necessary to cure you of your dithyrambic

madness ! " A hoary old Athenian, " looking up to him with the sublime eye

of Aeschylus, replies : ' Say also this, thou curious stranger : what sufferings

this people must have undergone, in order to be able to become so beautiful !

But now follow me to a tragic play, and sacrifice with me in the temple of

both deities ! ' ' Thus early did my brother have the thought that suffering

may be both the obstacle and impulse to, as well as the source of, the highest

development  of  power,  and  that  we  should  therefore  conceive  it  as  a

necessity. And this he wrote at a time when his strong frame had only just

recently  been  convulsed  with  pain  ;  but  his  deeply  sensitive  nature  was

already suffering, merely as the result of the fierce development of his mind.

To him a conviction was not a mere garment which may be exchanged at will

for a new one; it was something which involved the deepest feelings and

thoughts. His spirit, however, on its road to freedom and to truth, forced him

to newer views ; and how much pain it cost him to part from this old stage of

knowledge, so intimately bound up with his warmest feelings ! On the whole,

those of my brother's friends and acquaintances who had not witnessed the

gradual development of his first book felt very much like the worthy Herr

Engelmann.  They  were  full  of  boundless  admiration  not  unmixed  with

consternation before this unclassifiable little book. The more elderly of his

protectors, Privy Councillor Ritschl of Leipzig, and Vischer of Bale, felt in

their heart of hearts that they were a little compromised by the book, even

though its fine youthful enthusiasm somewhat stirred their old spirits andreconciled them to it. For what would genius be if it had not the power to

reconcile its opponents to its views and to seduce whole generations to its

ideas and even to its errors ? My brother was ingenuous enough to ask his

beloved teacher Ritschl what he really honestly felt in his inmost heart about

the book. And the wisdom and moderation with which that scholar responded

to the demand of this youthful Hotspur has always seemed to me extremely

kind and noble. Looked at closely, The Birth of Tragedy was as a matter of

fact an attack upon many of Ritschl's most valued convictions.

  At this time, shortly after the publication of The Birth of Tragedy, my

brother was offered a post at Greifswald, while he also received the proposal

of a Professorship at Dorpat. But in those days he was offered these things on

the  score  of  his  former  excellent  reputation  as  a  philologist,  before  his

colleagues  had  got  wind  of  The  Birth  of  Tragedy.  As  soon  as  this  book

became  known  in  philological  circles,  estrangement  was  general  and

widespread. All around him there reigned the most oppressive and uneasy

silence, and not one of the periodicals dared to review it.

  But the letters and descriptions dealing with the impression the book had'

made upon the family at Tribschen, consoled my brother for all the silence he

encountered in other quarters. Richard "Wagner wrote by return of post : "

DEAR FRIEND, I have never yet read a finer book than yours ! It is all

magnificent ! I now write to you in haste, because the reading of your work

has stirred me most extraordinarily, and I must first wait for a more sober

mood, before I can read it properly. I told Cosima that, after her, it is you

who come next in my heart, and then, for a long distance, no one else until

Lenbach, who has made such a strikingly lifelike portrait of me ! Adieu !

Come very soon to see us and then there will be Dionysian merriment ! "

  After the publication of the book, my brother received many other curious

letters which pleased him greatly. He himself speaks of the communications

from  Liszt,  Billow,  Baroness  von  Schleinitz,  Professor  Hagen  of  Berne,

Baron  von  Balligand  of  Munich  and  Edward  Schure".  Billow's  letter,  in

which he expressed himself rapturously about the book, is unfortunately not

to be found, but my brother wrote concerning his visit as follows : "Hans von

Billow, whom I had not yet met, called upon me here, and inquired whether

he might dedicate his translation of Leopardi (the outcome of his leisure time

in Italy) to me. He is so enthusiastic over my book, that he travels about with

a number of copies of it, and he gives these away right and left."

  It will readily be understood that this visit of Billow's (Frau Cosima's firsthusband), coming as it did at a time when the friendship between Wagner and

my brother was at its height, caused the latter to feel somewhat embarrassed.

After  having  discussed  The  Birth  of  Tragedy,  Billow  tried  to  dispel  my

brother's  uneasiness  by  himself  referring  to  his  former  relationship  with

Wagner  and  Frau  Wagner,  which  he  described  in  the  following  image  :

Cosima was Ariadne, he (Billow) was Theseus, and Wagner was Dionysus.

Like all similes, this one, too, was somewhat lame; for in the present instance

it was not Theseus who had abandoned Ariadne, but just the reverse. But all

Billow wished to imply was that, after him the higher man a god had come.

My brother was very pleased that Billow should raise his experiences to some

extent into an impersonal and mythological sphere, even T.N. S though he

had to put up with many bitter remarks about his dear friend Cosima, which,

though they cut him deeply, Billow was not able to suppress.

  From  that  time  forward  we  always  in  private  referred  to  Cosima  as

Ariadne. Strange to say, in my brother's rough draft of his " Conversations on

the Isle of Naxos," which were obviously written in the late autumn of 1885,

the  three  characters,  Dionysus,  Theseus  and  Ariadne  reappear,  and  utter

almost the same words as were actually said by Cosima, "Wagner and Bilow

in the years 1871 and 1872. Dionysus repeats precisely the same words as

were used by Wagner in regard to his absence of jealousy where Cosima was

concerned, to wit : " How could another love what I love in her ? " while

Ariadne herself pronounces the hard words Bilow had used on the occasion

of his first meeting with my brother, which had so hurt the latter, i.e., "All

heroes  shall  perish  through  me."  Suffering  from  the  injury  done  to  him,

Bilow had said to my brother : " Cosima has ruined me, and she will also ruin

Wagner."  Later  on,  when  my  brother  observed  that,  owing  to  Cosima'  s

influence Wagner had grown to be " more Liszt than Wagner " so much so

that he wrote " a parody to his Siegfried and called it Parsifal '' Billow's

words often came back to him, even in those " Conversations on the Isle of

Naxos " which he had in view. But everything in these conversations is raised

to the sphere of the symbolic, and has nothing to do with the persons above

mentioned.

  Owing to its connection with Wagner, The Birth of Tragedy penetrated

circles which, at bottom, were somewhat widely removed from the ideas it

contained. Nowadays the fact must seem rather amusing that it was ladies of

rank, and moreover of intellect, who were among the first to rave about this

book, which in every respect was so difficult to understand. And throughthem  there  was  formed  a  small  but  enthusiastic  band  of  disciples  whose

members  were  scattered  throughout  Europe  from  Moscow,  Berlin  and

Munich, to Paris, Geneva and Florence.

  In Berlin the book was read by Baroness von Schleinitz and her friends ;

in Munich by Baroness von Muchanoff and Baron Balligand, in Geneva by

Countess Diodati, Herr von Senger and numerous acquaintances. Indeed this

enthusiastic lady even began a French translation which was unfortunately

never completed ; but which, to judge from passages of it I have read, would

have  been  very  good.  Fraulein  von  Meysenbug  describes  her  first

acquaintance with the book exhaustively in the Neue Freie Presse.

  "In 1872, when I was living in Florence, Frau Cosima Wagner called my

attention to a certain pamphlet which had just been published and which was

written by a young professor of Bale who was on terms of intimate friendship

with the Wagner family then residing near the Lake of Lucerne. The work

bore the title, The Birth of Tragedy out of the Spirit of Music, and the name

of its author was Friedrich Nietzsche. As it happened, there were quite a

number of men of note in my circle at the time ; we therefore read the work

together and were immediately delighted with it. The light thrown upon the

two fundamental elements of Greek life, to which the author gives the names

of Dionysian and Apollonian, opened up a whole treasure of thoughts as to

how  the  essence  of  the  world  "per  se,"  the  Dionysian  element,  whose

primitive  language  is  music,  produces  the  art  work  of  tragedy  out  of  the

beauty of the Apollonian phenomenon. We also heard that Nietzsche was a

thoroughly scholarly philologist, and that while still a very young man he had

been recommended as a regular Professor to Bale University by the famous

Professor Ritschl, who esteemed him greatly. That which attracted us in the

work, however, more even than its scholarship and its intimate knowledge of

antiquity, was the wealth of intellect and poetry in the point of view the

divining eye of the poetical man who with the glance of a seer grasps the

inner truth of things where the pedantic dry-as-dust scholar sees only the

shell which he takes to be the essential thing. It is really a great joy to think

that there stands such a splendid and highly-gifted young personality, both in

the scientific and creative sense, behind this work, which was prepared in

Bayreuth, where Richard Wagner went to live directly after the war."

  s  A  philologist  who  conceived  of  Greek  antiquity  in  a  spirited  and

enthusiastic manner also wrote in very complimentary terms. He concluded

his private letter as follows : " You are right for that is how I understand you,and  that  is  what  I  think  too  the  true  scholar  educates  himself  through

intuition, through a living grasp of life itself."

  At  last  Rohde  came  forward  with  his  opinion,  and  published  a

sympathetic  review  in  the  Sunday  supplement  of  the  Norddeutsche

Allgemeine  Zeitung  shortly  after  the  glorious  days  of  the  laying  of  the

foundation  stone  of  the  theatre  at  Bayreuth.  On  the  27th  May,  1872,  my

brother wrote to him with great joy : " Friend, friend, friend ! What have you

done ! One can only meet with such an E. E. once in a lifetime. Without

having seen these letters I plunged into the abyss of Bayreuth feeling, and

read slowly on and on to a crescendo of surprise, until at last I recognised that

the voice that rang so solemn and so deep was that of my friend. Oh, dearest

friend, fancy your having done that for me ! "

  Erwin Rohde had been made a Professor at Kiel in April. He telegraphed

: Salve Friderice care amice professor te salutat. Erwin. My brother's joy was

indescribable,  for  he  had  had  the  gravest  fears  as  to  whether  the  loyal

brotherhood-in-arms of which Rohde had shown himself capable, had not

perhaps harmed him professionally. My brother wrote full of joy and high

spirits : " Now, however, that we stand in the midst of the body academic,

like  two  companions  of  the  sword,  armed  to  the  teeth,  and  now  that  all

anxiety as to our livelihood is at an end, we may still be allowed to dare many

things, in order to terrify people on the principle of the old riddle : ' What is

more terrible than a flute? Two flutes.' "

    Meanwhile Wagner's star had risen over Bayreuth. The Master went there

in January, in order to prepare the ground for his plans, and met with hearty

understanding and sympathy. On the 18th of January, Frau Cosima wrote to

my brother : " Yes, Bayreuth ! now we shall be tragic human creatures ! God

knows whether this new idea will succeed ; but that is almost immaterial ; we

cannot do more than stand for what we want. If, however, it succeed, we shall

experience in Wilhelmina's city that to which you summon us. Did the Master

tell you that the Burgomaster and Town- Councillor of Bayreuth have been

here? They suddenly appeared with building plans, and the day at Tribschen

was sufficiently remarkable. In April we shall probably have to go to Vienna,

and then farewell to lovely Tribschen, in which even The Birth of Tragedy

was born, and so many other things which may never return."

  The  departure  from  Tribschen  was  a  terribly  hard  experience  for  my

brother, and he could not even speak about it without a break in his voice.

When,  towards  the  end  of  April,  on  a  day  in  early  spring,  he  went  toTribschen to wish everyone good-bye, he found Frau Wagner in the middle

of  packing.  While  she  went  hither  and  thither,  my  brother  began  to

extemporise at the grand piano. All his SOITOW, his inexpressible hopes and

fears,  his  sweet  memories,  and  the  feeling  that  just  then  something

irretrievable was about to be lost, resounded in the wonderful melodies which

rang now joyously and now mournfully through the empty rooms. And even

now, after so many years, when all the old friendly feelings have changed,

Frau Cosima still remembers that strangely fascinating fantasia, my brother's

song of parting from Tribschen that Blessed Isle ! Very distressed, he wrote

to  Gersdorff  :  "  Last  Saturday  we  bade  a  sad  and  stirring  farewell  to

Tribschen. Tribschen has now ceased to exist : we walked about as amid

ruins of the past, tears hung heavily in the air, and in the clouds ; the dog

would  not  eat,  and  whenever  one  spoke  to  any  of  the  servants  of  the

household one was met with sobs. We packed the manuscripts, letters and

books together ah ! it was desperate ! These three years that I have spent in

close relationship with Tribschen, and during which I have made twenty-

three visits to the place what do they not mean to me ! If I had not had them,

what should I now be ! I am glad that I have petrified that Tribschen world

for myself in my book. . . ."

  Then came the perfect days of the laying of the foundation stone of the

Bayreuth Theatre (May, 1872). Later on, when he compared these days with

those of the production of the Nibelungen (1876), he cried with a sigh : " The

incomparable days devoted to the laying of the first stone, the small group of

the initiated who celebrated them, and who were far from lacking fingers for

the handling of delicate things not the shadow of a resemblance ! " And it

was indeed quite a select company that was assembled in the Margravine's

great box at the old Rococo Theatre at Bayreuth, to hear the rehearsals and

the performance of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.

  A  strange  world  !  All  those  present  were  full  of  genuine  and  real

enthusiasm for the artist and his work ; all were moved by the same hope, as

if they were witnessing the dawn of a glorious day, which seemed to promise

the  bliss  and  the  triumph  of  a  new  German  culture.  Besides  this,  vague

memories of the past hung in the air ; but I believe Richard Wagner himself

gives the best description of the strangely mixed feelings of the company

assembled at this Festival on that spring evening at Bayreuth : "Who could

have helped having the strangest thoughts when, on the 22nd May, 1872, he

found himself on the same spot whereon the Margravine's court and guests,presided over by the great Frederick, once used to stand to witness either a

ballet, an Italian opera, or a French comedy, while now from the same stage

there  resounded  the  powerful  strains  of  the  wonderful  Ninth  Symphony,

produced by German musicians from all parts of the Fatherland ? And who

could then have helped seeing a vision, intensified by sound, which made

him recognise the triumph of the German spirit, when, at last from the very

gallery from which at one time trumpeters in court livery played the trivial

fanfare at receptions given to their Royal Highnesses by the humble court,

enthusiastic  German  singers  called  to  the  assembled  throng:  Seid

umschlungen Millionen (' Oh ye millions, I embrace ye ! ')."

  A year later, still much affected by the memory of that occasion, my

brother wrote, " I believe they were the happiest days I have ever had in my

life.  There  was  that  something  in  the  air  which  I  have  never  detected

elsewhere, something unutterable and full of the greatest hopes."

  It was at Bayreuth that my brother made the acquaintance of all the most

charming of the patronesses of Wagner's art, the Baroness von Schleinitz,

Countess Donhoff , and also that sterling friend of Wagner's, Fraulein von

Meysenbug, who had stuck to him through so many struggles. Later on Fritz

became very friendly with her. She writes about her first meeting with my

brother as follows : " During an interval in the final rehearsal of Wagner's

production of the Ninth Symphony, Frau Wagner came to me with a young

man and said that she wished to introduce Hen Nietzsche to me. 'What? the

Nietzsche?' I cried joyfully. Both of them laughed, and Frau Wagner replied,

'Yes, the Nietzsche ! ' And now, to the already exalted idea one had formed of

the young author, there was added the picture of a youthful, good-looking,

and delightful personality with whom one quickly found one's self in hearty

sympathy."

  He also made many other acquaintances in those days, for all the noble,

self-denying men who had put themselves wholly at the service of Wagner's

Art and of the great idea of Bayreuth, were assembled there. Of course, the

two friends Rohde and Gersdorff were also there, and I, alone, who in a

moment of mad magnanimity had yielded up my place to someone else, was

not there, despite the fact that great pains had been taken to reserve a seat for

me. Later on, my brother wrote to Gersdorff : " Ah, dear friend, we know

what we have experienced ! Nobody will be able to rob us of these sacred and

solemn memories. Under their charm, and fighting for them, we must now go

through life, and strive above all to be so earnest and energetic in all theprincipal acts of our existence, as to show ourselves worthy of such great

experiences and distinctions."

  With the summer came other joys; for instance, a performance of Tristan

und  Isolde  at  Munich,  conducted  by  Hans  von  Billow.  My  brother  went

thither to enjoy the performance in the company of Gersdorff and Fraulein

von Meysenbug, as Bitlow himself had invited him to come. But even the

strain of a tiring journey seems to have been worthwhile, for the performance

must indeed have been excellent.

  My brother returned radiant from Munich. " You can have no idea what a

lot of good such a performance of Tristan does to me," he declared again and

again; and as a matter of fact, he had borne the two night journeys, the two

performances  of  Tristan,  and  the  whole  day  in  the  company  of  friends,

exceedingly well.

  In  the  year  1872  my  brother  had  recovered  the  good  health  he  had

enjoyed in the past ; whoever saw him and spent much time with him at this

period could not speak too highly of his condition. My recollections of the

period, also, are of the happiest nature. I can still see us both taking our walks

in the outlying districts of Bale, always talking animatedly, and interrupted

only  by  our  surging  love  of  song.  At  that  time,  however,  we  sang  only

"Wagnerian music, for instance, the Kaisermarsch or the Preislied which we

managed particularly well.

  The year 1872 marked the zenith of that period which the late Professor

Holzer intended to describe exhaustively, to wit the period from the end of

the sixties to the middle of the seventies of the " first Nietzsche, the friend of

Richard Wagner the Nietzsche whom Erwin Rohde loved so enthusiastically,

the young, hopeful and trustful Nietzsche who, with a colossal faith in his

ideals and friends, marched courageously towards the future the gladiator

who, in the early 'seventies, felt in possession of his greatest power, and who

seemed to Deussen, on the occasion of one of the latter's visits to Bale, full of

fire and buoyancy, and as self-reliant as a young lion."

                          CHAPTER XX FRIEND AND FOE

  THE wonderful health to which I referred in the previous chapter was

sorely needed by my brother in the year 1872. In June he received a shock

which was singularly well calculated to wound very deeply indeed a sensitive

nature such as his. Philology, mortified by my brother's misdeeds, dared to

level an attack which was not altogether in the best of taste.

  At the beginning of June, the faithful Gersdorff, quite beside himself withpassion, wrote that the philologist von Wilamowitz, a former school-friend of

his at Pforta, had just published a small pamphlet entitled, "The Philology of

the  Future:  A  reply  to  The  Birth  of  Tragedy,  by  Friedrich  Nietzsche,

Professor  of  Classical  Philology  at  Bale."  In  this  essay  my  brother  was

attacked with great spite and little wit, but also with much apparent learning.

Gersdorff was most bitterly offended, for this man Wilamowitz, who now

seemed to him no better than a monster fit only to be immediately swallowed

up by the earth, had once been his great friend. Later, we all came to regard

this  essay  as  a  piece  of  excusable  youthful  folly  ;  but  at  the  time  of  its

appearance we certainly felt differently about it.

  As soon as Rohde, that excellent brother in arms, had read the pamphlet,

he came forward full of indignation and offered his services in the task of

defending his friend and refuting his assailant. On the 8th of June my brother

replied as follows : "Do you see, my dear, dear friend, how offensive we are!

We shall soon learn, too, how lonely we are. Now we must stand decently at

our  posts.  Still  we  must  console  each  other  mutually  about  that.  May

everything that you undertake to do be blessed with my love ! We shall stand

loyally together, dear friend, even in calamities more serious than the present.

For this is only an impudent prelude played by an untrained boyish hand ; but

it can give us an idea of the ' manner ' in which opposition will one day come

to us from the quarter of the ' great guns.' "

  Rohde began to feel a little anxious concerning my brother's health, but

Fritz wrote to him quite cheerfully on the 11th of June : "I write to you to-

day, dear friend, only in order to set your mind quite at rest as far as I am

concerned. I am really in the place which you wished me to be in ; indeed, I

even feel in the very best of spirits. I have the pleasure of having my sister

with me ; we live the simplest of lives together. In my solitary moments those

ideas haunt me which I shall try to expound in my next book. In addition to

this  I  find  a  certain  pleasure  in  my  lectures,  especially  in  those  on  pre-

Platonic philosophy. . . ."

  At that time, while my brother's enemies certainly believed him to be

brooding  with  feelings  of  revenge  over  Wilamowitz's  pamphlet,  he  had

plunged wholly into that remote world of his beloved Greek philosophers of

the tragic age. He felt an almost personal attachment for them, especially for

Heraclitus, and it seemed as if he were able to derive more than others can

from that which has been handed down to us of this ancient wisdom. In the

year 1878, he wrote as follows : "If I listened with attention to the collectivesound of ancient Greek philosophy, I thought I should be able to hear notes

which I was used to hearing in Greek art and particularly in Greek tragedy.

To what extent this lay with the Greeks, or only with my own ears so starved

of art I cannot at present say with certainty."

  But, although my brother, far removed from the present, lived in thought

in the tragic age of the Greeks, he was very hard hit by Wilamowitz's attack

more  particularly  because,  despite  the  man's  youth,  he  had  thought  him

promising. He, himself, said very little about the affair, but when I ventured

to express myself with some indignation concerning it, he would only reply :

"The whole attack is false and unjust, but you would not have me defend

myself ! " This would have been an impossible thing in his opinion. Nor was

it necessary, for his friends were equipping themselves to fight the pamphlet.

  Richard  Wagner  opened  the  war  against  young  Wilamowitz  with  a  "

Letter to Friedrich Nietzsche," which was published on the 23rd of June,

1872, and which can be found in Vol. IX., p. 330, of Wagner's Prose Works.

  As will be readily understood, and as we have seen from his letter to

Gersdorff, my brother was full of the most hearty gratitude for the loyal stand

Wagner made for his ideas. With these feelings in his heart, he wrote to

Wagner, and received the following affecting lines in reply : " friend ! Now,

as a matter of fact, I feel just a little anxious about you, and simply because I

attach so much value to you. To tell the truth, after my wife, you are the only

windfall  life  has  ever  brought  me  :  now,  fortunately,  Fidi  must  also  be

included ; but between him and me, there is a missing link, the place of which

you alone can fill as the son to the grandson, so to speak. I feel no anxiety

about Fidi ; but I do about you, and in so far as I feel it about you I feel it

about Fidi. And this anxiety is quite of the common bourgeois kind. I should

like to see your common or garden welfare certain ; for, as to the rest, it

seems  to  me  in  your  case  to  be  thoroughly  assured.  Just  recently,  of  a

morning, I have been reading through your Birth again very attentively, and I

have been constantly repeating to myself : ' If only he can get thoroughly

healthy and remain so, and, if in other respects his circumstances continue to

be satisfactory, then things cannot go very far wrong with him.' "

  The whole letter shows Wagner's kindness of heart, and general good

nature,  and  is  an  excellent  proof  of  the  mutual  solicitude  and  veneration

which a true friendship always stimulates.

    Nevertheless,  the  philologists  still  sneered  as  they  had  done  before.

Professor U., of Bonn, replied to his pupils' questions concerning The Birthof Tragedy, by saying that it was pure nonsense. On the other hand, Ritschl

remained very attached to my brother, and when the latter sent him, for the

Rheinisches Museum, a continuation of his article dealing with the Florentine

tract concerning the Contest of Homer and Hesiod, Ritschl, heartily pleased,

wrote  that  Fritz  had  come  back  "  to  the  old  familiar  and  sympathetic

channel." Yet the fact that the old scholar was still only able to condone The

Birth of Tragedy was somewhat humiliating for my brother, although he may

have been convinced that it contained the first statement of great ideas which

would continue to exercise their influence for centuries.

  Fritz arranged to make a short trip to Italy during the autumn holidays,

and I was to accompany him. But as pressing invitations forced me to travel

northward once more, he decided to go with me as far as Naumburg. An

autumn day of heavenly beauty made him change his mind again and led him

to Italy after all. He promised me, however, to keep a diary of his journey, so

that I might enjoy it as well when he returned. But he only kept his promise

for the first few days. Nevertheless, I shall quote these short notes here, as

they show so plainly how kind and sympathetic he could be, even to the

simplest  people.  He  met  only  "  good,  pleasant  and  kind  people  "  on  his

journeys that is to say, he made them so ; charmed by the gentle sweetness of

his nature, they were tempted to show him their best side, and even to confide

in him concerning all their troubles and aspirations.

  The notes out of which, he concocted a letter to our dear mother (who, by

the bye, had counted most certainly upon a visit from him) begin on the

evening of the 28th of September, 1872 : "Saturday. I am with a married

couple from Bale. I did not know them, but had to pretend I did. I telegraphed

to Lizzie from Baden (the telegram read : ' First hearty greetings. To-day

glorious autumn weather. Am in for a grand time. Thy Brother '). Courtesy on

the part of Herr Haller from Berne, who has given me his card.

  " When I had almost reached Zurich I discovered that I had good old Gotz

as a travelling companion. He told me that owing to Kirchner's departure his

musical work at Zurich has greatly increased. He also informed me about his

opera which is to be performed in Hanover.

  " I travelled from Zurich to Rapperswyl with nice simple people in a

third-class carriage. But it was cold, and I scarcely felt the courage to go as

far as Chur. At Rapperswyl I took a second-class ticket to Wesen, where I

found the 'bus of the Hotel Schwert, into which I mounted. The hotel is very

fine  and  comfortable,  but  very  empty.  I  have  my  meals  all  alone  in  thedining-room.

  "  Throughout  the  afternoon  I  had  clear  autumn  weather,  the  remotest

snow mountains were visible. In the evening the whole range appeared in

magnificent steely grey. I have a slight headache for the moment. I had rather

a bad night with violent dreams.

  " Sunday. I awoke with a headache. My window looks out on the Lake of

Walenstadt. The sun rises over peaks partly covered with snow. I had my

breakfast and then walked for a while along the banks of the lake. Then I

went to the railway station, after first having had a look at the Pension Speer,

which  stands  at  a  higher  altitude  than  my  hotel,  and  looks  newer.  The

morning was very fine. I travelled second class to Chur, but grew ever more

and more ill at ease, in spite of the lovely country, Lake Ragatz, etc. At Chur

I felt that I could not go a step further; I paid no attention to the inquiries of

the diligence officials and quickly retired to the Hotel Lukmainer. There they

gave me a room with a good prospect, but I got into bed at once. I slept for

three  hours,  after  which  I  felt  better  and  ate  something.  A  particularly

obliging and intelligent waiter called my attention to Bad Passug : I took my

bearings. In the town of Chur the quiet of the Sabbath prevailed, and the

mood was that of the afternoon. I walked along the high road quite easily; the

view looking back on the town was magnificent, the scene was constantly

changing and widening. After about fifteen minutes' walk along a small side-

path, I reached some pinewoods and a lovely shaded spot for up to that point

it had been rather warm. I cannot say how delighted I was with the ravine

through which the Kabiusa rushes. The road lies now on this bank, now on

that, a number of bridges link it together, and it leads across waterfalls to the

heights. I expected to find a pension on this spot, but this was a mistake on

my part ; for I only came across a country inn, thronged with Sunday visitors

and feasting and coffee-drinking families. First of all I drank three glasses at

the soda spring ; then higher up, installed upon a balcony, I drank a bottle of

Asti with some more of the soda water, and feeling much better in the head, I

also had some goat's milk cheese, which I ate with a fair appetite. A man with

Chinese eyes, who was sitting at my table, also had a glass of Asti with me :

he thanked me and drank with much apparent satisfaction. Then the landlady

of the place handed me a number of reports and small pamphlets, and finally

the  landlord  Sprecher  conducted  me  over  the  place,  let  me  drink  at  the

springs, showed me the wealth of springs that had not yet been tapped, and,

taking  it  for  granted  that  I  was  interested,  offered  me  a  share  in  thefoundation  of  a  hotel,  etc.  The  valley  is  extremely  attractive  and  full  of

inexhaustible  interest  and  wonder  for  the  geologist.  Graphite,  ochre  and

quartz are to be found, and there is also a likelihood of gold, etc. The stone

strata are twisted, turned about and broken up in the most extraordinary way,

as they are at Axenstein on the Lake of Constance, but it is all much wilder,

though on a smaller scale. I returned home late, when the sun was setting and

the distant peaks were all aglow. At last happiness and inward content came

on the scene. A child with flaxen hair was trying to find one or two nuts and

was very funny. And then an old couple fetched me in, and we had a lively

conversation.  The  man  was  an  old  grey  headed  fellow,  a  master  cabinet-

maker,  who  once  when  he  was  on  the  tramp  fifty  years  ago  entered

Naumburg one very hot day. His son has been a missionary in India since

1858, and is expected in Chur next year, in order to see his father again. The

daughter  has  been  to  Egypt  several  times  and  was  a  friend  of  Pastor

Biggenbach's.  When  I  reached  the  hotel  I  did  a  little  writing  and  had

something to eat. An Italian who sat opposite me tried to talk to me ; but we

understood each other with difficulty as he could not speak German."

  In addition to this fragment of a diary, my brother, in a letter addressed to

Gersdorff early in October, 1872, writes as follows concerning this journey :

" I have retired to this place the ' Hotel Bodenhaus,' Spligen, on the frontier of

Switzerland and Italy. I am satisfied beyond all expectation, even as you

perceive with the ink and the pens, and am very happy. The solitude is rich

and wonderful, and there are the most beautiful roads, along which I can walk

for hours, absorbed in my own thoughts, without ever falling over a precipice

; but as soon as I look about me, there is something new and great to see. The

only people I meet are the travellers who pass through by coach. I take my

meals with them this is all I have to do with them they pass like Platonic

shadows  before  my  cave.  ...  If  I  should  travel  any  further,  I  shall  go  to

Brescia, to take another holiday there that is to say, I shall travel as one really

ought to travel, for refreshment. When I get there I shall study the paintings

of a great Venetian master, Moretto, and only his : and in this way I shall ruin

neither my stomach, my eyes, nor my holidays."

  With the help of Burckhardt and the latter's Cicerone he had thoroughly

prepared  himself  for  this  painter,  but  the  joys  of  art  and  Italy  could  not

compare with the air of the mountains. When he had been a week at Bergamo

he returned to Spligen.

  After the holidays he wrote to me from Bale as follows: " My dear Lizzie,now you know what the air of the mountains is in it one is cheerful and full of

love for mankind ; very often, too, one feels in a sublime and daring mood.

  " What I mean by this I have really forgotten maybe only that I am not

writing in mountain air, but that you are at liberty to receive and transfigure

this product of the plains with the feelings generally roused by mountain air,

" From a traveller's point of view my journey was a very unfortunate one;

from a higher standpoint, however, it was an incomparably happy one. It

sounds a trifle as I describe it the air of the heights, the air of the High Alps,

the air of the Central High Alps ! My attempted journey into Italy was a

failure the air was loathsomely mild, and there was no light and shade ! I got

as far as Bergamo (half way to Venice), and from there I returned post haste,

ventre-a-terre, to the Spligen Pass. Think of it ! Three days and two nights on

the road the first day thither, the third back at Spligen ! This was, at least,

energetic, brief and expensive ! In the last twenty-four hours of my holiday I

spent a heavenly autumn day at Kagatz."

  As far as I can remember, and judging from the handwriting and the ink,

it was during those raw autumn days at Spligen that my brother wrote " The

Relation of Schopenhauerian Philosophy to a German Culture."

  In November my brother met the Wagners in Strassburg, and delighted

them with his cheerfulness and endurance under the stress of the general

hostility towards him, the onerous duties of his post, music and travelling.

Frau Cosima afterwards wrote : "How pleased we were, dear good friend, to

see you as you were when we last met you ! You really do fulfil the Goethe-

Mazzini maxim, and you are so resolute and healthy that it is a joy to look

upon you."

  Meanwhile, his friend Erwin had equipped himself for war and triumph;

in the autumn of 1872 there appeared a pamphlet : AFTER PHILOLOGIE .

  An attempt at throwing some light upon a pamphlet published by Ulrich

von Wilamowitz-Mollendorff, Dr. Phil., entitled Zukunftsphilologie.

  A PHILOLOGIST'S COMMUNICATION TO RICHARD WAGNER.

  I  had  been  reminded  of  angry  Achilles,  marching,  magnificent  in  his

triumph, and mercilessly dragging Hector, his friend's foe, round the wailing

city of Troy. The whole pamphlet is a sharp and cutting refutation of all the

errors of the youthful Herr von Wilamowitz. One can understand the ruthless

tone of this reply only when one has read the essay that provoked it ; for the

latter is written in an uncommonly insulting manner, and, like Wagner, one

wonders that such coarse procedure could be possible in the service of theMuses.

  The crushing conclusion, in which Rohde braces up all his indignation for

a final blow, caused the most wholehearted amusement among my brother's

friends. Even my brother, who, on the whole, was not much in favour of

violent polemics, often used to laugh heartily over this conclusion. We may

therefore quote it here : "Now, however, enough, and more than enough, of

this unedifying confutation of a libeller. While vindicating our friend I had to

ascribe the arrogant claims of this Doctor of Philology to sounder knowledge

than that upon which they are really based. His pamphlet was the work of

thoughtlessness, ignorance and dishonesty not of a competent, methodical

philologist.  It  was  an  utter  travesty  of  the  critical  method,  in  fact  the

performance of a real Afterphilologen (pseudophilologist). If in doing this I

have  scarcely  touched  upon  half  of  the  misunderstandings,  intentional

misinterpretations and disfiguring innuendoes which this man splutters forth

in an unbroken stream throughout his libellous pages, side by side with the

actual ' replies ' which I have proved to be worthless; I shall not in conclusion

halt very long to wonder what may have induced this Doctor of Philology to

have  given  us  this  voluntary  exhibition  of  his  own  incompetence  and

ignorance when there was absolutely no need for him to do so. In addition to

the  ingenuous  vanity  of  confident  ignorance,  there  seems  to  have  been

another special incentive which is revealed to us by his final request to our

friend kindly to step down from the Professor's Chair entrusted to him, after

he has so foolishly forfeited the approval of Ulrich von Wilamowitz, Doctor

of  Philology.  I  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  qualify  this  very  friendly  and

extraordinary  demand  from  the  moral  standpoint.  We,  the  friends,  can

certainly do no more than smile at the ingenuousness with which the actual

motive itself of the denunciatory zeal of this ambitious Doctor of Philology is

thus revealed. In return, however, we also shall take the liberty of giving him

a little good counsel. It seems to us probable that his essay would never have

been written had it not been for the advice and incitement of certain good

friends. Now, in the event of his feeling himself once more called upon to

rescue  genuine  science  by  means  of  an  exhibition  of  his  historico-critical

ignorance, it would be an excellent thing if, before the publication of such '

rescue-work,' he would carefully consult any one of those afore-mentioned

friends who happened at least to have got beyond the swaddling-clothes stage

of  philological  knowledge  provided,  of  course,  that,  in  one  of  his  lucid

moments,  he  should  feel  prone  to  accept  that  advice  of  Heraclitus  whichseems to be most perfectly suited to his particular case, to wit : ' It is better to

conceal one's ignorance than to display it ostentatiously before the eyes of

all.' "

  An indignant friend is indeed a terrible and destructive fighter ! For a

while, after this act of slaughter, no philologist felt inclined to venture to

wage war upon The Birth of Tragedy. It is true that Herr von "Wilamowitz

tried to justify himself in a further pamphlet ; but it was love's labour lost the

victory  remained  on  the  side  of  the  two  brothers  in  arms,  Nietzsche  and

Rohde.

  We can gather what my brother's own feelings were in regard to the essay

from  the  following  words  :  "  Just  fancy  your  pamphlet,  with  all  its

magnanimity and daring warlike fellowship, falling in the midst of all that

cackling  throng  what  a  spectacle  !  Romundt  and  Overbeck,  the  only  two

people to whom I have been able to read it, are overjoyed at your successful

feat ! They never weary of pointing in praise to this in particular and to that in

general. They call the polemic ' Lessingesque ' ; now you know what good

Germans imply by this predicate. What pleases me most of all in your work is

to hearken to the deep, threatening tone, as of a thundering waterfall, which

seems to rise from its foundations, and without which no polemic can be

hallowed and given the stamp of strength that rumbling tone in which love,

trustfulness, courage, power, pain, triumph and hope all resound together.

Dear friend, I was overcome ; and when you spoke of the ' friends ' it was

some time before I could sufficiently regain my composure to go on reading.

What splendid experiences I have had this year ! And how every calamity

coming to me from other quarters, seems to vanish in the face of them ! I am

also  proud  and  happy  on  Wagner's  account  for  your  pamphlet  marks  an

extraordinary turning-point in his position, relative to the scientific circles of

Germany.  Not  long  ago,  the  Nationalzeitung  was  sufficiently  insolent  to

reckon me among ' Wagner's literary lackeys.' How surprised everyone must

have been to see you go over to his side ! That is certainly something more

important than the mere fact that you should have come over to me ! Is that

not so, dear old friend ? And it is this precisely this, which makes to-day the

happiest day I have had for many a year ; for I see what you, in your act of

friendship, have done for me and for Wagner ! "

  Later on, he wrote in the same connection to Fraulein von Meysenbug as

follows : " You have certainly not yet read the Apology which Professor

Rohde of Kiel has written, as much with the sword as with the pen, and inwhich he shows such great superiority to his opponents. By means of my

Birth of Tragedy have succeeded in becoming the most obnoxious philologist

of the day, to stand up for whom constitutes a genuine miracle of audacity,

because  everyone  seems  unanimous  in  wishing  to  pass  sentence  of  death

upon  me.  Apart  from  the  polemic,  with  which  I  would  not  harass  you,

Rohde's pamphlet contains many good things concerning the philosophical

basis of my work, and will therefore meet with some sympathy from you. If

only I did not fear that this courageous step on Rohde's part would land him

in a veritable labyrinth of disapprobation and malice ! Now we are both on

the Index ! " At bottom, it is a misunderstanding ; for I did not write for

philologists, although, if the latter were only able to do BO, they might even

learn much that is purely philological in my essay. Now they turn somewhat

bitterly upon me, and it looks as if they thought I had committed a crime

simply  because  I  did  not  give  them  and  their  understanding  the  first

consideration. Even Rohde's deed will not lead to anything ; for nothing can

bridge the yawning gulf. Now I shall quietly pursue my way, and shall take

good care not to suffer from that loathing, reasons for which one encounters

at every turn and step."

  Rohde's  really  self-sacrificing  behaviour  filled  my  brother  with

everlasting gratitude. It should not be forgotten that it was a really hazardous

enterprise  on  the  part  of  this  friend,  for  he  ran  the  danger  of  ruining  his

University career. Later on, during the period of my brother's most terrible

isolation,  when  both  the  friends  of  his  youth  had,  thanks  to

misunderstandings, grown almost strangers to him, how often did he not most

ardently wish that the few who had stood so near to him formerly might

defend  him  in  public  with  the  same  hearty  and  loyal  passion  !  Oh,  how

bitterly he felt this ! But then there was no one who dared to do so.

  In spite of Rohde's brilliant defence, however, my brother was absolutely

banned by philologists. Students were earnestly advised not to study at Bale,

and as the result of this there were no philological students there during the

winter term of 1872 to 1873. This vexed my brother very much indeed. Those

philologists who were well disposed towards him spoke of him only in the

most  plaintive  tones.  He  had,  indeed,  done  some  really  good  work  in

philology what a pity that he should have chosen to enter upon such curious

paths ! Still, they did not absolutely abandon all hope. One of the critics

closed  his  review  of  my  brother's  essay  on  the  Florentine  Tract  with  the

following words : " Here we take leave of this essay, which must occupy animportant position in Hesiodic literature, and express the hope that its gifted

author will promptly give effect to the plan of which he speaks at the end of

his treatise, concerning an analysis of the relation of Hesiod to Homer, and

will turn his back upon his present ' Music and Philology of the Future.' '' My

brother  had  expected  a  very  different  reception,  both  from  scholars  and

laymen. He could not understand why this " enthusiastic and good-natured "

book was so badly understood and provoked so much unnecessary animosity.

He  wrote  to  Gersdorff  expressing  great  disappointment  in  regard  to  the

present and great hopes about the future : " It will be difficult for my book to

spread ! . . . Now I expect nothing save malice and stupidity. But I reckon

upon its quiet, though slow career through the centuries, and I say this to you

with the utmost conviction. For certain eternal truths are here told for the first

time, and these must resound through the ages."

  In his heart of hearts he felt already in those days that he had increased

the obscurity of his book by introducing Wagnerian music into it ; but he was

also very strongly conscious of the fact that a friendship as profound as that

which he felt for Richard "Wagner involved serious duties, and that he should

find  satisfaction  and  compensation  in  this  feeling  he  even  felt  that  a

friendship of this sort might also in some respects demand his intelligence.

He writes : " On the whole, I believe that we were not born to be happy, but

to do our duty ; and we ought to think ourselves lucky if we know where our

duty lies." At that time he had no doubts about this ; but later on, after 1876, a

considerable change came over him : then he no longer applauded either

himself or the cause of duty which had led him to confound Wagner with

Greek Art, and for a while he did not like to speak about the book at all. Still,

in his notes of the year 1878, he recalls his attitude of mind during the period

in which The Birth of Tragedy appeared, and without any ill-humour : " I

thought how unsound and deteriorated human existence actually was, how

entirely  it  is  built  upon  deception  and  imagination,  and  how  everything

elevating in it, all its illusions, and all love of life, were the outcome of error.

Consequently, I thought, the origin of such a world was not to be sought in a

moral being, but perhaps in an artist-creator. By this I meant that such a being

was  absolutely  undeserving  of  reverence  in  the  Christian  sense  (which

postulates a God of Goodness and of Love), and I did not even scout the idea

that however deeply this notion may have penetrated into the German spirit,

it might yet be forcibly eradicated from it again. It was thus that I thought I

had found a way back to German Paganism through Wagner's art, or, at least,a bridge back to a specifically unChristian attitude towards the world and

man. ' The gods are evil and wise ; they deserve to go under. Man is good and

stupid he has a more beautiful future and can attain to it only when the gods

have at last entered the twilight of their days ' thus would I have formulated

my credo in those days. For I then believed that the world, from the aesthetic

standpoint, was intended to be a spectacle by its poet-creator ; but that as a

moral phenomenon it was a deception. That is why I came to the conclusion

that the world could be justified only as an aesthetic phenomenon."

  Later on he felt almost a dislike for his first book, and in a preface, or

rather an epilogue, which he called " An attempt at Self -Criticism," written

for it in the year 1886, when a second edition of it was published, he spoke

about it very bitterly. (See English Ed. Birth of Tragedy, p. XXV). He could

not understand the violent manner in which he had united the Hellenic world

with  "Wagnerian  music  more  particularly  with  that  philosophical  and

metaphysical point of view which exists in Bayreuth even to this day. But, as

he very rightly said later, "The transference of music into metaphysics was an

act of reverence and gratitude ; as a matter of fact all religious men hitherto

have done the same thing with their experiences." But what he then sacrificed

to  Wagner  the  latter  never  really  understood.  I  do  not  wish  to  lay  any

particular stress here upon the fact that through standing by Wagner during

this period he spoiled his whole philosophical career and his reputation as a

thoroughly scientific scholar. What was still worse was that, by acting as he

did, he became involved in a struggle which for the first time shattered his

ingenuous faith in the good-will of mankind and the world. Up to that time,

everything had gone remarkably well with him, and he often used to refer to

himself as a " Happy Prince." But had it not been for his association with

Wagner, he could not possibly have been attacked in such an unprecedented

manner after the appearance of The Birth of Tragedy. One can understand his

plaint : " What a pity it was that I did not dare to say all I had to say at that

time as a poet. I might perhaps have been able to do it ! Or at least as a

philologist : for to this day almost everything still remains to be discovered

and unearthed by philologists in this department ! And above all, the problem

that there actually is a problem to be solved here and that the Greeks will

continue to remain just as completely unrealisable as they have ever been, so

long as we can find no answer to the question ' what is Dionysian ?'.... But

there is something much more detestable about the book than the mere fact

that  I  obscured  and  impaired  my  notions  of  the  Dionysian  element,  byclothing them in Schopenhauerian formulae, and that is, that I should ever

have  ruined  the  prodigious  Problem  of  Hellenism,  as  I  conceived  it,  by

mixing it up with the most modern things ! "

  In this passage ill-humour is certainly the ruling note ; but only two years

later he is able, in The Twilight of the Idols, to contemplate even The Birth of

Tragedy, with that amor fati which was peculiar to him, and the pure joy that

proceeded from it ; and quite the last and most concise remarks that have ever

been written about this first book were written during the autumn of 1888 in

Ecce Homo, where he turns with love and passion to this work of his youth,

and recognises quite rightly how unmistakably it already heralds the whole of

his life-work in the stupendous hopes to which it gives utterance.

  In summing up all I have said above concerning The Birth of Tragedy, I

cannot help feeling most deeply how justified my brother was when he wrote

in January, 1872 : " I am filled with a terrible earnestness in regard to all that

I hear about this book ; for it is in such signs that I divine the future which

lies before me. This life is still full of enormous difficulties for me."

  The  reason  why  I  have  given  such  an  exhaustive  account  of  the

experiences which my brother's first book brought him, is because they are to

some  extent  typical  At  every  fresh  energetic  step  along  the  road  of  his

development,  and  of  his  literary  activity,  the  same  experiences  recurred.

Those who had hitherto regarded him as belonging entirely to them, became

extraordinarily estranged. A particular personality was discovered on whose

shoulders was thrown the whole of the responsibility for the change, and who

was regarded as the seducer. Some among his former sympathisers became

his determined enemies. Others who were particularly fond of him tried by

hook or by crook to understand him. One or two loyal friends stuck to him

through thick and thin and a number of new enthusiasts stepped to his side

who for the most part misunderstood him. Only a very few no, no one could

boast  of  having  an  inkling  of  his  real  greatness.  Taking  everything  into

consideration,  every  great  step  forward  which  he  happened  to  take  was

attended by the greatest sufferings and disappointments ; and these reached

such a terrible pitch towards the close of his life's work that, owing to his

great sensitiveness, his feelings were sometimes rendered intolerably bitter.

In the midst of his work he once wrote in tones of woe : " One has only to

accomplish something good and new, in order to experience among one's

friends what it means to ' put an anxious face on a happy event.'

                  CHAPTER XXI EDUCATION AND CULTURE  EVER since his student days my brother had put himself the questions,

"What is German education, what is German culture ? " Many notes written

in those early years bear witness to this fact. And now from all sides he began

to receive fresh incentives for asking himself the questions anew. Events in

his life which had stirred him deeply his friendship with Wagner and the

years of war had confirmed his old doubt, and had given him new replies to

the old questions. " What is education, what is the object of education?" he

asked himself "The understanding and the encouragement of one's noblest

contemporaries  ;  the  preparation  of  that  which  is  growing  and  coming."

"What is the mission of education?" " To live in the noblest aspirations of

one's nation and to exercise influence thereby. Not only, therefore, to receive

and  to  learn,  but  to  live.  To  liberate  one's  age  and  one's  nation  from  all

distorted conceptions, and to keep the image of one's ideal before one's eyes."

  For all that, my brother was not oblivious to the fact that, as far as the

culture of the Germans was concerned, they lacked the proper examples ; for,

" the education of a nation with a view to culture is essentially a matter of

becoming  used  to  good  models."  My  brother  set  all  his  hope  upon  the

teachers and educators of the people : " Educators must be educated ! But the

first must educate themselves ; and it is for these that I am writing." Now the

occasion arose for him to speak on this subject.

  At  the  beginning  of  the  winter  1871-72  he  was  invited  by  the  "

Academical Society " of Bale to deliver some lectures, and in response to this

invitation, during the Christmas holidays of 1871, which he spent in Bale in

consequence, he composed his lectures, On the Future of Our Educational

Institutions, based upon a series of earlier notes. They were received with

great enthusiasm, which increased with each lecture.

    Altogether at the beginning of the year 1872 my brother was the subject

of much discussion in Bale. The publication of The Birth of Tragedy, and the

wonderful lectures, provoked the most varied interest, and caused general

surprise. These lectures contained the most striking heresies against those

old-established institutions of which people thought they had a right to be

proud ; and as a matter of fact my brother's attacks ought to have roused

general indignation. They were, however, couched in such kindly terms that

the heresies were scarcely noticed.

  In these lectures my brother looks back seven years, speaks again as a

student, and describes the private struggles and serious questionings which he

had to face in those days. Many of the incidents he mentions, even thoughlater on he may not have remembered them accurately himself, were, as we

can see from his notes at the time, drawn from his own experiences, and not

his experiences in Bonn alone, but also in Leipzig, Naumburg, and at Pforta.

As he did not think it was seemly for a professor of twenty-seven to utter

such  exceptionally  bitter  truths  concerning  old-established  and  highly-

respected institutions, in the presence of the dignified councillors, and of his

own  colleagues  of  the  University  of  Bale,  he  clothed  his  thoughts  in  a

poetical garb, and invented the figure of a hoary old sage (Schopenhauer) in

whose mouth he put all his sharp criticisms and the passionate outpourings of

his  heart.  This  artifice,  by  means  of  which  age  and  not  youth  uttered  its

judgments, removed all sharpness from the lectures.

    Unfortunately  my  brother  was  unable  to  give  the  last  lecture,  for  on

leaving the overheated hall at the end of the fifth, he caught cold. Before he

could recover, the end of the term had come round, and prevented him from

delivering the last lecture.

  But the plan he had made for the whole course gives us a good idea of the

optimistic  tone  in  which  these  lectures  were  to  he  brought  to  a  close  in

March, 1872. In his description of a brotherhood of philosophers and artists

he outlines his picture of the German culture which was to blossom forth

from the union of Schopenhauerian philosophy with Wagnerian art. These

two  masters,  Schopenhauer  and  Wagner,  meet  each  other  one  beautiful

summer's night in the presence of crowds of their youthful admirers, and the

meeting  takes  the  form  of  a  ceremony  which  provides  a  momentary

realisation of the glorious future of their dreams. After the attacks to which

my brother was subjected during the summer of 1872, as the result of The

Birth of Tragedy, he felt too poignantly how far removed his age was from

such ideals. It therefore seemed quite proper to him, in the revised plan which

he prepared later, to make the representative of that age, the man of letters

and the young students who sympathised with him, emphatically reject the

old ideals. And thus in the boisterous closing scene of the second plan, which

he had drawn up in the autumn of 1872, he formulates for the first time the

hostile  opposition  between  his  unseasonable  hopes  and  the  whole  of  the

culture of the age. The conclusion strikes one almost as a painful renunciation

of his dreams of the future.

  If the revised plan had been carried out, one evening would not have

sufficed for dealing with the material it involved. My brother therefore had

the intention of delivering two more lectures : " The Degenerate Man ofCulture" and "The School of the Future." But he found no opportunity for

delivering  these  at  Bale  in  the  summer,  and  in  the  following  winter  he

progressed so far in his development and in the elaboration of his ideas that

the form of the lectures displeased him greatly, and he was unable to build

further upon such a foundation.

  The people of Bale were sincerely sorry to be deprived of the conclusion

of the lectures ; for they had provoked a host of interesting questions, and

there was no little excitement over the solution of the problem. How often did

they not express their regret to me that they had never had the educational

institutions  of  the  future  described  to  them.  I  always  comforted  them  by

saying  that  my  brother  would  shortly  have  these  lectures  printed.  In  the

spring of 1872 he had had this intention, and it was his desire to dedicate

them, with some touch of irony, as a solemn exhortation, to the Philological

Congress to take place at Leipzig in May. But he could never find the time

either  to  prepare  them  carefully  for  the  Press,  or  to  write  the  conclusion

which was still required. Then he resolved to recast the whole of the lectures

and to make them more artistic, especially the dialogue parts, and therefore

postponed publication to a later date ; but the tide of his development washed

far over the whole matter.

In the summer of 1873 vigorous steps were taken towards the realisation of

the educational institution of the future, for the education of the educator. My

brother and I were in Graubinden, in the charming region of Flims ; and there

a beautiful though rather diminutive old castle, which was supposed to be

haunted, was offered to us for sale at an exceptionally low price, 800 to

1,000. I had always been animated by the desire of devoting my whole life to

a great cause, and was then quite determined to purchase this little castle for

the  purpose  of  the  educational  institution.  It  contained  fine  old-fashioned

rooms,  one  of  which  was  covered  with  beautiful  Renaissance  panelling,

embellished with magnificent carvings. There would certainly not have been

enough room for many inmates ; but its very purpose excluded the " many

too many." In front of the castle there lay gardens in the form of an extended

oblong. Cloisters were to be erected along the walls; for all teaching and

exhortation  were  to  be  given  as  little  as  possible  indoors,  but  chiefly

peripatetically. The long lawn between the cloisters was to be reserved for

physical exercise.

  At first the little castle would not be used as an educational establishment,

but as a sort of lay-monastery, where teachers and educators should cometogether. Here life, thought and good counsel would be shared in common,

and  there  would  be  occasional  interruptions  in  the  form  of  excursions  to

places of artistic interest within easy reach a plan which would have been

facilitated by the close proximity of the place to Italy. My brother wrote a

stirring invitation to his nearest friends to join him in this brotherhood, but

though Baron von Gersdorff retained a vivid recollection of this document, a

copy of it has never been found. Nevertheless, in one of my brother's notes of

the spring of 1874, Gersdorff believed he recognised a retrospect of Fritz's

scheme, and a reminiscence of the invitation in question. It reads as follows :

" I dreamt of an association of men, who would be free from all compromise,

who  would  repudiate  all  tender  forbearance,  and  would  call  themselves

Destroyers. They were to measure everything according to the standard of

their own criticism, and to sacrifice themselves to truth. Everything bad and

false was to be brought to light. We do not wish to construct prematurely ; we

do not know whether we shall ever be able to construct, and whether it were

not  better  to  refrain  from  construction.  There  are  such  people  as  lazy

pessimists and creatures of resignation we decline to belong to their party."

    Throughout  his  whole  life,  and  in  the  most  varied  forms,  my  brother

pursued one and the same scheme that of forming a community of deep-

thinking and genuinely free men, chosen from all spheres of society, whose

business it would be to try together to fathom the most recondite problems of

this  enigmatical  existence,  attempt  to  clear  them  up,  and  give  each  other

mutual instruction. The fact that the realisation of this fell through at the time

is  to  be  ascribed  entirely  to  the  influence  of  external  circumstances.  The

good-natured and honest vendors of the above-mentioned property believed

me to be younger than I really was, and, fearing apparently that they might

exploit my inexperience and enthusiasm, offered to allow me four weeks in

which to think over the purchase. By this means I obtained sufficient time to

think the matter over and to give it serious consideration, and in the end we

arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  scheme  was  too  youthful  and  fantastic.

Moreover, my brother began to feel ever less inclined to sever himself from

Bale.

  As  early  as  January,  1872,  when  he  received  the  offer  of  a  post  at

Greifswald (on the score of his old reputation as a sound philologist, before

the  authorities  at  that  place  had  heard  of  The  Birth  of  Tragedy),  he  was

feeling  so  happy  at  Bale,  that  he  gave  the  matter  only  a  moment's

consideration and forthwith declined the offer. Concerning this incident hesaid : " Why change so soon ? why dip your hand into the lucky bag, when

there are so many blanks ? " Of course my brother knew perfectly well that it

was customary for a man to use such an offer from another institution as a

means of bringing pressure to bear upon his present employers, in order to

extract some advantage from them ; he, however, never dreamed of making

any  such  use  of  the  occasion.  He  even  gratefully  declined  a  torchlight

procession in his honour, which the students proposed to organise ; he did not

wish to be feted for an action which had cost him no self-sacrifice. Later on I

heard how the Education Board of Bale had marvelled in silence over his

childish disinterestedness in regard to money matters. But they behaved quite

in the noble Bale manner, by increasing his salary very shortly after this

incident, without having received the slightest word or hint from him that he

expected it. It was with the following kind words that the trustees of the

University acquainted him with their decision, on the 24th January, 1872 : "

DEAR PROFESSOR NIETZSCHE, " It is our pleasant duty to have to tender

you our very best thanks for the way in which you declined the flattering

offer from Greifswald, simply out of love for the post you hold here and the

good work you are doing ; and we do not doubt that you will continue to be

satisfied with the honoured position you fill at the University and the School

for some time to come. In recognition of your excellent work, the supreme

governing body have, in accordance with our suggestion, resolved to increase

your salary, from the beginning of this year, to the sum of 4,000 francs per

annum."

  The considerations which in those days were particularly instrumental in

binding Fritz to Bale were, in the first place, the great personal freedom he

was  allowed  by  the  authorities  and  his  colleagues,  the  great  friendliness

which was shown to him by both, and, above all, the extraordinary reverence

he felt for Jacob Burckhardt. Even Frau Wagner, when she had heard from

my  brother  about  his  refusal  of  the  Greifswald  offer,  wrote  to  him  :  "

Burckhardt was all that mattered to you at Bale."

  But my brother had every reason to feel happy at Bale. Everybody treated

him in the most friendly fashion, and even the haute volee, who were known

as a rule to stand so severely aloof from everything new and strange, made an

exception in his favour. He was constantly invited to the balls and receptions

of this class of the community, and was often the only German present at

these functions. He danced so much during the winter of 1872, that in the

following spring he wrote requesting us to order new evening clothes for himat his tailor's in Naumburg. "Those I am now using are quite worn out with

the exertions of this winter." Privy Councillor Gelzer, of Jena, told me once

that on one occasion during this period a few old patricians of Bale, who

were assembled at some social function, jokingly discussed which member of

their own class was in his manners and bearing the most distinguished of

Bale society ; whereupon old Peter Merian exclaimed in reply : " Not one of

us; the most distinguished is Professor Nietzsche."

  Even my brother's home-life, however, had grown more pleasant; for,

since the autumn of 1872 his friend Dr. Romundt had come to live with him,

and he had also become friendly with Professor Overbeck. True, he had lived

in the same house with this man for two-and-a-half years, but without ever

having  grown  intimate  with  him  a  fact  which  is  best  proved  when  we

remember that my brother never dreamed of taking Overbeck with him to

Richard  "Wagner  at  Tribschen,  whereas  Rohde  and  Gersdorff  were

immediately invited and taken there, even if he was only paying a flying visit.

In fact, he also performed the ceremony in honour of his friendship with

Rohde and Gersdorff the rite of the beneficent demons at Jacob Burckhardt's

house, which was at the opposite end of the town to that in which my brother

lived ; and it never occurred to him to perform this ceremony with Overbeck.

Fritz may have kept aloof from Overbeck all this time because Burckhardt

disliked  the  man  ;  but  what  ultimately  drew  them  together  was  the

circumstance that Overbeck stood up so enthusiastically for my brother after

Wilamowitz's attack an attitude about which Fritz afterwards spoke to me

with as much surprise as gratefulness. But other people as well stood by him

in Bale over the Wilamowitz episode ; for his work was well known to them.

  My brother was considered a distinguished teacher at the University and

the School ; it was often said that his most prominent colleagues at Bale, as

for instance Jacob Burckhardt, had declared that Bale would not get another

teacher so powerful as he for a very long while. He, for his part, was not

wholly content with his work, and was constantly wishing that his pupils

were older. He was held in the highest esteem by the students. Many entered

Bale University merely on his account, swore by him and lavished the most

gentle attentions on him ; while those among their number who were inclined

to  be  poetical  would  lay  a  few  flowers  in  his  room  as  a  token  of  their

admiration. From a work of Ludwig Stein's, I take the following passages as

throwing  further  light  upon  my  brother's  life  at  Bale.  Professor  Stein,  in

describing Fritz's outward appearance while at Bale, begins by saying that hissmart and tasteful dress was certainly to be explained as a mark of attention

to the fair sex.

  I must, however, deny this most emphatically ; and, at the risk of being

accused of rudeness towards my own sex, assure the reader that my brother

never took the slightest trouble with his dress on our account. After his first

early-morning toilet he was always dressed ready to receive any visitor ; his

inborn  and  thorough  cleanliness  and  dignified  grace  made  him  seem

elegantly attired even in the simplest clothes. In those days he never would

wear a dressing-gown and slippers ; in fact, he had contracted a positive

repugnance for such articles of apparel. Stein proceeds as follows in the work

referred  to  above  :  "  Thus,  in  Bale,  as  one  of  his  most  grateful  pupils

informed me, he always appeared carefully and elegantly dressed ; in summer

he wore a white top hat (silver grey felt) ; and if the weather permitted it, his

clothes were always of a light colour. As a University Professor his strength

lay more in the depth than in the range of his influence. His one object was to

discover the most intelligent pupils from among the crowd of the mediocre,

and to lavish particular care upon the former. His favoured pupils looked up

to  him  with  grateful  reverence.  One  of  them,  who  is  now  a  very  highly

esteemed University don, and who in the years 1873-4 attended Nietzsche's

lectures on pre-Platonic Philosophy, and Plato's Life and Works, gave me the

following description of his impressions : ' Nietzsche was then twenty-eight

years old, and the fact that in his mariner he manifested the philosophical

objectivity of an older man therefore seemed all the more peculiar to us. His

delivery  was  slow,  gentle  and  never  pathetic,  and  it  was  frequently

interrupted by thoughtful " artistic pauses," as our terminus technicus had it.

He read his lectures, and always out of fine large books bound in red leather.

He began his Greek classes with us at the School (where, together with Jacob

Burckhardt and Moritz Heyne, he was obliged to teach, in his capacity as a

University  Professor),  with  the  very  hardest  of  Greek  plays,  Aeschylus's

Eumenides. Often, in the school, he would treat us to lectures about Greek

tragedy (his pet subject at that time), about the earliest Greek philosophy,

concerning the philosophy of language, etc., and at times would even make

us deliver extempore lectures or read Grote's History of Greece aloud.' "

  The highest class in the Bale University School, which during the years

1869-1877 consisted only of a few pupils nine to sixteen at the outside had

been somewhat closely united with the University in the old days, and on

leaving it every pupil had been entitled to the matriculation certificate. Fromthis time onwards it had enjoyed various privileges and a much larger amount

of freedom than falls to the lot of the sixth form of a German public school.

For instance, the pupils belonging to it had clubs exactly similar in style to

the student-clubs. The great amount of freedom it enjoyed was shown by the

fact that at times it would play harmless practical jokes upon the masters.

When one of my brother's pupils once told his mother of these things, she

exclaimed : " And do you play such practical jokes upon Professor Nietzsche

too?" "No, of course not," the young man replied indignantly, " for he would

simply despise us if we did." Looking back upon his work as a teacher at

Bale, Fritz wrote in the year 1888 as follows : " During the seven years in

which I taught Greek to the sixth form of the University School at Bale, I

never  had  occasion  to  administer  a  punishment  :  the  laziest  youths  were

diligent in my class."

  My brother's whole personality seemed to act as an exhortation to his

pupils to exercise their power to the utmost. The fact that he paid attention

only  to  the  most  efficient  and  most  gifted  among  them,  while  he  merely

treated the others with a gentle and kind tolerance, acted as a spur to all those

who possessed the smallest spark of self-esteem, and made them strive to do

the very best they could. And he was able to show genuine pleasure when a

youth of inferior capacity suddenly brought him good work.

  The charm of his personality lay in its absolute lack of all " side " and

affectation ; with perfect and noble naturalness he gave himself just as he

was. He had the right to do this others have not. A distinguished old member

of Bale society, Dr. Thurneysen, said to me in the autumn of 1896 : " Your

brother always struck me as a being who had come direct from God's hands,

and was not yet soiled by the dust of the world."

    Although  later  on,  he  judged  them  unfavourably,  his  lectures  on  our

educational  institutions  afforded  my  brother  much  pleasure  while  he  was

delivering them. This was something very different from teaching young men

to whom one was not allowed to say the best things. In the spring of 1872 he

resolved  upon  the  plan  of  interrupting  his  academical  duties  in  order  to

deliver  lectures  upon  the  Ring  before  the  Wagner  Societies  of  the  larger

cities. These lectures were intended principally to assist the Bayreuth scheme,

and also as a means of rousing the German Philistine from his smug self-

sufficiency, and of showing the German scholar clearly what his highest aims

should be as an educator and an imparter of culture to the people.

    Nevertheless,  on  practical  and  other  grounds,  this  lecturing  tour  wasabandoned, as was likewise a literary plan which he had formed soon after

his return from the foundation ceremony of "Wagner's Festival Playhouse at

Bayreuth. The new work was to be called "Reflections of a Hopeful Man",

and later on "Thoughts about the Future and Bayreuth ". All these plans were

abandoned, because they did not seem likely to promote the undertaking at

Bayreuth.

  In his sorrow at the spurious culture of the Germans and their obtuseness

in art matters, my brother turned in the summer of 1872 to the more remote

age of Hellenic culture, and particularly to the sublime figures of the pre-

Platonic philosophers, on whom he gave a course of lectures. He wrote to

Rohde : "At present all sorts of plans fill my brain, and yet I still feel that I

am on one single path I am not really confused. And if only I can find the

time  I  shall  bring  my  thoughts  to  light.  My  study  of  the  pre-Platonic

philosophers this summer has been particularly fruitful."

  As the result of these lectures there was written in the winter of 1872-73

the MS. of a new work. At the beginning of February, 1873, my brother

wrote to me that he was very busy with a new book, the title of which would

probably be, " Greek Philosophy of the Tragic Age," and in a subsequent

letter he wrote in his usual kind way : " Dear Lizzie, let me thank you very

much for your letter. Your joy over the growing book, and your promise to be

here in the summer, have each made an equal claim upon my gratitude, and I

am looking forward to Whitsuntide, when you will be here, and when I also

hope my book will be finished." Concerning the same subject he wrote to

Gersdorff as follows : " I am bringing a new MS. with me to read aloud at

Bayreuth : ' Greek Philosophy of the Tragic Age.' The whole is, however, still

very far from being a proper book. I become every day more critical towards

myself, and must wait another long spell yet, before attempting a further

elaboration of my theme. [This constituted the fourth attempt at the same

theme.] I was obliged to pursue the very queerest studies for this work. Even

mathematics  were  touched  upon  without  causing  any  terrors,  as  well  as

mechanics  and  the  atomic  theory  in  chemistry,  etc.  I  have  once  more

convinced myself in the most splendid manner as to what the Greeks are and

were. The ground covered between Thales and Socrates is enormous."

  My  brother  had  the  intention  at  some  future  date  of  writing  an

independent work on the pre-Platonic philosophers, out of these notes, which

in the first place were planned to serve the purpose only of a short historical

summary of the Greek philosophers before Socrates, to form part of a greatphilosophical work. Professor E. Holzer speaks as follows concerning this

question : " From the very start, however, the historical summary was not an

end in itself ; originally what he [Nietzsche] wished to do was rather to make

this monograph take its place in a great whole, and to develop and expound

his views on philosophy in general, on its relation to science and art, on its

teleology,  and  finally  on  the  fundamental  problems  of  epistemology,  in

connection with these selected philosophical personages. For he thought he

could  recognise  a  perfectly  distinct  type  in  these  more  ancient  Hellenic

philosophers, compared with which those that came later, and whom tradition

regarded as forming the zenith of the development of Hellenic thought, were,

in  his  opinion,  only  half-castes,  or,  to  use  one  of  his  later  expressions,

decadents. If, in tragedy, the art of the fifth and sixth centuries appeared to

him in a new light, the question was, What kind of philosophy did the Greeks

of this age expound ? What was philosophy to them in that age ; what can it

mean to us, and can it mean anything to us at all ? Thus the book was to be a

sequel to The Birth of Tragedy, and from among the many titles that were

thought of for it, none expresses the subject of the contents so briefly and

perfectly as, ' The Justification of Philosophy through the Greeks.' "

                CHAPTER XXII "THOUGHTS OUT OF SEASON"

  AT Easter, 1873, my brother went to Bayreuth. His friend Rohde had

written to him from Kiel suggesting to him that they should spend the week

before Easter together somewhere in central Germany. With great delight my

brother  wrote  back  proposing  that  Rohde  should  join  him  on  a  visit  to

Bayreuth. At that time the Bayreuth scheme seemed to be in very low water,

and there were fears that the whole plan would fall to the ground, for in spite

of all the efforts that had been made, scarcely two hundred certificates of

patronage had been allotted (my brother had been a patron since 1872). But

one thousand certificates of patronage (at 300 talers apiece), or, better still,

thirteen hundred, were necessary in order to put the undertaking securely on

its  legs.  Even  in  Wagner's  own  house,  therefore,  the  friends  encountered

somewhat serious and gloomy spirits, and this made such a deep impression

upon my brother that, on the return journey to Bale, he was in the saddest of

moods. He wrote as follows concerning this journey : " I spent the second day

of Easter in Nuremberg, and felt just as well, bodily, as I was thoroughly

depressed spiritually. Everybody seemed to be out in his best, and the sun

was so beautifully autumnal and mild ! In the night I made a dash for Lindau,

and at five in the morning, while the stars and the rising sun were at war inthe heavens, I crossed the Lake of Constance, reached the falls of the Rhine

near Schaffhausen in good tune, and had lunch there. I was seized with fresh

melancholy, and in this mood journeyed home."

  He grew very sad at heart indeed, and reproached himself deeply. His

friends were suffering, the great work was threatening to fall to pieces, and

all the while he had been breathing the air of the remote heights -of ancient

Greek philosophy, very far removed from the struggles and disappointments

of the community at Bayreuth. Almost shamefaced, he laid aside the book

upon which he was at work, " Greek Philosophy in the Tragic Age," and felt

distinctly that it was his duty to play his part in the struggle of the day. Full of

indignation, he asked himself what could account for the fact that such a

great thought should not be understood by the Germans, and the reply seemed

to him to be that the German Philistine of Culture in his smug content was

satisfied with the paltriness of his age, and had lost the sense of everything

truly great. The fact that his concern about Bayreuth led him to write these

Thoughts out of Season can be gathered from a number of his private notes

written at the time (" . . . my despair about Bayreuth ; I can see nothing which

is not full of shame ; profound meditation has led me to discover that I have

lighted upon the most fundamental problem of all culture "). From these same

notes we can also see the reason why he chose precisely David Strauss as the

type of a Philistine of Culture who in those materialistic days, after the war,

made the German almost incapable of a higher culture : " Tension of feeling

over the production of the first of the Thoughts out of Season. Anxiety about

the  genius  and  his  work,  and  in  addition  the  spectacle  of  Strauss's  self-

complacency ! The falsity of all spiritual diet. The paralysis of all knights of

knowledge ! Morality tottering, both in its sense of right and in its sense of

wrong, and the indomitable lust of low pleasures ! Sham happiness ! "

  It seemed to him as if the German had grown a degree more dishonest,

more greedy of favours, more grasping and more thoughtless since t the war,

and  it  depressed  him  to  see  that  the  free-thinking,  venerable  theologian

should glorify this state of affairs and be the herald of public self-sufficiency.

In no direction did he see anyone calling attention to the dangers that the

military triumph might mean to German culture. The triumphant German, and

the non-combatants in particular who had not, by means of severe military

discipline,  converted  their  coarseness  into  strength  and  courage,  and  who

now, sitting at the tables of their beer houses, boasted of their victories and

declared that German culture had conquered, were really a disagreeable sight.Germany had triumphed, because in our country men are still to be found

who can command and who can obey ; but neither German education, and

still less German culture, had been in any way victorious in the recent war.

My brother did France the honour of fully acknowledging her possession of a

real culture that had been forming for centuries; for "Culture is before all

things, the unity of artistic style, in every expression of the life of a people."

This might certainly be said of the French, but not of the Germans of the

period,  although  Fritz  showed  quite  conclusively  that  the  German  people

knew more and had learned more than the French. He writes : "It was simply

to the more extensive knowledge of German officers, to the superior training

of  their  soldiers,  and  to  their  more  scientific  military  strategy,  that  all

impartial judges, and even the French nation, in the end, ascribed the victory.

Hence, if it be intended to regard German erudition as a thing apart, in what

sense can German culture be said to have conquered ? In none whatsoever ;

for the moral qualities of severe discipline, of placid obedience, have nothing

in common with culture. Such virtues were characteristic of the Macedonian

army, for instance, despite the fact that the Greek soldiers were infinitely

more cultivated."

  These questions, concerning the relation of education to culture and to

national vitality, which had not yet been solved, pressed upon my brother

with  extraordinary  force.  No  one  could  have  been  more  earnest  or  more

serious  about  them  than  he,  for,  whatever  people  may  say,  he  loved  his

German Fatherland. All his passionate reproaches are only the utterances of

his loving heart. He wished to see the Germans really great, filled with and

transfigured  by  a  genuine  culture  ;  it  was  his  ambition  to  conjure  up  a

German culture. The German must not deceive himself ; he must look truth

bravely in the face, recognise his own imperfections, and not shun a struggle

with his weaknesses and perversities. And this the German can do because he

is brave. And how delighted my brother was to unite his highest hopes for the

Germans with this virtue of theirs is shown by the deep pride with which he

wrote to his friend Gersdorff, who had returned home from the war : " Now

new duties beckon to us, and if there is one thing that will remain with us in

time of peace from out those wild days of war, it will be the heroic and at the

same time sober mind, which, to my surprise, I found with all the joy of a

beautiful unexpected discovery, still fresh and powerful and with all its old

Germanic vigour in our army. On such a foundation things can be built. We

may begin to hope afresh. Our German mission is not yet over ! I feel morefull of courage than ever 1^' Was this bravery now going to lead the Germans

to an independent culture ? Even in those days he was confronted with the

profound problem that high culture and warlike vigour are but rarely found

together in a nation, though they are often found opposed to each other. Thus

he thought that the daily life of the German, who was so brave in war, was

both petty and wretched in its inartistic dullness, and he therefore declared : "

The German is magnificent in war ; he is admirable as an astute investigator

and scholar, removed from the world ; but otherwise he is hardly a pleasing

person." Now one can imagine how David Strauss' s transfiguration of the

German Culture Philistine's self-complacency must have affected him.

  The  greater  part  of  the  first  of  the  Thoughts  out  of  Season,  "David

Strauss, the Confessor and the Writer," was composed with extraordinary

rapidity ; then, however, the completion of the work met with all kinds of

difficulties.

  During the year 1872 his health had been excellent. Despite the severe

shock his constitution had received through the campaign and through illness,

he believed he had quite recovered the "bear-like " health of his youth. But

the year 1873 proved this to be an error. The trouble began with a bad attack

of influenza which tormented him for over a month. In those days the illness

was called " la grippe."

  After this, his short-sightedness considerably increased in the spring, and

was accompanied by pains in the eyes and in the head. Baron von Gersdorff,

who, owing to an attack of malaria, and also, as he himself said, " in order to

fulfil a serious friendly duty," had returned from Italy much earlier than he

had  intended,  describes  my  brother's  condition  exhaustively  in  a  letter  to

Rohde dated the 24th of May, 1873 : " Nietzsche worked so hard, wrote and

read so much last term, more particularly for his pre-Platonic philosophy, and

also for the Strauss essay, written in a diminutive scrawl, that now severe

pain in his eyes prevents him from continuing his work after he has been at it

only an hour and a half. On Wagner's birthday (May 22nd) I went with him to

the oculist. The latter declared that the right eye was so weak that it could do

no work at all, while the left eye, which had to do all the work alone, was

excessively  short-sighted.  He  earnestly  entreated  Nietzsche  to  abstain

absolutely from all reading and writing for a fortnight, and to bathe his eyes.

But Nietzsche will not interrupt his work at the University School ; nor will

he cease lecturing. He can manage the School quite well; but a new mode of

procedure  had  to  be  thought  out  for  the  University.  And  we  have  nowdiscovered it. I play the part of assistant, and secretary, and I read aloud. I

read the necessary passages for the lecture aloud to him ; the customary slip

of  paper  containing  the  quotations  is  done  away  with  altogether,  and  all

indispensable  quotations  are  learnt  by  heart.  Yesterday  he  made  the  first

experiment on the new plan, and in my opinion it succeeded brilliantly.

  With  his  eyes  concealed  behind  grey  opaque  glasses,  and  his  short-

sighted vision thus almost entirely cut off from the visible world, while I take

possession of his note-book so that the doctor's prescription may be followed

to the letter, Nietzsche is thrown entirely upon himself ; and we found that he

spoke more clearly, more eloquently, and with more concentration upon his

theme, than when he has to refer from time to time to his note-book for

quotations. He will probably have to go on like this for a fortnight or more."

  This oculist, then, Professor Schiess, expressed the same opinion about

him as Professor Schillbach of Jena had formerly done when, as a twelve-

year-old schoolboy, Fritz had been sent to him from Pforta ; one of his eyes

was weak, and the other was overstrained through doing all the work. The

oculists who examined him later also maintained that the cause of his eye

trouble was to be ascribed to excessive strain. This excessive strain, however,

began to affect his general condition only after his strong constitution, and

particularly his excellent digestive system, had been weakened by the results

of his severe illness after the campaign ; for then his optic nerves and his

brain were no longer sufficiently nourished for the heavy work and pressure

imposed upon them. On the 26th of June, Gersdorff continued his report of

my brother's trouble as follows : " When the fortnight was over, Nietzsche

tried to write ; but it was no good, and exasperating pain drove him once

more  to  the  oculist  who,  this  time,  prescribed  a  complete  rest,  until  the

summer vacation, and eye-drops of atropine. This drug is a clear vegetable

juice.  It  is  dropped  delicately  into  the  eye,  over  which  it  spreads,  and  it

immediately enlarges the pupil to double its size an almost terrifying sight ! It

is said that vain people use this drug as a means of beautifying their eyes. In

Nietzsche's case it serves the purpose of paralysing the muscles of the eye, in

order to give them rest and time to recoup. He now wears the blackest of sun

glasses to shield his eyes from the light. Nevertheless, he suffers from the

intensity of the light in this place, which seems to me positively tropical.

Meanwhile, thanks to the rest and to the atropine treatment, his sight has

much improved, and he can now wear No. glasses for work for which six

weeks ago No. glasses were inadequate. His sister is here to console him. Wedo our utmost to make the time seem short on his hands."

  Since the 5th of May I had been in Bale, where I usually stayed for some

time in the summer, and did my best to keep my brother from his studies. We

took  long  walks  together,  and  on  two  of  these  we  were  joined  by  Jacob

Burckhardt. This old friend made these excursions particularly festive, for on

both  occasions  he  was  extraordinarily  cheerful  and  in  the  highest  spirits.

Once, for instance, we went to Pratteln ; partook of food, drank beer and

Burckhardt told us a fairy tale he had composed himself, called " The Trout

Queen." It was our intention to order trout for our meal that led to this story ;

but unfortunately there was no trout to be had. Baron von Gersdorff, who

accompanied us on this excursion, wrote in 1897 to ask me why I had not

referred  to  this  splendid  walk  in  the  biography  of  my  brother,  as  he  still

remembered  a  host  of  most  amusing  incidents  in  connection  with  it.  Our

walks  with  Burckhardt,  however,  came  to  an  end,  for  he  assumed  as  it

happened quite mistakenly that Overbeck was going to take Gersdorff's place

on our excursions.

  At Whitsun my brother and I went to Strassburg, of whose cathedral he

was particularly fond ; and later on we spent a few weeks together at Flims in

Graubimden,  whither  he  had  gone  in  advance  of  me  with  Baron  von

Gersdorff and Romundt. On the 9th August, Gersdorff wrote to Rohde as

follows concerning this journey : " The fears which you expressed in your

last letter that our friend could not continue to fulfil his fatiguing duties were

at  last  shared  by  the  oculist,  who  quickly  ordered  him  to  anticipate  his

holidays.  So  your  letter,  for  which  I  now  send  you  my  belated  thanks,

reached  me  only  when  we  were  already  breathing  the  glorious  air  of  the

woods at our house near Flims, and were convinced that we had taken the

proper course. Now a month has almost elapsed without our having felt in the

slightest degree discontented with our lot, and I hope that the peace and quiet,

the regular mode of life, the breathing of the splendid air of the woods, daily

baths  in  the  beautiful  shaded  lake  of  Cauma,  wholesome  food,  company

which  is  not  too  exacting,  and  finally  intercourse  with  the  works  of  the

greatest  and  best  writers,  Wagner,  Goethe,  and  Plutarch,  together  with

interesting conversation, will have a salutary effect upon our friend's eyes and

nerves.  It  is  true  that  there  recur  from  time  to  time  attacks  of  so-called

'accommodation  cramp'  of  the  muscles  of  the  eye;  but  the  eyes  are

considerably  stronger,  and  with  continued  care  the  pain  will  certainly

disappear altogether. Romundt has been here for about three weeks, and isenjoying the ' pointless ' existence with us very much indeed. To-morrow he

is going to leave us, because his eagerness to get to work no longer allows

him any peace."

  Films, on Lake Cauma, in Graubinden, is the beautiful spot with, the little

old castle, already mentioned in the last chapter in connection with the plan

which we formed at one time to establish a lay monastery of free spirits.

  With the assistance of his excellent friend Gersdorff , my brother was

able to get the MS. of the essay "David Strauss, the Confessor and the Writer

" ready for the press, and in July and August it was already printed. The two

friends, Gersdorff and Romundt, read the proofs very carefully, and were

subsequently  very  cross,  because  in  spite  of  their  pains,  some  faults  had

escaped their notice. At last on the 8th of August, the first advance copy of

the  book  reached  Flims  an  event  which  led  to  a  ceremony  organised  by

Gersdorff.  In  a  letter  to  Rohde  on  the  9th  August,  he  describes  it  very

charmingly : " At half-past three we set out upon the green Lake of Cauma ;

we  engraved  the  initials  '  U.  B.  I.  F.  N.  8/8  1873  '  on  some  marble,

whereupon we swam to a rock which rose up out of the green water in the

middle of the lake. There we quickly engraved the initials of our names, and

then remained for a while on the delightful Rheingold rock. The smile of the

rising sun was mirrored in the dark depths out of which the rock rises. After

the bath we poured a libation of wine over the first stone and its inscription,

and read Leopardi's Ricordanze and ad un vincitore net pallone. The evening

was heavenly in its clearness and purity. It was a day we shall never forget.

Thus we commemorated the Antistraussiad. Now let the adversaries advance.

Let them all go to the devil ! "

  These adversaries soon appeared in surprising numbers ; there were more

of  them  than  my  brother  and  his  friends  had  expected.  In  later  years,

however, he liked to recall this first passage of arms. In the year 1888 he

described the whole course of events in the most exhaustive manner in Ecce

Homo, though in much more trenchant language than he used in 1873 : " The

four essays composing the Thoughts out of Season are thoroughly warlike in

tone. They prove that I was no mere dreamer, that I delight in drawing the

sword  and  perhaps,  also,  that  my  wrist  is  dangerously  supple.  The  first

onslaught (1873) was directed against German culture, upon which I looked

down  even  at  that  time  with  unmitigated  contempt.  Without  either  sense,

substance, or goal, it was simply ' public opinion.' There could be no more

dangerous misunderstanding than to suppose that Germany's success at armsproved anything in favour of German culture and still less the triumph of this

culture over that of France. . . .

  " Of these four attacks, the first met with extraordinary success. The stir

which it created was in every way gorgeous. I had put my finger on the

vulnerable spot of a triumphant nation I had told it that its victory was not a

red-letter day for culture, but, perhaps, something very different. The reply

rang out from all sides, and certainly not only from old friends of David

Strauss, whom I had made ridiculous as the type of a German Philistine of

Culture  and  a  man  of  smug  self-content  in  short,  as  the  author  of  that

suburban gospel of his, called The Old and the New Faith (the term Philistine

of Culture passed into the current language of Germany after the appearance

of  my  book).  These  old  friends,  whose  vanity  as  Wurtemburgians  and

Swabians I had deeply wounded in regarding their unique animal, their bird

of Paradise, as a trifle comic, replied to me as ingenuously and as grossly as I

could have wished. The Prussian replies were smarter ; they contained more

Prussian  blue.  The  most  disreputable  attitude  was  assumed  by  a  Leipzig

paper, the egregious Grenzboten ; and it cost me some pains to prevent my

indignant  friends  in  Bale  from  taking  action  against  it.  Only  a  few  old

gentlemen  decided  in  my  favour,  and  for  very  diverse  and  sometimes

unaccountable  reasons.  Among  them  was  one,  Ewald  of  Gottingen,  who

made it clear that my attack on Strauss had been deadly. There was also the

Hegelian, Bruno Bauer, who from that time became one of my most attentive

readers. In his later years he liked to refer to me, when, for instance, he

wanted to give Herr von Treitschke, the Prussian historiographer, a hint as to

where he could obtain information about the notion ' Culture,' of which he

(Herr von T ) had completely lost sight. The weightiest and longest notice of

my book and its author appeared in Wurzburg, and was written by Professor

Hoffman, an old pupil of the philosopher von Baader. The essays made him

foresee a great future for me, namely, that of bringing about a sort of crisis

and decisive turning-point in the problem of atheism, of which he recognised

in me the most instinctive and most radical advocate. It was atheism that had

drawn  me  to  Schopenhauer.  The  review  which  received  by  far  the  most

attention,  and  which  excited  the  most  bitterness,  was  an  extraordinarily

powerful and plucky appreciation of my work by Carl Hillebrand, a man who

was usually so mild, and the last humane German who knew how to wield a

pen. The article appeared in the Augsburg Gazette, and it can be read to-day

couched in rather more cautious language, among his collected essays. In itmy work was referred to as an event, as a decisive turning-point, as the first

sign of an awakening, as an excellent symptom, and as an actual revival of

German earnestness and of German passion in things spiritual. Hillebrand

could speak only in terms of the highest respect of the form of my book, of its

consummate taste, of its perfect tact in discriminating between persons and

causes  ;  he  characterised  it  as  the  best  polemical  work  in  the  German

language the best performance in the art of polemics, which for Germans is

so  dangerous  and  so  strongly  to  be  deprecated.  Besides  confirming  my

standpoint, he laid even greater stress upon what I had dared to say about the

deterioration of language in Germany (nowadays writers assume the airs of

purists and can no longer even construct a sentence) ; sharing my contempt

for the literary stars of this nation, he concluded by expressing his admiration

for my courage that greatest courage of all which places the very favourites

of the people in the dock. . . . The aftereffects of this essay of mine proved

invaluable to me in my life. No one has ever tried to meddle with me since.

People are silent. In Germany I am treated with gloomy caution : for years I

have rejoiced in the privilege of such absolute freedom of speech, as no one

nowadays,  least  of  all  in  the  Empire,  has  enough  liberty  to  claim.  My

paradise is in the shadow of my sword. At bottom all I had done was to put

one  of  Stendhal's  maxims  into  practice  :  he  advises  one  to  make  one's

entrance into society by means of a duel."

  In the above memoir my brother forgets only one fact, which is that there

was a time when he was very sorry that he had written the book. David

Strauss died at the beginning of the year 1874, and owing to some casual

remark made in my brother's presence, the latter somehow got it into his head

that the old theologian fretted himself to death over his attack. It is true that

everybody, and I in particular, contradicted this notion most emphatically : I

assured him that as the old man had been suffering for some time, his friends

would certainly have kept all knowledge of the book from him ; but though

this appeased my brother somewhat, the most grievous doubts remained in

his  mind  on  the  subject,  and  he  wrote  to  Gersdorff  :  "  Yesterday  David

Strauss was buried at Ludwigsburg. I sincerely hope that I did not darken his

last days, and that he died without knowing anything about me. I feel deeply

concerned about it."

  But no ! David Strauss did not die of a broken heart ! I wish my brother

had  been  able  to  read  some  passages  out  of  Strauss's  letters,  which  were

published posthumously, and then he would have seen what small reasonthere  was  to  have  been  distressed,  and  how  little  Strauss  and  others

understood the fight he was making and his whole manner of setting about it.

For my brother was able to attack a man publicly only when there was not the

slightest  personal  difference  between  him  and  the  man  he  assailed,  and

precisely in regard to this first essay of the Thoughts out of Season he writes

concerning this peculiar trait in his nature as follows : " My war tactics can be

reduced to four principles : First, I attack only things that are triumphant if

necessary  I  wait  until  they  are  triumphant.  Secondly,  I  attack  only  those

things  against  which  I  find  no  allies,  against  which  I  stand  alone  against

which I compromise nobody but myself. . . . I have not yet taken one single

step  before  the  public  eye,  which  did  not  compromise  me  :  that  is  my

criterion of a proper mode of action. Thirdly, I never make personal attacks I

use a personality merely as a magnifying-glass, by means of which I render a

general, but elusive and scarcely noticeable, evil more apparent. In this way I

attacked David Strauss, or rather the success given to a senile book by the

cultured classes of Germany by this means I caught German culture red-

handed."

  Despite all these warlike words and sentiments, I must admit that my

brother was not at all suited to the role of a warrior " whose paradise is in the

shadow of his sword." So long as the type he was fighting remained to some

extent an impersonal phantom, he was full of the most cheerful lust of battle.

But if any word, or any kind of description, suddenly made this type appear

before him as a man with a sensitive heart, surrounded by admiring friends

then  his  sympathetic  nature  felt  only  pity  for  the  type  become  flesh  and

blood, and he suffered beneath the heavy blows of his own sword much more

than the enemy he had assailed. At such times he would exclaim : "I was not

made to hate and to be an enemy." The year 1873 was very fruitful : in

addition to the essay already mentioned, " Greek philosophy of the Tragic

Age," and the first of the Thoughts out of Season, a number of notes show

how full of new ideas his mind was at this period. The short essay " On Truth

and Falsity in their Ultra moral Sense" was written in the summer of 1873,

and, as the proofs show, it was also intended to form an integral part of the

book  on  the  philosophers.  Later  on,  it  is  true,  he  thought  of  making  an

independent essay out of it which might possibly have been introduced into

the frame of the Thoughts out of Season. What his reasons were for changing

his mind on this point cannot now be ascertained. At any rate, it is a great

pity  that  it  was  never  elaborated  and  published  at  that  period,  the  laterNietzsche  would  then  have  been  more  easily  understood,  and  the

misunderstanding of a " development by fits and starts " to which superficial

writers gave rise, would have been avoided.

  From all this it may be gathered how little my brother spared his eyes,

once they had slightly recovered their strength. The oculist ought to have told

him to be much more careful ; but the real cause of his trouble was not

known then, and the other doctors always treated him for stomach trouble,

nerves, and brain fag, when all the time it was the overstraining of his eyes

that produced those terrible headaches which from this time forward began to

torment him, and continued to do so, at intervals of three to four weeks, and

even  oftener  still  when  he  was  feeling  low.  I  always  advised  him  most

earnestly to train somebody to write from his dictation; but he could not get

himself  to  do  this.  He  declared  that  any  other  man  than  Gersdorff,  who,

however, was but seldom at his disposal, would disturb him in his dictating

and alter his style. That " undulating quality " in the style of Goethe's latter

days he believed to have been caused by dictating.

  And now other claims were made upon him. At Wagner's suggestion, the

Wagner Societies approached' my brother with the request that he should

compose an Appeal to the German Nation on behalf of Bayreuth ; but I shall

refer to this later.

  In the autumn he wrote the second essay of the Thoughts out of Season,

and at Christmas brought the MS. almost finished to Naumburg with the view

of reading it to me. My brother attached particular importance to my hearing

his work before it went to press. Once Overbeck asked him why this was. He

said that I discovered certain things : <( My sister listens not only with her

ears and with her understanding, but also with her heart." In Naumburg he

wrote the conclusion of the second essay.

The last months of the year 1873 were, once more not very favourable as far

as his health went ; but the Christmas holidays considerably improved his

condition. He wrote as follows concerning them : " They were pleasant and

peaceful days, and I am quite sure that my health improved while I was with

you, particularly my nerves." The change from his usual mode of life, the rest

and  cure  given  to  his  eyes,  the  altered  climate,  pleasant  and  cheerful

company, and our mother's good cooking, all had a share in improving his

health  maybe,  too,  his  joy  at  having  finished  the  second  essay  of  the

Thoughts out of Season so happily. For after having read it aloud he was

convinced that it was a success.  The  attention  roused  by  the  second  essay,  "  The  Use  and  Abuse  of

History," was just as small as the stir caused by the first had been great. And

it was precisely this essay which later on became, and continued to be the

most unseasonable of them all, that has been most highly valued generally,

and has certainly exercised the greatest influence. This is an example of how

differently  contemporary  readers  and  posterity  often  judge  things.  It  is

precisely this second essay which penetrates most deeply into the aspirations

of modern science and reveals its advantages and its great disadvantages.

Fifteen years later in Ecce Homo, my brother wrote as follows concerning

this essay, and it will be observed that, in comparison with what he says

about his other works, this reference to the "Use and abuse of History " is

very short : " The second essay (1874) brings to light that which is dangerous,

that which corrodes and poisons life in our manner of pursuing scientific

study. Life is diseased, thanks to this dehumanised piece of clockwork and

mechanism,  thanks  to  the  '  impersonally  '  of  the  workman,  and  the  false

economy of the ' division of labour.' The object, which is culture, is lost sight

of ; modern scientific activity as a means thereto simply produces barbarism.

In this treatise, the ' historical sense,' of which this century is so proud, is for

the first time recognised as sickness, as a typical symptom of decay."

  The  essay  was  published  in  February,  1874,  and  was  received  coldly

even, by his own friends especially those at Bayreuth. I believe that even at

that time Wagner felt somewhat bitterly " how very much Nietzsche went his

own sweet way," and that he had absolutely no intention of being merely the

herald of "Wagner's fame and intentions, as the latter would have liked.

    Considered  superficially,  the  first  two  essays  give  one  rather  the

impression of negation ; but a deeper reading of them soon proves the error

of this view. Professor Holzer therefore shows a good understanding of the

spirit lying at the bottom of these two essays when he says : " He [Nietzsche]

had to give vent to his feelings : the loathing of the culture peculiar to the age

of bubble companies, distressed him. But, as he himself says in Zarathustra

(Part  3,  p.  250),  '  loathing  itself  createth  wings  and  fountain-  divining

powers.' "

  The  essence  of  these  essays  is  not  really  negation.  Despite  his  own

remarks in the second volume of his Letters (p. 445), the author feels that his

power and his courage give him a right to enter the lists and to fight spiritedly

for a higher German culture. A tremendously powerful kind of optimism is

breathed from these first essays ; how can anybody help but recognise the "Yeasayer," the fierce love of the German nation, and the profound belief in

their future, in these pages? Nietzsche himself still believes in friends and

comrades in this war ; he dreams of a " society of strangers to the age," and

drafts out its regulations ; he still believes that with Schopenhauer, Wagner

and Neo-Hellenism, he will be able to stir the waters of Acheron.

              CHAPTER XXIII SCHOPENHAUER AS EDUCATOR

  SINCE the summer of 1870 my brother and I had made it a habit always

to spend the summer months together. In the year 1871, however, we not

only spent the summer, but also the winter together, because he was so ill

after his experiences in the campaign, that he took me to Italy with him. In

that year he recovered comparatively quickly, and was pleased to see how

well I adapted myself to his life in Bale. And thus he took it for granted that I

ought to spend every summer with him, as my presence was, to use his own

expression,  "  in  every  way  conducive  to  his  happiness."  Henceforward,

therefore, he always requested our mother to allow me to go to Bale for the

summer. The negotiations about this matter were generally carried on during

the  Christmas  holidays,  and  I  must  say  that,  as  far  as  my  brother  was

concerned, they were conducted very diplomatically ; for our mother was

very easily offended and was also exceedingly jealous that Fritz should be so

keen to have me with him, and that I should leave her alone for six months at

home, in order to go to him. In spite of all his diplomacy, it actually did come

to quarrels at times between mother and son, and in order to throw a cheerful

light on the whole affair, Fritz used to call these differences of opinion " The

fight  between  the  Trojans  and  Danaans  for  Helen."  It  is  true  that  she

persistently declared that I might do as I liked, but until the very last minute

she would put difficulties in the way of my going. This is what happened

once more in the spring of 1874, until Fritz wrote that my presence was

absolutely essential if he were to derive any benefit from his holidays. He

was not in any way indisposed on the contrary ; for during the first quarter of

the year he had written saying that his health was excellent ; but he was not

pleased with himself. When at last I reached Bale on the 24th April, I found

him rather depressed in spirits. He spoke with real concern about his great

plans for the future and about works which he had in mind but for which his

spiritual  gifts  were  inadequate.  Thus,  before  my  arrival  at  Bale,  he  had

written to Gersdorff on the 1st of April : " DEAR OLD FRIEND, If only you

did not have a much too high opinion of me ! I almost fancy that one day you

will be disappointed in me; and I will straightway begin to effect this changein you, by telling you from the bottom of my heart that I do not deserve a

single word of the praise you have lavished upon me. If only you knew how

despondent and how melancholy I feel about myself as a productive creature

! I desire nothing more than a little freedom, a little genuine breath of life,

and I am on my guard, I am in revolt, against the host, the countless host, of

constraints that I am not yet rid of. It is useless to think of genuine production

so long as one is not freed, however slightly, from one's trammels, from the

pain and oppression of embarrassment. Shall I ever attain to that freedom ? It

is extremely doubtful. The goal is too far away and even if one reaches it in

the end, it is generally at the cost of one's strength, spent in long seeking and

struggling. Then one attains to freedom with one's spirits as flat as those of a

short-lived butterfly at evening. I am terrified at this. It is a misfortune to be

so conscious of one's struggle so early in life ! I cannot, like the artist or the

ascetic,  balance  my  doubts  by  means  of  great  deeds.  How  wretched  and

loathsome this monotonous wailing is to me ! For the moment I am really

very, very tired of everything more than tired.

  " My health, by-the-bye, is excellent : do not be anxious on that account.

But I am not quite satisfied with Nature, who ought to have given me a little

more intellect as well as a more overflowing heart. I am keenly aware of this,

and to know it is the greatest torture a man can have. Regular work in an

official post is so good, because it leads to a certain obtuseness, and then one

suffers less."

    Shortly after my arrival, however, he recovered his pride and good spirits,

declaring  that  I  had  such  a  splendid  way  of  infusing  him  with  cheerful

confidence. But how could this confidence have helped coming to him, after

he had read me the MS. of his third essay for the Thoughts out of Season, and

had himself felt in the reading of it how magnificent was its promise. After

this he could not even remember the period of discouragement through which

he had gone, and therefore wrote to Gersdorff on the 8th May, in reply to an

anxious letter from his old friend : " I must have created a false impression by

my last letter : as you know, that was not the language of depression, but, at

most, of a kind of resignation which as yet is not devoid of desire and of

phantasy." And then he proceeded : " My sister is staying with me at present,

and together we dream of the most beautiful plans for an idyllic, industrious

and  simple  life  in  the  future."  When,  however,  his  friend  still  refused  to

believe that he was quite well, he wrote to him on the 1st of June that he was

really cross because Gersdorff would not credit the fact that he was "well," "normal,"  and  "  quite  fit."  But  in  his  letter  of  the  8th  of  May  he  already

revealed the true reason of his cheerful spirits as follows : " Meanwhile I

have got so far with my third essay for the Thoughts out of Season, that if

you were here, the final casting might be begun ; the summer term, however,

keeps me busy now, and that is why, as there is no hurry, I have laid this MS.

aside for a while. The title (between ourselves !) is, ' Schopenhauer among

the Germans.' It will be fine, I can tell you ! "

  With all the fluctuations of spirit which mark this period, it seems to me

that  it  might  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  turning-point  in  my  brother's

development.  As  the  letter  to  Gersdorff  shows,  he  had  the  most  modest

opinion of his gifts, despite the enormous demands he made upon himself;

and graphologists declare that this is revealed even by his handwriting of the

period. But his modesty was particularly touching when he compared himself

with  people  he  loved  and  honoured  ;  he  transfigured  these  into  perfectly

marvellous prodigies, while he was ruthlessly critical towards himself. The

result was perforce a lack of proportion. In 1878 he poked fun at himself by

writing that such gifted creatures as he had imagined geniuses to be, have

never existed.

  He had been busy with the essay on Schopenhauer since the beginning of

the  year  1874,  and  the  greater  the  scale  of  the  work  became,  the  more

despondent he felt about it. But, strange to say, just when he had reached, so

to speak, the lowest ebb of self-contempt, he unconsciously attained other

results.  The  following  notes  and  aphorisms  will  show  what  his  inner

experiences of this period were, as also the course taken by his inquiring

mind  on  the  way  to  self-emancipation  :  "  First  we  believe  a  particular

philosopher ; then we say that however wrong he may be in the proof of his

propositions, the propositions themselves are true. Finally we say that it does

not matter what his propositions are, the nature of the man himself is as good

as a hundred systems. As a teacher he may have been wrong over and over

again ; but the essence of his doctrine is right, and we shall hold by that.

There  is  something  about  a  philosopher  which  can  never  belong  to  a

philosophy, i.e., the cause of many philosophies the great man.

  "  I  reached  the  highest  point  in  pathos  when  I  depicted  the

Schopenhauerian  man  the  destructive  genius  opposed  to  all  learning.  In

compensation I needed the constructive metaphysical artist who causes one to

dream  beautiful  dreams  in  the  midst  of  such  a  sinister  occupation.

Dissatisfaction with the tragic mode of thought increased."  In these notes he suggests repeatedly how Schopenhauer hampered him,

despite the reverence he felt for him, or precisely on that account ; and yet

Schopenhauer was not only an educator to him, but also an emancipator; for

while  my  brother  wrote  about  the  philosopher,  his  idea  of  the  latter  was

changed. He put his own distress and salvation into ardent language, and read

them into the character of the philosopher. Hence he was able to say with

gratitude:  "  I  am  far  from  supposing  that  I  ever  thoroughly  understood

Schopenhauer ; but through him I was enabled to understand myself, alone, a

little better; that is why I feel so deeply indebted to him."

  The memory of one of our most cheerful holiday trips is associated with

the production of the third essay of the Thoughts out of Season. We had

arranged to make a pleasant excursion, during the Whitsuntide holidays, to

Schaffhausen, the Falls of the Rhine, the Lake of Constance, and Uberlingen

and Heiligenberg, but we only got as far as the Falls of the Rhine, for we

were  exceptionally  pleased  by  the  hotel  opposite  the  Falls  which  is  so

beautifully situated. We discovered some lovely walks, explored the whole

neighbourhood, and had an extraordinary amount of harmless amusement.

  Anyone who did not frequent my brother's company for a long period

could scarcely imagine how much childlike good cheer and guileless fun lay

in his nature. Yet I must admit that he laughed with no one so much as with

me, and that is why he found my company so refreshing and so helpful in re-

establishing the equilibrium between reality and concentrated thinking.

  The  conclusion  of  this  little  tour  afforded  another  example  of  our

guilelessness even in other directions. We had arranged our day, our time-

table and our menus according to our own taste ; and in Switzerland, where it

is customary to arrange for inclusive terms, this was the most unpractical

thing we could possibly have done. We knew this from hard experience ; but

Fritz had a great aversion from every kind of table d'hote (he called it the

browsing  of  herds),  and  therefore  did  not  readily  acquiesce  in  such

arrangements. The hotel in which we lived was a first-class hotel-de-luxe,

and the bill which was presented to us for all the lunches and dinners we had

taken a part can therefore readily be imagined. We stared in astonishment at

the account that was laid before us ; we were most surprised that our simple

holiday should have cost us so much money. "Lizzie," Fritz said to me, in

mock solemnity, " one always has to pay dearly for grazing away from the

herd."  We  had  to  abandon  the  continuation  of  our  tour  to  the  Lake  of

Constance, as we had not brought enough money with us, and feeling verycrestfallen we were forced to return home earlier than we expected.

  Now, does it not seem extraordinary that throughout this extremely jolly

time  my  brother  completed  the  greater  part  of  a  book  in  which,  almost

unconsciously, he wrote down his whole self and all his inmost experiences

with  his  heart's  blood  ?  It  was  by  means  of  all  his  guileless  fun  that  he

recovered from the terrible seriousness of his own personal tragedy for the

fate of genius is always tragic. But one could tell that great things were taking

place in his soul, for a wonderful light shone in his eyes the joy of the creator,

the  triumph  of  the  victor.  Often  we  would  sit  for  hours  at  a  time  at  our

favourite spot on the Rhine, and neither of us would utter a word ; we could

hear the rumbling sound of the falls in the distance, and we could see the

torrent, wildly agitated by its passage over all kinds of obstructions, dashing

by us with angry violence headlong towards its goal the sea and infinity. The

bank vibrated, the sound as of a mighty symphony rang out of the depths ; the

stream sang the heroic song of its road to Freedom, and this was re-echoed in

my brother's soul.

  Fritz finished the rough draft of " Schopenhauer as Educator" in June,

1874; in the following month, the several parts were elaborated, and then, in

September,  the  last  portion  was  completely  re-cast  and  re-written.  As  his

work progressed, he grew ever more bright, more cheerful and more happy.

  On the 1st of June, he wrote to Rohde : "DEAR FRIEND, I have just

heard from Gersdorff and our friends at Bayreuth that great anxiety once

more prevails concerning me, and that my attitude is considered dangerous,

grimly  humorous,  etc.  Well,  I  cannot  help  it  ;  some  men  see  better  at  a

distance  than  I  can  see  quite  close  consequently  the  anxiety  may  not  be

entirely without foundation. The only thing is that physically I am quite well :

my  stomach,  my  digestion,  and  my  complexion  are  all  healthy  ;  and  in

addition I am once more in a tolerably productive frame of mind that is to

say, cheerful. And I have my sister with me ; in fact I resemble a happy man

as far as it is possible for me to know what happiness is - for, that something

of the kind exists cannot be doubted . . . Are you also having magnificent

moonlight nights ? It is impossible to stay indoors, and often I really believe

that the air sings. I have just written the preface to my third essay for the

Thoughts out of Season."

  But the song and sounds he heard at that time came from the voice of his

own secret happiness of heart : the vague premonition of his own greatness.

And for how many years did not this vague premonition remain his onlyfeeling  on  this  point  !  Only  in  the  year  1888,  when  his  spirit  saw  quite

clearly, and when his body, his ego, vanished in order to become one with the

sublime figure of Zarathustra, was he able to look back upon his own life as

upon an outside spectacle. Only then did he become conscious of what he

himself was. In Ecce Homo he applauds the fate which kept him for so many

years enveloped in unconsciousness about himself, while it led him onwards

to individual perfection and to the highest goals.

  In that summer of 1874, he was really very happy. He felt that he was in

every  respect  so  rich,  especially  in  friends.  And  this  meant  an  enormous

amount to him ; for, from his earliest childhood onwards, friendship played

quite an unusually important part in his life. Without friends life seemed to

him a wilderness. From his sixth to his eighteenth year, Wilhelm Pinder (later

on  a  high  Government  official  in  Cassel)  and  Gustav  Krug  (also  a  high

Government official in Freiburg, in Breisgau, where lie died in 1902) had

been  his  greatest  intimates.  After  that  began  his  friendship  -with  Paul

Deussen  (Professor  at  Kiel),  and  Baron  von  Gersdorff.  In  Leipzig,  Erwin

Rohde and Heinrich Romundt were added to his circle of friends, and in Bale,

Professor Franz Overbeck, then Malvida von Meysenbug; later on for a few

years only, Dr. Paul Ree, and finally Baron von Seidlitz and Dr. Rifer. But

what  he  prized  above  all  these  was  his  intimacy  with  Richard  Wagner.

Anyone who has studied these various friendships of my brother will agree

with  the  following  remarks  of  Henri  Lichtenberger  :  "  Nietzsche's  moral

energy, like that of many other heroic natures, was tempered by a great need

of friendship, admiration and tenderness. His heart felt the necessity for a

sympathetic circle where it could beat freely. Hence at every period of his life

he had friends whom he loved passionately. It must be added that some of

these  friendships  had  a  sad  ending.  Nietzsche,  indeed,  had  the  dangerous

habit of seeing all his friends through rose-coloured spectacles. Free from

every  trace  of  envy,  and  deeply  impressed  at  first  sight  by  everything

remarkable  in  those  around  him,  he  pleased  himself  by  transforming,  or

rather retouching, in his imagination the physiognomies of those around him ;

he saw in them more beauty, greatness, and style than they really had. In the

frenzy of his enthusiastic love, he closed his eyes to their defects, their human

weakness, so that he might see only their perfections, and he finally made for

himself an exact and striking likeness of his friends, but one which was as

ideal as the portrait of a master ... But if this faculty of thus embellishing his

friends  permitted  him  to  feel  greater  and  more  perfect  pleasure  in  theircompany than that experienced by the realistic psychologist, he also found it

a source of cruel disappointments."

  But at that time there was no question of disappointments in friendship,

and  my  brother  would  never  have  believed  then  that  such  things  were

possible. He himself was the best and most self-sacrificing friend that could

be imagined ; he was incessantly trying to show others some kindness. When

for  instance  Rohde  had  to  wait  too  long  for  the  offer  of  a  University

Professorship, my brother, in perfect earnest, offered him his own post at

Bale. He himself was ready to get on without one. One has only to hear

Deussen's and Romundt's accounts, to know how ready he was to help. If a

friend asked to borrow 50 francs from him, he would reply considerately, "

Would you not prefer 100 ?"

  He spent his summer holidays of 1874 with Romundt, at Bergin, in the

Albulastrasse,  in  order  to  work  hard  at  his  "Schopenhauer  as  Educator."

Towards the end of July, 1874, he wrote ; " MY DEAR MOTHER, Here I am

among the hills, and I will write you another little letter, because Lizzie is far

away from both of us and cannot tell you about me and me about you, as she

usually does in the summer. We have had bleak rainy weather for the last few

days, and everyone is peevish this is the prevailing mood here in the solitude,

and I alone do not share it, because I am busy with the thinking-out and

perfecting of a new essay. When I am thus occupied, I live in another world,

where the rain cannot get at me. Moreover, without thinking about it, I enjoy

the benefit of the invigorating Alpine air, and when I am out of every-day

town life, I think of many things that are not to be found in the vortex and

sweltering heat of cities."

  At the end of the summer term my brother finished his work on the third

essay for the Thoughts out of Season. Things came in somewhat of a rush at

the last, and in a letter to Gersdorff at the end of September he bewails his lot

as follows : " MY DEAR FRIEND, The closing weeks of our half-year have

been a hard time for me, and I am greatly relieved now that it is over. For, in

addition to all my other duties, I was obliged completely to recast a rather

long portion of my third essay, and the inevitable nervous strain and spiritual

agitation  that  such  thinking  and  burrowing  in  the  depths  involved  often

threatened to knock me up ; even now I have not quite recovered from my

puerperal fever. Nevertheless something good has come forth from all this

labour,  and  I  rejoice  at  the  thought  that  you  will  be  pleased  by  it.  The

printing,  which  is  being  pressed  along  very  rapidly,  and  which  isconsequently one burden the more on my shoulders, is almost completed, and

when you arrive I shall most probably have a finished copy to lay before

you."

  "What he felt, and what his resolutions for the future were, when he had

finished his book, may best be judged from a letter written to Fraulein von

Meysenbug : " It is certainly a great joy to accomplish one's mission step by

step and now I have three of the thirteen essays ready, and a fourth is already

taking shape in my brain. How shall I feel when I have rid my breast of all

the negative and indignant feelings that are surging in it ? and yet I may hope

to have achieved this magnificent end in about five years. Already I feel, with

genuine gratitude, that I am beginning to see ever more clearly and more

sharply in an intellectual sense ! (Unfortunately this is not so physically) and

I  am  also  beginning  to  express  myself  with  ever  greater  definiteness  and

lucidity. If I am not utterly diverted from my purpose, and provided that I do

not break down, something must come of it all. Just think of a whole series of

fifty essays such as the four I have already written, in which everything that

lies stored in my inner experience, is forced out into the light of day. One

ought certainly to produce some effect with such work, for by means of it one

would have loosed the tongues of men, and much would have been expressed

that humanity could not forget so easily, much that to-day seems as if it were

forgotten or as if it did not exist. But what could divert me from my purpose ?

Even hostile influences I now turn to my own advantage ; for they often give

me more light than friendly sympathy. And I desire nothing more than to be

enlightened  concerning  the  extremely  intricate  system  of  antagonistic

elements  of  which  the  '  modern  world  '  is  composed.  Fortunately  I  am

absolutely devoid of all political and social ambition, so that I have nothing

to fear in that quarter nothing in the way of a deviation, no constraints, no

scruples. In short, I may say just what I think, and I will thus test to what

extent  our  fellow-men  who  are  so  proud  of  free  thought  can  endure  free

thoughts. My demands upon life are neither excessive nor extravagant ; on

the other hand, we shall all experience something soon for which former

generations and posterity may well envy us. In addition to this I am blessed

beyond my deserts with a number of excellent friends, and all that I now

desire, between ourselves, is a good wife ; if I had her I should consider that

all the wishes of my life were fulfilled. Everything else would then depend

upon me."

  The third essay of the Thoughts out of Season was greeted by all hisfriends with, genuine enthusiasm aye, even with delight and solemn rejoicing

and, at any rate quite differently from the second essay. Letters of praise and

of agreement poured in from all sides, and Frau Cosima, who was deeply

moved, wrote that she could feel right well that in this essay the author had

described  the  inmost  sufferings  of  a  genius  sufferings  which  are  often

concealed from his contemporaries. Her letter was couched in much the same

terms as Wagner's, and it expressed what both of them had felt when they had

read this essay together. She began her letter with the words, "This is my

essay of the Thoughts out of Season," and all those who had spent their lives

struggling and suffering for a great idea, felt that " Schopenhauer as Educator

"  was  their  gospel.  Again  and  again  Fraulein  von  Meysenbug  expressed

herself in the warmest terms about the essay, and on one occasion she wrote :

" The third essay of the Thoughts out of Season is always with me ; it has

become my Bible, and I often find comfort by reading passages of it. Never

has anyone defined the object of all culture more beautifully, and I really

cannot think what more one may want to know."

I, too, from the very beginning, had felt the warmest personal attachment to

this essay ; it moved me deeply, for it seemed to me like a rare vision of my

brother's own life, his thought and his future. Even at that time I said to him :

" I do not know enough about Schopenhauer's personality to feel quite sure

whether he is really such an educator as you make him out to be ; but of this I

am certain, that you yourself are the educating philosopher who is described

in that essay." " Nonsense ! " Fritz cried. " Or that you will be," I added. And

then he replied thoughtfully : " Who can tell, Lizzie ? "

    Throughout his life my brother regarded this third essay of the Thoughts

out  of  Season  as  the  token  of  his  most  profound  gratitude  for  all  that

Schopenhauer  had  done  for  him  as  a  teacher  and  educator.  He  always

declared  that  this  treatise  had  nothing  to  do  with  Schopenhauer's

philosophical doctrines, and that it dealt only with the effect of the great

philosopher's personality upon himself. In the year 1880 he wrote: " When I

honoured Schopenhauer as my educator, I forgot that already for some time

not one of his dogmas had succeeded in resisting my suspicion ; but I did not

care how often I might have written ' inadequately proved,' or ' cannot be

proved,' or 'overdrawn' under his utterances ; for I gratefully enjoyed the

mighty impression that Schopenhauer himself had made upon me for the last

ten years by his free and plucky attitude towards things in general."

  Even  in  later  years  he  always  regarded  this  essay  as  the  touchstonewhereby he could tell whether a person belonged to him or not. For instance,

in the autumn of 1882 he wrote to Fraulein Lou Salome" (now Frau Lou

Andreas), with whom he broke off all relations after having been friendly

with her for the short period of only five months : "In Lucerne I gave you my

essay on Schopenhauer. I told you at the time that in it you would find my

fundamental views, and that I believed they would be yours also : you ought

to have read it then and said ' No ! ' for then I should have been spared a good

deal ! In such matters I detest superficiality ! "

  There is very little in "Schopenhauer as Educator" which, if the names

were changed, would not apply equally well to my brother, and describe one

or another of his experiences. Take, for instance, the following passage : "

But Schopenhauer had the extraordinary good fortune to see genius not only

at close quarters, that is to say, in T.N. y himself, but also at a distance in

Goethe : owing to this twofold reflection he was thoroughly well informed

and wise concerning all the aims and the culture of the learned. By means of

this experience he knew how the free and strong man, who constitutes the

aim  of  every  artistic  culture,  should  be  constituted."  Now,  if  one  writes

Nietzsche  instead  of  Schopenhauer,  and  Wagner  (as  my  brother  saw  him

then) instead of Goethe, in this passage, would not every word apply to my

brother's most secret experiences ? At times he himself would use whole

pages of this essay in order to describe his own state of mind, and would then

always write "I" in place of "Schopenhauer." For instance, in the month of

January, 1875, just after he had had a certain painful experience, he wrote me

a letter, at the conclusion of which he said : " You can find all these things

printed in my Schopenhauer essay but they are all my own experiences and

feelings and they constantly recur to me, as at present, for instance." The

passage in the letter which is referred to here reads as follows : " Ah ! we free

and lonely spirits we know that we perpetually seem other than we are. While

we wish for nothing but truth and honesty, we are caught up in a net of

misunderstandings ; and our ardent desires cannot prevent a mist of false

opinions, of adaptations and wrong conclusions, protective reticence's and

erroneous interpretations from gathering round our actions. And there settles

a cloud of melancholy on our brows, for we hate the necessity of pretence

worse  than  death  ;  and  the  persistent  feeling  of  bitterness  that  this  hate

provokes gives us a threatening and volcanic temper. We take revenge from

time to time for our forced concealment and self-restraint : we issue from our

dens with lowering looks : our words and deeds are explosive, and may evenlead to our own destruction. I live amid dangers of this sort. It is precisely

such lonely men as we that need love and friends, to whom we can be as open

and sincere as to ourselves, and in whose presence the struggle for silence

and dissimulation may cease."

  In this letter my brother also told me that I, too, was a comrade and a

friend to him, and one before whom he could be unconstrained and honest.

This  seemed  the  highest  praise  to  me  !  In  spite  of  all  that  I  experienced

subsequently, I yet made the surprising discovery that he used not to speak so

openly or so confidentially to any one of his friends as he did to me. It was

Baron von Gersdorff who called my attention to this after the publication of

my first biography of my brother, and who pointed out that I had not made

this sufficiently plain. He had always known that this was so, and Fraulein

von  Meysenbug  will  certainly  remember  his  having  said  to  her  on  one

occasion that if one really wished to know exactly what Nietzsche thought

and felt, one should ask his sister. But I never knew this, or I was not clear

about it, and I always suspected that my brother said more to his friends than

to me concerning all that went on in his soul. Many an error arose from this.

  Now, to sum up the contents of the third essay for the Thoughts out of

Season, I cannot do better than quote the following words of the late Dr. Fritz

Kogel : " The whole of the essay on Schopenhauer is an undeniable example

of  Nietzsche's  undogmatic  and  purely  personal  style  ;  never  was  there  a

panegyric written about a philosopher, in which less attention is paid to his

philosophy. Not a word is said concerning the Schopenhauerian doctrine ;

Nietzsche  considers  only  Schopenhauer's  personality,  his  ethos,  the

conditions and dangers of his development, and his direct personal influence ;

and to this he attaches thoughts upon the possibility of a culture of the future,

and the rearing of philosophers of the future. At bottom the whole of this

essay is simply a confession on Nietzsche's part concerning his own spiritual

experience of Schopenhauer, and the ideals that were born of it : thus in its

essence it is a purely personal document. And it was precisely because he

preserved his own spiritual freedom in the presence even of the most revered

of  men  that  he  was  able  in  the  essays  of  those  days  to  write  so

enthusiastically about them, to yield to the forces they represented and to

speak in those inspired and inspiring tones which were to seduce his listeners.

He was thoroughly convinced at that time that no one could dispense with

these experiences, and that everyone who felt called upon to bear his share of

the duties of the future must perforce go through them an opinion which heheld unto the last."

  After the publication of the Schopenhauer essay, my brother received a

mysterious telegram, which, if I remember rightly, had been dispatched from

a post office at Lindau, on Lake Constance ; it ran thus : " You are like the

spirit that you can understand, but you are not like me. Schopenhauer." We

were never able to discover who it was that had sent him this communication

                  CHAPTER XXIV MISCELLANEOUS EVENTS

  HOWEVER serious and full of work we may imagine the last weeks of

the autumn of 1874 to have been if we are to judge from my brother's own

account of them the following term (1874-5) was in any case a very happy

one for him. In a biography which Frau von Miaskowski, the wife of Privy

Councillor  August  von  Miaskowski,  wrote  of  her  late  husband,  for  her

children's benefit, there are some very delightful passages about her stay in

Bale.  August  von  Miaskowski  was  for  some  time  one  of  my  brother's

colleagues  at  the  University.  Now,  anybody  who  reads  the  passages  in

question, so brightly written by Frau von Miaskowski, cannot help having the

impression  that,  during  the  winters  of  1871  to  1872  and  1872  to  1873,

Nietzsche must not only have danced a good deal, but must also have been

regarded at Bale as a brilliant " society man" and even something of a lady-

killer.  In  any  case,  he  certainly  received  a  number  of  anonymous  letters

which were intended to call his attention to certain young lady admirers in his

circle of friends. He could, however, never discover who they were. " I am

short-sighted," he would sigh. Frau von Miaskowski writes as follows : " In

the winter 1874 5, with the help of two other young German professors and

their wives, and of Professors Nietzsche, Overbeck and Romundt, we formed

a small social union, which met every Tuesday evening at each of the three

married men's houses in turn. The hosts for the evening had to undertake to

provide some special sort of entertainment, in which the unmarried men had,

however, to give a helping hand. Among some letters written by me to my

mother  I  came  across  one  which  contained  a  detailed  account  of  a  little

performance  of  this  kind  that  was  once  organised  at  our  house.  We  had

arranged  to  give  a  most  carefully  prepared  tableau  vivant  out  of  Richard

Wagner's  Meister  singer,  in  which  our  two  sons  of  five  and  three  years

respectively, and a little girl very close to them in age, were to take part. The

whole thing was got up to please Professor Nietzsche, whose friendship with

Wagner was then at its height.

  " When all our guests were assembled, I asked Nietzsche kindly to playWalther's  Meisterlied.  Then  I  opened  the  door  leading  into  the  adjoining

room, in which the tableau arranged by my husband was ready to be viewed.

Each of the children was very characteristically dressed up, and all were all

the more charming owing to their very tender years. Little Eva was in a light-

blue Gretchen costume, and was holding out her foot to be measured by the

tiny three-year-old Hans Sachs, clad in a leather apron and cap ; while from a

slight  elevation  the  little  Walther  von  Stolzing,  attired  in  a  beautiful  red

doublet with big white sleeves, lace, and a heavy gold chain, gazed down

upon the lovely picture. ' Everyone was delighted,' so runs my report to my

mother, ' and Nietzsche was quite moved. He took both my hands and pressed

them again and again, while he thanked me for the charming surprise. ... At

the end of the evening we had some music, and Nietzsche once more played

extemporarily with beautiful effect.' " On one of our evenings, at the house of

another of the members of the little social union, we were joined by a young

girl friend who was staying with us at the time ; and when we returned home,

as I wrote to my mother, ' this young lady declared that she had never been in

such merry and at the same time ingenuous company. The curious feature of

it was that two of the chief merry-makers among us, Overbeck and Nietzsche,

were  known  all  over  Germany  as  thorough-going  pessimists  and

Schopenhauerians.' "

  Another proof of the cheerful and ingenuous spirits that prevailed in that

little circle seems to me to be the fact that the humorous works of Mark

Twain  used  to  provoke  endless  laughter  there  a  thing  that  other  scholars

could not understand at all.

  But all this merry-making did not prevent my brother from proceeding

with his Thoughts out of Season. At the beginning of the year 1875 Baron

von  Gersdorff  came  to  Bale  in  order  to  write  the  draft  my  brother  had

prepared of the new essay " We Philologists." As might be expected, this

essay  shows  us  particularly  plainly  the  relation  between  my  brother's

educational plans and Hellenism ; but no one would guess from the title that

it  is  the  one  which  is  most  profoundly  related  in  ideas  to  Thus  Spake

Zarathustra. It is greatly to be regretted that it was never finished ; because it

would probably have proved the most important of all the Thoughts out of

Season. But it was only my brother's devotion to duty that prevented him

from finishing it. On May the 8th, 1875, he wrote to Gersdorff as follows,

concerning it ("We Philologists") : " As a matter of fact I have about forty

pages more of notes similar to those you wrote out for me. But the necessaryflow, ardour and courage are still wanting to complete the whole." Finally, as

we see from a letter to Gersdorff dated May the 21st, he laid it altogether

aside : " Not a line more have I written of the fourth essay for the Thoughts. I

have laid it aside for the term ; for my daily work and all the lectures it

involves  (thirteen  hours)  are  pressing,  and  I  have  no  time."  This  is  an

example of how conscientiousness, when it is lavished upon a thing of minor

importance  (in  this  case,  my  brother's  Professorship),  may  prejudice  the

highest  of  life's  missions.  Thanks  to  the  demands  of  daily  drudgery,

something immortal has been lost to us. My brother must often have felt this

before,  and  very  bitterly,  too  ;  and  the  severe  judgment  passed  upon  the

scholar in " Schopenhauer as Educator " may be understood as a kind of

slight momentary revolt against himself and his devotion to duty. For men of

smaller gifts, of course, the matter is quite different. Nothing could be more

deplorable than the contempt of the minor task in those who are unable to do

anything better.

  But there were other reasons for his having been disturbed in his work at

the end of the winter term. As I have already stated, he lived in a house with

his two friends Professor Overbeck and Dr. Romundt. The latter had been

admitted as an academical teacher into the Faculty of Philosophy at Bale, and

in his lectures had devoted himself specially to Schopenhauer. Now, strange

to say, his profound study of Schopenhauer had made Dr. Romundt decide to

become a Catholic priest. My brother was beside himself with anger, for he

was very fond of Dr. Romundt. He could not in the least understand how a

philosopher who had learnt to value freedom of thought could possibly intend

to take up a position which, from an intellectual standpoint, was so terribly

confined on all sides. And the fact that a friend, after having frequented his

company  for  eight  years,  could  thus  secretly  have  planned  such  a  coup

against the freedom of his own spirit made him thoroughly unhappy. In a

very depressed mood he wrote to Rohde as follows : " With your ideas of

what a friendship with me means, tell me what you make of this story, and

send me a few words of comfort. It is precisely in my friendship that I am

wounded."  After  lengthy  discussions,  however,  Dr.  Romundt  did  at  last

decide  to  return  to  his  earlier  calling  as  a  teacher.  My  brother  wrote

concerning Romundt's departure as follows : " It was exceedingly sad, and

Romundt  kept  repeating  that  all  that  was  best  and  most  beautiful  in  his

experience  had  now  come  to  an  end  ;  with  copious  tears  he  begged  for

forgiveness,  and  did  not  know  what  to  do,  he  was  so  wretched.  Anextraordinarily  weird  thing  occurred  at  the  last  moment.  A  porter  at  the

railway station closed the door of the carriage just before the train began to

move, and Romundt, wishing to say something to us, tried to pull down the

window. But in vain ! He strained and strained, and, while he was struggling

thus in order to let us hear what he wanted to say the train rolled slowly out

of  the  station,  and  all  we  could  do  was  to  exchange  signs.  The  ghastly

symbolism of the whole scene depressed me exceedingly, as it did Overbeck

(a fact he confessed to me later). I could scarcely endure it."

  From this description of his sorrow over the first painful experience he

had ever had with a friend, we can gather how pleased he was when Dr.

Romundt afterwards returned to his sound philosophical studies, and wrote

books over which my brother could heartily rejoice. Concerning Antdus, he

wrote to me as follows : " Romundt's book is a genial production ; personally

I think it is very refreshing. I am to some extent aware of the inner obstacles

which he had to overcome. What a price has to be paid in blood for every

step towards self-reliance ! "

  In addition to having taken Dr. Romundt's affair a little too much to heart

during the winter of 1875, my brother worked and wrote far too much, and

the result of it was that another spell of indisposition supervened. In order to

recover, he went for a few days at Easter to Berne, where he was the only

guest at the Hotel Victoria, on the Schanzli, and made many excursions into

the mountains and the woods, " always alone, and meditating a good deal."

But even this change did not do him much good, and at Whitsuntide, when

we met at Baden-Baden, I thought at first he looked very ill. In a few days,

however,  his  buoyant  nature  quickly  recuperated,  and  Dr.  Richard  Pohl,

whom we happened to meet there, declared that he looked the " picture of

health."

  During  our  stay  in  Baden-Baden  Wagner  and  Bayreuth  formed  the

subject of almost all our conversation. For, at the beginning of the year 1875,

Frau Cosima had begged me to come to Bayreuth for a fairly long stay in

order to take her place at the head of the household of Wahnfried while she

was away. She wished to join Wagner on his concert-tour to Vienna. My

brother had agreed to this somewhat hastily, because, as he explained to me

later,  he  thought  it  was  of  paramount  importance  that  I  should  become

initiated as far as possible into the circumstances of the Wagners' private life.

It was about this time that Wagner, while temporarily indisposed, had told

my brother that in the event of his (Wagner's) death, he wished to make himguardian and educator of his son Siegfried. My brother's assumption that our

mother  would  hail  the  "Wagners'  invitation  gladly,  as  also  his  hasty

acceptance of it on my behalf, annoyed her exceedingly. As I have already

stated, slight and also more or less serious differences of opinion had been of

constant  occurrence  between  mother  and  son,  owing  to  the  fact  that  he

claimed me for the whole of every summer. Now, however, she was asked to

do without me in the winter as well, and this struck her as excessive. In

addition to this she adduced all kinds of reasons against my making a stay at

Wahnfried. The upshot of it was that, in her anger, she wrote an indignant

letter to my brother, in which she expressed her aversion from Wagner's art

and his whole mode of life, and all this in a much severer strain than her real

feelings on the matter warranted. This letter threatened to lead to a serious

breach between mother and son, but I quickly wrote another letter to my

brother, on the heels of the one my mother had sent, in which I explained that

she was already taking a much milder view of the whole plan. At last she

granted me permission to go, or, rather, left it to me to decide one way or the

other. Fritz knew only too well how characteristic it was of all three of us, in

the first flush of our indignation, to say and write sharp and unpleasant things

which a day or two later we scarcely remembered having thought or written.

  Thus,  I  really  went  to  Bayreuth,  and  had  all  kinds  of  delightful  and

exciting experiences. Fritz could scarcely expect me to go to him in order to

have long talks about Wagner and Bayreuth, for as my mother had consented

to my going to Bayreuth only on condition that I should spend the summer

with her, it certainly seemed at first as if I should be unable to go to Bale.

When, however, Fritz wrote that he was quite alone in the house formerly

shared with him by Overbeck and Romundt, my mother thought it right to let

me go to him. Overbeck had obtained six months' leave in order to go to

Karlsbad to cure some severe stomach trouble, while Romundt, as we have

already seen, had left Bale for good.

  Fritz was highly delighted to join me at Baden-Baden, nor could he cease

from asking me questions about my experiences at Bayreuth, and I for my

part talked inexhaustibly about all that the Wagners had done and said. It was

only later that I understood what deep anxiety lay at the bottom of all his

questioning. But at that time all I could do was to give an account of the

hearty feelings of friendship to which they had given expression. It was in

Baden-Baden that I realised for the first time that despite his admiration for

Wagner and Frau Cosima, my brother differed very distinctly from them oncertain concepts of art. On one occasion when we were sitting in the park,

and Fritz was giving vent to opinions in this strain, I suddenly noticed that on

the .other side of the shrubbery a man was sitting who, with his face turned in

our direction and his elbow resting on the arm of his chair, was listening very

intently to our conversation. It was Turgenieff, whose photograph I had seen

and examined closely only that very morning in a shop window. When he

saw that he had been caught listening to us, he stood up, politely raised his

hat, and walked away. "It is a good thing that he does not know who we are,"

said  Fritz,  "  otherwise  Wagner  would  ultimately  get  to  hear  of  our

conversation and that would lead to endless annoyance." "But Fritz," I said

eagerly, "Wagner surely cannot expect his friends to share all his opinions ? "

"  He  does  indeed,  Lizzie,"  my  brother  replied  thoughtfully  ;  and  then  I

remembered an incident which proved this very point.

  In the spring of 1874 my brother and I had heard Brahms' Triumphlied at

the  Cathedral  of  Bale.  It  was  magnificently  rendered,  and  Fritz  was

exceedingly pleased with it ; and when in August, 1874, he went to Bayreuth,

he took the piano arrangement of the piece with him, prompted apparently by

the ingenuous belief that it would please Wagner. I say " apparently," for

since then it has occurred to me that this Triumphlied, bound in red, was a

kind of experimental test, and that Wagner's terrible anger was therefore not

quite without foundation. But I shall let Wagner himself tell the tale, for he

had a most delightful way of poking fun at himself. " Your brother," he said

to me, " laid the red book on the grand piano, and whenever I came down to

the drawing-room this red object stared right at me it literally inflamed me,

just  as  a  red  rag  does  a  bull.  I  could  very  well  see  that  by  means  of  it

Nietzsche wished tacitly to say, ' Just look ! here is also someone who has

done good work ! ' Well, the end of it was that one evening I simply fell into

a passion, and fell almost to bits as well ! " Wagner laughed heartily over the

thought of it. " But what did my brother say ? " I demanded anxiously. " He

said nothing," Wagner replied, " he simply blushed and gazed at me with

mingled surprise and calm dignity. I would give a hundred thousand marks

this minute for a bearing such as Nietzsche's always distinguished, always

dignified ! That sort of thing is invaluable in this world."

  As I say, it was this incident which occurred to me while sitting with Fritz

in the park at Baden-Baden. " Fritz," I said, " why have you never told me the

story about Brahms' Triumphlied ? Wagner told me the whole thing himself !

" Fritz stared into the distance and was silent; at last he said quietly : " Lizzie,on that occasion, Wagner was not great." And this is the story which has been

transformed by some Wagnerites into the following fiction : One day, my

brother  is  said  to  have  handed  Wagner  an  opera  which  he  himself  had

composed, and Wagner, very indignant, had declared that it was worthless.

Profoundly hurt by this, my brother had given Wagner up. The truth, as we

have seen, was very different indeed. La bttise humaine is aware only of

wounded vanity as a cause of all changes in a man's attitude towards his

friends, and invents its improbable stories accordingly.

  After our enjoyable stay at Baden-Baden, we travelled in high spirits to

Bale, where, however, my brother's good health unfortunately did not last. In

any case, Fritz took an extraordinary quantity of medicine during that spring.

When, however, he felt better, and had an appetite for lunch, we had to go in

the heat of the summer sun at midday all the way to an hotel, only to be

served with dishes which he could hardly digest. When I said to him, ' ' If

only we had our own household, how much more care we could take of your

digestion ! " he replied eagerly, "Yes, that would be splendid ! " and he

admitted to me that of all his plans to make himself independent, the only one

that he still cherished was that of having a household of his own, a thing that

could be done much more comfortably in Bale than elsewhere. " But it would

involve tremendous self-sacrifice on your part," he added. I was, however,

sincerely desirous of doing it. To spend six months in Switzerland and six

months in Naumburg, of which I was very fond, and where I had my dearest

friends, seemed quite an enjoyable manner of passing my life ; for I did not

crave for enjoyment, but for real occupation, and to do my brother a service

seemed to me to be the greatest joy of all. But in spite of all assurances to the

contrary, my brother could not get rid of the idea of self denial, and at last I

had to beg Frau Cosima to tell him how willing and ready I was to do it and

that it entailed no sacrifice on my part. And in all my brother's letters of this

period one can see how delighted he was at this happy turn of events. He

wrote to Rohde as follows : "My DEAR FRIEND, I have not written; but you

will certainly have guessed already why I have been silent ; because I have

not been well. I have been suffering with my digestion and my eyes. But all I

wish to do to-day is to please you with the news that I am on the point of

making a radical change in my mode of life. ' Please,' I say. God knows !

Radicalism has at least its well-known flaw even here. Well, my sister and I

are just in the throes of finding a flat, and of buying furniture, in' order that

from  the  middle  of  this  year  I  may  begin  to  lead  a  life  which,  from  thestandpoint of hygiene and diet, will be adapted and beneficial to my physical

afflictions. I shall certainly not be able to go to Bayreuth during the summer

holidays this is the flaw but I shall have to go to a watering-place, probably

Pfaffers. The whole plan is very necessary, and the prospect of this beautiful

change fills me with a sense of relief."

  He wrote to Gersdorff as follows : "I am very happy over this alteration in

my mode of life, and look very confidently into the future. My grand plan for

the  next  seven  years  was  only  possible  provided  my  daily  life  became

ordered and regulated in this way. Now, at last, I have a thoroughly intimate

and helpful soul about me. I have not used a word of persuasion with her ;

she came to the decision quite voluntarily."

  This  "  grand  plan  for  the  next  seven  years  "  consisted  of  the  most

extensive studies of Hellenism, which he wished ultimately to incorporate in

the large book on Greece already mentioned. He wanted to combine all these

studies with his official work at the University, and in accordance with this

idea, arranged the following cycle of lectures on Hellenism to be delivered

during the coming seven years : 1, 2, 3. The History of Literature.

  4. Religious Antiquities.

  5. Private Antiquities.

  6. State Antiquities.

  7. Mythology.

  8, 9. Political History.

  10. Rhetoric and Style.

  11. Rhythmic and Metrics (with Music). 12, 13. History and Philosophy.

  14, 15. Ethics of the Hellenes.

  (Of these fifteen lectures, my brother delivered only eight, and they were :

The History of Literature, Religious Antiquities, Rhetoric, Rhythmics and the

History of Philosophy up to Plato inclusive.) It is greatly to be deplored that

he never carried out the plan of this book on Greece. By means of it alone

would people have been able to obtain a complete idea of what the Greeks

meant to my brother, i.e., the starting point to many of the psychological and

scientific problems of his life. He gazed upon this wonderful Hellenic world

and upon this highly superior people with astonished eyes ; and this led him

to the question, What is the power that made the Greek spirit the pioneer of

all  culture,  what  physical  conditions,  what  religious  concepts,  what

economical  and  political  institutions,  what  racial  gifts,  what  climatic  and

geographical influences, what mode of life, etc., etc. ? A large proportion ofthe results of his study and reflection can be found in his works ; but it

appears only here and there, and is scattered over the whole. What a great

pity it is that we do not possess the complete work in its full range In the

summer of 1875 he was particularly busy with this great plan, and believed

that he would best be able to accomplish it with " a perfectly regular and self

centred mode of life." Every new state of things was pictured in the warmest

colours by his vivid imagination, but always with the one object of promoting

and completing his great life-task. And even if here and there he speaks of the

future in emotional and personal terms, one is still conscious that his eyes are

scanning the distance in search of what is great. For instance, he wrote to his

friend Frau Marie Baumgartner, expressing his joy over the establishment of

his  own  household,  as  follows  :  "  You  have  no  idea  how  gladly  and

confidently I look forward to the winter that will be with us in a few months.

For the first time I feel, so to speak, secure. I have a great increase of love

about  me,  and  on  that  account  feel  more  protected  and  no  longer  so

vulnerable and forsaken as I have been hitherto as an exile in Bale . . . Now

things are beginning to bloom within me, from month to month I see the

outlines of my life-task ever more clearly, without feeling the courage to

impart the knowledge to anyone. A steady but very resolute pace leading

from stage to stage this is what will assure my covering some distance. I feel

as if I were a born mountain climber. See how proudly I can talk ! "

  As will readily be understood, our mother was very unhappy about the

whole of this arrangement, and I had to write her a number of long letters in

order to reconcile her to it. Finally Fritz wrote as follows : " The resolution

that I and my helpmeet Lizzie have made, and concerning which she has

written to you, is the result of dire necessity ; I can no longer go on in any

other way. If it cannot be carried out I shall be compelled to give up my

Professorship almost immediately." The thought of this alternative turned the

scales,  and  our  dear  mother  then  helped  us  in  every  possible  way.  She

assisted me in packing the household effects of our late aunt Rosalie, which

were our property, and gave us all kinds of good advice.

  I have had to refer once or twice to certain differences of opinion between

mother and son. It would be wrong to conceal the fact that these occurred,

and  yet  in  my  endeavours  to  settle  them,  I  suffered  much  more  than  my

brother  did  ;  for  he  was  so  seldom  with  my  mother.  Dr.  Richard  Oehler

describes their relationship very accurately when he says : " The contrast of

their  religious  convictions  must  gradually  have  led  to  an  estrangementbetween mother and son. But nothing in the way of an actual breach ever

occurred, nor were serious discussions at all frequent ; for Nietzsche was too

considerate  and  tactful  in  practical  life  to  oppose  views  which  were

unalterable and determined by circumstances. His letters to his mother are

sufficient proof of the delicacy and profound nobility with which he could

spare  other  people's  feelings.  They  also  show  the  manner  in  which,  by

carefully avoiding all useless reference to doubtful questions, he always knew

how to speak of matters of common interest in the sphere of simple and

practical  life,  and  until  the  last  to  find  a  hearty  and  sympathetic  way  of

expressing his natural filial affection. Still, in spite of this, there was always a

feeling of something suppressed, of a division of thought between mother and

son, and never were their relations so intimate as those that obtained between

him and his sister."

  It was just this last circumstance that made my life with her so hard at

times.  It  was,  however,  quite  natural  that  my  brother  and  I  should  hold

together ; for in our mother we always met with the most severe critic of our

works and deeds. " Who would tell you, if I did not ? " she was wont to say.

We were never spoilt by blind maternal love this we learnt to value only in

later years though at that time a little uncritical tenderness would have made

us very happy. Later on we heard that she always spoke of us in terms of the

most affectionate esteem ; but for fear lest she should spoil us, she never let

us suspect that she thought well of us.

  With others for whom she did not feel responsible, she gave free play to

all  the  charm  and  gaiety  of  her  nature,  and  Paul  Deussen  very  rightly

compares her " in her activity and constant good cheer to Frau Aja." She had

a great number of excellent friends, and Dr. Richard Oehler says plainly, "

that  her  little  house  in  Naumburg  was  the  constant  resort  of  refined  and

interesting men. There was a peculiar attraction about her home, which was

not easily found elsewhere. She was above all fond of the company of merry,

laughing and high-spirited girls and boys ; for, outwardly as well as at heart,

this woman seemed destined to enjoy eternal and irrepressible youth."

  After forming our resolution to establish our own little household in Bale,

I went for a few weeks to Naumburg, and Fritz went to Steinabad in the

Schwarzwald with the view of undergoing the treatment of a certain Doctor

Wiel,  who  had  won  a  great  reputation  as  a  specialist  for  diseases  of  the

stomach. For all details concerning his stay there, the treatment which he

underwent, his fluctuations of opinion in regard to the nature of his trouble,and  his  sorrow  at  not  being  able  to  join  his  friends  at  the  rehearsals  at

Bayreuth, the reader is begged to refer to his letters to Gersdorff and Rohde,

which are to be found in the various volumes of letters published. Still, to be

strictly truthful, I must state it as a fact already here, that Fritz felt positively

relieved at being prevented from going to Bayreuth. He patiently endured

every  obstacle  and  all  his  sufferings  during  this  summer,  because  he  felt

vaguely that, thanks to them, something threatening in the distance, a definite

decision concerning Bayreuth and Richard Wagner, was postponed. But it

would  have  given  him  untold  joy  to  be  able  to  exchange  all  kinds  of

confidences with his friends.

  He wrote to Gersdorff concerning his state of health as follows : " My

trouble has been diagnosed as chronic gastric catarrh, accompanied by great

dilatation of the stomach. This dilatation causes vascular engorgements, and

results in the brain being insufficiently supplied with blood. In the first place,

then,  the  stomach  is  to  be  reduced  to  its  normal  size,  by  means  of  an

extraordinary diet consisting of the most nourishing substances, provided that

they be not bulky, i.e., almost exclusively meat. In addition I am to take

Carlsbad salts, and am to have leeches applied to my head."

  Then in later letters to his friends he goes on to say : " In my last letter I

told you how I felt ; meanwhile, however, the diet has been changed. At my

request I am now eating much less ; I am weary of eating so much meat. I

have been enjoying a lovely swimming-bath since yesterday. It adjoins the

gardens of the hotel ; but I am the only person here who uses it, for the others

find it too cold. Early in the morning, at six o'clock, I take my plunge, and

shortly  afterwards  I  go  for  a  two  hours'  walk  all  this  before  breakfast.

Yesterday for about three hours, late in the afternoon, I roamed about the

exceptionally  lovely  woods  and  secluded  valleys,  and  as  I  went  along  I

mused over all that seemed hopeful in the future such a vista of happiness has

not fallen to my lot for a very long time. Why, in sooth, is one spared ? I have

a nice armful of work awaiting me for the next seven years, and whenever I

think of it I can only feel happy. I have not a single soul for company here,

and I am leading a perfectly independent and aristocratic sort of life. To-

morrow, in order to amuse and instruct me, Dr.Wiel is going to do some

cooking with me ; he is a famous and thoughtful culinary artist, and is the

author of a very popular dietary cookery book that has been translated into

every language. Yesterday he gave me a little lecture on enamelled ware, and

the new meat-mincing machine, and in this way I am learning a few thingsfor my new home."

  In his letters to his friends, written from Bonndorf , there is, in spite of all,

a feeling of great content.

  " Everywhere I see despair ! " he says, " and yet I do not feel it myself,

although I am not in Bayreuth ! Do you understand how this can be ? I hardly

can. And yet I am there in spirit for over three-quarters of the day, and like a

ghost I am perpetually hovering round it. Do not have any qualms about

making my soul die of longing, but just tell me all about it, dear friend. On

my walks, I conduct whole passages of the music which I know by heart, and

hum to myself. Remember me most kindly to the Wagners ! Good-bye, dear

friends  for  here  and  there  my  letter  is  addressed  to  you  all  your  loving

comrade, Fritz."

  My brother returned to Bale in the middle of August, and was full of

admiration and childlike joy at the sight of his new home, which I had been

arranging in the meantime. Everything was pleasant and comfortable ; but it

was far from being " sybaritic in its luxury," as a certain critic declared our

simple and somewhat old-fashioned establishment to be. During the whole of

this period, from the middle of August to the end of November, my brother's

health was really excellent. From early in the morning till late in the evening

he was radiant and cheerful, and declared himself exceptionally pleased with

everything.

  He started the day very early, even in winter. In Zarathustra he describes

his early hours : " With a wickedness do I begin every day : I mock at the

winter with a cold bath on that account grumbleth my stern house-mate. Also

do I tickle him with a wax-taper, that he may finally let the heavens emerge

from ashen-grey twilight,"

  Then there would follow an hour's meditation, breakfast, and intellectual

work. Fritz was entirely a morning worker. He declared that the intellect was

freshest  and  most  exuberant  in  the  morning.  To  use  the  morning  for  his

favourite literary work was his constant endeavour, and that is why he never

read a book early in the day. " To set too early in the morning, at break of

day, in all the fullness and dawn of one's strength, and to read a book that I

call positively vicious ! "

  He had fixed his lectures and Greek lessons for the afternoon, and the

remainder of the day he spent walking. For the most part he went alone, for

my household duties took up the greater part of my time, but on occasion I

would be able to join him, and then we would find all kinds of things toamuse us. For instance, we would sing scenes out of the Gotterdammerung

together, the piano arrangements of which had appeared during the spring.

My brother, in a letter to me, had described them as heaven on earth (the

scene  between  Siegfried  and  the  Shine-Daughters  was  a  particularly

successful one with us). We enjoyed watching the strange formations of the

clouds, the effects of light, and the flight of birds over the bare fields. We

loved to walk on green fields and along country lanes, and to stop and look at

the most simple things : now we would be amused at a dog that sprang to

catch a partridge and slunk away with a most comical expression of shame

when  it  missed  its  prey,  and  anon  at  a  cat  which  would  fawn  upon  my

brother, purring affectionately the while, and rubbing its arched back against

his leg. We rejoiced over the children who brought us flowers or played their

games  with,  zest,  and  in  doing  so  revealed  human  nature  free  from  all

artificiality. And often we would laugh and reflect at the sight of a little rascal

of a boy making himself master of the situation, and the joy with which the

others,  and  especially  the  little  girls,  obeyed  him.  But  what  particularly

delighted us was the sight of the villages on Saturdays, with everybody so

gaily and busily preparing for Sunday. They seemed often to have little fetes

in  those  parts,  but  I  do  not  know  whether  they  were  connected  with

gymnastic or rifle-shooting exhibitions or what not. On one occasion, when

we saw the inhabitants of a certain village particularly busy hanging garlands

and festoons about their streets, and heard them expressing their fears about

the weather, Fritz good-naturedly indulged in a little prophecy, and assured

them that they would have the most beautiful weather possible. The people

believed it and were very happy, for a man of his learning from the town

must be sure to know. On the following day, however, it simply poured with

rain, and Fritz made all sorts of funny comments about himself as a weather

prophet. Nevertheless, we did not care to walk into that village again ; false

prophets do not like to be seen. Thus our amusements were all very simple.

But what indeed does Zarathustra say on this subject? " 'For happiness, what

little sufticeth for happiness ! ' Thus spake I once and thought myself wise.

But it was a blasphemy : that have I now learned. Wise fools speak better.

  " The least thing precisely, the gentlest thing, the lightest thing, a lizard's

rustling, a breath, a whisk, an eye-gleam little maketh up the best happiness."

  Taking  it  all  in  all,  Fritz  was  exceptionally  happy  and  content  during

these three months. On the 26th of September, 1875, he wrote to Gersdorff as

follows : " Meanwhile, then, with the help of my sister I have established rayown household, and it is quite successful. Thus at last, after having been

without  a  home  since  my  thirteenth  year,  I  am  once  more  in  familiar

surroundings. The more we exile ourselves from the things that please others,

the more necessary it becomes for people like ourselves to have our own

citadel  from  which  we  can  look  on,  and  in  which  we  no  longer  feel  so

harassed  by  life.  Thanks  to  the  fact  that  I  have  a  sister  whose  nature  is

admirably suited to mine, I have perhaps succeeded better than many others.

Our  Nietzschean  style,  which  I  rejoiced  to  find  even  among  my  father's

brothers and sisters, finds its pleasure in its own resources ; it knows how to

entertain itself, and prefers to give to other people rather than to demand of

them. In such circumstances one can bear to live as a thinker and a teacher for

one feels one is condemned to live as both."

  Fritz was so well at this time, even as far as his eyes were concerned, that

every evening he used to read his own unfinished works, or essays upon

which he was still engaged, aloud to me. Thus I heard " Greek Philosophy of

the Tragic Age," and the first five sections of " Richard Wagner in Bayreuth."

We spent the most lovely evenings in this way, full of a lofty and solemn

kind of happiness. And what delightful conversations we used to have ! Later

on he recited passages from translations of Greek tragedies, and would often

quote even the Greek itself to show me how beautiful it sounded. I thought

Philoctetes particularly fine and stirring. But in reading it aloud he sighed and

cried so dolefully that our servant, who was obviously impelled by curiosity,

brought  the  tea  an  hour  earlier  than  usual.  I  sought  an  explanation.  "

Caroline," I said, "you are surprised at something?" "Oh, no," she replied

with a superior smile, " I knew at once that the professor was play-acting ! "

Caroline was, to use a Bale expression, " a steady girl m ; she had served in

the best Bale families, and certainly did not find our way of living in keeping

with  the  traditions  of  Bale  for  the  last  hundred  years.  Her  superiority

sometimes  oppressed  me,  though  it  was  always  the  cause  of  much  silent

amusement to Fritz.

  What in my opinion contributed the most delightful feature of those days,

however,  was  Fritz's  piano-playing.  It  seems  to  me  that  he  never  played

extemporarily with more effect than on those evenings we spent together : it

was as if his soul were relating the happiness and the fate of his whole life.

We did not dream then that this was the last year in which Fritz was going to

devote himself to music and to enjoy it to the full. How strange it seems that

the  last  piece  of  music  which  he  composed,  the  improvisation  which  heplayed almost every evening, was the "Hymn to Solitude"! He had already

written  to  Rohde  during  the  previous  winter  as  follows  :  "In  my  rarest

moments I now work at a ' Hymn to Solitude.' I wish to realise it in all its

terrible beauty." It is deeply to be deplored that these notes seem to have been

lost.

  From the end of November his good health gradually declined; still he

wrote to Gersdorff on the 1st December : " Gradually I shall have everything

properly placed in my mind. And then even my health will be more steady a

state to which I shall not attain until I deserve it, that is to say, until I have

reached that spiritual condition which seems to be the promised one to me,

that  healthy  condition  of  mind  in  which  only  one  instinct,  the  will  to

knowledge, has remained over, and in which the spirit has become free from

all  other  instincts  and  desires.  A  simple  home,  a  perfectly  regular  daily

routine, no enervating desire for honours, or for society, my sister's company

(through  which  everything  about  me  is  quite  Nietzschean  and  strangely

restful), the consciousness of having excellent and affectionate friends, the

possession of forty good books of all times and climes (and of many more

which are not altogether bad), the constant joy of having found educators in

Schopenhauer and Wagner, and the subject of my daily work in the Greeks,

the belief that henceforward I shall no longer lack good pupils all these things

now constitute my life. Unfortunately my chronic physical troubles which

seize  me  for  about  two  days,  and  sometimes  longer,  at  intervals  of  two

weeks, should also be added to the reckoning; but they must one day cease."

  But, on the whole, it was not surprising that my brother's health gradually

declined, for during this period he did an incredible amount of work and

seriously  overstrained  his  eyes.  I  ought  to  point  out  here  that  it  was  not

reading, but writing, that proved most trying to his sight. His acute short-

sightedness made him bend so low over his work that it constantly led to his

head becoming congested with blood, and to the muscles of his neck getting

over-tired. Now it happened that on his return from Steinabad, in the first

flush of his recovered health and his joy over his new home, he could not do

enough in the way of productive work and study ; for instance, he wrote the

greater part of " Richard Wagner in Bayreuth," he began to recast his " Greek

Philosophy of the Tragic Age " again from a new standpoint ; he once more

took up his notes on the subject of " We Philologists," which was now to be

the fifth essay of the Thoughts out of Season, although he had previously

thought  of  making  it  the  fourth.  Concerning  my  brother's  plans  andprogramme of study at this time, Dr. Koegel writes as follows : " Having

returned from Steinabad with the brightest hopes as to his recovered health,

he spread his ' armful of work ' out before him. These plans of all kinds,

besides including the gradual continuation of his Thoughts out of Season, and

the  conclusion  at  last  of  certain  old  philosophical  essays,  also  involved

extensive  research  work  and  study  for  future  creations.  In  addition  to

historical, mathematical, physical and natural science and economical studies,

he conceived the plan of an ' Enormous Collection of Psychological Details

and Human Documents.' In addition to this there were historical works and

novels to be read, and letters to be written. He also wished to revise his

fundamental philosophical opinions, and with this object in view he resolved

to study Duhring as an attempt at doing away with Schopenhauer, and in

order to see what there was for and against him in Schopenhauer. He also had

the intention of studying Schopenhauer again; while among the authors set

down to be read over a period of eight years are ' Schopenhauer, Duhring,

Aristotle, Goethe and Plato.' He began this plan by reading Duhring's The

Value of lge, from which he made thirty pages of extracts, consisting of the

principal thoughts of the book, and a general outline of Duhring's argument,

and these extracts he interspersed with a hort of short remarks and more

lengthy observations of his After Fritz's health had begun to decline, I used to

read to him aloud, of an evening, after the moil and toil of the day ; and for

this purpose we chose Walter Scott's novels, of which I believe I must have

read sixteen, one after the other for we liked him, we liked his heroes, and we

liked even his long-winded descriptions. When, for instance he described a

meal in detail, Fritz would be amused at the quantities which people in those

days could absorb, What stomachs the fellows must have had!" he would

exclaim From the beginning of December, however, I began to 31 really

concerned. Much as I deplored the fact, I could not help feeling that our idea

of having a home of our own in Bale was anything but beneficial to my

brother's health. The very fact that he felt quite comfortable indoors, and

therefore went out so rarely. Long before any that his digestion was not the

only  cause  Of  his  trouble;  that  over-work,  and  above  all  the  excessive

straining.  l  also  realised  that  be  only  cure  for  all  this  would  be  frequent

change of air and scene, leading naturally to more walking exercise. But the

worst feature of those days was the fact that as n as Fritz began to feel a little

low, he immediately had recourse to the old remedies. If only I had had more

courage  to  express  my  honest  opinion,  or  if  I  had  only  possessed  moreauthority over him, how much better everything would probably have turned

out ! I was, however, so accustomed to think everything that Fritz did was

right, that I did not dare to oppose even his most unreasonable whim.

    Shortly  after  Christmas  his  steadily  declining  health  broke  down

altogether. He suffered from terrible headaches and violent nausea for almost

four days, and these attacks would recur repeatedly with only short intervals

of relief in between. During these intervals he was weak and exhausted. His

doctor, Professor Immermann, expressed grave fears, and all of us who loved

him deeply were very unhappy. Gradually I tried to make it clear to him that

he ought to leave Bale as quickly as possible ; all his friends also tried to urge

him to take this step, but he would not be convinced. On the 23rd of January,

1876, he wrote to Gersdorff as follows: " Up to the present I have had no

fresh attack ; but I am still in the same state, and I have the greatest fears. I

still do my work at the University, however, and live with the greatest care

and regularity. Under these circumstances I surely ought to get better. The

complete rest which you advise is not so easily carried out, and it seems to

me  that  to  go  on  living  in  the  usual  way,  while  duly  observing  every

precaution, is the most practical thing to do, and will probably lead to the best

results. And then my sister's presence is helpful, as is also Overbeck's happy

Overbeck, by the bye what should I do with myself in exile ! "

    Professor Overbeck had meanwhile become engaged, and this change in

his life improved his rather peevish temper. In spite of all his suffering, Fritz

was heartily delighted at the news, for, on the whole, it cannot be said that

my brother was ever indifferent or apathetic, on the contrary, he remained

throughout all his sufferings full of consideration and solicitude for those

about him.

  Despite the fact that his illness was an intolerable torment to him, for he

feared that it might prevent him from fulfilling his life's task, he never once

assumed a tragic attitude about it. He detested every kind of pose. Even when

he was in the midst of the loftiest intellectual creations, he maintained his

usual  amiable,  gentle  and  dignified  demeanour  towards  his  surroundings.

Some people declare that he was nervous in his manner ; this, however, was

only a sign that he did not feel at ease in their presence.

  When he was in the company of people to whom in his heart of hearts he

objected, he grew silent, reserved, and almost oppressed. He could not bear

anything in the way of dishonesty, cowardice, affectation, or ostentation. In

1888 he wrote in Ecce Homo : " It is my privilege to have the very sharpestdiscernment for every sign of healthy instincts. There is no such thing as a

morbid  trait  in  me  ;  even  in  times  of  serious  illness  I  have  never  grown

morbid, and you might seek in vain for a trace of fanaticism in my nature. No

one can point to any moment of my life in which I have assumed either an

arrogant  or  a  pathetic  attitude.  Pathetic  attitudes  are  not  in  keeping  with

greatness ; he who needs attitudes is false . . . Beware of all picturesque men !

Life was easy in fact easiest to me, in those periods when it exacted the

heaviest duties from me."

  Gradually his health began slightly to improve, and he therefore resolved

to go with Gersdorff to Montreux at the beginning of March. He wrote : " I

can at last say that my health is improving, after a very long and painful

indisposition. Nevertheless, I had to discontinue all my lectures, and it is

since then that I have begun to feel better." Meanwhile, our dear mother had

come to Bale and was able to keep me company in his absence. On the 7th of

March, therefore, Fritz set off with his friend. Unfortunately, the weather was

not favourable, while Baron von Gersdorff also had very soon to return to

Germany, as he was extremely busy and had only undertaken the journey to

oblige my brother. The good effects of the change became visible only at the

end of the holiday, or as a matter of fact only when Fritz was back in Bale.

After  his  return  he  wrote  to  his  faithful  travelling  companion  somewhat

discontentedly about their rather wretched trip together: " Another time it will

be jollier and more successful, for this time I was really ill and especially

morally ill. One should not say too much about the wickedness of the world,

but about the victory and accomplishment of the good and the right; in this

way  one  banishes  moroseness  and  every  muscle  braces  itself."  We  were

exceedingly delighted to have him safely back, and even our laughter, which

had vanished for so long, began to return. Fritz said : " Lizzie, you ought to

have come with us, then we should certainly have been more cheerful in

Montreux."  "Nonsense,  Fritz!"  I  said,  "  cheerfulness  comes  to  you  quite

naturally when you get better." As a matter of fact, it was quite touching to

see how quickly he was up to all kinds of fun the moment he felt a little better

; for instance, he would say all he had to say for hours in doggerel verses.

  I was somewhat surprised to see my brother in such good spirits during

the spring of this year ; for as a matter of fact he had only just been refused,

after proposing to a young Dutch girl, Fraulein Tr., whom he had known only

for a very short time, and with whom he had taken a four hours' walk in

Geneva. She was a charming girl who really aspired to good and lofty things,and who found the epitome of her life's philosophy in Longfellow's Excelsior.

While she was making a copy of her translation of this poem my brother sent

her the following letter. I ought, however, to add that a certain newly-made

acquaintance had been chiefly instrumental in inducing him to take this step,

a man who had known the girl a long while, who raved about her, and who

subsequently married her. All other particulars appear in the letter.

  " MY DEAR YOUNG LADY, " This evening you are writing something

for me and I will write something for you as well. Take your courage in both

hands so as not to be too overcome by the question which I am now going to

put to you : will you be my wife ? I love you, and it seems to me as if you

already belonged to me. Not a word about the suddenness of my affection ! In

any case it is no sin, and therefore does not require to be pardoned. But what

I should like to know is whether you feel as I do and that we have never been

strangers at all, not for one moment ! Do you not also believe that, joined

together,  each  of  us  would  be  freer  and  better  than  we  could  be  apart

therefore Excelsior ! Would you dare to walk shoulder to shoulder with me as

with one who strives heartily after emancipation and improvement, along all

the paths of life and of thought ? " Now be frank and conceal nothing. No one

knows anything about this letter and my proposal save our common friend,

Herr v. S. Tomorrow morning at 11 a.m. I shall take the express back to Bale

; I must get back ; I therefore send you my address there. If you find you can

accept my proposal, I shall write to your mother immediately, in which case I

must beg you to give me her address. If you are able to come to a prompt

decision one way or the other, a note from you will find me at the Hotel de la

Poste until ten. Wishing you every joy and blessing for ever, " FRIEDRICH

NIETZSCHE. " Geneva, 11th April, 1876."

  But  the  young  lady's  heart  was  no  longer  fancy  free,  and  she  was

somewhat startled by this sudden offer of marriage. Upon hearing this, my

brother wrote her the following letter from Bale on the 15th of April.

  " DEAR MADAM, " You are good enough to forgive me this I feel from

your very kind letter which I really did not deserve. I have suffered so much

at the thought of my cruel behaviour that I cannot be sufficiently grateful to

you for your gentle kindness. I shall explain nothing, nor do I know how to

justify myself. I can only express this last wish, that if ever you should read

my name, or meet me again, you will not think of the shock I have given you;

I beg you ever to believe that I would fain make amends where I have erred. "

With great respect, " I am yours sincerely, " FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE."  I almost believe now that my brother was somewhat glad that his hasty

proposal did not lead to marriage. After we had spent one or two gloomy

days together for we were all very grieved that my brother's first attempt at a

betrothal had failed we could not help looking back on the whole matter with

a smile. " Fritz," I said, " your affair with Fraulein Tr. was like that affair of

your duel. You always do things differently from other people so suddenly." "

Yes" my brother replied, " I ought to be thankful for the way these things turn

out. A sudden, ill-advised marriage would in the end have been no better than

a manage de convenance, and from that may heaven preserve everyone." My

brother's intellectual plans and aspirations played by far the most important

part in his life. It was impossible for him to regard love affairs as seriously as

poets do, or to realise the part they played in other men's lives. At about this

time Gersdorff wrote me a private letter in which he said that he had heard

accidentally that a beautiful young woman loved and revered Nietzsche, and

that, as she was very wealthy and much in demand, she had already refused

many offers for Nietzsche's sake. The news came at the wrong time, for my

brother was far too busily engaged just then in pondering over the difficulties

of  marriage.  On  the  26th  of  May  he  answered  Gersdorff's  letter  very

emphatically as follows : " I am not going to be married ; as a matter of fact I

so detest restrictions of any sort, and the thought of adapting myself to the *

civilised ' order of things, that the woman could hardly be found who would

be liberal-minded enough to follow me. I begin to regard Greek philosophers

and their mode of life ever more and more as the proper examples to be

followed."

  The new term began happily in every way. Fritz was fresh and eager for

work ; his lectures were attended by a number of students, which for Bale

was quite exceptional, and he was full of hopes for his health. He wrote to

Gersdorff : " It really seems as if the gruesomeness of my condition during

the winter has vanished like a spectre. I feel happy and comfortable once

more."

  As for me, however, the experiences of the winter had left me with all

kinds of vague fears, which I may well have expressed in many a letter of the

period ; but however this may be, " his best friend," as Fritz called Fraulein

von Meysenbug suggested to my brother that he should spend the following

winter with her somewhere at a Southern seaside resort, either Fano, Capri, or

Sorrento. We were all delighted ! This was an offer at the right time. We

literally feasted on new plans. Building castles in the air was a favouriteoccupation of my brother's, whether he was well or ill. I can still see his

joyful expression when he used to say : " Lizzie, let us think of something !" I

urged Fritz to try by all means in his power to obtain a whole year's leave. He

wrote to Gersdorff that he wished to tell him privately that he thought of

going to Italy for a year.

  " I have not yet obtained the definite consent of the authorities," he said, "

but it will no doubt be granted to me, more particularly as I have of my own

accord declared myself willing to forego my salary for the whole period so as

not to place an undue burden upon such a small community. Freedom ! You

cannot believe how full I fill my lungs whenever I think of it! ... All my

hopes and plans for ultimate spiritual emancipation and for further untiring

progress along my own road once more fill my blood. Confidence in myself I

mean in my better self, fills me with courage. Even the state of my eyes does

not modify this feeling."

  At about this time Professor Schiess had just made the most unfavourable

report concerning his short-sightedness and the weakness of his eyes, and it

was  greatly  to  be  deplored  that  my  brother  was  not  made  to  understand

perfectly seriously that the state of his sight was not the result but the cause

of his sufferings.

  Ever since 1869, when his unexpected call to Bale had disturbed all my

brother's fine plans for travelling in France, Italy, and Greece, he had retained

a deep longing for freedom and meditation beneath blue skies in a southern

clime. Now, at last, after all this long time, he saw with delight the possibility

of  fulfilling  all  his  wishes.  A  wonderful  year  in  the  South,  free  from  all

official duties and other fetters, devoted to the purpose of carrying out new,

magnificent,  and  far-reaching  plans  !  But  the  year  would  certainly  have

needed to be endless in order to carry out all his wishes.

  In the first place, however, that festival in Bayreuth was drawing near, for

which my brother had so long been yearning, and his grateful heart made him

recall the long period of happiness which he had spent with Wagner's music

and  with  Wagner  himself  However  much  many  of  his  views  might  have

changed, his gratitude for the most profound experience of his soul remained

unshaken. He therefore took up the unfinished MS. of " Wagner in Bayreuth

" in order to rewrite it as a solemn essay in honour of the Bayreuth Festival.

              CHAPTER XXV RICHARD WAGNER IN BAYREUTH

  IN order to assume the proper attitude towards this essay of the Thoughts

out of Season, it is necessary to look back upon the whole period, beginningwith my brother's first acquaintance with Wagner's music, to his ultimate

friendship with the composer. My brother was certainly qualified to say in

1888, " I have seen three generations of Wagnerites ; " for in 1860, when he

was scarcely more than a child, he was one of the most enthusiastic of them,

and he himself experienced the transformations of this peculiar species for

almost  thirty  years.  It  ought,  however,  to  be  definitely  stated  here  that,

previous  to  his  meeting  with  Wagner  in  the  autumn  of  1868,  he  really

admired and revered only two of the Master's works, the Meistersinger and

Tristan und Isolde; his attitude to the other works was cold, and to some

extent hostile. Before he got to know Wagner, he even thought there were

some things in these works which were unpleasant and trivial. The fact that

he became a complete Wagnerite after he had become personally acquainted

with Wagner in Leipzig, and had during the Tribschen days been regarded by

the Master himself as his best friend, is perfectly comprehensible ; and in this

connection we may recall Wagner's own words : " I told Cosima that you

come  next  after  her  in  my  affections,  and  then  nobody  else  for  a  great

distance.  .  .  ."  It  is  also  easy  to  understand  that  when  he  was  under  the

influence of Wagner's personal charm, by means of which the latter exercised

the most extraordinary fascination over all those surrounding him, he either

partly suppressed his most heartfelt convictions in regard to Wagner's art, or

transfigured it by means of them, or else (and this is by far the most likely) he

forgot "to say, concerning the picture of this life, of this mighty independent

torrent  of  a  life,  flowing  as  it  were  up  the  mountain,  what  he  truthfully

thought of Wagner." The most beautiful period of this friendship consisted of

the  three  years  at  Tribschen,  from  Whitsuntide,  1869,  to  1872,  and  the

friendship was at its height during the winter of 1871 to 1872, before and

after the appearance of The Birth of Tragedy, up to the time of the laying of

the foundation stone at Bayreuth in May, 1872.

  In November, 1871, the Wagners induced my brother to go with them to

Mannheim to attend a great Wagner concert. The " Siegfried Idyll," was also

performed for the first time, before a circle of friends, and in December,

1871, Fritz wrote a most enthusiastic letter to Rohde about it : "Moreover, I

feel I have had my views on music wonderfully confirmed, and am convinced

they are right thanks to what I have experienced this week with Wagner in

Mannheim. Ah ! my dear friend ! If only you could have been with us ! I felt

like one whose presentiment has at last come true. For this is precisely what

music is, and nothing else. And this is just what I meant by the word ' music,'when I described the Dionysian form of it, and nothing else ! But when I

realise that only a few hundred people of the next generation will find that in

music which I find in it, I expect a totally new culture ! "

  Recalling these impressions he wrote in the year 1888 : "A psychologist

might  add  that  what  I  heard  in  Wagnerian  music  in  my  youth  and  early

manhood had nothing whatsoever to do with Wagner ; that when I described

Dionysian music, I merely depicted what I personally had heard, that I was

compelled instinctively to translate and transfigure everything into the new

spirit which filled my breast."

  But at that time my brother did not yet hear himself, but only Wagner, in

all these delicious tones; or, better still, he felt himself completely one with

Wagner. In January, 1872, he wrote to Rohde : " I have concluded an alliance

with Wagner. You have no idea how close we stand together now, and how

our  plans  agree."  And,  truth  to  tell,  no  one  can  imagine  how  thoroughly

intimate the two were at this time. All my brother's plans in those days were

conceived in connection with Wagner ; in regard to everything he did, he

asked himself the question, " Will this do Wagner any good ? " He was

prepared to make any sacrifice.

  Of course, my brother never once allowed Wagner to suspect in what way

he sacrificed himself for him. But what cost him the greatest effort was that,

for Wagner's sake, he had to suppress his own convictions. He treated the fact

that  he  had  spoilt  the  whole  of  his  University  career  as  a  philologist,  by

fighting  for  Wagner,  much  more  lightly.  And  in  other  directions  I  can

remember many a pleasure that he declined out of consideration for Wagner.

As  a  single  instance  of  this,  I  recall  a  certain  trip  to  the  south.  Felix

Mendelssohn's  son,  a  professor  at  Freiburg,  in  Breisgau,  who  was  a  very

sympathetic  person,  invited  Fritz  to  join  him  on  a  tour  through  Italy  and

Greece an offer which pleased my brother immensely. But, as Wagner had

not been a friend of Mendelssohn's, and the latter's son could not help but

think reverently of his father (and, as we know, my brother had been a hearty

admirer  of  Mendelssohn's  in  his  youth,  and,  even  in  1872,  still  had  a

particular fondness for some of his compositions), for fear lest he might rouse

the Master's suspicions as to his loyalty, Fritz declined the kind invitation,

and, as far as I can remember, honestly stated his reasons for so doing.

  But, as we have already seen, my brother was ready to make even greater

sacrifices. For Wagner's sake he was willing to resign his University post in

order to travel about Germany, propagating the cause of Bayreuth. He alsogave up his precious time to the work of founding Wagner societies, and

availed himself of every opportunity of selling certificates of patronage for

Bayreuth. For instance, it was through him that the German Musical Society

of Leipzig paid for an essay on Wagner by purchasing one of the certificates

of patronage, to which my brother himself added a further sum of 50 thalers.

These are all signs of his sincere desire to be a true and helpful friend of

Wagner.

  It is strange that, in spite of my brother's love and reverence, of which he

was ever giving visible and active signs, Wagner was never able to suppress

certain qualms and fears that " this Nietzsche will go his own way." I have

already spoken of the delightfully successful visit he paid to Strassburg with

the Wagners, in the autumn of 1872. Frau Cosima afterwards declared in

many letters how enjoyable it had been, and that henceforward no such things

as  misunderstandings  could  occur  between  them.  But  this  assurance  is  in

itself simply evidence of the fact that misunderstandings had occurred. The

year 1873 began with another act of unwarranted suspicion on Wagner's part.

My brother spent the Christmas of 1872 in Naumburg, and he received an

invitation from Wagner to make a stay at Bayreuth on his way back to Bale,

as his friend Gersdorff would also be there at that time. Now it happened that

Fritz's Christmas holidays were in any case very short, and if he had been

obliged to go back to Bale via Bayreuth, he would have been left no time for

rest, and, in the middle of the term, this is precisely what he needed most. On

account of this he declined Wagner's invitation, and then, in his innocence,

was surprised to be left without news from Bayreuth for many weeks.

  Only sometime after Christmas, to his great astonishment, he heard how

vexed  Wagner  had  been  over  his  refusal  ;  but  thanks  to  a  cordial  and

perfectly  unsuspecting  letter  from  my  brother,  Wagner  himself  was  soon

convinced that he had misinterpreted his friend's action. In February, 1873,

Fritz wrote to Gersdorff as follows : "I have received two splendid letters

from the Master and Frau Wagner respectively, and in them I learned for the

first time that Wagner had been very hurt by my absence at the New Year.

You knew this, my dearest friend, and concealed it from me. But all clouds

have now been dissipated, and it was a good thing I did not know anything

about it ; for very often in such cases one cannot improve matters and one

only makes them worse. Heaven knows, by-the-bye, how often I have given

the Master offence : every time it happens I am more surprised than ever, and

cannot make it out, or think what the reason can be. I am therefore all themore pleased that peace has been established once more. Do please give me

your  own  view  about  the  persistent  manner  in  which  I  seem  to  give  the

Master offence. I absolutely fail to see how anyone can be more loyal and

more thoroughly devoted to Wagner in all things that really matter, than I am.

If  I  could  see  this  I  should  do  my  utmost  to  improve.  But,  in  small  and

secondary matters of minor importance, and in abstaining from living under

the same roof with him, which in my case might be regarded as necessary to

my health. I am obliged to preserve my freedom, simply in order that I may

continue to be loyal in a higher sense. Of course, not a word of this should be

mentioned ; but it is hard notwithstanding and it becomes desperate when life

leads to all kinds of unpleasantness, suspicion and silence. On this occasion,

for  instance,  I  had  not  the  smallest  notion  that  I  had  caused  such  deep

offence; and my one fear is that such experiences will only make me more

timid than I already am." But his friend found kind words with which to

console him, and, as it so happened that my brother and Rohde were able to

go together to Bayreuth at Easter, everything appeared to take a satisfactory

turn without further complications.

  When I spoke of the first essay of the Thoughts out of Season, I had

occasion to refer to the temper of those days.

  It was a serious meeting ; for the Bayreuth undertaking had made no

progress and gave rise to much anxiety.

  The smaller personal differences vanished in the face of these greater

troubles  ;  moreover  it  was  precisely  at  serious  and  painful  moments  that

Wagner's greatness was most plainly felt. My brother loved good cheer, but

the Wagner who was full of fun and indifferent jokes, and who could tell

more or less unpalatable Saxon anecdotes, was not altogether to his liking.

Wagner felt this, and often it goaded him on to even less pleasant stories, and

finally he would grow cross with himself. Wagner once said to me : " Your

brother is often very discomfiting in his delicate refinement, and to make

matters worse one can read all he feels ; sometimes he literally blushes at my

jokes and then I crack still more shocking ones. Your brother is just like

Liszt, he also did not like my jokes and jests."

  The summer of 1873 was spent amid grave qualms for Bayreuth. At this

time something strange occurred which showed my brother's love for Wagner

in a remarkable manner. "Unfortunately Professor Overbeck gives quite a

distorted  account  of  it  in  his  regrettable  "  Recollections  of  Nietzsche,"  l

because he omits the most important points. When I was in Bale during thesummer  of  1873  I  one  day  met  on  the  stairs  an  old  and  somewhat  odd-

looking woman who had paid a visit to my brother. When I asked him who

this extraordinary apparition might be, he replied in his humorous way : "

Lizzie, she is a spirit who visits me from time to time, and who is wont to

have private talks with me, just as spirits always do." It transpired that this

lady, whose name was Rosalie Nielsen, had twice visited him, and had made

him feel a little anxious about the publisher of his works. She had hinted that

the firm of E. W. Fritzsch was really bankrupt, and that it could only hold

together with the help of others. Then she had made mysterious references to

an International Society which, in the event of its purchasing the business of

E. W. Fritzsch, would lay great stress upon retaining the publication of my

brother's  works.  Now,  as  Overbeck  had  only  just  published  Ms  "The

Christianity of Modern Theology," through Fritzsch, these hints dropped by

the  mysterious  lady  interested  him  as  well.  When  she  appeared  again,

therefore, my brother asked Overbeck's permission for the interview to take

place in the latter's own room. On this occasion, the following facts were

elicited:  the  International  Society  already  mentioned,  which  was  in

possession of large funds, desired to purchase the business of E. W. Fritzsch

(the owners of Wagner's prose works) only in order to be able to get Wagner

into their power so to speak. Wagner was at that moment in great financial

straits ; he had used the funds subscribed for the building of his theatre for the

purpose  of  building  his  own  private  house  ;  and  now,  it  appeared,  this

International Society wished utterly to ruin all his work. At this point my

brother's  courtesy  and  amiability  suddenly  vanished.  His  anger  positively

choked him, and he could not even speak. He took a chair, opened the door,

stood the chair outside, and made a sign to the lady to leave the room. Later

on,  although  he  still  felt  alarmed  for  Wagner's  safety,  he  could  not  help

seeing the thing in a humorous light. On the 18th of October, 1873, he wrote

a letter to Rohde which gives an accurate account of the mingled feelings of

gravity and amusement roused by this mysterious intrigue : " Does not your

manly heart beat against your ribs ? After such adventures I scarcely dare

sign my name to this letter. We are living Samarow- we can think only of

poses  and  counter-poses  (Minen  und  Gegenminen),  we  sign  only

pseudonyms, and we wear false beards.

  " Hist ! Hist ! how the wind whistles ! In the name of my co-conspirators,

yours truly, Hugo of the hoarse ghost's voice.

    Rohde, who hazarded the guess that the grim conspiracy existed only inthe head of the extraordinary lady herself, ultimately proved to be right. He

also informed his friend that the publisher E. W. Fritzsch had also turned the

lady in question (Rohde referred to her as the " ghost ") out of doors.

  In the autumn of 1873 great things were expected to come of a general

assembly  of  the  patrons  of  the  undertaking  at  Bayreuth.  At  first  it  was

arranged  that  this  should  take  place  in  August,  but  it  was  afterwards

postponed to the end of October. Now, in pursuance of Wagner's wish, the

executive  council  of  the  Wagner  Societies  came  to  my  brother  with  the

request that he should write the " Appeal to the German Nation " already

referred to, for the purpose of promoting the Bayreuth scheme. After much

hesitation Fritz drafted it out between the 18th and 20th of October, 1873 ;

finished it, and had many proofs of it printed, which he proposed to take with

him  to  Bayreuth  at  the  end  of  October.  The  fate  of  the  "  Appeal,"  the

meetings of the delegates, and their plans and proposals, are all described by

my  brother  in  a  long  dictated  letter  addressed  to  Gersdorff,  who  was

unfortunately prevented from coming.

  " Thus," the letter says, " I was travelling from Wednesday evening to

Monday morning. In going I was alone, but Heckel was with me on the return

journey. In Bayreuth about a dozen men had gathered together, all delegates

from the Wagner Societies, and I was the only patron per se. Among our

acquaintances  there,  I  may  mention  Davidson,  the  editor  of  the

Borsencourier, the worthy pair Batz and Woltz, Baligand, and to refer to the

best of the lot, Stern from Dresden and Count Dumoulin from Kegensburg.

  " But who failed to attend despite all his promises to do so ? Fritzsch !

Fritzsch  who  is  once  more  concealing  himself  behind  clouds,  and  whose

reassuring letters tend only to disquiet us the more. On the actual day of the

ceremony we had the same filthy weather which, as you remember, we had

on the occasion of the inauguration ; so that for a second time on reaching the

headquarters  of  our  league,  the  splendidly  attired  patron  was  obliged  to

sacrifice  a  new  hat.  Of  course  the  weather  on  the  previous  and  on  the

following day was beautifully clear and sunny. After the inspection in mud,

fog and blackness, the principal meeting took place in the town-hall, where

my ' Appeal ' was kindly but resolutely rejected by the delegates. I refused to

recast the thing, and recommended Professor Stern as a person who would

quickly be able to compose a fresh one. Then Heckel's excellent proposal that

collection-boxes  should  be  placed  with  every  German  bookseller  was

approved.  The  whole  sitting  was  very  wonderful,  half-sublime  and  halfrealistic, but strong enough in its influence to suppress all projects relating to

raffles and such things which were very much in the air at the meeting. In the

evening the day's business was brought to a close with a very successful,

congenial and simple banquet at the ' Sonne,' at which Frau Wagner and

Fraulein von Meysenbug were the only ladies present. I had the place of

honour between the two, and therefore received the name ' Sargino,' after '

Sargino, The Apprentice of Love,' the title of an Italian opera. Batz made an

after-dinner  speech,  proposing  the  toast  of  Frau  Wagner,  in  which  he

managed in the most extraordinary manner to drag in allusions to a snuff-box

and even to copyright, into his panegyric of her. Early on Saturday we held

our final meeting at Feustel's at which Stern's draft was accepted. You must

read it, for it will have a large circulation.

  " My Appeal, which the Wagners like very much indeed, once it has been

signed by a number of great names, may also play an important role in the

event  of  the  present,  more  optimistic  one,  failing  in  its  object.  In  the

afternoon,  we  had  one  more  look  at  the  theatre  in  the  glory  of  the  late

sunshine ; the children were also with us, and I climbed to the centre of the

royal  box.  The  building  looks  much  more  beautiful  and  much  better

proportioned  than  the  plans  led  one  to  expect.  It  is  quite  impossible  to

contemplate it on a clear autumn day without emotion. Now we have a house

and it is our emblem."

  I must add one or two facts myself to the story my brother has given of

his " Appeal " facts, I mean, elicited from the other side. It appears that

Wagner was quite beside himself with anger when he heard that my brother's

"Appeal" had been rejected by the delegates as too serious and pessimistic in

tone ; indeed, he had got into a towering passion and had raved and stamped

his feet. Nevertheless, my brother quietly persuaded him in the end that an

appeal  written  by  Professor  Stern  would  be  certain  to  meet  with  greater

success, and that if the worst came to the worst there would still be his own to

fall back upon. And this consoled Wagner. Be this as it may, my brother's

"Appeal" was never mentioned again. As to whether the delegates had made

a mistake in rejecting it, nothing can now be said ; but, in any case, the good-

humoured and optimistic appeal written by Professor Stern could not boast of

a glorious success either. Chamberlain writes in his Biography of Wagner : "

One incident may be mentioned to show the extent of the indifference with

which Wagner's work glorious as it has since proved to the German name had

to contend throughout the Empire. Dr. A. Stern was commissioned by theWagner Societies to draw up a ' Report and Appeal for Aid ' at the end of

1873 ; four thousand copies of this were distributed to various booksellers

and  musical  dealers,  with  forms  for  subscription.  Not  one  of  the  four

thousand took the slightest notice of the document ! In Gottingen alone some

students  put  down  their  names  for  a  few  thalers."  l  At  Easter,  1874,  my

brother wrote to Fraulein von Meysenbug : " With regard to my health, I must

say that, since the New Year, thanks to a new mode of life, it has been very

good, and has caused me no anxiety at all ; but I must be careful of my eyes.

Yet as you must be aware there is such a thing as a state of physical suffering

which comes as a blessing ; for with it one forgets one's other sufferings, or,

better still, one imagines that these can be cured just as the body's sufferings

can. This is my philosophy of illness, it gives hope to the soul. And is it not a

feat to be able to go on hoping ? "

  The last portion of the letter refers to the distressing condition of affairs at

Bayreuth; for the year 1874 began very badly. There seemed to be no longer

any doubt that the Bayreuth scheme, in the form in which the Master had

conceived it and in which it had found expression in the society of patrons,

was wrecked. Funds were lacking for the completion of the theatre-building

and for other undertakings, so that all work had to be stopped. My brother

suffered terribly ! But it was precisely in his hours of deepest depression that

the whole bravery of his nature was shown; he did not give way to endless

plaints and lamentations, but tested the basis of the things for the sake of

which  he  was  suffering.  He,  whose  eyes  were  so  prone  to  overlook

everything petty and unpleasant, and even to close completely at the right

time wherever he had given his reverence and his love, now forced himself to

examine  those  very  petty  and  unpleasant  details  he  had  hitherto  passed

unheeded, and to judge them soberly and coolly. He now compelled himself

to face and to test everything which he himself had recognised as false, in

order  to  discover  whether  a  great  deal  of  that  which  he  had  deliberately

disregarded, out of respect for the Master, were not necessarily the cause of

the present failure. This is one of the instances which prove most strongly

how little his severe sense of intellectual truthfulness scouted a struggle, even

of the hardest kind, with himself, with his own loving and reverent heart.

  The  fact  that  my  brother  had  already  fostered  different  views  from

Wagner, concerning a number of artistic questions, may be seen from the

appendix  to  The  Birth  of  Tragedy  ;  l  but  in  any  case,  he  had  never  felt

directly antagonistic to Wagner's art before 1874. It seems as if he becameconscious of the conflict between his own convictions and his admiration for

Wagner only from this time onward. But these repeated attempts to reconcile

his opinions with Wagner's, or rather to be able to find in Wagner what he

felt he could admire and respect, in spite of the many points on which he

differed from the Master must have provided a magnificent object-lesson in

genius itself. What great experiences sprang from it, and to what a subtle

training in psychological matters it must have led ! But a lucky star seemed

after all to shine over Bayreuth. Wagner's greatest benefactor, King Ludwig

of Bavaria, intervened in the unhappy state of affairs, and lent his help. On

the 15th of February, 1874, my brother wrote to Rohde concerning all these

events as follows : " As to Bayreuth there is good news ; if only it is true ! In

a very explicit article in the Mannheim Gazette (Heckel's organ), the writer

declares that he has heard from an authoritative source (i.e. Frau Wagner),

that  the  completion  of  the  building  is  now  ensured.  Thus  the  longed-for

miracle has occurred ! Let us at least hope it has ! The state of affairs since

the New Year has been indeed distressing, and in the end I could hope only

for the unexpected to get us out of the difficulty. With the most absolute

coolness of perception, I began to ask myself why the undertaking had failed

; in this way I learnt a good deal, and I believe that I now understand Wagner

much better than before. Even if the ' miracle ' is true it does not in the least

interfere with the result of my meditations ! But if it is true we shall be very

happy and celebrate a Feast."

  In March he wrote further, as follows : " As to Bayreuth ! Through Frau

Wagner we know and the fact is to remain a secret among Wagner's friends

that the King of Bavaria has subsidised the undertaking by advancing sums to

the amount of 100,000 thalers (15,000), so that the work (machinery and

decorations) is now being pressed forward vigorously. Wagner himself has

written saying that he expects everything to be completed by the year 1876.

He is full of courage, and believes that the undertaking will now be plain

sailing. Well, may God grant that it will be so ! It is difficult to get over all

this waiting and uneasiness ; sometimes I really lost all hope."

  When in the autumn of 1874, it became clear that the undertaking was

perfectly  secure,  my  brother  gave  vent  to  a  real  cry  of  joy  in  a  letter  to

Gersdorff, " By-the-bye," he says, " the news from Bayreuth is magnificent

and incredible ; who could be more delighted to hear it than you?" And later

on he writes: "Hearty thanks for your letter, and for details about the letter

from Bayreuth ; every one of us will thank Heaven and Hades, and whereverelse gods are wont to reside, for the fact that the work of the Nibelungen is

done."

  But  what  was  "Wagner's  attitude  towards  my  brother  during  all  these

years  ?  His  letters  always  reveal  the  same  affectionate  tone  of  warm

friendship  and  loyal  solicitude,  mingled  with  a  certain  fatherliness  which

suits him particularly well. When his letters to my brother are published,

people will certainly agree with me in thinking that there are scarcely any in

which Wagner appears in a more thoroughly attractive and lovable light.

  The hearty affectionate tone of voice in which Wagner used to say "my

Nietzsche," still rings in my ears, and although I cannot very well reproduce

it in a book, I can nevertheless quote a few dedicatory verses in which the

words occur, and which Wagner composed for my brother at the time when

he presented him with his complete works. The verses are as follows : " Was

ich, mit Not gesammdt, Neun Bdnden eingerammelt, Was darin spricht und

stammelt,  Was  geht,  steht  oder  bammelt,  Schwert,  Stock,  und  Pritzsche,

Kurz,  was  im  Verlag  von  Fritzsche,  Schref,  Idrm'  oder  quietzsche,  Das

schenW ich meinem Nietzsche, War's ihm eu 'was nutze ! "

  Maybe, if they had been together more often, and had had more leisure,

the conflict between their deepest thoughts would have been revealed much

sooner ; but it was during those very years in which they were drifting ever

further and further apart from each other in their convictions, that each was

thoroughly absorbed in his own work. This was especially so with Wagner,

who was called upon to exercise all his faculties of mind and body to the

most extraordinary degree in order to carry through his great work of the

Nibelungen.  In  these  circumstances  he  had  but  little  time  to  spare  for

reflection. But he still continued to invite my brother in the most friendly

manner to stay with him. For instance, in June, 1874, he pressed Fritz most

eagerly to come and spend his summer holidays in Bayreuth, and the letter of

invitation contained the following appeal : " O dear Friend ! Why do you not

come to us ? Do not let us remain so far apart ; for as things are I can be

nothing to you." But, as Fritz had to finish his third essay for the Thoughts

out of Season during the holidays, he told Wagner that he could come only at

the end of the summer. This led to more unpleasantness.

  To all outward appearance my brother's stay in Bayreuth in August, 1874,

certainly revealed the same old friendliness ; but little scenes such as the one

over Brahms' s Triumphlied made Fritz feel only too plainly how little his

personal  independence  was  considered.  I  have  already  spoken  of  howdepressed he had been at Easter, 1874, by Wagner's lukewarm appreciation of

" The Use and abuse of History," and now he said to himself very sorrowfully

" so my only value consists in my being a writer on Wagner ; I must not be

anything more, I may admire and honour only that which is approved of in

Bayreuth." What free spirit would have liked to have his path mapped out for

him in this way by another, more particularly when it was such a narrow one

? The torrent of my brother's development in those days was growing ever

broader and mightier ; was he to be caged up and confined in a corner ? He

was tormented by this idea and still his thoughts drove him ever nearer to

freedom. When in June, 1874, I happened to speak of some hidden trouble,

Fritz cried emphatically : " O Lizzie, we all have our gnawing trouble in our

breast I have one too ! " And on the 9th of July he wrote to Gersdorff : "A

number of thoughts are fermenting in my mind, and among them many which

are both extreme and daring. I should like to know to what extent I might be

allowed to communicate such thoughts to my friend. In a letter, of course, it

is impossible to do so at all." Cold, superficial people cannot understand the

inner conflict which raged in my brother's heart for four years. What do they

know of a friendship so passionate as that which existed between him and

Richard Wagner; what do they know of the iron severity of a truthful and

emancipated spirit ; how can they understand the hesitation of the loving

heart that quivers at the thought of the pain which the last heart-breaking

hours of the farewell parting will cause ? And Fritz trembled, not only at the

thought of his own pain ; but, oh, how much more at the thought of the

suffering he was going to impose on another ! Be this as it may, from the

middle of the year 1874, that wonderful new melody rang in his heart to

which he scarcely dared listen, though it swelled ever louder and louder.

Sorrow  and  rejoicing  were  mingled  in  its  stirring  tones,  they  lured  the

disciple on to new paths, away from the Master whom he had outgrown and

he equipped himself for a still greater advance ! A farewell letter full of the

deepest gratitude, " Schopenhauer as Educator," had already been written ;

and his loving heart at that time was still convinced that there was no need to

write another. He hoped that even yet Wagner would not only concede him

the right of new convictions, but would also share them. My brother trusted

in his love, and perhaps also, unconsciously, in the charm and power of his

own  personality.  For  he  was  well  aware  that  changes  had  occurred  in

Wagner's views, as for instance the Master's conversion from Feuerbach's

sensualism  to  Schopenhauer's  pessimism.  Why  should  he  not  cherish  the