  109.

  The  Treasure  of  German  Prose.—Apart  from  Goethe's  writings  and

especially Goethe's conversations with Eckermann (the best German book in

existence), what German prose literature remains that is worth reading over

and over again? Lichtenberg's Aphorisms, the first book of Jung-Stilling's

Story  of  My  Life,  Adalbert  Stifter's  St.  Martin's  Summer  and  Gottfried

Keller's People of Seldwyla—and there, for the time being, it comes to an

end.

  110.

  Literary  and  Colloquial  Style.—The  art  of  writing  demands,  first  and

foremost,  substitutions  for  the  means  of  expression  which  speech  alone

possesses—in other words, for gestures, accent, intonation, and look. Hence

literary style is quite different from colloquial style, and far more difficult,

because  it  has  to  make  itself  as  intelligible  as  the  latter  with  fewer

accessories. Demosthenes delivered his speeches differently from what we

read; he worked them up for reading purposes.—Cicero's speeches ought to

be "demosthenised" with the same object, for at present they contain more of

the Roman Forum than we can endure.

  111.

  Caution  in  Quotation.—Young  authors  do  not  know  that  a  good

expression  or  idea  only  looks  well  among  its  peers;  that  an  excellent

quotation may spoil whole pages, nay the whole book; for it seems to cry

warningly to the reader, "Mark you, I am the precious stone, and round about

me is lead—pale, worthless lead!" Every word, every idea only desires to live

in its own company—that is the moral of a choice style.

  112.

  How should Errors be Enunciated?—We may dispute whether it be more

injurious for errors to be enunciated badly or as well as the best truths. It is

certain that in the former case they are doubly harmful to the brain and are

less easily removed from it. But, on the other hand, they are not so certain of

effect as in the latter case. They are, in fact, less contagious.

  113.

  Limiting and Widening.—Homer limited and diminished the horizon of

his subject, but allowed individual scenes to expand and blossom out. Later,

the tragedians are constantly renewing this process. Each takes his material in

ever smaller and smaller fragments than his predecessor did, but each attains

a greater wealth of blooms within the narrow hedges of these sequesteredgarden enclosures.

  114.

  Literature  and  Morality  Mutually  Explanatory.—We  can  show  from

Greek literature by what forces the Greek spirit developed, how it entered

upon different channels, and where it became enfeebled. All this also depicts

to us how Greek morality proceeded, and how all morality will proceed: how

it  was  at  first  a  constraint  and  displayed  cruelty,  then  became  gradually

milder; how a pleasure in certain actions, in certain forms and conventions

arose,  and  from  this  again  a  propensity  for  solitary  exercise,  for  solitary

possession;  how  the  track  becomes  crowded  and  overcrowded  with

competitors; how satiety enters in, new objects of struggle and ambition are

sought, and forgotten aims are awakened to life; how the drama is repeated,

and the spectators become altogether weary of looking on, because the whole

gamut  seems  to  have  been  run  through—and  then  comes  a  stoppage,  an

expiration, and the rivulets are lost in the sand. The end, or at any rate an end,

has come.

  115.

  What Landscapes give Permanent Delight.—Such and such a landscape

has features eminently suited for painting, but I cannot find the formula for it;

it remains beyond my grasp as a whole. I notice that all landscapes which

please me permanently have a simple geometrical scheme of lines underneath

all  their  complexity.  Without  such  a  mathematical  substratum  no  scenery

becomes artistically pleasing. Perhaps this rule may be applied symbolically

to human beings.

  116.

  Reading  Aloud.—The  ability  to  read  aloud  involves  of  necessity  the

ability  to  declaim.  Everywhere  we  must  apply  pale  tints,  but  we  must

determine  the  degree  of  pallor  in  close  relation  to  the  richly  and  deeply

colored background, that always hovers before our eyes and acts as our guide

—in other words, in accordance with the way in which we should declaim the

same passages. That is why we must be able to declaim.

  117.

  The Dramatic Sense.—He who has not the four subtler senses of art tries

to understand everything with the fifth sense, which is the coarsest of all—the

dramatic sense.

  118.

    Herder.—Herder fails to be all that he made people think he was andhimself wished to think he was. He was no great thinker or discoverer, no

newly fertile soil with the unexhausted strength of a virgin forest. But he

possessed in the highest degree the power of scenting the future, he saw and

picked the first-fruits of the seasons earlier than all others, and they then

believed that he had made them grow. Between darkness and light, youth and

age,  his  mind  was  like  a  hunter  on  the  watch,  looking  everywhere  for

transitions, depressions, convulsions, the outward and visible signs of internal

growth. The unrest of spring drove him to and fro, but he was himself not the

spring.—At times, indeed, he had some inkling of this, and yet would fain not

have believed it—he, the ambitious priest, who would have so gladly been

the intellectual pope of his epoch! This is his despair. He seems to have lived

long as a pretender to several kingdoms or even to a universal monarchy. He

had his following which believed in him, among others the young Goethe.

But  whenever  crowns  were  really  distributed,  he  was  passed  over.  Kant,

Goethe, and then the first true German historians and scholars robbed him of

what he thought he had reserved for himself (although in silence and secret

he often thought the reverse). Just when he doubted in himself, he gladly

clothed  himself  in  dignity  and  enthusiasm:  these  were  often  in  him  mere

garments, which had to hide a great deal and also to deceive and comfort

him. He really had fire and enthusiasm, but his ambition was far greater! It

blew impatiently at the fire, which flickered, crackled, and smoked—his style

flickers, crackles, and smokes—but he yearned for the great flame which

never broke out. He did not sit at the table of the genuine creators, and his

ambition  did  not  admit  of  his  sitting  modestly  among  those  who  simply

enjoy. Thus he was a restless spirit, the taster of all intellectual dishes, which

were  collected  by  the  Germans  from  every  quarter  and  every  age  in  the

course of half a century. Never really happy and satisfied, Herder was also

too often ill, and then at times envy sat by his bed, and hypocrisy paid her

visit as well. He always had an air of being scarred and crippled, and he

lacked simple, stalwart manliness more completely than any of the so-called

"classical writers."

  119.

  Scent  of  Words.—Every  word  has  its  scent;  there  is  a  harmony  and

discord of scents, and so too of words.

  120.

  The Far-Fetched Style.—The natural style is an offence to the lover of the

far-fetched style.  121.

  A Vow.—I will never again read an author of whom one can suspect that

he  wanted  to  make  a  book,  but  only  those  writers  whose  thoughts

unexpectedly became a book.

  122.

  The Artistic Convention.—Three-fourths of Homer is convention, and the

same is the case with all the Greek artists, who had no reason for falling into

the modern craze for originality. They had no fear of convention, for after all

convention was a link between them and their public. Conventions are the

artistic  means  acquired  for  the  understanding  of  the  hearer;  the  common

speech, learnt with much toil, whereby the artist can really communicate his

ideas. All the more when he wishes, like the Greek poets and musicians, to

conquer at once with each of his works (since he is accustomed to compete

publicly  with  one  or  two  rivals),  the  first  condition  is  that  he  must  be

understood at once, and this is only possible by means of convention. What

the artist devises beyond convention he offers of his own free will and takes a

risk, his success at best resulting in the setting-up of a new convention. As a

rule  originality  is  marveled  at,  sometimes  even  worshipped,  but  seldom

understood. A stubborn avoidance of convention means a desire not to be

understood. What, then, is the object of the modern craze for originality?

  123.

  Artists' Affectation of Scientific Method.—Schiller, like other German

artists, fancied that if a man had intellect he was entitled to improvise even

with the pen on all difficult subjects. So there we see his prose essays—in

every way a model of how not to attack scientific questions of aesthetics and

ethics, and a danger for young readers who, in their admiration for Schiller

the poet, have not the courage to think meanly of Schiller the thinker and

author.—The temptation to traverse for once the forbidden paths, and to have

his say in science as well, is easy and pardonable in the artist. For even the

ablest  artist  from  time  to  time  finds  his  handicraft  and  his  workshop

unendurable. This temptation is so strong that it makes the artist show all the

world what no one wishes to see, that his little chamber of thought is cramped

and untidy. Why not, indeed? He does not live there. He proceeds to show

that  the  storeroom  of  his  knowledge  is  partly  empty,  partly  filled  with

lumber. Why not, indeed? This condition does not really become the artist-

child badly. In particular, the artist shows that for the very easiest exercises of

scientific method, which are accessible even to beginners, his joints are toostiff and untrained! Even of that he need not really be ashamed! On the other

hand, he often develops no mean art in imitating all the mistakes, vices, and

base pedantries that are practised in the scientific community, in the belief

that these belong to the appearance of the thing, if not to the thing itself This

is  the  very  point  that  is  so  amusing  in  artists'  writing,  that  the  artist

involuntarily  acts  as  his  vocation  demands:  he  parodies  the  scientific  and

inartistic natures. Towards science he should show no attitude but that of

parody, in so far as he is an artist and only an artist.

  124.

  The Faust-Idea.—A little sempstress is seduced and plunged into despair:

a great scholar of all the four Faculties is the evil-doer. That cannot have

happened in the ordinary course, surely? No, certainly not! Without the aid of

the devil incarnate, the great scholar would never have achieved the deed.—

Is this really destined to be the greatest German "tragic idea," as one hears it

said among Germans?—But for Goethe even this idea was too terrible. His

kind heart could not avoid placing the little sempstress, "the good soul that

forgot itself but once," near to the saints, after her involuntary death. Even the

great scholar, "the good man" with "the dark impulse," is brought into heaven

in the nick of time, by a trick which is played upon the devil at the decisive

moment. In heaven the lovers find themselves again. Goethe once said that

his nature was too conciliatory for really tragic subjects.

  125.

  Are there "German Classics"?—Sainte-Beuve observes somewhere that

the word "classic" does not suit the genius of certain literatures. For instance,

nobody could talk seriously of "German classics."—What do our German

publishers, who are about to add fifty more to the fifty German classics we

are told to accept, say to that? Does it not almost seem as if one need only

have been dead for the last thirty years, and lie a lawful prey to the public,

[21] in order to hear suddenly and unexpectedly the trumpet of resurrection

as a "Classic"? And this in an age and a nation where at least five out of the

six  great  fathers  of  its  literature  are  undoubtedly  antiquated  or  becoming

antiquated—without there being any need for the age or the nation to be

ashamed of this. For those writers have given way before the strength of our

time—let that be considered in all fairness!—Goethe, as I have indicated, I do

not include. He belongs to a higher species than "national literatures": hence

life, revival, and decay do not enter into the reckoning in his relations with

his countrymen. He lived and now lives but for the few; for the majority he isnothing but a flourish of vanity which is trumpeted from time to time across

the border into foreign ears. Goethe, not merely a great and good man, but a

culture, is in German history an interlude without a sequel. Who, for instance,

would be able to point to any trace of Goethe's influence in German politics

of the last seventy years (whereas the influence, certainly of Schiller, and

perhaps of Lessing, can be traced in the political world)? But what of those

five others? Klopstock, in a most honourable way, became out of date even in

his  own  lifetime,  and  so  completely  that  the  meditative  book  of  his  later

years, The Republic of Learning, has never been taken seriously from that

day to this. Herder's misfortune was that his writings were always either new

or antiquated. Thus for stronger and more subtle minds (like Lichtenberg)

even Herder's masterpiece, his Ideas for the History of Mankind, was in a

way antiquated at the very moment of its appearance. Wieland, who lived to

the full and made others live likewise, was clever enough to anticipate by

death the waning of his influence. Lessing, perhaps, still lives to-day—but

among a young and ever younger band of scholars. Schiller has fallen from

the hands of young men into those of boys, of all German boys. It is a well-

known sign of obsolescence when a book descends to people of less and less

mature age.—Well, what is it that has thrust these five into the background,

so that well-educated men of affairs no longer read them? A better taste, a

riper knowledge, a higher reverence for the real and the true: in other words,

the very virtues which these five (and ten or twenty others of lesser repute)

first re-planted in Germany, and which now, like a mighty forest, cast over

their graves not only the shadow of awe, but something of the shadow of

oblivion.—But classical writers are not planters of intellectual and literary

virtues. They bring those virtues to perfection and are their highest luminous

peaks, and being brighter, freer, and purer than all that surrounds them, they

remain shining above the nations when the nations themselves perish. There

may come an elevated stage of humanity, in which the Europe of the peoples

is a dark, forgotten thing, but Europe lives on in thirty books, very old but

never antiquated—in the classics. [21] The German copyright expires thirty

years after publication.—Tr.

  126.

  Interesting, but not Beautiful.—This countryside conceals its meaning,

but it has one that we should like to guess. Everywhere that I look, I read

words and hints of words, but I do not know where begins the sentence that

solves the riddle of all these hints. So I get a stiff neck in trying to discoverwhether I should start reading from this or that point.

  127.

  Against Innovators in Language.—The use of neologisms or archaisms,

the preference for the rare and the bizarre, the attempt to enrich rather than to

limit the vocabulary, are always signs either of an immature or of a corrupted

taste. A noble poverty but a masterly freedom within the limits of that modest

wealth distinguishes the Greek artists in oratory. They wish to have less than

the people has—for the people is richest in old and new—but they wish to

have that little better. The reckoning up of their archaic and exotic forms is

soon done, but we never cease marveling if we have an eye for their light and

delicate manner in handling the commonplace and apparently long outworn

elements in word and phrase.

  128.

  Gloomy and Serious Authors.—He who commits his sufferings to paper

becomes a gloomy author, but he becomes a serious one if he tells us what he

has suffered and why he is now enjoying a pleasurable repose.

  129.

    Healthiness  of  Taste.—How  is  it  that  health  is  less  contagious  than

disease—generally,  and  particularly  in  matters  of  taste?  Or  are  there

epidemics of health?

  130.

  A Resolution.—Never again to read a book that is born and christened

(with ink) at the same moment.

  131.

    Improving our Ideas.—Improving our style means improving our ideas,

and  nothing  else.  He  who  does  not  at  once  concede  this  can  never  be

convinced of the point.

  132.

    Classical Books.—The weakest point in every classical book is that it is

written too much in the mother tongue of its author.

  133.

  Bad Books.—The book should demand pen, ink, and desk, but usually it

is pen, ink, and desk that demand the book. That is why books are of so little

account at present.

  134.

  Presence of Sense.—When the public reflects on paintings, it becomes a

poet;  when  on  poems,  an  investigator.  At  the  moment  when  the  artistsummons  it  it  is  always  lacking  in  the  right  sense,  and  accordingly  in

presence of sense, not in presence of mind.

  135.

  Choice Ideas.—The choice style of a momentous period does not only

select its words but its ideas—and both from the customary and prevailing

usage. Venturesome ideas, that smell too fresh, are to the maturer taste no

less  repugnant  than  new  and  reckless  images  and  phrases.  Later  on  both

choice ideas and choice words soon smack of mediocrity, because the scent

of  the  choice  vanishes  quickly,  and  then  nothing  but  the  customary  and

commonplace element is tasted.

  136.

  Main  Reason  for  Corruption  of  Style.—The  desire  to  display  more

sentiment than one really feels for a thing corrupts style, in language and in

all art. All great art shows rather the opposite tendency. Like every man of

moral significance, it loves to check emotion on its way and not let it run its

course to the very end. This modesty of letting emotion but half appear is

most  clearly  to  be  observed,  for  example,  in  Sophocles.  The  features  of

sentiment seem to become beautified when sentiment feigns to be more shy

than it really is.

  137.

  An Excuse for the Heavy Style.—The lightly uttered phrase seldom falls

on the ear with the full weight of the subject. This is, however, due to the bad

training of the ear, which by education must pass from what has hitherto been

called  music  to  the  school  of  the  higher  harmony—in  other  words,  to

conversation.

  138.

    Bird's-Eye Views.—Here torrents rush from every side into a ravine: their

movement is so swift and stormy, and carries the eye along so quickly, that

the bare or wooded mountain slopes around seem not to sink down but to fly

down. We are in an agonized tension at the sight, as if behind all this were

hidden some hostile element, before which all must fly, and against which the

abyss alone gave protection. This landscape cannot be painted, unless we

hover above it like a bird in the open air. Here for once the so-called bird's-

eye view is not an artistic caprice, but the sole possibility.

  139.

  Rash  Comparisons.—If  rash  comparisons  are  not  proofs  of  the

wantonness  of  the  writer,  they  are  proofs  of  the  exhaustion  of  hisimagination. In any case they bear witness to his bad taste.

  140.

  Dancing in Chains.—In the case of every Greek artist, poet, or writer we

must ask: What is the new constraint which he imposes upon himself and

makes attractive to his contemporaries, so as to find imitators? For the thing

called "invention" (in metre, for example) is always a self-imposed fetter of

this kind. "Dancing in chains"—to make that hard for themselves and then to

spread a false notion that it is easy—that is the trick that they wish to show

us. Even in Homer we may perceive a wealth of inherited formulæ and laws

of epic narration, within the circle of which he had to dance, and he himself

created new conventions for them that came after. This was the discipline of

the Greek poets: first to impose upon themselves a manifold constraint by

means of the earlier poets; then to invent in addition a new constraint, to

impose it upon themselves and cheerfully to overcome it, so that constraint

and victory are perceived and admired.

  141.

  Authors' Copiousness.—The last quality that a good author acquires is

copiousness: whoever has it to begin with will never become a good author.

The noblest racehorses are lean until they are permitted to rest from their

victories.

  142.

    Wheezing Heroes.—Poets and artists who suffer from a narrow chest of

the emotions generally make their heroes wheeze. They do not know what

easy breathing means.

  143.

  The  Short-Sighted.  [22]—The  short-sighted  are  the  deadly  foes  of  all

authors who let themselves go. These authors should know the wrath with

which these people shut the book in which they observe that its creator needs

fifty pages to express five ideas. And the cause of their wrath is that they

have endangered what remains of their vision almost without compensation.

A short-sighted person said, "All authors let themselves go." "Even the Holy

Ghost?" "Even the Holy Ghost." But he had a right to, for he wrote for those

who had lost their sight altogether. [22] Nietzsche himself was extremely

short-sighted—Tr.

  144.

  The  Style  of  Immortality.—Thucydides  and  Tacitus  both  imagined

immortal  life  for  their  works  when  they  executed  them.  That  might  beguessed (if not known otherwise) from their style. The one thought to give

permanence to his ideas by salting them, the other by boiling them down; and

neither, it seems, made a miscalculation.

  145.

  Against Images and Similes.—By images and similes we convince, but

we do not prove. That is why science has such a horror of images and similes.

Science does not want to convince or make plausible, and rather seeks to

provoke cold distrust by its mode of expression, by the bareness of its walls.

For distrust is the touchstone for the gold of certainty.

  146.

  Caution.—In Germany, he who lacks thorough knowledge should beware

of writing. The good German does not say in that case "he is ignorant," but

"he is of doubtful character."—This hasty conclusion, by the way, does great

credit to the Germans.

  147.

  Painted Skeletons.—Painted skeletons are those authors who try to make

up for their want of flesh by artistic colorings.

  148.

  The Grand Style and Something Better.—It is easier to learn how to write

the grand style than how to write easily and simply. The reasons for this are

inextricably bound up with morality.

  149.

  Sebastian Bach.—In so far as we do not hear Bach's music as perfect and

experienced connoisseurs of counterpoint and all the varieties of the fugal

style(and accordingly must dispense with real artistic enjoyment), we shall

feel in listening to his music—in Goethe's magnificent phrase—as if "we

were present at God's creation of the world." In other words, we feel here that

something  great  is  in  the  making  but  not  yet  made—our  mighty  modern

music, which by conquering nationalities, the Church, and counterpoint has

conquered the world. In Bach there is still too much crude Christianity, crude

Germanism,  crude  scholasticism.  He  stands  on  the  threshold  of  modern

European music, but turns from thence to look at the Middle Ages.

  150.

    Händel.—Händel, who in the invention of his music was bold, original,

truthful, powerful, inclined to and akin to all the heroism of which a nation is

capable, often proved stiff, cold, nay even weary of himself in composition.

He  applied  a  few  well-tried  methods  of  execution,  wrote  copiously  andquickly, and was glad when he had finished—but that joy was not the joy of

God and other creators in the eventide of their working day.

  151.

    Haydn.—So far as genius can exist in a man who is merely good, Haydn

had genius. He went just as far as the limit which morality sets to intellect,

and only wrote music that has "no past."

  152.

    Beethoven and Mozart.—Beethoven's music often appears like a deeply

emotional  meditation  on  unexpectedly  hearing  once  more  a  piece  long

thought to be forgotten, "Tonal Innocence": it is music about music. In the

song of the beggar and child in the street, in the monotonous airs of vagrant

Italians, in the dance of the village inn or in carnival nights he discovers his

melodies. He stores them together like a bee, snatching here and there some

notes or a short phrase. To him these are hallowed memories of "the better

world," like the ideas of Plato.—Mozart stands in quite a different relation to

his melodies. He finds his inspiration not in hearing music but in gazing at

life, at the most stirring life of southern lands. He was always dreaming of

Italy, when he was not there.

  153.

    Recitative.—Formerly recitative was dry, but now we live in the age of

moist  recitative.  It  has  fallen  into  the  water,  and  the  waves  carry  it

whithersoever they list.

  154.

  "Cheerful" Music.—If for a long time we have heard no music, it then

goes like a heavy southern wine all too quickly into the blood and leaves

behind it a soul dazed with narcotics, half-awake, longing for sleep. This is

particularly the case with cheerful music, which inspires in us bitterness and

pain, satiety and home-sickness together, and forces us to sip again and again

as at a sweetened draught of poison. The hall of gay, noisy merriment then

seems to grow narrow, the light to lose its brightness and become browner.

At last we feel as if this music were penetrating to a prison where a poor

wretch cannot sleep for home-sickness.

  155.

  Franz Schubert.—Franz Schubert, inferior as an artist to the other great

musicians, had nevertheless the largest share of inherited musical wealth. He

spent  it  with  a  free  hand  and  a  kind  heart,  so  that  for  a  few  centuries

musicians will continue to nibble at his ideas and inspirations. In his workswe find a store of unused inventions; the greatness of others will lie inmaking

use of those inventions. If Beethoven may be called the ideal listener for a

troubadour, Schubert has a right to be called the ideal troubadour.

  156.

  Modern Musical Execution.—Great tragic or dramatic execution of music

acquires its character by imitating the gesture of the great sinner, such as

Christianity  conceives  and  desires  him:  the  slow-stepping,  passionately

brooding man, distracted by the agonies of conscience, now flying in terror,

now clutching with delight, now standing still in despair—and all the other

marks of great sinfulness. Only on the Christian assumption that all men are

great sinners and do nothing but sin could we justify the application of this

style of execution to all music. So far, music would be the reflection of all the

actions  and  impulses  of  man,  and  would  continually  have  to  express  by

gestures the language of the great sinner. At such a performance, a listener

who was not enough of a Christian to understand this logic might indeed cry

out in horror, "For the love of Heaven, how did sin find its way into music?"

  157.

  Felix Mendelssohn.—Felix Mendelssohn's music is the music of the good

taste that enjoys all the good things that have ever existed. It always points

behind. How could it have much "in front," much of a future?—But did he

want it to have a future? He possessed a virtue rare among artists, that of

gratitude without arrière-pensée. This virtue, too, always points behind.

  158.

  A Mother of Arts.—In our skeptical age, real devotion requires almost a

brutal heroism of ambition. Fanatical shutting of the eyes and bending of the

knee  no  longer  suffice.  Would  it  not  be  possible  for  ambition—in  its

eagerness to be the last devotee of all the ages—to become the begetter of a

final  church  music,  as  it  has  been  the  begetter  of  the  final  church

architecture? (They call it the Jesuit style.)

  159.

  Freedom  in  Fetters—A  Princely  Freedom.—Chopin,  the  last  of  the

modern  musicians,  who  gazed  at  and  worshipped  beauty,  like  Leopardi;

Chopin, the Pole, the inimitable (none that came before or after him has a

right to this name)—Chopin had the same princely punctilio in convention

that Raphael shows in the use of the simplest traditional colors. The only

difference  is  that  Chopin  applies  them  not  to  color  but  to  melodic  and

rhythmic traditions. He admitted the validity of these traditions because hewas born under the sway of etiquette. But in these fetters he plays and dances

as the freest and daintiest of spirits, and, be it observed, he does not spurn the

chain.

  160.

  Chopin's Barcarolle.—Almost all states and modes of life have a moment

of  rapture,  and  good  artists  know  how  to  discover  that  moment.  Such  a

moment there is even in life by the seashore—that dreary, sordid, unhealthy

existence, dragged out in the neighbourhood of a noisy and covetous rabble.

This  moment  of  rapture  Chopin  in  his  Barcarolle  expressed  in  sound  so

supremely that Gods themselves, when they heard it, might yearn to lie long

summer evenings in a boat.

  161.

  Robert  Schumann.—"The  Stripling,"  as  the  romantic  songsters  of

Germany and France of the first three decades of this century imagined him

—this stripling was completely translated into song and melody by Robert

Schumann, the eternal youth, so long as he felt himself in full possession of

his powers. There are indeed moments when his music reminds one of the

eternal "old maid."

  162.

    Dramatic Singers.—"Why does this beggar sing?" "Probably he does not

know how to wail." "Then he does right." But our dramatic singers, who wail

because they do not know how to sing—are they also in the right?

  163.

    Dramatic Music.—For him who does not see what is happening on the

stage, dramatic music is a monstrosity, just as the running commentary to a

lost text is a monstrosity. Such music requires us to have ears where our eyes

are. This, however, is doing violence to Euterpe, who, poor Muse, wants to

have her eyes and ears where the other Muses have theirs.

  164.

  Victory and Reasonableness.—Unfortunately in the aesthetic wars, which

artists provoke by their works and apologias for their works, just as is the

case in real war, it is might and not reason that decides. All the world now

assumes as a historical fact that, in his dispute with Piccini, Gluck was in the

right. At any rate, he was victorious, and had might on his side.

  165.

  Of  the  Principle  of  Musical  Execution.—Do  the  modern  musical

performers really believe that the supreme law of their art is to give everypiece as much high-relief as is possible, and to make it speak at all costs a

dramatic language? Is not this principle, when applied for example to Mozart,

a  veritable  sin  against  the  spirit—the  gay,  sunny,  airy,  delicate  spirit—of

Mozart,  whose  seriousness  was  of  a  kindly  and  not  awe-inspiring  order,

whose pictures do not try to leap from the wall and drive away the beholder

in panic? Or do you think that all Mozart's music is identical with the statue-

music in Don Juan? And not only Mozart's, but all music?—You reply that

the advantage of your principle lies in its greater effect. You would be right if

there did not remain the counter-question, "On whom has the effect operated,

and on whom should an artist of the first rank desire to produce his effect?"

Never  on  the  populace!  Never  on  the  immature!  Never  on  the  morbidly

sensitive! Never on the diseased! And above all—never on the blasé!

  166.

  The Music of To-Day.—This ultra-modern music, with its strong lungs

and weak nerves, is frightened above all things of itself.

  167.

  Where  Music  is  at  Home.—Music  reaches  its  high-water  mark  only

among men who have not the ability or the right to argue. Accordingly, its

chief  promoters  are  princes,  whose  aim  is  that  there  should  be  not  much

criticism nor even much thought in their neighbourhood. Next come societies

which, under some pressure or other (political or religious), are forced to

become habituated to silence, and so feel all the greater need of spells to

charm  away  emotional  ennui—these  spells  being  generally  eternal  love-

making and eternal music. Thirdly, we must reckon whole nations in which

there is no "society," but all the greater number of individuals with a bent

towards  solitude,  mystical  thinking,  and  a  reverence  for  all  that  is

inexpressible; these are the genuine "musical souls." The Greeks, as a nation

delighting in talking and argument, accordingly put up with music only as an

hors  d'œuvre  to  those  arts  which  really  admit  of  discussion  and  dispute.

About music one can hardly even think clearly. The Pythagoreans, who in so

many  respects  were  exceptional  Greeks,  are  said  to  have  been  great

musicians. This was the school that invented a five-years' silence, [23] but

did not invent a dialectic. [23] In the sixth century B.C. Pythagoras founded

at  Croton  a  "school"  somewhat  resembling  a  monastic  order.  Among  the

ordeals for novitiates was enforced silence for five years.—Tr.

  168.

    Sentimentality in Music.—We may be ever so much in sympathy withserious and profound music, yet nevertheless, or perhaps all the more for that

reason,  we  shall  at  occasional  moments  be  over-powered,  entranced,  and

almost melted away by its opposite—I mean, by those simple Italian operatic

airs  which,  in  spite  of  all  their  monotony  of  rhythm  and  childishness  of

harmony, seem at times to sing to us like the very soul of music. Admit this

or not as you please, you Pharisees of good taste, it is so, and it is my present

task to propound the riddle that it is so, and to nibble a little myself at the

solution.—In childhood's days we tasted the honey of many things for the

first  time.  Never  was  honey  so  good  as  then;  it  seduced  us  to  life,  into

abundant  life,  in  the  guise  of  the  first  spring,  the  first  flower,  the  first

butterfly, the first friendship. Then—perhaps in our ninth year or so—we

heard our first music, and this was the first that we understood; thus the

simplest and most childish tunes, that were not much more than a sequel to

the nurse's lullaby and the strolling fiddler's tune, were our first experience.

(For even the most trifling "revelations" of art need preparation and study;

there  is  no  "immediate"  effect  of  art,  whatever  charming  fables  the

philosophers  may  tell.)  Our  sensation  on  hearing  these  Italian  airs  is

associated with those first musical raptures, the strongest of our lives. The

bliss of childhood and its flight, the feeling that our most precious possession

can  never  be  brought  back,  all  this  moves  the  chords  of  the  soul  more

strongly than the most serious and profound music can move them.—This

mingling  of  aesthetic  pleasure  with  moral  pain,  which  nowadays  it  is

customary to call (rather too haughtily, I think) "sentimentality"—it is the

mood  of  Faust  at  the  end  of  the  first  scene—this  "sentimentality"  of  the

listener  is  all  to  the  advantage  of  Italian  music.  It  is  a  feeling  which  the

experienced  connoisseurs  in  art,  the  pure  "aesthetes,"  like  to  ignore.—

Moreover, almost all music has a magical effect only when we hear it speak

the language of our own past. Accordingly, it seems to the layman that all the

old music is continually growing better, and that all the latest is of little value.

For  the  latter  arouses  no  "sentimentality,"  that  most  essential  element  of

happiness, as aforesaid, for every man who cannot approach this art with pure

aesthetic enjoyment.

  169.

  As Friends of Music.—Ultimately we are and remain good friends with

music,  as  we  are  with  the  light  of  the  moon.  Neither,  after  all,  tries  to

supplant the sun: they only want to illumine our nights to the best of their

powers. Yet we may jest and laugh at them, may we not? Just a little, at least,and from time to time? At the man in the moon, at the woman in the music?

  170.

  Art  in  an  Age  of  Work.—We  have  the  conscience  of  an  industrious

epoch. This debars us from devoting our best hours and the best part of our

days to art, even though that art be the greatest and worthiest. Art is for us a

matter of leisure, of recreation, and we consecrate to it the residue of our time

and strength. This is the cardinal fact that has altered the relation of art to life.

When art makes its great demands of time and strength upon its recipients, it

has  to  battle  against  the  conscience  of  the  industrious  and  efficient,  it  is

relegated to the idle and conscienceless, who, by their very nature, are not

exactly  suited  to  great  art,  and  consider  its  claims  arrogant.  It  might,

therefore, be all over with art, since it lacks air and the power to breathe. But

perhaps the great art attempts, by a sort of coarsening and disguising, to make

itself  at  home  in  that  other  atmosphere,  or  at  least  to  put  up  with  it—an

atmosphere which is really a natural element only for petty art, the art of

recreation,  of  pleasant  distraction.  This  happens  nowadays  almost

everywhere.  Even  the  exponents  of  great  art  promise  recreation  and

distraction; even they address themselves to the exhausted; even they demand

from him the evening hours of his working-day—just like the artists of the

entertaining  school,  who  are  content  to  smooth  the  furrowed  brow  and

brighten the lack-lustre eye. What, then, are the devices of their mightier

brethren? These have in their medicine-chests the most powerful excitants,

which might give a shock even to a man half-dead: they can deafen you,

intoxicate you, make you shudder, or bring tears to your eyes. By this means

they overpower the exhausted man and stimulate him for one night to an

over-lively condition, to an ecstasy of terror and delight. This great art, as it

now lives in opera, tragedy, and music—have we a right to be angry with it,

because of its perilous fascination, as we should be angry with a cunning

courtesan?  Certainly  not.  It  would  far  rather  live  in  the  pure  element  of

morning calm, and would far rather make its appeal to the fresh, expectant,

vigorous morning-soul of the beholder or listener. Let us be thankful that it

prefers living thus to vanishing altogether. But let us also confess that an era

that once more introduces free and complete high-days and holidays into life

will have no use for our great art.

  171.

  The  Employees  of  Science  and  the  Others.—Really  efficient  and

successful men of science might be collectively called "The Employees." If inyouth their acumen is sufficiently practised, their memory is full, and hand

and  eye  have  acquired  sureness,  they  are  appointed  by  an  older  fellow-

craftsman  to  a  scientific  position  where  their  qualities  may  prove  useful.

Later on, when they have themselves gained an eye for the gaps and defects

in their science, they place themselves in whatever position they are needed.

These persons all exist for the sake of science. But there are rarer spirits,

spirits  that  seldom  succeed  or  fully  mature—"for  whose  sake  science

exists"—at least, in their view. They are often unpleasant, conceited, or cross-

grained men, but almost always prodigies to a certain extent. They are neither

employees nor employers; they make use of what those others have worked

out and established, with a certain princely carelessness and with little and

rare praise—just as if the others belonged to a lower order of beings. Yet they

possess the same qualities as their fellow-workers, and that sometimes in a

less developed form. Moreover, they have a peculiar limitation, from which

the others are free; this makes it impossible to put them into a place and to

see in them useful tools. They can only live in their own air and on their own

soil.  This  limitation  suggests  to  them  what  elements  of  a  science  "are

theirs"—in  other  words,  what  they  can  carry  home  into  their  house  and

atmosphere:  they  think  that  they  are  always  collecting  their  scattered

"property." If they are prevented from building at their own nest, they perish

like shelterless birds. The loss of freedom causes them to wilt away. If they

show, like their colleagues, a fondness for certain regions of science, it is

always only regions where the fruits and seeds necessary to them can thrive.

What do they care whether science, taken as a whole, has untilled or badly

tilled regions? They lack all impersonal interest in a scientific problem. As

they are themselves personal through and through, all their knowledge and

ideas  are  remolded  into  a  person,  into  a  living  complexity,  with  its  parts

interdependent, overlapping, jointly nurtured, and with a peculiar atmosphere

and  scent  as  a  whole.—Such  natures,  with  their  system  of  personal

knowledge,  produce  the  illusion  that  a  science  (or  even  the  whole  of

philosophy)  is  finished  and  has  reached  its  goal.  The  life  in  their  system

works this magic, which at times has been fatal to science and deceptive to

the really efficient workers above described, and at other times, when drought

and exhaustion prevailed, has acted as a kind of restorative, as if it were the

air  of  a  cool,  refreshing  resting-place.—These  men  are  usually  called

philosophers.

  172.    Recognition of Talent.—As I went through the village of S., a boy began

to crack his whip with all his might—he had made great progress in this art,

and  he  knew  it.  I  threw  him  a  look  of  recognition—in  reality  it  hurt  me

cruelly. We do the same in our recognition of many of the talents. We do

good to them when they hurt us.

  173.

  Laughing and Smiling.—The more joyful and assured the mind becomes,

the more man loses the habit of loud laughter. In compensation, there is an

intellectual smile continually bubbling up in him, a sign of his astonishment

at the innumerable concealed delights of a good existence.

  174.

  The Talk of Invalids.—Just as in spiritual grief we tear our hair, strike our

foreheads, lacerate our cheeks or even (like Œdipus) gouge our eyes out, so

against  violent  physical  pain  we  call  to  our  aid  a  bitter,  violent  emotion,

through  the  recollection  of  slanderous  and  malignant  people,  through  the

denigration of our future, through the sword-pricks and acts of malice which

we mentally direct against the absent. And at times it is true that one devil

drives out another—but then we have the other.—Hence a different sort of

talk, tending to alleviate pain, should be recommended invalids: reflections

upon the kindnesses and courtesies that can be performed towards friend and

foe.

  175.

    Mediocrity  as  a  Mask.—Mediocrity  is  the  happiest  mask  which  the

superior mind can wear, because it does not lead the great majority—that is,

the  mediocre—to  think  that  there  is  any  disguise.  Yet  the  superior  mind

assumes the mask just for their sake—so as not to irritate them, nay, often

from a feeling of pity and kindness.

  176.

  The Patient.—The pine tree seems to listen, the fir tree to wait, and both

without impatience. They do not give a thought to the petty human being

below who is consumed by his impatience and his curiosity.

  177.

  The Best Joker.—My favorite joke is the one that takes the place of a

heavy and rather hesitating idea, and that at once beckons with its finger and

winks its eye.

  178.

  The  Accessories  of  all  Reverence.—Wherever  the  past  is  revered,  theover-cleanly and over-tidy people should not be admitted. Piety does not feel

content without a little dust, dirt, and dross.

  179.

  The Great Danger of Savants.—It is just the most thorough and profound

savants who are in peril of seeing their life's goal set ever lower and lower,

and, with a feeling of this in their minds, to become ever more discouraged

and more unendurable in the latter half of their lives. At first they plunge into

their science with spacious hopes and set themselves daring tasks, the ends of

which are already anticipated by their imaginations. Then there are moments

as in the lives of the great maritime discoverers—knowledge, presentiment,

and power raise each other higher and higher, until a new shore first dawns

upon the eye in the far distance. But now the stern man recognizes more and

more how important it is that the individual task of the inquirer should be

limited as far as possible, so that it may be entirely accomplished and the

intolerable waste of force from which earlier periods of science suffered may

be avoided. In those days everything was done ten times over, and then the

eleventh always had the last and best word. Yet the more the savant learns

and practices this art of solving riddles in their entirety, the more pleasure he

finds in so doing. But at the same time his demands upon what is here called

"entirety" grow more exacting. He sets aside everything that must remain in

this sense incomplete, he acquires a disgust and an acute scent for the half-

soluble—for  all  that  can  only  give  a  kind  of  certainty  in  a  general  and

indefinite  form.  His  youthful  plans  crumble  away  before  his  eyes.  There

remains scarcely anything but a few little knots, in untying which the master

now takes his pleasure and shows his strength. Then, in the midst of all this

useful, restless activity, he, now grown old, is suddenly then often overcome

by a deep misgiving, a sort of torment of conscience. He looks upon himself

as  one  changed,  as  if  he  were  diminished,  humbled,  transformed  into  a

dexterous dwarf; he grows anxious as to whether mastery in small matters be

not a convenience, an escape from the summons to greatness in life and form.

But he cannot pass beyond any longer—the time for that has gone by.

  180.

    Teachers  in  the  Age  of  Books.—Now  that  self-education  and  mutual

education are becoming more widespread, the teacher in his usual form must

become almost unnecessary. Friends eager to learn, who wish to master some

branch of knowledge together, find in our age of books a shorter and more

natural way than "school" and "teachers."  181.

  Vanity as the Greatest Utility.—Originally the strong individual uses not

only Nature but even societies and weaker individuals as objects of rapine.

He exploits them, so far as he can, and then passes on. As he lives from hand

to mouth, alternating between hunger and superfluity, he kills more animals

than he can eat, and robs and maltreats men more than is necessary. His

manifestation  of  power  is  at  the  same  time  one  of  revenge  against  his

cramped  and  worried  existence.  Furthermore,  he  wishes  to  be  held  more

powerful than he is, and thus misuses opportunities; the accretion of fear that

he begets being an accretion of power. He soon observes that he stands or

falls not by what he is but by what he is thought to be. Herein lies the origin

of vanity. The man of power seeks by every means to increase others' faith in

his power.—The thralls who tremble before him and serve him know, for

their part, that they are worth just so much as they appear to him to be worth,

and so they work with an eye to this valuation rather than to their own self-

satisfaction.  We  know  vanity  only  in  its  most  weakened  forms,  in  its

idealizations  and  its  small  doses,  because  we  live  in  a  late  and  very

emasculated  state  of  society.  Originally  vanity  is  the  great  utility,  the

strongest  means  of  preservation.  And  indeed  vanity  will  be  greater,  the

cleverer the individual, because an increase in the belief in power is easier

than an increase in the power itself, but only for him who has intellect or (as

must be the case under primitive conditions) who is cunning and crafty.

  182.

    Weather-Signs of Culture.—There are so few decisive weather-signs of

culture that we must be glad to have at least one unfailing sign at hand for use

in house and garden. To test whether a man belongs to us (I mean to the free

spirits) or not, we must test his sentiments regarding Christianity. If he looks

upon Christianity with other than a critical eye, we turn our backs to him, for

he brings us impure air and bad weather.—It is no longer our task to teach

such  men  what  a  sirocco  wind  is.  They  have  Moses  and  the  prophets  of

weather and of enlightenment [24] If they will not listen to these, then——

[24] In the German Aufklärung there is a play on the sense "clearing up" (of

weather) and "enlightenment."—Tr.

  183.

  There  is  a  Proper  Time  for  Wrath  and  Punishment.—Wrath  and

punishment are our inheritance from the animals. Man does not become of

age until he has restored to the animals this gift of the cradle.—Herein liesburied one of the mightiest ideas that men can have, the idea of a progress of

all progresses.—Let us go forward together a few millenniums, my friends!

There is still reserved for mankind a great deal of joy, the very scent of which

has not yet been wafted to the men of our day! Indeed, we may promise

ourselves this joy, nay summon and conjure it up as a necessary thing, so

long as the development of human reason does not stand still. Some day we

shall no longer be reconciled to the logical sin that lurks in all wrath and

punishment, whether exercised by the individual or by society—some day,

when head and heart have learnt to live as near together as they now are far

apart. That they no longer stand so far apart as they did originally is fairly

palpable from a glance at the whole course of humanity. The individual who

can  review  a  life  of  introspective  work  will  become  conscious  of  the

rapprochement arrived at, with a proud delight at the distance he has bridged,

in order that he may thereupon venture upon more ample hopes.

  184.

  Origin of Pessimists.—A snack of good food often decides whether we

are to look to the future with hollow eye or in hopeful mood. The same

influence extends to the very highest and most intellectual states. Discontent

and reviling of the world are for the present generation an inheritance from

starveling  ancestors.  Even  in  our  artists  and  poets  we  often  notice  that,

however exuberant their life, they are not of good birth, and have often, from

oppressed and ill-nourished ancestors, inherited in their blood and brain much

that comes out as the subject and even the conscious coloring of their work.

The culture of the Greeks is a culture of men of wealth, in fact, inherited

wealth. For a few centuries they lived better than we do (better in every

sense, in particular far more simply in food and drink). Then the brain finally

became so well-stored and subtle, and the blood flowed so quickly, like a

joyous, clear wine, that the best in them came to light no longer as gloomy,

distorted, and violent, but full of beauty and sunshine.

  185.

  Of Reasonable Death.—Which is more reasonable, to stop the machine

when the works have done the task demanded of them, or to let it run on until

it stands still of its own accord—in other words, is destroyed? Is not the latter

a waste of the cost of upkeep, a misuse of the strength and care of those who

serve? Are men not here throwing away that which would be sorely needed

elsewhere? Is not a kind of contempt of the machines propagated, in that

many  of  them  are  so  uselessly  tended  and  kept  up?—I  am  speaking  ofinvoluntary  (natural)  and  voluntary  (reasonable)  death.  Natural  death  is

independent  of  all  reason  and  is  really  an  irrational  death,  in  which  the

pitiable substance of the shell determines how long the kernel is to exist or

not; in which, accordingly, the stunted, diseased and dull-witted jailer is lord,

and  indicates  the  moment  at  which  his  distinguished  prisoner  shall  die.

Natural death is the suicide of nature—in other words, the annihilation of the

most  rational  being  through  the  most  irrational  element  that  is  attached

thereto. Only through religious illumination can the reverse appear; for then,

as is equitable, the higher reason (God) issues its orders, which the lower

reason  has  to  obey.  Outside  religious  thought  natural  death  is  not  worth

glorifying. The wise dispensation and disposal of death belongs to that now

quite  incomprehensible  and  immoral-sounding  morality  of  the  future,  the

dawn of which it will be an ineffable delight to behold.

  186.

    Retrograde Influences.—All criminals force society back to earlier stages

of  culture  than  that  in  which  they  are  placed  for  the  time  being.  Their

influence is retrograde. Let us consider the tools that society must forge and

maintain for its defence: the cunning detectives, the jailers, the hangmen. Nor

should we forget the public counsel for prosecution and defence. Finally we

may ask ourselves whether the judge himself and punishment and the whole

legal procedure are not oppressive rather than elevating in their reaction upon

all who are not law-breakers. For we shall never succeed in arraying self-

defence and revenge in the garb of innocence, and so long as men are used

and  sacrificed  as  a  means  to  the  end  of  society,  all  loftier  humanity  will

deplore this necessity.

  187.

  War as a Remedy.—For nations that are growing weak and contemptible

war may be prescribed as a remedy, if indeed they really want to go on living.

National  consumption  as  well  as  individual  admits  of  a  brutal  cure.  The

eternal will to live and inability to die is, however, in itself already a sign of

senility of emotion. The more fully and thoroughly we live, the more ready

we are to sacrifice life for a single pleasurable emotion. A people that lives

and feels in this wise has no need of war.

  188.

    Intellectual  and  Physical  Transplantation  as  Remedies.—The  different

cultures are so many intellectual climates, every one of which is peculiarly

harmful or beneficial to this or that organism. History as a whole, as theknowledge  of  different  cultures,  is  the  science  of  remedies,  but  not  the

science of the healing art itself. We still need a physician who can make use

of these remedies, in order to send every one—temporarily or permanently—

to the climate that just suits him. To live in the present, within the limits of a

single culture, is insufficient as a universal remedy: too many highly useful

kinds of men, who cannot breathe freely in this atmosphere, would perish.

With the aid of history we must give them air and try to preserve them: even

men of lower cultures have their value.—Add to this cure of intellects that

humanity,  on  considerations  of  bodily  health,  must  strive  to  discover  by

means of a medical geography what kinds of degeneration and disease are

caused by each region of the earth, and conversely, what ingredients of health

the earth affords: and then, gradually, nations, families, and individuals must

be transplanted long and permanently enough for them to become masters of

their inherited physical infirmities. The whole world will finally be a series of

sanatoria.

  189.

    Reason and the Tree of Mankind.—What you all fear in your senile short-

sightedness,  regarding  the  over-population  of  the  world,  gives  the  more

hopeful a mighty task. Man is someday to become a tree overshadowing the

whole earth, with millions upon millions of buds that shall all grow to fruits

side by side, and the earth itself shall be prepared for the nourishment of this

tree. That the shoot, tiny as yet, may increase in sap and strength; that the sap

may flow in countless channels for the nutrition of the whole and the parts—

from  these  and  similar  tasks  we  must  derive  our  standard  for  measuring

whether a man of to-day is useful or worthless. The task is unspeakably great

and  adventurous:  let  us  all  contribute  our  share  to  prevent  the  tree  from

rotting before its time! The historically trained mind will no doubt succeed in

calling  up  the  human  activities  of  all  the  ages  before  its  eyes,  as  the

community  of  ants  with  its  cunningly  wrought  mounds  stands  before  our

eyes. Superficially judged, mankind as a whole, like ant-kind, might admit of

our speaking of "instinct." On a closer examination we observe how whole

nations, nay whole centuries, take pains to discover and test new means of

benefiting the great mass of humanity, and thus finally the great common

fruit-tree of the world. Whatever injury the individual nations or periods may

suffer in this testing process, they have each become wise through this injury,

and from them the tide of wisdom slowly pours over the principles of whole

races and whole epochs. Ants too go astray and make blunders. Through thefolly of its remedies, mankind may well go to rack and ruin before the proper

time. There is no sure guiding instinct for the former or the latter. Rather

must we boldly face the great task of preparing the earth for a plant of the

most ample and joyous fruitfulness—a task set by reason to reason!

  190.

  The  Praise  of  Disinterestedness  and  its  Origin.—Between  two

neighbouring chieftains there was a long-standing quarrel: they laid waste

each other's territories, stole cattle, and burnt down houses, with an indecisive

result on the whole, because their power was fairly equal. A third, who from

the distant situation of his property was able to keep aloof from these feuds,

yet had reason to dread the day when one of the two neighbours should gain a

decisive  preponderance,  at  last  intervened  between  the  combatants  with

ceremonial goodwill. Secretly he lent a heavy weight to his peace proposal by

giving either to understand that he would henceforth join forces with the

other  against  the  one  who  strove  to  break  the  peace.  They  met  in  his

presence, they hesitatingly placed into his hand the hands that had hitherto

been the tools and only too often the causes of hatred—and then they really

and  seriously  tried  to  keep  the  peace.  Either  saw  with  astonishment  how

suddenly  his  prosperity  and  his  comfort  increased;  how  he  now  had  as

neighbour a dealer ready to buy and sell instead of a treacherous or openly

scornful evil-doer; how even, in unforeseen troubles, they could reciprocally

save each other from distress, instead of, as before, making capital out of this

distress  of  his  neighbour  and  enhancing  it  to  the  highest  degree.  It  even

seemed as if the human type had improved in both countries, for the eyes had

become brighter, the forehead had lost its wrinkles; all now felt confidence in

the future—and nothing is more advantageous for the souls and bodies of

men than this confidence. They saw each other every year on the anniversary

of the alliance, the chieftains as well as their retinue, and indeed before the

eyes of the mediator, whose mode of action they admired and revered more

and more, the greater the profit that they owed to him became. Then his mode

of action was called disinterested. They had looked far too fixedly at the

profit  they  had  reaped  themselves  hitherto  to  see  anything  more  of  their

neighbor's method of dealing than that his condition in consequence of this

had not altered so much as their own; he had rather remained the same: and

thus it appeared that the former had not had his profit in view. For the first

time people said to themselves that disinterestedness was a virtue. It is true

that in minor private matters similar circumstances had arisen, but men onlyhad eyes for this virtue when it was depicted on the walls in a large script that

was legible to the whole community. Moral qualities are not recognized as

virtues, endowed with names, held in esteem, and recommended as worthy of

acquisition until the moment when they have visibly decided the happiness

and destiny of whole societies. For then the loftiness of sentiment and the

excitation of the inner creative forces is in many so great, that offerings are

brought to this quality, offerings from the best of what each possesses. At its

feet  the  serious  man  lays  his  seriousness,  the  dignified  man  his  dignity,

women their gentleness, the young all the wealth of hope and futurity that in

them  lies;  the  poet  lends  it  words  and  names,  sets  it  marching  in  the

procession of similar beings, gives it a pedigree, and finally, as is the way

ofartists, adores the picture of his fancy as a new godhead—he even teaches

others to adore. Thus in the end, with the co-operation of universal love and

gratitude, a virtue becomes, like a statue, a repository of all that is good and

honourable,  a  sort  of  temple  and  divine  personage  combined.  It  appears

thenceforward as an individual virtue, as an absolute entity, which it was not

before,  and  exercises  the  power  and  privileges  of  a  sanctified  super-

humanity.—In the later days of Greece the cities were full of such deified

human abstractions (if one may so call them). The nation, in its own fashion,

had set up a Platonic "Heaven of Ideas" on earth, and I do not think that its

inhabitants were felt to be less alive than any of the old Homeric divinities.

  191.

  Days of Darkness.—"Days of Darkness" is the name given in Norway to

the period when the sun remains below the horizon the whole day long. The

temperature then falls slowly but continually.—A fine simile for all thinkers

for whom the sun of the human future is temporarily eclipsed.

  192.

  The Philosophy of Luxury.—A garden, figs, a little cheese, and three or

four good friends—that was the luxury of Epicurus.

  193.

  The Epochs of Life.—The real epochs of life are those brief periods of

cessation  midway  between  the  rise  and  decline  of  a  dominating  idea  or

emotion. Here once again there is satisfaction: all the rest is hunger and thirst

—or satiety.

  194.

    Dreams.—Our  dreams,  if  for  once  in  a  way  they  succeed  and  are

complete—generally  a  dream  is  a  bungled  piece  of  work—are  symbolicconcatenations of scenes and images in place of a narrative poetical language.

They  paraphrase  our  experiences  or  expectations  or  relations  with  poetic

boldness and definiteness, so that in the morning we are always astonished at

ourselves when we remember the nature of our dream. In dreams we use up

too much artistry—and hence are often too poor in artistry in the daytime.

  195.

  Nature  and  Science.—As  in  nature,  so  in  science  the  worse  and  less

fertile soils are first cultivated—because the means that science in its early

stages has at command are fairly sufficient for this purpose. The working of

the most fertile soils requires an enormous, carefully developed, persevering

method, tangible individual results, and an organized body of well-trained

workers. All these are found together only at a late stage.—Impatience and

ambition often grasp too early at these most fertile soils, but the results are

then from the first null and void. In nature such losses would usually be

avenged by the starvation of the settlers.

  196.

  The Simple Life.—A simple mode of life is nowadays difficult, requiring

as it does far more reflection and gift for invention than even very clever

people possess. The most honourable will perhaps still say, "I have not the

time for such lengthy reflection. The simple life is for me too lofty a goal: I

will wait till those wiser than I have discovered it."

  197.

  Peaks and Needle-Points.—The poor fertility, the frequent celibacy, and

in general the sexual coldness of the highest and most cultivated spirits, as

that of the classes to which they belong, is essential in human economy.

Intelligence  recognizes  and  makes  use  of  the  fact  that  at  an  acme  of

intellectual development the danger of a neurotic offspring is very great. Such

men are the peaks of mankind—they ought no longer to run out into needle-

points.

  198.

  Natura non facit saltum.—However strongly man may develop upwards

and seem to leap from one contradiction to another, a close observation will

reveal the dovetails where the new building grows out of the old. This is the

biographer's task: he must reflect upon his subject on the principle that nature

takes no jumps.

  199.

  Clean, but——He who clothes himself with rags washed clean dressescleanly, to be sure, but is still ragged.

  200.

  The  Solitary  Speaks.—In  compensation  for  much  disgust,

disheartenment,  boredom—such  as  a  lonely  life  without  friends,  books,

duties,  and  passions  must  involve—we  enjoy  those  short  spans  of  deep

communion  with  ourselves  and  with  Nature.  He  who  fortifies  himself

completely  against  boredom  fortifies  himself  against  himself  too.  He  will

never drink the most powerful elixir from his own innermost spring.

  201.

  False Renown.—I hate those so-called natural beauties which really have

significance only through science, especially geographical science, but are

insignificant in an aesthetic sense: for example, the view of Mont Blanc from

Geneva. This is an insignificant thing without the auxiliary mental joy of

science: the nearer mountains are all more beautiful and fuller of expression,

but "not nearly so high," adds that absurd depreciatory science. The eye here

contradicts science: how can it truly rejoice in the contradiction?

  202.

  Those  that  Travel  for  Pleasure.—Like  animals,  stupid  and  perspiring,

they climb mountains: people forgot to tell them that there were fine views on

the way.

  203.

  Too Much and Too Little.—Men nowadays live too much and think too

little.  They  have  hunger  and  dyspepsia  together,  and  become  thinner  and

thinner, however much they eat. He who now says "Nothing has happened to

me" is a blockhead.

  204.

  End and Goal.—Not every end is the goal. The end of a melody is not its

goal, and yet if a melody has not reached its end, it has also not reached its

goal. A parable.

  205.

    Neutrality of Nature on a Grand Scale.—The neutrality of Nature on a

grand scale (in mountain, sea, forest, and desert) is pleasing, but only for a

brief space. Afterwards we become impatient. "Have they all nothing to say

to us? Do we not exist so far as they are concerned?" There arises a feeling

that a lèse-majesté is committed against humanity.

  206.

    Forgetting  our  Purpose.—In  a  journey  we  commonly  forget  its  goal.Almost every vocation is chosen and entered upon as means to an end, but is

continued as the ultimate end. Forgetting our purpose is the most frequent

form of folly.

  207.

  Solar Orbit of an Idea.—When an idea is just rising on the horizon, the

soul's  temperature  is  usually  very  low.  Gradually  the  idea  develops  in

warmth, and is hottest (that is to say, exerts its greatest influence) when belief

in the idea is already on the wane.

  208.

  How to have every Man against You.—If someone now dared to say, "He

that is not for me is against me," he would at once have all against him.—

This sentiment does credit to our era.

  209.

  Being Ashamed of Wealth.—Our age endures only a single species of

rich men—those who are ashamed of their wealth. If we hear it said of any

one  that  he  is  very  rich,  we  at  once  feel  a  similar  sentiment  to  that

experienced at the sight of a repulsively swollen invalid, one suffering from

diabetes or dropsy. We must with an effort remember our humanity, in order

to go about with this rich man in such a way that he does not notice our

feeling of disgust. But as soon as he prides himself at all on his wealth, our

feelings are mingled with an almost compassionate surprise at such a high

degree of human unreason. We would fain raise our hands to heaven and cry,

"Poor deformed and over-burdened creature, fettered a hundredfold, to whom

every  hour  brings  or  may  bring  something  unpleasant,  in  whose  frame

twitches every event that occurs in scores of countries, how can you make us

believe that you feel at ease in your position? If you appear anywhere in

public,  we  know  that  it  is  a  sort  of  running  the  gauntlet  amid  countless

glances that have for you only cold hate or importunity or silent scorn. You

may earn more easily than others, but it is only a superfluous earning, which

brings little joy, and the guarding of what you have earned is now, at any

rate, a more troublesome business than any toilsome process of earning. You

are continually suffering, because you are continually losing. What avails it

you that they are always injecting you with fresh artificial blood? That does

not relieve the pain of those cupping-glasses that are fixed, forever fixed, on

your neck!—But, to be quite fair to you, it is difficult or perhaps impossible

for you not to be rich. You must guard, you must earn more; the inherited

bent of your character is the yoke fastened upon you. But do not on thataccount deceive us—be honestly and visibly ashamed of the yoke you wear,

as in your soul you are weary and unwilling to wear it. This shame is no

disgrace."

  210.

    Extravagant Presumptions.—There are men so presumptuous that they

can only praise a greatness which they publicly admire by representing it as

steps and bridges that lead to themselves.

  211.

  On the Soil of Insult.—He who wishes to deprive men of a conception is

generally  not  satisfied  with  refuting  it  and  drawing  out  of  it  the  illogical

worm that resides within. Rather, when the worm has been killed, does he

throw the whole fruit as well into the mire, in order to make it ignoble in

men's sight and to inspire disgust. Thus he thinks that he has found a means

of making the usual "third-day resurrection" of conceptions an impossibility.

—He is wrong, for on the very soil of insult, in the midst of the filth, the

kernel of the conception soon produces new seeds.—The right thing then, is

not to scorn and bespatter what one wishes finally to remove, but to lay it

tenderly on ice again and again, having regard to the fact that conceptions are

very  tenacious  of  life.  Here  we  must  act  according  to  the  maxim:  "One

refutation is no refutation."

  212.

  The Lot of Morality.—Since spiritual bondage is being relaxed, morality

(the  inherited,  traditional,  instinctive  mode  of  action  in  accordance  with

moral sentiments) is surely also on the decline. This, however, is not the case

with  the  individual  virtues,  moderation,  justice,  repose;  for  the  greatest

freedom of the conscious intellect leads at some time, even unconsciously,

back to these virtues, and then enjoins their practice as expedient.

  213.

  The Fanatic of Distrust and his Surety.—The Elder: You wish to make

the tremendous venture and instruct mankind in the great things? What is

your surety? Pyrrho: It is this: I intend to warn men against myself; I intend

to confess all the defects of my character quite openly, and reveal to the

world my hasty conclusions, my contradictions, and my foolish blunders. "Do

not  listen  to  me,"  I  will  say  to  them,  "until  I  have  become  equal  to  the

meanest among you, nay am even less than he. Struggle against truth as long

as you can, from your disgust with her advocate. I shall be your seducer and

betrayer  if  you  find  in  me  the  slightest  glimmering  of  respectability  anddignity." The Elder: You promise too much; you cannot bear this burden.

Pyrrho: Then I will tell men even that, and say that I am too weak, and cannot

keep my promise. The greater my unworthiness, the more will they mistrust

the truth, when it passes through my lips. The Elder: You propose to teach

distrust of truth? Pyrrho: Yes; distrust as it never was yet on earth, distrust of

anything and everything. This is the only road to truth. The right eye must not

trust the left eye, and for some time light must be called darkness: this is the

path that you must tread. Do not imagine that it will lead you to fruit trees

and fair pastures. You will find on this road little hard grains—these are

truths. For years and years you will have to swallow handfuls of lies, so as

not to die of hunger, although you know that they are lies. But those grains

will  be  sown  and  planted,  and  perhaps,  perhaps  someday  will  come  the

harvest. No one may promise that day, unless he be a fanatic. The Elder:

Friend, friend! Your words too are those of a fanatic! Pyrrho: You are right! I

will be distrustful of all words. The Elder: Then you will have to be silent.

Pyrrho: I shall tell men that I have to be silent, and that they are to mistrust

my silence. The Elder: So you draw back from your undertaking? Pyrrho: On

the contrary—you have shown me the door through which I must pass. The

Elder:  I  don't  know  whether  we  yet  completely  understand  each  other?

Pyrrho: Probably not. The Elder: If only you understand yourself! (Pyrrho

turns round and laughs.) The Elder: Ah, friend! Silence and laughter—is that

now your whole philosophy? Pyrrho: There might be a worse.

  214.

  European Books.—In reading Montaigne, La Rochefoucauld, La Bruyère,

Fontenelle  (especially  the  Dialogues  des  Morts),  Vauvenargues,  and

Chamfort we are nearer to antiquity than in any group of six authors of other

nations. Through these six the spirit of the last centuries before Christ has

once more come into being, and they collectively form an important link in

the great and still continuous chain of the Renaissance. Their books are raised

above all changes of national taste and philosophical nuances from which as

a rule every book takes and must take its hue in order to become famous.

They contain more real ideas than all the books of German philosophers put

together: ideas of the sort that breed ideas——I am at a loss how to define to

the end: enough to say that they appear to me writers who wrote neither for

children nor for visionaries, neither for virgins nor for Christians, neither for

Germans nor for——I am again at a loss how to finish my list. To praise

them in plain terms, I may say that had they been written in Greek, theywould have been understood by Greeks. How much, on the other hand, would

even a Plato have understood of the writings of our best German thinkers—

Goethe and Schopenhauer, for instance—to say nothing of the repugnance

that he would have felt to their style, particularly to its obscure, exaggerated,

and occasionally dry-as-dust elements? And these are defects from which

these two among German thinkers suffer least and yet far too much (Goethe

as thinker was fonder than he should have been of embracing the cloud, and

Schopenhauer almost constantly wanders, not with impunity, among symbols

of objects rather than among the objects themselves).—On the other hand,

what  clearness  and  graceful  precision  there  is  in  these  Frenchmen!  The

Greeks, whose ears were most refined, could not but have approved of this

art,  and  one  quality  they  would  even  have  admired  and  reverenced—the

French verbal wit: they were extremely fond of this quality, without being

particularly strong in it themselves.

  215.

  Fashion  and  Modernity.—Wherever  ignorance,  uncleanness,  and

superstition are still rife, where communication is backward, agriculture poor,

and the priesthood powerful, national costumes are still worn. Fashion, on the

other  hand,  rules  where  the  opposite  conditions  prevail.  Fashion  is

accordingly to be found next to the virtues in modern Europe. Are we to call

it  their  seamy  side?—Masculine  dress  that  is  fashionable  and  no  longer

national proclaims of its wearer: firstly, that he does not wish to appear as an

individual or as member of a class or race; that he has made an intentional

suppression of these kinds of vanity a law unto himself: secondly, that he is a

worker, and has little time for dressing and self-adornment, and moreover

regards  anything  expensive  or  luxurious  in  material  and  cut  as  out  of

harmony  with  his  work:  lastly,  that  by  his  clothes  he  indicates  the  more

learned and intellectual callings as those to which he stands or would like to

stand nearest as a European—whereas such national costumes as still exist

would exhibit the occupations of brigand, shepherd, and soldier as the most

desirable  and  distinguished.  Within  this  general  character  of  masculine

fashion exist the slight fluctuations demanded by the vanity of young men,

the dandies and dawdlers of our great cities—in other words, Europeans who

have not yet reached maturity.—European women are as yet far less mature,

and for this reason the fluctuations with them are much greater. They also

will not have the national costume, and hate to be recognized by their dress as

German, French, or Russian. They are, however, very desirous of creating animpression as individuals. Then, too, their dress must leave no one in doubt

that they belong to one of the more reputable classes of society (to "good" or

"high"  or  "great"  society),  and  on  this  score  their  pretensions  are  all  the

greater if they belong scarcely or not at all to that class. Above all, the young

woman  does  not  want  to  wear  what  an  older  woman  wears,  because  she

thinks  she  loses  her  market  value  if  she  is  suspected  of  being  somewhat

advanced  in  years.  The  older  woman,  on  the  other  hand,  would  like  to

deceive  the  world  as  long  as  possible  by  a  youthful  garb.  From  this

competition must continually arise temporary fashions, in which the youthful

element  is  unmistakably  and  inimitably  apparent.  But  after  the  inventive

genius  of  the  young  female  artists  has  run  riot  for  some  time  in  such

indiscreet revelations of youth (or rather, after the inventive genius of older,

courtly civilizations and of still existing peoples—in fact, of the whole world

of dress—has been pressed into the service, and, say, the Spaniards, Turks,

and ancient Greeks have been yoked together for the glorification of fair

flesh), then they at last discover, time and again, that they have not been good

judges of their own interest; that if they wish to have power over men, the

game of hide-and-seek with the beautiful body is more likely to win than

naked or half-naked honesty. And then the wheel of taste and vanity turns

once more in an opposite direction. The rather older young women find that

their kingdom has come, and the competition of the dear, absurd creatures

rages again from the beginning.—But the more women advance mentally,

and no longer among themselves concede the pre-eminence to an unripe age,

the smaller their fluctuations of costume grow and the less elaborate their

adornment. A just verdict in this respect must not be based on ancient models

—in other words, not on the standard of the dress of women who dwell on

the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean—but  must  have  an  eye  to  the  climatic

conditions  of  the  central  and  northern  regions,  where  the  intellectual  and

creative  spirit  of  Europe  now  finds  its  most  natural  home.—Generally

speaking, therefore, it is not change that will be the characteristic mark of

fashion  and  modernity,  for  change  is  retrograde,  and  betokens  the  still

unripened men and women of Europe; but rather the repudiation of national,

social,  and  individual  vanity.  Accordingly,  it  is  commendable,  because

involving  a  saving  of  time  and  strength,  if  certain  cities  and  districts  of

Europe think and invent for all the rest in the matter of dress, in view of the

fact that a sense of form does not seem to have been bestowed upon all. Nor

is it really an excessive ambition, so long as these fluctuations still exist, forParis, for example, to claim to be the sole inventor and innovator in this

sphere. If a German, from hatred of these claims on the part of a French city,

wishes to dress differently,—as, for example, in the Dürer style,—let him

reflect that he then has a costume which the Germans of olden times wore,

but which the Germans have not in the slightest degree invented. For there

has never been a style of dress that characterized the German as a German.

Moreover, let him observe how he looks in his costume, and whether his

altogether modern face, with all its hues and wrinkles, does not raise a protest

against a Dürer fashion of dress.—Here, where the concepts "modern" and

"European"  are  almost  identical,  we  understand  by  "Europe"  a  far  wider

region than is embraced by the Europe of geography, the little peninsula of

Asia. In particular, we must include America, in so far as America is the

daughter of our civilization. On the other hand, not all Europe falls under the

heading of cultured "Europe," but only those nations and divisions of nations

which have their common past in Greece, Rome, Judaism, and Christianity.

  216.

    "German  Virtue."—There  is  no  denying  that  from  the  end  of  the

eighteenth  century  a  current  of  moral  awakening  flowed  through  Europe.

Then only Virtue found again the power of speech. She learnt to discover the

unrestrained gestures of exaltation and emotion, she was no longer ashamed

of herself, and she created philosophies and poems for her own glorification.

If we look for the sources of this current, we come upon Rousseau, but the

mythical  Rousseau,  the  phantom  formed  from  the  impression  left  by  his

writings (one might almost say again, his mythically interpreted writings) and

by the indications that he provided himself. He and his public constantly

worked at the fashioning of this ideal figure. The other origin lies in the

resurrection of the Stoical side of Rome's greatness, whereby the French so

nobly  carried  on  the  task  of  the  Renaissance.  With  striking  success  they

proceeded  from  the  reproduction  of  antique  forms  to  the  reproduction  of

antique characters. Thus they may always claim a title to the highest honours,

as the nation which has hitherto given the modern world its best books and its

best  men.  How  this  twofold  archetype,  the  mythical  Rousseau  and  the

resurrected  spirit  of  Rome,  affected  France's  weaker  neighbours,  is

particularly noticeable in Germany, which, in consequence of her novel and

quite unwonted impulse to seriousness and loftiness in will and self-control,

finally came to feel astonishment at her own newfound virtue, and launched

into the world the concept "German virtue," as if this were the most originaland hereditary of her possessions. The first great men who transfused into

their own blood that French impulse towards greatness and consciousness of

the  moral  will  were  more  honest,  and  more  grateful.  Whence  comes  the

moralism of Kant? He is continually reminding us: from Rousseau and the

revival of Stoic Rome. The moralism of Schiller has the same source and the

same glorification of the source. The moralism of Beethoven in notes is a

continual  song  in  praise  of  Rousseau,  the  antique  French,  and  Schiller.

"Young  Germany"  was  the  first  to  forget  its  gratitude,  because  in  the

meantime people had listened to the preachers of hatred of the French. The

"young German" came to the fore with more consciousness than is generally

allowed to youths. When he investigated his paternity, he might well think of

the proximity of Schiller, Schleiermacher, and Fichte. But he should have

looked for his grandfathers in Paris and Geneva, and it was very short-sighted

of him to believe what he believed: that virtue was not more than thirty years

old.  People  became  used  to  demanding  that  the  word  "German"  should

connote "virtue," and this process has not been wholly forgotten to this day.

—Be  it  observed  further  that  this  moral  awakening,  as  may  almost  be

guessed, has resulted only in drawbacks and obstacles to the recognition of

moral phenomena. What is the entire German philosophy, starting from Kant,

with all its French, English, and Italian offshoots and by-products? A semi-

theological attack upon Helvetius, a rejection of the slowly and laboriously

acquired views and signposts of the right road, which in the end he collected

and expressed so well. To this day Helvetius is the best-abused of all good

moralists and good men in Germany.

  217.

  Classic and Romantic.—Both classically and romantically minded spirits

—two  species  that  always  exist—cherish  a  vision  of  the  future;  but  the

former derive their vision from the strength of their time, the latter from its

weakness.

  218.

  The  Machine  as  Teacher.—Machinery  teaches  in  itself  the  dovetailed

working of masses of men, in activities where each has but one thing to do. It

is the model of party organizations and of warfare. On the other hand, it does

not teach individual self-glorification, for it makes of the many a machine,

and of each individual a tool for one purpose. Its most general effect is to

teach the advantage of centralization.

  219.  Unable to Settle.—One likes to live in a small town. But from time to

time just this small town drives us out into bare and lonely Nature, especially

when we think we know it too well. Finally, in order to refresh ourselves

from Nature, we go to the big town. A few draughts from this cup and we see

its dregs, and the circle begins afresh, with the small town as starting-point.—

So the moderns live; they are in all things rather too thorough to be able to

settle like the men of other days.

  220.

  Reaction against the Civilization of Machinery.—The machine, itself a

product  of  the  highest  mental  powers,  sets  in  motion  hardly  any  but  the

lower, unthinking forces of the men who serve it. True, it unfetters a vast

quantity  of  force  which  would  otherwise  lie  dormant.  But  it  does  not

communicate the impulse to climb higher, to improve, to become artistic. It

creates activity and monotony, but this in the long-run produces a counter-

effect, a despairing ennui of the soul, which through machinery has learnt to

hanker after the variety of leisure.

  221.

  The Danger of Enlightenment.—All the half-insane, theatrical, bestially

cruel,  licentious,  and  especially  sentimental  and  self-intoxicating  elements

which go to form the true revolutionary substance, and became flesh and

spirit,  before  the  revolution,  in  Rousseau—all  this  composite  being,  with

factitious  enthusiasm,  finally  set  even  "enlightenment"  upon  its  fanatical

head, which thereby began itself to shine as in an illuminating halo. Yet,

enlightenment is essentially foreign to that phenomenon, and, if left to itself,

would have pierced silently through the clouds like a shaft of light, long

content to transfigure individuals alone, and thus only slowly transfiguring

national customs and institutions as well. But now, bound hand and foot to a

violent and abrupt monster, enlightenment itself became violent and abrupt.

Its  danger  has  therefore  become  almost  greater  than  its  useful  quality  of

liberation and illumination, which it introduced into the great revolutionary

movement. Whoever grasps this will also know from what confusion it has to

be extricated, from what impurities to be cleansed, in order that it may then

by itself continue the work of enlightenment and also nip the revolution in the

bud and nullify its effects.

  222.

  Passion in the Middle Ages.—The Middle Ages are the period of great

passions. Neither antiquity nor our period possesses this widening of the soul.Never was the capacity of the soul greater or measured by larger standards.

The physical, primeval sensuality of the barbarian races and the over-soulful,

over-vigilant, over-brilliant eyes of Christian mystics, the most childish and

youthful and the most over-ripe and world-weary, the savageness of the beast

of prey and the effeminacy and excessive refinement of the late antique spirit

—all these elements were then not seldom united in one and the same person.

Thus, if a man was seized by a passion, the rapidity of the torrent must have

been greater, the whirl more confused, the fall deeper than ever before.—We

modern men may be content to feel that we have suffered a loss here.

  223.

  Robbing and Saving.—All intellectual movements whereby the great may

hope  to  rob  and  the  small  to  save  are  sure  to  prosper.  That  is  why,  for

instance, the German Reformation made progress.

  224.

    Gladsome Souls.—When even a remote hint of drink, drunkenness, and

an evil-smelling kind of jocularity was given, the souls of the old Germans

waxed  gladsome.  Otherwise  they  were  depressed,  but  here  they  found

something they really understood.

  225.

    Debauchery at Athens.—Even when the fish-market of Athens acquired

its  thinkers  and  poets,  Greek  debauchery  had  a  more  idyllic  and  refined

appearance  than  Roman  or  German  debauchery  ever  had.  The  voice  of

Juvenal would have sounded there like a hollow trumpet, and would have

been answered by a good-natured and almost childish outburst of laughter.

  226.

    Cleverness of the Greek.—As the desire for victory and pre-eminence is

an  ineradicable  trait  of  human  nature,  older  and  more  primitive  than  any

respect  of  or  joy  in  equality,  the  Greek  State  sanctioned  gymnastic  and

artistic competitions among equals. In other words, it marked out an arena

where this impulse to conquer would find a vent without jeopardizing the

political order. With the final decline of gymnastic and artistic contests the

Greek State fell into a condition of profound unrest and dissolution.

  227.

  The "Eternal Epicurus."—Epicurus has lived in all periods, and lives yet,

unbeknown  to  those  who  called  and  still  call  themselves  Epicureans,  and

without repute among philosophers. He has himself even forgotten his own

name—that was the heaviest luggage that he ever cast off.  228.

  The Style of Superiority.—"University slang," the speech of the German

students, has its origin among the students who do not study. The latter know

how to acquire a preponderance over their more serious fellows by exposing

all  the  farcical  elements  of  culture,  respectability,  erudition,  order,  and

moderation, and by having words taken from these realms always on their

lips, like the better and more learned students, but with malice in their glance

and an accompanying grimace. This language of superiority—the only one

that is original in Germany—is nowadays unconsciously used by statesmen

and newspaper critics as well. It is a continual process of ironical quotation, a

restless,  cantankerous  squinting  of  the  eye  right  and  left,  a  language  of

inverted commas and grimaces.

  229.

  The  Recluse.—We  retire  into  seclusion,  but  not  from  personal

misgivings, as if the political and social conditions of the day did not satisfy

us; rather because by our retirement we try to save and collect forces which

will someday be urgently needed by culture, the more this present is this

present, and, as such, fulfils its task. We form a capital and try to make it

secure, but, as in times of real danger, our method is to bury our hoard.

  230.

  Tyrants of the Intellect.—In our times, anyone who expressed a single

moral trait so thoroughly as the characters of Theophrastus and Molière do,

would be considered ill, and be spoken of as possessing "a fixed idea." The

Athens of the thirdcentury, if we could visit it, would appear to us populated

by fools. Nowadays the democracy of ideas rules in every brain—there the

multitude collectively is lord. A single idea that tried to be lord is now called,

as above stated, "a fixed idea." This is our method of murdering tyrants—we

hint at the madhouse.

  231.

  A Most Dangerous Emigration.—In Russia there is an emigration of the

intelligence. People cross the frontier in order to read and write good books.

Thus, however, they are working towards turning their country, abandoned

by the intellect, into a gaping Asiatic maw, which would fain swallow our

little Europe.

  232.

    Political Fools.—The almost religious love of the king was transferred by

the Greeks, when the monarchy was abolished, to the polis. An idea can beloved more than a person, and does not thwart the lover so often as a beloved

human  being  (for  the  more  men  know  themselves  to  be  loved,  the  less

considerate they usually become, until they are no longer worthy of love, and

a rift really arises). Hence the reverence for State and polis was greater than

the reverence for princes had ever been. The Greeks are the political fools of

ancient history—to-day other nations boast that distinction.

  233.

  Against Neglect of the Eyes.—Might one not find among the cultured

classes of England, who read the Times, a decline in their powers of sight

every ten years?

  234.

  Great  Works  and  Great  Faith.—One  man  had  great  works,  but  his

comrade had great faith in these works. They were inseparable, but obviously

the former was entirely dependent upon the latter.

  235.

  The Sociable Man.—"I don't get on well with myself," said someone in

explanation of his fondness for society. "Society has a stronger digestion than

I have, and can put up with me."

  236.

  Shutting the Mind's Eyes.—If we are practiced and accustomed to reflect

upon our actions, we must nevertheless close the inner eye while performing

an action (be this even only writing letters or eating or drinking). Even in

conversation with average people we must know how to obscure our own

mental vision in order to attain and grasp average thinking. This shutting of

the eyes is a conscious act and can be achieved by the will.

  237.

  The  Most  Terrible  Revenge.—If  we  wish  to  take  a  thorough  revenge

upon an opponent, we must wait until we have our hand quite full of truths

and  equities,  and  can  calmly  use  the  whole  lot  against  him.  Hence  the

exercise of revenge may be identified with the exercise of equity. It is the

most terrible kind of revenge, for there is no higher court to which an appeal

can be made. Thus did Voltaire revenge himself on Piron, with five lines that

sum up Piron's whole life, work, and character: every word is a truth. So too

he revenged himself upon Frederick the Great in a letter to him from Ferney.

  238.

  Taxes of Luxury.—In shops we buy the most necessary and urgent things,

and have to pay very dear, because we pay as well for what is also to be hadthere cheap, but seldom finds a customer-articles of luxury that minister to

pleasure. Thus luxury lays a constant tax upon the man of simple life who

does without luxuries.

  239.

  Why Beggars still Live.—If all alms were given only out of compassion,

the whole tribe of beggars would long since have died of starvation.

  240.

  Why Beggars still Live.—The greatest of almsgivers is cowardice.

  241.

  How  the  Thinker  Makes  Use  of  a  Conversation.—Without  being

eavesdroppers, we can hear a good deal if we are able to see well, and at the

same time to let ourselves occasionally get out of our own sight. But people

do not know how to make use of a conversation. They pay far too much

attention to what they want to say and reply, whereas the true listener is often

contented to make a provisional answer and to say something merely as a

payment on account of politeness, but on the other hand, with his memory

lurking in ambush, carries away with him all that the other said, together with

his  tones  and  gestures  in  speaking.—In  ordinary  conversation  everyone

thinks he is the leader, just as if two ships, sailing side by side and giving

each other a slight push here and there, were each firmly convinced that the

other ship was following or even being towed.

  242.

  The Art of Excusing Oneself.—If someone excuses himself to us, he has

to make out a very good case, otherwise we readily come to feel ourselves the

culprits, and experience an unpleasant emotion.

  243.

    Impossible Intercourse.—The ship of your thoughts goes too deep for you

to be able to travel with it in the waters of these friendly, decorous, obliging

people. There are too many shallows and sandbanks: you would have to tack

and turn, and would find yourself continually at your wits' end, and they

would soon also be in perplexity as to your perplexity, the reason for which

they cannot divine.

  244.

  The Fox of Foxes.—A true fox not only calls sour the grapes he cannot

reach, but also those he has reached and snatched from the grasp of others.

  245.

  In Intimate Intercourse.—However closely men are connected, there arestill all the four quarters of the heavens in their common horizon, and at times

they become aware of this fact.

  246.

  The  Silence  of  Disgust.—Behold!  someone  undergoes  a  thorough  and

painful  transformation  as  thinker  and  human  being,  and  makes  a  public

avowal of the change. And those who hear him see nothing, and still believe

he is the same as before! This common experience has already disgusted

many writers. They had rated the intellectuality of mankind too highly, and

made a vow to be silent as soon as they became aware of their mistake.

  247.

  Business Seriousness.—The business of many rich and eminent men is

their form of recreation from too long periods of habitual leisure. They then

become as serious and impassioned as other people do in their rare moments

of leisure and amusement.

  248.

  The Eye's Double Sense.—Just as a sudden scaly ripple runs over the

waters at your feet, so there are similar sudden uncertainties and ambiguities

in the human eye. They lead to the question: is it a shudder, or a smile, or

both?

  249.

  Positive and Negative.—This thinker needs noone to refute him—he is

quite capable of doing that himself.

  250.

  The Revenge of the Empty Nets.—Above all we should beware of those

who have the bitter feeling of the fisherman who after a hard day's work

comes home in the evening with nets empty.

  251.

    Non-Assertion of our Rights.—The exertion of power is laborious and

demands courage. That is why so many do not assert their most valid rights,

because  their  rights  are  a  kind  of  power,  and  they  are  too  lazy  or  too

cowardly to exercise them. Indulgence and patience are the names given to

the virtues that cloak these faults.

  252.

  Bearers of Light.—In Society there would be no sunshine if the born

flatterers (I mean the so called amiable people) did not bring some in with

them.

  253.  When most Benevolent.—When a man has been highly honoured and has

eaten a little, he is most benevolent.

  254.

  To the Light.—Men press forward to the light not in order to see better

but to shine better.—The person before whom we shine we gladly allow to be

called a light.

  255.

  The Hypochondriac.—The hypochondriac is a man who has just enough

intellect and pleasure in the intellect to take his sorrows, his losses, and his

mistakes seriously. But the field on which he grazes is too small: he crops it

so  close  that  in  the  end  he  has  to  look  for  single  stalks.  Thus  he  finally

becomes envious and avaricious—and only then is he unbearable.

  256.

    Giving  in  Return.—Hesiod  advises  us  to  give  the  neighbour  who  has

helped us good measure and, if possible, fuller measure in return, as soon as

we have the power. For this is where the neighbor's pleasure comes in, since

his former benevolence brings him interest. Moreover, he who gives in return

also has his pleasure, inasmuch as, by giving a little more than he got, he

redeems the slight humiliation of being compelled to seek aid.

  257.

  More Subtle than is Necessary.—Our sense of observation for how far

others  perceive  our  weaknesses  is  far  more  subtle  than  our  sense  of

observation for the weaknesses of others. It follows that the first-named sense

is more subtle than is necessary.

  258.

  A  Kind  of  Bright  Shadows.—Close  to  the  nocturnal  type  of  man  we

almost regularly find, as if bound up with him, a bright soul. This is, as it

were, the negative shadow cast by the former.

  259.

  Not to take Revenge.—There are so many subtle sorts of revenge that one

who has occasion to take revenge can really do or omit to do what he likes. In

any  case,  the  whole  world  will  agree,  after  a  time,  that  he  has  avenged

himself. Hence the avoidance of revenge is hardly within man's power. He

must not even so much as say that he does not want to do so, since the

contempt for revenge is interpreted and felt as a sublime and exquisite form

of revenge.—It follows that we must do nothing superfluous.

  260.  The Mistake of Those who Pay Homage.—Everyone thinks he is paying

a most agreeable compliment to a thinker when he says that he himself hit

upon exactly the same idea and even upon the same expression. The thinker,

however,  is  seldom  delighted  at  hearing  such  news,  nay,  rather,  he  often

becomes distrustful of his own thoughts and expressions. He silently resolves

to  revise  both  someday.  If  we  wish  to  pay  homage  to  anyone,  we  must

beware of expressing our agreement, for this puts us on the same level.—

Often it is a matter of social tact to listen to an opinion as if it were not ours

or even travelled beyond the limits of our own horizon—as, for example,

when  an  old  man  once  in  a  while  opens  the  storehouse  of  his  acquired

knowledge.

  261.

  Letters.—A  letter  is  an  unannounced  visit,  and  the  postman  is  the

intermediary of impolite surprises. Every week we ought to have one hour for

receiving letters, and then go and take a bath.

  262.

      Prejudiced.—Someone said: I have been prejudiced against myself from

childhood upwards, and hence I find some truth in every censure and some

absurdity in every eulogy. Praise I generally value too low and blame too

high.

  263.

  The  Path  to  Equality.—A  few  hours  of  mountain-climbing  make  a

blackguard and a saint two rather similar creatures. Weariness is the shortest

path to equality and fraternity—and finally liberty is bestowed by sleep.

  264.

    Calumny.—If  we  begin  to  trace  to  its  source  a  real  scandalous

misrepresentation, we shall rarely look for its origin in our honourable and

straightforward enemies; for if they invented anything of the sort about us,

they,  as  being  our  enemies,  would  gain  no  credence.  Those,  however,  to

whom for a time we have been most useful, but who, from some reason or

other,  may  be  secretly  sure  that  they  will  obtain  no  more  from  us—such

persons  are  in  a  position  to  start  the  ball  of  slander  rolling.  They  gain

credence, firstly, because it is assumed that they would invent nothing likely

to  do  them  damage;  secondly,  because  they  have  learnt  to  know  us

intimately.—As a consolation, the much-slandered man may say to himself:

Calumnies are diseases of others that break out in your body. They prove that

Society is a (moral) organism, so that you can prescribe to yourself the curethat will in the end be useful to others.

  265.

  The Child's Kingdom of Heaven.—The happiness of a child is as much of

a myth as the happiness of the Hyperboreans of whom the Greeks fabled. The

Greeks supposed that, if indeed happiness dwells anywhere on our earth, it

must certainly dwell as far as possible from us, perhaps over yonder at the

edge of the world. Old people have the same thought—if man is at all capable

of being happy, he must be happy as far as possible from our age, at the

frontiers  and  beginnings  of  life.  For  many  a  man  the  sight  of  children,

through the veil of this myth, is the greatest happiness that he can feel. He

enters himself into the forecourt of heaven when he says, "Suffer the little

children to come unto me, for of them is the kingdom of heaven." The myth

of the child's kingdom of heaven holds good, in some way or other, wherever

in the modern world some sentimentality exists.

  266.

  The Impatient.—It is just the growing man who does not want things in

the growing stage. He is too impatient for that. The youth will not wait until,

after long study, suffering, and privation, his picture of men and things is

complete. Accordingly, he confidently accepts another picture that lies ready

to his hand and is recommended to him, and pins his faith to that, as if it must

give  him  at  once  the  lines  and  colors  of  his  own  painting.  He  presses  a

philosopher or a poet to his bosom, and must from that time forth perform

long stretches of forced labour and renounce his own self. He learns much in

the process, but he often forgets what is most worth learning and knowing—

his self. He remains all his life a partisan. Ah, a vast amount of tedious work

has to be done before you find your own colors, your own brush, your own

canvas!—Even then you are very far from being a master in the art of life, but

at least you are the boss in your own workshop.

  267.

  There  are  no  Teachers.—As  thinkers  we  ought  only  to  speak  of  self-

teaching.  The  instruction  of  the  young  by  others  is  either  an  experiment

performed  upon  something  as  yet  unknown  and  unknowable,  or  else  a

thorough  leveling  process,  in  order  to  make  the  new  member  of  society

conform to the customs and manners that prevail for the time being. In both

cases  the  result  is  accordingly  unworthy  of  a  thinker—the  handiwork  of

parents and teachers, whom some valiantly honest person [25] has called "nos

ennemis naturels." One day, when, as the world thinks, we have long sincefinished our education, we discover ourselves. Then begins the task of the

thinker, and then is the time to summon him to our aid—not as a teacher, but

as a self-taught man who has experience. [25] Stendhal.—Tr.

  268.

    Sympathy with Youth.—We are sorry when we hear that someone who is

still young is losing his teeth or growing blind. If we knew all the irrevocable

and hopeless feelings hidden in his whole being, how great our sorrow would

be! Why do we really suffer on this account? Because youth has to continue

the work we have undertaken, and every flaw and failing in its strength is

likely to injure our work, that will fall into its hands. It is the sorrow at the

imperfect  guarantee  of  our  immortality:  or,  if  we  only  feel  ourselves  as

executors of the human mission, it is the sorrow that this mission must pass to

weaker hands than ours.

  269.

  The Ages of Life.—The comparison of the four ages of life with the four

seasons of the year is a venerable piece of folly. Neither the first twenty nor

the last twenty years of a life correspond to a season of the year, assuming

that we are not satisfied with drawing a parallel between white hair and snow

and similar color-analogies. The first twenty years are a preparation for life in

general, for the whole year of life, a sort of long New Year's Day. The last

twenty review, assimilate, bring into union and harmony all that has been

experienced till then: as, in a small degree, we do on every New Year's Eve

with the whole past year. But in between there really lies an interval which

suggests a comparison with the seasons—the time from the twentieth to the

fiftieth year (to speak here of decades in the lump, while it is an understood

thing that everyone must refine for himself these rough outlines). Those three

decades correspond to three seasons—summer, spring, and autumn. Winter

human  life  has  none,  unless  we  like  to  call  the  (unfortunately)  often

intervening  hard,  cold,  lonely,  hopeless,  unfruitful  periods  of  disease  the

winters of man. The twenties, hot, oppressive, stormy, impetuous, exhausting

years, when we praise the day in the evening, when it is over, as we wipe the

sweat  from  our  foreheads—years  in  which  work  seems  to  us  cruel  but

necessary—these twenties are the summer of life. The thirties, on the other

hand, are its spring-time, with the air now too warm, now too cold, ever

restless and stimulating, bubbling sap, bloom of leaves, fragrance of buds

everywhere, many delightful mornings and evenings, work to which the song

of  birds  awakens  us,  a  true  work  of  the  heart,  a  kind  of  joy  in  our  ownrobustness,  strengthened  by  the  savor  of  hopeful  anticipation.  Lastly  the

forties,  mysterious  like  all  that  is  stationary,  like  a  high,  broad  plateau,

traversed by a fresh breeze, with a clear, cloudless sky above it, which always

has the same gentle look all day and half the night—the time of harvest and

cordial gaiety—that is the autumn of life.

  270.

    Women's Intellect in Modern Society.—What women nowadays think of

men's intellect may be divined from the fact that in their art of adornment

they think of anything but of emphasizing the intellectual side of their faces

or their single intellectual features. On the contrary, they conceal such traits,

and  understand,  for  example  by  an  arrangement  of  their  hair  over  their

forehead, how to give themselves an appearance of vivid, eager sensuality

and materialism, just when they but slightly possess those qualities. Their

conviction that intellect in women frightens men goes so far that they even

gladly deny the keenness of the most intellectual sense and purposely invite

the reputation of short-sightedness. They think they will thereby make men

more  confiding.  It  is  as  if  a  soft,  attractive  twilight  were  spreading  itself

around them.

  271.

  Great and Transitory.—What moves the observer to tears is the rapturous

look of happiness with which a fair young bride gazes upon her husband. We

feel all the melancholy of autumn in thinking of the greatness and of the

transitoriness of human happiness.

  272.

  Sense  and  Sacrifice.—Many  a  woman  has  the  intelletto  del  sacrifizio

[26], and no longer enjoys life when her husband refuses to sacrifice her.

With all her wit, she then no longer knows—whither? and without perceiving

it, is changed from sacrificial victim to sacrificial priest. [26] A transposition

of sacrifizio dell' intelletto, the Jesuit maxim.—Tr.

  273.

  The Unfeminine.—"Stupid as a man," say the women; "Cowardly as a

woman," say the men. Stupidity in a woman is unfeminine.

  274.

  Masculine  and  Feminine  Temperament  and  Mortality.—That  the  male

sex has a worse temperament than the female follows from the fact that male

children have a greater mortality than female, clearly because they "leap out

of their skins" more easily. Their wildness and unbearableness soon make allthe bad stuff in them deadly.

  275.

  The Age of Cyclopean Building.—The democratization of Europe is a

resistless force. Even he who would stem the tide uses those very means that

democratic thought first put into men's hands, and he makes these means

more  handy  and  workable.  The  most  inveterate  enemies  of  democracy  (I

mean the spirits of upheaval) seem only to exist in order, by the fear that they

inspire,  to  drive  forward  the  different  parties  faster  and  faster  on  the

democratic course. Now we may well feel sorry for those who are working

consciously  and  honorably  for  this  future.  There  is  something  dreary  and

monotonous in their faces, and the grey dust seems to have been wafted into

their very brains. Nevertheless, posterity may possibly some day laugh at our

anxiety, and see in the democratic work of several generations what we see in

the  building  of  stone  dams  and  walls—an  activity  that  necessarily  covers

clothes and face with a great deal of dust, and perhaps unavoidably makes the

workmen, too, a little dull-witted; but who would on that account desire such

work undone? It seems that the democratization of Europe is a link in the

chain of those mighty prophylactic principles which are the thought of the

modern era, and whereby we rise up in revolt against the Middle Ages. Now,

and  now  only,  is  the  age  of  Cyclopean  building!  A  final  security  in  the

foundations, that the future may build on them without danger! Henceforth,

an  impossibility  of  the  orchards  of  culture  being  once  more  destroyed

overnight  by  wild,  senseless  mountain  torrents!  Dams  and  walls  against

barbarians, against plagues, against physical and spiritual serfdom! And all

this understood at first roughly and literally, but gradually in an ever higher

and more spiritual sense, so that all the principles here indicated may appear

as the intellectual preparation of the highest artist in horticulture, who can

only apply himself to his own task when the other is fully accomplished!—

True, if we consider the long intervals of time that here lie between means

and  end,  the  great,  supreme  labour,  straining  the  powers  and  brains  of

centuries, that is necessary in order to create or to provide each individual

means, we must not bear too hardly upon the workers of the present when

they loudly proclaim that the wall and the fence are already the end and the

final goal. After all, no one yet sees the gardener and the fruit, for whose sake

the fence exists.

  276.

  The  Right  of  Universal  Suffrage.—The  people  has  not  granted  itselfuniversal suffrage but, wherever this is now in force, it has received and

accepted it as a temporary measure. But in any case the people has the right

to restore the gift, if it does not satisfy its anticipations. This dissatisfaction

seems  universal  nowadays,  for  when,  at  any  occasion  where  the  vote  is

exercised, scarce two-thirds, nay perhaps not even the majority of all voters,

go to the polls, that very fact is a vote against the whole suffrage system.—

On this point, in fact, we must pronounce a much sterner verdict. A law that

enacts that the majority shall decide as to the welfare of all cannot be built up

on the foundation that it alone has provided, for it is bound to require a far

broader foundation, namely the unanimity of all. Universal suffrage must not

only be the expression of the will of a majority, but of the whole country.

Thus the dissent of a very small minority is already enough to set aside the

system as impracticable; and the abstention from voting is in fact a dissent of

this  kind,  which  ruins  the  whole  institution.  The  "absolute  veto"  of  the

individual, or—not to be too minute—the veto of a few thousands, hangs

over the system as the consequence of justice. On every occasion when it is

employed, the system must, according to the variety of the division, first

prove that it has still a right to exist.

  277.

  False Conclusions.—What false conclusions are drawn in spheres where

we are not at home, even by those of us who are accustomed as men of

science to draw right conclusions! It is humiliating! Now it is clear that in the

great turmoil of worldly doings, in political affairs, in all sudden and urgent

matters such as almost every day brings up, these false conclusions must

decide. For no one feels at home with novelties that have sprung up in the

night. All political work, even with great statesmen, is an improvisation that

trusts to luck.

  278.

    Premises of the Age of Machinery.—The press, the machine, the railway,

the  telegraph  are  premises  of  which  no  one  has  yet  dared  to  draw  the

conclusions that will follow in a thousand years.

  279.

  A Drag upon Culture.—When we are told that here men have no time for

productive occupations, because military manœuvres and processions take up

their days, and the rest of the population must feed and clothe them, their

dress, however, being striking, often gay and full of absurdities; that there

only a few distinguished qualities are recognized, individuals resemble eachother more than elsewhere, or at any rate are treated as equals, yet obedience

is exacted and yielded without reasoning, for men command and make no

attempt to convince; that here punishments are few, but these few cruel and

likely to become the final and most terrible; that there treason ranks as the

capital offence, and even the criticism of evils is only ventured on by the

most audacious; that there, again, human life is cheap, and ambition often

takes the form of setting life in danger—when we hear all this, we at once

say,  "This  is  a  picture  of  a  barbarous  society  that  rests  on  a  hazardous

footing." One man perhaps will add, "It is a portrait of Sparta." But another

will become meditative and declare that this is a description of our modern

military system, as it exists in the midst of our altogether different culture and

society, a living anachronism, the picture, as above said, of a community

resting on a hazardous footing; a posthumous work of the past, which can

only act as a drag upon the wheels of the present.—Yet at times even a drag

upon culture is vitally necessary—that is to say, when culture is advancing

too rapidly downhill or (as perhaps in this case) uphill.

  280.

  More Reverence for Them that Know.—In the competition of production

and sale the public is made judge of the product. But the public has no special

knowledge, and judges by the appearance of the wares. In consequence, the

art  of  appearance  (and  perhaps  the  taste  for  it)  must  increase  under  the

dominance  of  competition,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  quality  of  every

product must deteriorate. The result will be—so far as reason does not fall in

value—that  one  day  an  end  will  be  put  to  that  competition,  and  a  new

principle will win the day. Only the master of the craft should pronounce a

verdict on the work, and the public should be dependent on the belief in the

personality of the judge and his honesty. Accordingly, no anonymous work!

At least an expert should be there as guarantor and pledge his name if the

name of the creator is lacking or is unknown. The cheapness of an article is

for the layman another kind of illusion and deceit, since only durability can

decide that a thing is cheap and to what an extent. But it is difficult, and for a

layman impossible, to judge of its durability.—Hence that which produces an

effect on the eye and costs little at present gains the advantage—this being

naturally machine-made work. Again, machinery—that is to say, the cause of

the greatest rapidity and facility in production—favors the most saleable kind

of article. Otherwise it involves no tangible profit; it would be too little used

and too often stand idle. But as to what is most saleable, the public, as abovesaid, decides: it must be the most exchangeable—in other words, the thing

that appears good and also appears cheap. Thus in the domain of labour our

motto must also hold good: "More respect for them that know!"

  281.

  The  Danger  of  Kings.—Democracy  has  it  in  its  power,  without  any

violent  means,  and  only  by  a  lawful  pressure  steadily  exerted,  to  make

kingship and emperorship hollow, until only a zero remains, perhaps with the

significance  of  every  zero  in  that,  while  nothing  in  itself,  it  multiplies  a

number tenfold if placed on the right side. Kingship and emperorship would

remain  a  gorgeous  ornament  upon  the  simple  and  appropriate  dress  of

democracy, a beautiful superfluity that democracy allows itself, a relic of all

the historically venerable, primitive ornaments, nay the symbol of history

itself, and in this unique position a highly effective thing if, as above said, it

does not stand alone, but is put on the right side.—In order to avoid the

danger of this nullification, kings hold by their teeth to their dignity as war-

lords.  To  this  end  they  need  wars,  or  in  other  words  exceptional

circumstances, in which that slow, lawful pressure of the democratic forces is

relaxed.

  282.

  The Teacher a Necessary Evil.—Let us have as few people as possible

between  the  productive  minds  and  the  hungry  and  recipient  minds!  The

middlemen almost unconsciously adulterate the food which they supply. For

their work as middlemen they want too high a fee for themselves, and this is

drawn  from  the  original,  productive  spirits—namely,  interest,  admiration,

leisure, money, and other advantages.—Accordingly, we should always look

upon the teacher as a necessary evil, just like the merchant; as an evil that we

should  make  as  small  as  possible.—Perhaps  the  prevailing  distress  in

Germany has its main cause in the fact that too many wish to live and live

well by trade (in other words, desiring as far as possible to diminish prices for

the producer and raise prices for the consumer, and thus to profit by the

greatest possible loss to both). In the same way, we may certainly trace a

main cause of the prevailing intellectual poverty in the superabundance of

teachers. It is because of teachers that so little is learnt, and that so badly.

  283.

  The  Tax  of  Homage.—Him  whom  we  know  and  honour,—be  he

physician, artist, or artisan,—who does and produces something for us, we

gladly pay as highly as we can, often a fee beyond our means. On the otherhand, we pay the unknown as low a price as possible; here is a contest in

which everyone struggles and makes others struggle for a foot's breadth of

land. In the work of the known there is something that cannot be bought, the

sentiment and ingenuity put into his work for our own sake. We think we

cannot better express our sense of obligation than by a sort of sacrifice on our

part.—The heaviest tax is the tax of homage. The more competition prevails,

the more we buy for the unknown and work for the unknown, the lower does

this tax become, whereas it is really the standard for the loftiness of man's

spiritual intercourse.

  284.

  The  Means  towards  Genuine  Peace.—No  government  will  nowadays

admit that it maintains an army in order to satisfy occasionally its passion for

conquest. The army is said to serve only defensive purposes. This morality,

which justifies self-defence, is called in as the government's advocate. This

means,  however,  reserving  morality  for  ourselves  and  immorality  for  our

neighbour, because he must be thought eager for attack and conquest if our

state is forced to consider means of self-defence.—At the same time, by our

explanation of our need of an army (because he denies the lust of attack just

as  our  state  does,  and  ostensibly  also  maintains  his  army  for  defensive

reasons), we proclaim him a hypocrite and cunning criminal, who would fain

seize by surprise, without any fighting, a harmless and unwary victim. In this

attitude all states face each other to-day. They presuppose evil intentions on

their  neighbor's  part  and  good  intentions  on  their  own.  This  hypothesis,

however, is an inhuman notion, as bad as and worse than war. Nay, at bottom

it is a challenge and motive to war, foisting as it does upon the neighbouring

state the charge of immorality, and thus provoking hostile intentions and acts.

The  doctrine  of  the  army  as  a  means  of  self-defence  must  be  abjured  as

completely as the lust of conquest. Perhaps a memorable day will come when

a  nation  renowned  in  wars  and  victories,  distinguished  by  the  highest

development of military order and intelligence, and accustomed to make the

heaviest sacrifice to these objects, will voluntarily exclaim, "We will break

our  swords,"  and  will  destroy  its  whole  military  system,  lock,  stock,  and

barrel. Making ourselves defenseless (after having been the most strongly

defended) from a loftiness of sentiment—that is the means towards genuine

peace,  which  must  always  rest  upon  a  pacific  disposition.  The  so-called

armed peace that prevails at present in all countries is a sign of a bellicose

disposition, of a disposition that trusts neither itself nor its neighbour, and,partly from hate, partly from fear, refuses to lay down its weapons. Better to

perish than to hate and fear, and twice as far better to perish than to make

oneself hated and feared—this must someday become the supreme maxim of

every political community!—Our liberal representatives of the people, as is

well known, have not the time for reflection on the nature of humanity, or

else they would know that they are working in vain when they work for "a

gradual  diminution  of  the  military  burdens."  On  the  contrary,  when  the

distress of these burdens is greatest, the sort of God who alone can help here

will  be  nearest.  The  tree  of  military  glory  can  only  be  destroyed  at  one

swoop, with one stroke of lightning. But, as you know, lightning comes from

the cloud and from above.

  285.

  Whether Property can be squared with Justice.—When the injustice of

property is strongly felt (and the hand of the great clock is once more at this

place), we formulate two methods of relieving this injustice: either an equal

distribution,  or  an  abolition  of  private  possession  and  a  return  to  State

ownership. The latter method is especially dear to the hearts of our Socialists,

who are angry with that primitive Jew for saying, "Thou shalt not steal." In

their view the eighth [27] commandment should rather run, "Thou shalt not

possess."—The  former  method  was  frequently  tried  in  antiquity,  always

indeed on a small scale, and yet with poor success. From this failure we too

may  learn.  "Equal  plots  of  land"  is  easily  enough  said,  but  how  much

bitterness is aroused by the necessary division and separation, by the loss of

time-honored possessions, how much piety is wounded and sacrificed! We

uproot the foundation of morality when we uproot boundary-stones. Again,

how  much  fresh  bitterness  among  the  new  owners,  how  much  envy  and

looking askance! For there have never been two really equal plots of land,

and  if  there  were,  man's  envy  of  his  neighbour  would  prevent  him  from

believing in their equality. And how long would this equality, unhealthy and

poisoned at the very roots, endure? In a few generations, by inheritance, here

one plot would come to five owners, there five plots to one. Even supposing

that men acquiesced in such abuses through the enactment of stern laws of

inheritance, the same equal plots would indeed exist, but there would also be

needy  malcontents,  owning  nothing  but  dislike  of  their  kinsmen  and

neighbours, and longing for a general upheaval.—If, however, by the second

method  we  try  to  restore  ownership  to  the  community  and  make  the

individual but a temporary tenant, we interfere with agriculture. For man isopposed to all that is only a transitory possession, unblessed with his own

care and sacrifice. With such property he behaves in freebooter fashion, as

robber  or  as  worthless  spendthrift.  When  Plato  declares  that  self-seeking

would be removed with the abolition of property, we may answer him that, if

self-seeking be taken away, man will no longer possess the four cardinal

virtues either; as we must say that the most deadly plague could not injure

mankind so terribly as if vanity were one day to disappear. Without vanity

and self-seeking what are human virtues? By this I am far from meaning that

these virtues are but varied names and masks for these two qualities. Plato's

Utopian  refrain,  which  is  still  sung  by  Socialists,  rests  upon  a  deficient

knowledge of men. He lacked the historical science of moral emotions, the

insight into the origin of the good and useful characteristics of the human

soul. He believed, like all antiquity, in good and evil as in black and white—

that is to say, in a radical difference between good and bad men and good and

bad  qualities.—In  order  that  property  may  henceforth  inspire  more

confidence and become more moral, we should keep open all the paths of

work  for  small  fortunes,  but  should  prevent  the  effortless  and  sudden

acquisition  of  wealth.  Accordingly,  we  should  take  all  the  branches  of

transport  and  trade  which  favor  the  accumulation  of  large  fortunes—

especially, therefore, the money market—out of the hands of private persons

or private companies, and look upon those who own too much, just as upon

those who own nothing, as types fraught with danger to the community. [27]

The original, by a curious slip, has "seventh."—Tr.

  286.

  The Value of Labor.—If we try to determine the value of labour by the

amount  of  time,  industry,  good  or  bad  will,  constraint,  inventiveness  or

laziness, honesty or make-believe bestowed upon it, the valuation can never

be a just one. For the whole personality would have to be thrown into the

scale, and this is impossible. Here the motto is, "Judge not!" But after all the

cry for justice is the cry we now hear from those who are dissatisfied with the

present valuation of labour. If we reflect further we find every person non-

responsible for his product, the labour; hence merit can never be derived

therefrom, and every labour is as good or as bad as it must be through this or

that necessary concatenation of forces and weaknesses, abilities and desires.

The worker is not at liberty to say whether he shall work or not, or to decide

how he shall work. Only the standpoints of usefulness, wider and narrower,

have created the valuation of labour. What we at present call justice does verywell in this sphere as a highly refined utility, which does not only consider

the  moment  and  exploit  the  immediate  opportunity,  but  looks  to  the

permanence of all conditions, and thus also keeps in view the well-being of

the worker, his physical and spiritual contentment: in order that he and his

posterity may work well for our posterity and become trustworthy for longer

periods than the individual span of human life. The exploitation of the worker

was, as we now understand, a piece of folly, a robbery at the expense of the

future, a jeopardization of society. We almost have the war now, and in any

case the expense of maintaining peace, of concluding treaties and winning

confidence, will henceforth be very great, because the folly of the exploiters

was very great and long-lasting.

  287.

  Of the Study of the Social Body.—The worst drawback for the modern

student  of  economics  and  political  science  in  Europe,  and  especially  in

Germany,  is  that  the  actual  conditions,  instead  of  exemplifying  rules,

illustrate exceptions or stages of transition and extinction. We must therefore

learn to look beyond actually existing conditions and, for example, turn our

eyes  to  distant  North  America,  where  we  can  still  contemplate  and

investigate, if we will, the initial and normal movement of the social body. In

Germany such a study requires arduous and historical research, or, as I have

suggested, a telescope.

  288.

  How far Machinery Humiliates.—Machinery is impersonal; it robs the

piece of work of its pride, of the individual merits and defects that cling to all

work  that  is  not  machine-made—in  other  words,  of  its  bit  of  humanity.

Formerly, all buying from handicraftsmen meant a mark of distinction for

their personalities, with whose productions people surrounded themselves.

Furniture and dress accordingly became the symbols of mutual valuation and

personal connection. Nowadays, on the other hand, we seem to live in the

midst  of  anonymous  and  impersonal  serfdom.—We  must  not  buy  the

facilitation of labour too dear.

  289.

    Century-old  Quarantine.—Democratic  institutions  are  centers  of

quarantine  against  the  old  plague  of  tyrannical  desires.  As  such  they  are

extremely useful and extremely tedious.

  290.

  The Most Dangerous Partisan.—The most dangerous partisan is he whosedefection would involve the ruin of the whole party—in other words, the best

partisan.

  291.

  Destiny and the Stomach.—A piece more or less of bread and butter in

the jockey's body is occasionally the decisive factor in races and bets, and

thus  in  the  good  and  bad  luck  of  thousands.—So  long  as  the  destiny  of

nations depends upon diplomats, the stomachs of diplomats will always be

the object of patriotic misgivings. Quousque tandem . .

  292.

  The Victory of Democracy.—All political powers nowadays attempt to

exploit the fear of Socialism for their own strengthening. Yet in the long run

democracy alone gains the advantage, for all parties are now compelled to

flatter "the masses" and grant them facilities and liberties of all kinds, with

the result that the masses finally become omnipotent. The masses are as far as

possible removed from Socialism as a doctrine of altering the acquisition of

property. If once they get the steering-wheel into their hands, through great

majorities in their Parliaments, they will attack with progressive taxation the

whole dominant system of capitalists, merchants, and financiers, and will in

fact slowly create a middle class which may forget Socialism like a disease

that  has  been  overcome.—The  practical  result  of  this  increasing

democratization will next be a European league of nations, in which each

individual  nation,  delimited  by  the  proper  geographical  frontiers,  has  the

position of a canton with its separate rights. Small account will be taken of

the  historic  memories  of  previously  existing  nations,  because  the  pious

affection for these memories will be gradually uprooted under the democratic

regime,  with  all  its  craze  for  novelty  and  experiment.  The  corrections  of

frontiers  that  will  prove  necessary  will  be  so  carried  out  as  to  serve  the

interests  of  the  great  cantons  and  at  the  same  time  that  of  the  whole

federation, but not that of any venerable memories. To find the standpoints

for these corrections will be the task of future diplomats, who will have to be

at  the  same  time  students  of  civilization,  agriculturists,  and  commercial

experts, with no armies but motives and utilities at their back. Then only will

foreign and home politics be inseparably connected, whereas to-day the latter

follows its haughty dictator, and gleans in sorry baskets the stubble that is left

over from the harvest of the former.

  293.

  Goal  and  Means  of  Democracy.—Democracy  tries  to  create  andguarantee independence for as many as possible in their opinions, way of life,

and  occupation.  For  this  purpose  democracy  must  withhold  the  political

suffrage both from those who have nothing and from those who are really

rich, as being the two intolerable classes of men. At the removal of these

classes it must always work, because they are continually calling its task in

question. In the same way democracy must prevent all measures that seem to

aim at party organization. For the three great foes of independence, in that

threefold  sense,  are  the  have-nots,  the  rich,  and  the  parties.—I  speak  of

democracy  as  of  a  thing  to  come.  What  at  present  goes  by  that  name  is

distinguished from older forms of government only by the fact that it drives

with new horses; the roads and the wheels are the same as of yore.—Has the

danger really become less with these conveyances of the commonwealth?

  294.

  Discretion  and  Success.—That  great  quality  of  discretion,  which  is

fundamentally  the  virtue  of  virtues,  their  ancestress  and  queen,  has  in

common life by no means always success on its side. The wooer would find

himself deceived if he had wooed that virtue only for the sake of success. For

it is rated by practical people as suspicious, and is confused with cunning and

hypocrisy: he who obviously lacks discretion, the man who quickly grasps

and sometimes misses his grasp, has prejudice on his side—he is an honest,

trustworthy  fellow.  Practical  people,  accordingly,  do  not  like  the  prudent

man, thinking he is to them a danger. Moreover, we often assume the prudent

man to be anxious, preoccupied, pedantic—unpractical, butterfly people find

him uncomfortable, because he does not live in their happy-go-lucky way,

without  thinking  of  actions  and  duties;  he  appears  among  them  as  their

embodied conscience, and the bright day is dimmed to their eyes before his

gaze. Thus when success and popularity fail him, he may often say by way of

private consolation, "So high are the taxes you have to pay for the possession

of the most precious of human commodities—still it is worth the price!"

  295.

  Et in Arcadia Ego.—I looked down, over waves of hills, to a milky-green

lake, through firs and pines austere with age; rocky crags of all shapes about

me, the soil gay with flowers and grasses. A herd of cattle moved, stretched,

and expanded itself before me; single cows and groups in the distance, in the

clearest evening light, hard by the forest of pines; others nearer and darker;

all in calm and eventide contentment. My watch pointed to half-past six. The

bull of the herd had stepped into the white foaming brook, and went forwardslowly,  now  striving  against,  now  giving  way  to  his  tempestuous  course;

thus, no doubt, he took his sort of fierce pleasure. Two dark brown beings, of

Bergamasque origin, tended the herd, the girl dressed almost like a boy. On

the  left,  over-hanging  cliffs  and  fields  of  snow  above  broad  belts  of

woodland;  to  the  right,  two  enormous  ice-covered  peaks,  high  above  me,

shimmering in the veil of the sunny haze—all large, silent, and bright. The

beauty of the whole was awe-inspiring and induced to a mute worship of the

moment  and  its  revelation.  Unconsciously,  as  if  nothing  could  be  more

natural, you peopled this pure, clear world of light (which had no trace of

yearning, of expectancy, of looking forward or backward) with Greek heroes.

You felt it all as Poussin and his school felt—at once heroic and idyllic.—So

individual men too have lived, constantly feeling themselves in the world and

the  world  in  themselves,  and  among  them  one  of  the  greatest  men,  the

inventor of a heroico-idyllic form of philosophy—Epicurus.

  296.

    Counting and Measuring.—The art of seeing many things, of weighing

one with another, of reckoning one thing with another and constructing from

them a rapid conclusion, a fairly correct sum—that goes to make a great

politician or general or merchant. This quality is, in fact, a power of speedy

mental calculation. The art of seeing one thing alone, of finding therein the

sole motive for action, the guiding principle of all other action, goes to make

the hero and also the fanatic. This quality means a dexterity in measuring

with one scale.

  297.

  Not to See too Soon.—As long as we undergo some experience, we must

give ourselves up to the experience and shut our eyes—in other words, not

become observers of what we are undergoing. For to observe would disturb

good  digestion  of  the  experience,  and  instead  of  wisdom  we  should  gain

nothing but dyspepsia.

  298.

  From  the  Practice  of  the  Wise.—To  become  wise  we  must  will  to

undergo certain experiences, and accordingly leap into their jaws. This, it is

true, is very dangerous. Many a "sage" has been eaten up in the process.

  299.

  Exhaustion of the Intellect.—Our occasional coldness and indifference

towards people, which is imputed to us as hardness and defect of character, is

often only an exhaustion of the intellect. In this state other men are to us, aswe are to ourselves, tedious or immaterial.

  300.

  "The One Thing Needful."—If we are clever, the one thing we need is to

have joy in our hearts. "Ah," adds some one, "if we are clever, the best thing

we can do is to be wise."

  301.

  A Sign of Love.—Someone said, "There are two persons about whom I

have never thought deeply. That is a sign of my love for them."

  302.

  How we Seek to Improve Bad Arguments.—Many a man adds a bit of his

personality to his bad arguments, as if they would thus go better and change

into straight and good arguments. In the same way, players at skittles, even

after a throw, try to give a direction to the ball by turns and gestures.

  303.

    Honesty.—It is but a small thing to be a pattern sort of man with regard to

rights and property—for instance (to name trifling points, which of course

give a better proof of this sort of pattern nature than great examples), if as a

boy one never steals fruit from another's orchard, and as a man never walks

on  unmown  fields.  It  is  but  little;  you  are  then  still  only  a  "law-abiding

person," with just that degree of morality of which a "society," a group of

human beings, is capable.

  304.

    "Man!"—What is the vanity of the vainest individual as compared with

the vanity which the most modest person feels when he thinks of his position

in nature and in the world as "Man!"

  305.

  The Most Necessary Gymnastic.—Through deficiency in self-control in

small matters a similar deficiency on great occasions slowly arises. Every day

on which we have not at least once denied ourselves some trifle is turned to

bad use and a danger to the next day. This gymnastic is indispensable if we

wish to maintain the joy of being our own master.

  306.

    Losing  Ourselves.—When  we  have  first  found  ourselves,  we  must

understand how from time to time to lose ourselves and then to find ourselves

again.—This is true on the assumption that we are thinkers. A thinker finds it

a drawback always to be tied to one person.

  307.  When it is Necessary to Part.—You must, for a time at least, part from

that which you want to know and measure. Only when you have left a city do

you see how high its towers rise above its houses.

  308.

  At  Noontide.—He  to  whom  an  active  and  stormy  morning  of  life  is

allotted, at the noontide of life feels his soul overcome by a strange longing

for a rest that may last for months and years. All grows silent around him,

voices sound farther and farther in the distance, the sun shines straight down

upon him. On a hidden woodland sward he sees the great God Pan sleeping,

and with Pan Nature seems to him to have gone to sleep with an expression

of eternity on their faces. He wants nothing, he troubles about nothing; his

heart stands still, only his eye lives. It is a death with waking eyes. Then man

sees much that he never saw before, and, so far as his eye can reach, all is

woven into and as it were buried in a net of light. He feels happy, but it is a

heavy, very heavy kind of happiness.—Then at last the wind stirs in the trees,

noontide is over, life carries him away again, life with its blind eyes, and its

tempestuous  retinue  behind  it—desire,  illusion,  oblivion,  enjoyment,

destruction, decay. And so comes evening, more stormy and more active than

was even the morning.—To the really active man these prolonged phases of

cognition seem almost uncanny and morbid, but not unpleasant.

  309.

  To Beware of One's Portrait-Painter.—A great painter, who in a portrait

has revealed and put on canvas the fullest expression and look of which a

man is capable, will almost always think, when he sees the man later in real

life, that he is only looking at a caricature.

  310.

  The Two Principles of the New Life.—First Principle: to arrange one's

life on the most secure and tangible basis, not as hitherto upon the most

distant, undetermined, and cloudy foundation. Second Principle: to establish

the rank of the nearest and nearer things, and of the more and less secure,

before one arranges one's life and directs it to a final end.

  311.

  Dangerous Irritability.—Talented men who are at the same time idle will

always appear somewhat irritated when one of their friends has accomplished

a thorough piece of work. Their jealousy is awakened, they are ashamed of

their  own  laziness,  or  rather,  they  fear  that  their  active  friend  will  now

despise them even more than before. In such a mood they criticize the newachievement,  and,  to  the  utter  astonishment  of  the  author,  their  criticism

becomes a revenge.

  312.

    Destructions of Illusions.—Illusions are certainly expensive amusements;

but the destruction of illusions is still more expensive, if looked upon as an

amusement, as it undoubtedly is by some people.

  313.

  The  Monotone  of  the  "Sage."—Cows  sometimes  have  a  look  of

wondering which stops short on the path to questioning. In the eye of the

higher intelligence, on the other hand, the nil admirari is spread out like the

monotony of the cloudless sky.

  314.

  Not to be Ill too Long.—We should beware of being ill too long. The

lookers-on become impatient of their customary duty of showing sympathy,

because  they  find  it  too  much  trouble  to  maintain  the  appearance  of  this

emotion for any length of time. Then they immediately pass to suspicion of

our character, with the conclusion: "You deserve to be ill, and we need no

longer be at pains to show our sympathy."

  315.

  A Hint to Enthusiasts.—He who likes to be carried away, and would fain

be carried on high, must beware lest he become too heavy. For instance, he

must not learn much, and especially not let himself be crammed with science.

Science makes men ponderous—take care, ye enthusiasts!

  316.

    Knowledge of how to Surprise Oneself.—He who would see himself as

he is, must know how to surprise himself, torch in hand. For with the mind it

is as with the body: whoever is accustomed to look at himself in the glass

forgets is ugliness, and only recognizes it again by means of the portrait-

painter. Yet he even grows used to the picture and forgets his ugliness all

over  again.—Herein  we  see  the  universal  law  that  man  cannot  endure

unalterable ugliness, unless for a moment. He forgets or denies it in all cases.

—The moralists must reckon upon that "moment" for ringing forward their

truths.

  317.

  Opinions and Fish.—We are possessors of our pinions as of fish—that is,

in so far as we are possessors of a fish pond. We must go fishing and have

luck—then we have our fish, our opinions. I speak here of live opinions, oflive fish. Others are intent to possess a cabinet of fossils—and, in their read,

"convictions."

  318.

  Signs  of  Freedom  and  Servitude.—To  satisfy  one's  needs  so  far  as

possible oneself, even imperfectly, is the path towards freedom in mind and

personality.  To  satisfy  many  even  superfluous  seeds,  and  that  as  fully  as

possible, is a training for servitude. The Sophist Hippias, who himself turned

and made all that he wore within and without, is the representative of the

highest freedom of mind and personality. It does not matter whether all is

done equally well and perfectly—pride can repair the damaged places.

  319.

  Belief in Oneself.—In our times we mistrust everyone who believes in

himself. Formerly this was enough to make people believe in one. The recipe

for finding faith now runs: "Spare not thyself! In order to set thy opinion in a

credible light, thou must first set fire to thy own hut!"

  320.

  At Once Richer and Poorer.—I know a man who accustomed himself

even in childhood to think well of the intellectuality of mankind—in other

words, of their real devotion as regards things of the intellect, their unselfish

preference for that which is recognized as true—but who had at the same

time  a  modest  or  even  depreciatory  view  of  his  own  brain  (judgment,

memory, presence of mind, imagination). He set no value on himself when he

compared himself with others. Now in the course of years he was compelled,

first once and then in a hundred ways, to revise this verdict. One would have

thought he would be thoroughly satisfied and delighted. Such, in fact, was to

some extent the case, but, as he once said, "Yet a bitterness of the deepest dye

is mingled with my feeling, such as I did not know in earlier life; for since I

learnt to value men and myself more correctly, my intellect seems to me of

less use. I scarcely think I can now do any good at all with it, because the

minds of others cannot understand the good. I now always see before me the

frightful gulf between those who could give help and those who need help.

So I am troubled by the misfortune of having my intellect to myself and of

being forced to enjoy it alone so far as it can give any enjoyment. But to give

is more blessed than to possess, and what is the richest man in the solitude of

a desert?" [28] [28] Clearly autobiographical. Nietzsche, like all great men,

passed through a period of modesty and doubt.—Tr.

  321.  How we should attack.—The reasons for which men believe or do not

believe are in very few people as strong as they might be. As a rule, in order

to shake a belief it is far from necessary to use the heaviest weapon of attack.

Many attain their object by merely making the attack with some noise—in

fact,  pop-guns  are  often  enough.  In  dealing  with  very  vain  persons,  the

semblance of a strong attack is enough. They think they are being taken quite

seriously, and readily give way.

  322.

    Death.—Through the certain prospect of death a precious, fragrant drop

of frivolity might be mixed with every life—and now, you singular druggist-

souls, you have made of death a drop of poison, unpleasant to taste, which

makes the whole of life hideous.

  323.

    Repentance.—Never  allow  repentance  free  play,  but  say  at  once  to

yourself, "That would be adding a second piece of folly to the first." If you

have  worked  evil,  you  must  bethink  yourself  of  doing  good.  If  you  are

punished for your actions, submit to the punishment with the feeling that by

this very submission you are somehow doing good, in that you are deterring

others from falling into the same error. Every malefactor who is punished has

a right to consider himself a benefactor to mankind.

  324.

  Becoming a Thinker.—How can anyone become a thinker if he does not

spend at least a third part of the day without passions, men, and books?

  325.

  The Best Remedy.—A little health on and off is the best remedy for the

invalid.

  326.

  Don't  Touch.—There  are  dreadful  people  who,  instead  of  solving  a

problem, complicate it for those who deal with it and make it harder to solve.

[29]  Whoever  does  not  know  how  to  hit  the  nail  on  the  head  should  be

entreated not to hit the nail at all. [29] Nietzsche here alludes to his own

countrymen.—Tr.

  327.

    Forgetting  Nature.—We  speak  of  Nature,  and,  in  doing  so,  forget

ourselves: we ourselves are Nature, quand même.—Consequently, Nature is

something  quite  different  from  what  we  feel  on  hearing  her  name

pronounced.  328.

    Profundity and Ennui.—In the case of profound men, as of deep wells, it

takes  a  long  time  before  anything  that  is  thrown  into  them  reaches  the

bottom. The spectators, who generally do not wait long enough, too readily

look upon such aman as callous and hard—or even as boring.

  329.

  When it is Time to Vow Fidelity to Oneself.—We sometimes go astray in

an intellectual direction which does not correspond to our talents. For a time

we struggle heroically against wind and tide, really against ourselves; but

finally we become weary and we pant. What we accomplish gives us no real

pleasure,  since  we  think  that  we  have  paid  too  heavy  a  price  for  these

successes. We even despair of our productivity, of our future, perhaps in the

midst of victory.—Finally, finally we turn back—and then the wind swells

our sails and bears us into our smooth water. What bliss! How certain of

victory we feel! Only now do we know what we are and what we intend, and

now we vow fidelity to ourselves, and have a right to do so—as men that

know.

  330.

  Weather Prophets.—Just as the clouds reveal to us the direction of the

wind high above our heads, so the lightest and freest spirits give signs of

future weather by their course. The wind in the valley and the market-place

opinions of to-day have no significance for the future, but only for the past.

  331.

  Continual  Acceleration.—Those  who  begin  slowly  and  find  it  hard  to

become familiar with a subject, sometimes acquire afterwards the quality of

continual acceleration—so that in the end no one knows where the current

will take them.

  332.

  The  Three  Good  Things.—Greatness,  calm,  sunlight—these  three

embrace all that a thinker desires and also demands of himself: his hopes and

duties, his claims in the intellectual and moral sphere, nay even in his daily

manner of life and the scenic background of his residence. Corresponding to

these  three  things  are,  firstly  thoughts  that  exalt,  secondly  thoughts  that

soothe,  and  thirdly  thoughts  that  illuminate—but,  fourthly,  thoughts  that

share in all these three qualities, in which all earthly things are transfigured.

This is the kingdom of the great trinity of joy.

  333.  Dying  for  "Truth."—We  should  not  let  ourselves  be  burnt  for  our

opinions—we  are  not  so  certain  of  them  as  all  that.  But  we  might  let

ourselves be burnt for the right of possessing and changing our opinions.

  334.

  Market Value.—If we wish to pass exactly for what we are, we must be

something that has its market value. As, however, only objects in common

use  have  a  market  value,  this  desire  is  the  consequence  either  of  shrewd

modesty or of stupid immodesty.

  335.

  Moral for Builders.—We must remove the scaffolding when the house

has been built.

  336.

      Sophocleanism.—Who poured more water into wine than the Greeks?

Sobriety  and  grace  combined—that  was  the  aristocratic  privilege  of  the

Athenian in the time of Sophocles and after. Imitate that whoever can! In life

and in work!

  337.

    Heroism.—The heroic consists in doing something great (or in nobly not

doing something) without feeling oneself to be in competition with or before

others. The hero carries with him, wherever he goes, the wilderness and the

holy land with inviolable precincts.

  338.

  Finding our "Double" in Nature.—In some country places we rediscover

ourselves, with a delightful shudder: it is the pleasantest way of finding our

"double."—How happy must he be who has that feeling just here, in this

perpetually sunny October air, in this happy elfin play of the wind from morn

till eve, in this clearest of atmospheres and mildest of temperatures, in all the

serious yet cheerful landscape of hill, lake, and forest on this plateau, which

has encamped fearlessly next to the terrors of eternal snow: here, where Italy

and Finland have joined hands, and where the home of all the silver color-

tones of Nature seems to be established. How happy must he be who can say,

"True,  there  are  many  grander  and  finer  pieces  of  scenery,  but  this  is  so

familiar and intimate to me, related by blood, nay even more to me!"

  339.

  Affability of the Sage.—The sage will unconsciously be affable in his

intercourse with other men, as a prince would be, and will readily treat them

as equals, in spite of all differences of talent, rank, and character. For thischaracteristic,  however,  so  scon  as  people  notice  it,  he  is  most  heavily

censured.

  340.

  Gold.—All that is gold does not glitter. A soft sheen characterizes the

most precious metal.

  341.

  Wheel and Drag.—The wheel and the drag have different duties, but also

one in common—that of hurting each other.

  342.

    Disturbances  of  the  Thinker.—All  that  interrupts  the  thinker  in  his

thoughts (disturbs him, as people say) must be regarded by him calmly, as a

new  model  who  comes  in  by  the  door  to  offer  himself  to  the  artist.

Interruptions are the ravens which bring food to the recluse.

  343.

  Being very Clever.—Being very clever keeps men young, but they must

put up with being considered, for that very reason, older than they are. For

men read the handwriting of the intellect as signs of experience—that is, of

having lived much and evilly, of suffering, error, and repentance. Hence, if

we are very clever and show it, we appear to them older and wickeder than

we are.

  344.

  How we must Conquer.—We ought not to desire victory if we only have

the prospect of overcoming our opponent by a hair's breadth. A good victory

makes  the  vanquished  rejoice,  and  must  have  about  it  something  divine

which spares humiliation.

  345.

  An Illusion of Superior Minds.—Superior minds find it difficult to free

themselves from an illusion; for they imagine that they excite envy among

the  mediocre  and  are  looked  upon  as  exceptions.  As  a  matter  of  fact,

however, they are looked upon as superfluous, as something that would not

be missed if it did not exist.

  346.

  Demanded  by  Cleanliness.—Changing  opinions  is  in  some  natures  as

much  demanded  by  cleanliness  as  changing  clothes.  In  the  case  of  other

natures it is only demanded by vanity.

  347.

  Also Worthy of a Hero.—Here is a hero who did nothing but shake thetree as soon as the fruits were ripe. Do you think that too small a thing? Well,

just look at the tree that he shook.

  348.

  A Gauge for Wisdom.—The growth of wisdom may be gauged exactly

by the diminution of ill-temper.

  349.

    Expressing an Error disagreeably.—It is not to everyone's taste to hear

truth  pleasantly  expressed.  But  let  no  one  at  least  believe  that  error  will

become truth if it is disagreeably expressed.

  350.

  The Golden Maxim.—Man has been bound with many chains, in order

that he may forget to comport himself like an animal. And indeed he has

become more gentle, more intellectual, more joyous, more meditative than

any animal. But now he still suffers from having carried his chains so long,

from having been so long without pure air and free movement—these chains,

however, are, as I repeat again and again, the ponderous and significant errors

of moral, religious, and metaphysical ideas. Only when the disease of chains

is overcome is the first great goal reached—the separation of man from the

brute. At present we stand in the midst of our work of removing the chains,

and in doing so we need the strictest precautions. Only the ennobled man

may be granted freedom of spirit; to him alone comes the alleviation of life

and heals his wounds; he is the first who can say that he lives for the sake of

joy, with no other aim; in any other mouth, his motto of "Peace around me

and goodwill towards all the most familiar things," would be dangerous.—In

this  motto  for  single  individuals  he  is  thinking  of  an  ancient  saying,

magnificent and pathetic, which applied to all, and has remained standing

above all mankind, as a motto and a beacon whereby shall perish all who

adorn their banner too early—the rock on which Christianity foundered. It is

not even yet time, it seems, for all men to have the lot of those shepherds who

saw the heavens lit up above them and heard the words: "Peace on earth and

goodwill to one another among men."—It is still the age of the individual.

    AFTERWORD

  The Shadow From everything that you said, nothing has pleased me more

than a promise: you want again to become a good neighbor to the things

closest to you. This will benefit us poor shadows as well. Because, admit it,

so far you have slandered us all too often. The Wanderer Slander? But why

haven't you ever defended yourselves? You were near to our ear.  63

  The Shadow It seemed to us as if we were much too close to be allowed

to speak of ourselves.

  The Wanderer Delicately! Very delicately! Oh, you shadows are "better

human beings" than we are, I see.

  The Shadow And, nevertheless, you call us "obtrusive"; we understand at

least one thing well: to be silent and wait -- no Englishman understands it

better. It is true, one very often finds us in the retinue of human beings, but

nevertheless we are not servants. When human beings shun the light, we shun

them: that's the extent of our freedom.

  The Wanderer Oh, the light shuns human beings even more frequently,

and then you abandon us as well.

  The Shadow. I've often abandoned you with sorrow: it remains dark for

man since I -- being eager for knowledge -- cannot always be around.

  As full payment for the complete understanding of man, I would probably

be your slave.

  The Wanderer Do you know -- do I know? -- whether you would undergo

a sudden change from slave to master? Or remain a slave, but also become

disdainful of your master, and lead a life of degradation and disgust? Let's be

content with this freedom, such as you have it, you and me! Because the sight

of one unfree turns my greatest joys into rancor; I would be adverse to the

best if I had to share it with someone -- I do not want slaves around me. Thus,

I don't even like dogs, lazy tail-wagging parasites that became "doglike" only

as servants of man and who are still praised for their faithfulness to their

master and follow him in this manner.

  The Shadow Like his shadow, that's what they say. Yet today -- have I

already followed you too easily, and for too long?

  The Wanderer. Oh, is it time to part? I had to give you the last blow --

and I see that you became darker thereby.

  The Shadow. I blushed, in the color that I'm able to blush. It occurred to

me that I've often been at your heels like a dog, and that you then --

  The Wanderer And couldn't I do in all haste something to please you?

Don't you have a desire?

  The  Shadow.  Nothing,  except  perhaps  the  same  desire  that  the

philosophical "dog" had of the great Alexander: move a little out of the sun,

it's getting too cold for me.

  The Wanderer What am I to do?  The Shadow Step under these spruces and look out at the mountains; the

sun is sinking.

  The Wanderer -- Where are you? Where are you?

  The End



                                  THE DAWN OF DAY

    Translated by J.M. Kennedy

                                        PREFACE

  IN  this  book  we  find  a  "  subterrestrial  "  at  work,  digging  mining,

undermining. You can see him, always provided that you have eyes for such

deep work, -how he makes his way slowly, cautiously, gently but surely,

without  showing  signs  of  the  weariness  that  usually  accompanies  a  long

privation of light and air. He might even be called happy, despite his labours

in the dark. Does it not seem as if some faith were leading him on, some

solace  recompensing  him  for  his  toil  ?  Or  that  he  himself  desires  a  long

period of darkness, an unintelligible, hidden, enigmatic something, knowing

as he does that he will in time have his own morning, his own redemption, his

own rosy dawn ? Yes, verily he will return : ask him not what he seeks in the

depths  ;  for  he  himself  will  tell  you,  this  apparent  Trophonius  and

subterrestrial, whenever he once again becomes man. One easily unlearns

how to hold one's tongue when one has for so long been a mole, and all

alone, like him.

  Indeed, my indulgent friends, I will tell you here, in this late preface,

which  might  easily  have  become  an  obituary  or  a  funeral  oration  what  I

sought in the depths below: for I have come back, and I have escaped. Think

not that I will urge you to run the same perilous risk ! or that I will urge you

on even to the same solitude ! For whoever proceeds on his own path meets

nobody : that is the feature of one's "own path." "" No "one comes to Kelp

him  in  his  task  :  he  must  face  everything  quite  alone  danger,  bad  luck,

wickedness, foul weather - He goes his own way ; and, as is only right, meets

with bitterness and occasional irritation because he pursues this "own way" of

his : for instance, the knowledge that not even his friends can guess who he is

and whither he is going, and that they ask themselves now and then : " Well ?

Is he really moving at all? Has he still a "path" before him ? " At that time I

had undertaken something which could not have been done by everybody : I

went down into the deepest depths ; I tunnelled to the very bottom ; I startedto  investigate  and  unearth  an  old  faith  which  for  thousands  of  years  we

philosophers used to build on as the safest of all foundations which we built

on again and again although every previous structure fell in : I began to

undermine our faith in morals. But you do not understand me?

  So far it is on Good and Evil that we have meditated least profoundly:

this was always too dangerous a subject. Conscience, a good reputation, hell,

and  at  times  even  the  police,  have  not  allowed  and  do  not  allow  of

impartiality ; in the presence of morality, as before alt authority, we must not

even think, much less speak : here we must obey ! Ever since the beginning

of  the  world,  no  authority  has  permitted  itself  to  be  made  the  subject  of

criticism ; and to criticise morals to look upon morality as a problem, as

problematic what ! was that not is that not immoral ? But morality has at its

disposal not only every means of intimidation wherewith to keep itself free

from critical hands and instruments of torture: its security lies rather in a

certain  art  of  enchantment,  in  which  it  is  a  past  master  it  knows  how  to

"enrapture." It can often paralyse the critical will with a single look, or even

seduce  it  to  itself:  yes,  there  are  even  cases  where  morality  can  turn  the

critical will against itself ; so that then, like the scorpion, it thrusts the sting

into its own body. Morality has for ages been an expert in all kinds of devilry

in the art of convincing : even at the present day there is no orator who would

not turn to it for assistance (only listen to our anarchists, for instance: how

morally they speak when they would gladly convince ! In the end they even

call themselves "the good and the just"). Morality has shown herself to be the

greatest  mistress  of  seduction  ever  since  men  began  to  discourse  and

persuade on earth and, what concerns us philosophers even more, she is the

veritable Circe of the philosophers. Why is it that, from Plato onwards, all the

philosophic architects in Europe have built in vain ? that everything which

they themselves honestly believed to be aere perennius threatens to subside or

is already laid in ruins? Oh, how wrong is the answer which, even in our own

day, rolls glibly off the tongue when this question is asked : " Because they

have  all  neglected  the  prerequisite,  the  examination  of  the  foundation,  a

critique of all reason " that fatal answer made by Kant, who has certainly not

thereby  attracted  us  modern  philosophers  to  firmer  and  less  treacherous

ground  !  (and,  one  may  ask  apropos  of  this,  was  it  not  rather  strange  to

demand that an instrument should criticise its own value and effectiveness?

that the intellect itself should " recognise " its own worth, power, and limits ?

was it not even just a little ridiculous ?) The right answer would rather havebeen, that all philosophers, including Kant himself, were building under the

seductive influence of morality that they aimed at certainty and "truth" only

in  appearance;  but  that  in  reality  their  attention  was  directed  towards  "

majestic  moral  edifices?  to  use  once  more  Kant's  innocent  mode  of

expression, who deems it his " less brilliant, but not undeserving " task and

work " to level the ground and prepare a solid foundation for the erection A

of those majestic moral edifices " (Critique of Pure Reason, il 257). Alas! He

did not succeed in his aim, quite the contrary as we must acknowledge to-

day. With this exalted aim, Kant was merely a true son of his century, which

more than any other may justly be called the century of exaltation: and this he

fortunately  continued  to  be  in  respect  to  the  more  valuable  side  of  this

century (with that solid piece of sensuality, for example, which he introduced

into his theory of knowledge). He, too, had been bitten by the moral tarantula,

Rousseau ; he, too, felt weighing on his soul that moral fanaticism of which

another disciple of Rousseau's, Robespierre, felt and proclaimed himself to be

the executor : de fonder sur la terre {empire de la sagesse, de la justice et de

la vertu. (Speech of June 4th, 1794.) On the other hand, with such a French

fanaticism in his heart, no one could have cultivated it in a less French, more

deep, more thorough and more German manner if the word German is still

permissible in this sense than Kant did : in order to make room for his "

moral kingdom," he found himself compelled to add to it an indemonstrable

world, a logical " beyond " that was why he required his critique of pure

reason ! In other words, he would not have wanted it, if he had not deemed

one  thing  to  be  more  important  than  all  the  others  :  to  render  his  moral

kingdom unassailable by or, better still, invisible to, reason, for he felt too

strongly the vulnerability of a moral order of things in the face of reason. For,

when confronted with nature and history, when confronted with the ingrained

immorality of nature and history, Kant was, like all good Germans from the

earliest  times,  a  pessimist  :  he  believed  in  morality,  not  because  it  is

demonstrated  through  nature  and  history,  but  despite  its  being  steadily

contradicted by them. To understand this "despite" we should perhaps recall a

somewhat similar trait in Luther, that other great pessimist, who once urged it

upon his friends with true Lutheran audacity : " If we could conceive by

reason alone how that God who shows so much wrath and malignity could be

merciful and just what use should we have for faith ? w For, from the earliest

times, nothing has ever made a deeper impression upon the German soul,

nothing has ever " tempted " it more, than that deduction, the most dangerousof all, which for every true Latin is a sin against the intellect : credo quia

absurdum est. With it German logic enters for the first time into the history of

Christian dogma ; but even to-day, a thousand years later, we Germans of the

present, late Germans in every way, catch the scent of truth, a possibility of

truth,  at  the  back  of  the  famous  fundamental  principle  of  dialectics  with

which  Hegel  secured  the  victory  of  the  German  spirit  over  Europe  "

contradiction moves the world ; all things contradict themselves." We are

pessimists even in logic.

  But logical judgments are not the deepest and most fundamental to which

the  daring  of  our  suspicion  descends  :  the  confidence  in  reason  which  is

inseparable from the validity of these judgments, is, as confidence, a moral

phenomenon . . . perhaps German pessimism has yet to take its last step ?

Perhaps it has once more to draw up its " credo " opposite its "absurdum" in a

terrible manner? And if this book is pessimistic even in regard to morals,

even above the confidence in morals should it not be a German book for that

very reason ? For, in fact, it represents a contradiction, and one which it does

not fear : in it confidence in morals is retracted but why ? Out of morality. Or

how shall we call that which takes place in it in us ? for our taste inclines to

the employment of more modest phrases. But there is no doubt that to us

likewise there speaks a " you shall " ; we likewise obey a strict law which is

set above us and this is the last cry of morals which is still audible to us,

which we too must live : here, if anywhere, are we still men of conscience

because, to put the matter in plain words, we will not return to that which we

look  upon  as  decayed,  outlived,  and  superseded,  we  will  not  return  to

something  "  unworthy  of  belief,"  whether  it  be  called  God,  virtue,  truth,

justice, love of one's neighbour, or what not ; we will not permit ourselves to

open  up  a  lying  path  to  old  ideals  ;  we  are  thoroughly  and  unalterably

opposed to anything that would intercede and mingle with us ; opposed to all

forms of present-day faith and Christianity ; opposed to the lukewarmness of

all  romanticism  and  fatherlandism  ;  opposed  also  to  the  artistic  sense  of

enjoyment and lack of principle which would gladly make us worship where

we no longer believe for we are artists opposed, in short, to all this European

feminism (or idealism, if this term be thought preferable) which everlastingly

" draws upward," and which in consequence everlastingly " lowers" and "

degrades." You, being men of this conscience, we feel that we are related to

that  German  uprightness  and  piety  which  dates  back  thousands  of  years,

although we immoralists and atheists may be the late and uncertain offspringof these virtues yet, we even consider ourselves, in a certain respect, as their

heirs, the executors of their inmost will: a pessimistic will, as I have already

pointed out, which is not afraid to deny itself, because it denies itself with joy

!  In  us  is  consummated,  if  you  desire  a  formula  the  autosuppression  of

morals.

  But, after all, why must we proclaim so loudly and with such intensity

what we are, what we want, and what we do not want ? Let us look at this

more calmly and wisely ; from a higher and more distant point of view. Let

us proclaim it, as if among ourselves, in so low a tone that all the world fails

to hear it and us ! Above all, however, let us say it slowly. . . . This preface

comes late, but not too late : what, after all, do five or six years matter ? Such

a book, and such a problem, are in no hurry ; besides, we are friends of the

lento, I and my book. I have not been a philologist in vain perhaps I am one

yet : a teacher of slow reading. I even come to write slowly. At present it is

not  only  my  habit,  but  even  my  taste  a  perverted  taste,  maybe  to  write

nothing but what will drive to despair everyone who is " in a hurry." For

philology  is  that  venerable  art  which  exacts  from  its  followers  one  thing

above all to step to one side, to leave themselves spare moments, to grow

silent, to become slow the leisurely art of the goldsmith applied to language :

an art which must carry out slow, fine work, and attains nothing if not lento.

For this very reason philology is now more desirable than ever before ; for

this very reason it is the highest attraction and incitement in an age of " work

" : that is to say, of haste, of unseemly and immoderate hurry-skurry, which is

intent upon " getting things done " at once, even every book, whether old or

new. Philology itself, perhaps, will not "get things done" so hurriedly : it

teaches how to read well: i.e. slowly, profoundly, attentively, prudently, with

inner thoughts, with the mental doors ajar, with delicate fingers and eyes . . .

my patient friends, this book appeals only to perfect readers and philologists :

learn to read me well ! RUTA, NEAR GENOA, Autumn 1886

                                          BOOK I

  1

    SUBSEQUENT JUDGMENT. All things that endure for a long time are

little by little so greatly permeated by reason that their origin in unreason

becomes  improbable.  Does  not  almost  every  exact  statement  of  an  origin

strike us as paradoxical and sacrilegious ? Indeed, does not the true historian

constantly contradict ?

  2    PREJUDICE  OF  THE  LEARNED.  Savants  are  quite  correct  in

maintaining the proposition that men in all ages believed that they knew what

was good and evil, praiseworthy and blamable. But it is a prejudice of the

learned to say that we now know it better than any other age.

  3

  A TIME FOR EVERYTHING. When man assigned a sex to all things, he

did not believe that he was merely playing ; but he thought, on the contrary,

that he had acquired a profound insight : it was only at a much later period,

and then only partly, that he acknowledged the enormity of his error. In the

same way, man has attributed a moral relationship to everything that exists,

throwing the cloak of ethical significance over the world's shoulders. One day

all that will be of just as much value, and no more, as the amount of belief

existing to-day in the masculinity or femininity of the sun.

  4

    AGAINST THE FANCIFUL DISHARMONY OF THE SPHERES. We

must  once  more  sweep  out  of  the  world  all  this  false  grandeur,  for  it  is

contrary to the justice that all things about us may claim. And for this reason

we must not see or wish the world to be more disharmonic than it is !

  5

  BE  THANKFUL  !  The  most  important  result  of  the  past  efforts  of

humanity is that we need no longer go about in continual fear of wild beasts,

barbarians, gods, and our own dreams.

  6

  THE JUGGLER AND HIS COUNTERPART. That which is wonderful

in science is contrary to that which is wonderful in the art of the juggler. For

the latter would wish to make us believe that we see a very simple causality,

where, in reality, an exceedingly complex causality is in operation. Science,

on the other hand, forces us to give up our belief in the simple causality

exactly where everything looks so easily comprehensible and we are merely

the victims of appearances. The simplest things are very "complicated" we

can never be sufficiently astonished at them !

  7

    RECONCEIVING OUR FEELING OF SPACE. Is it real or imaginary

things which have built up the greater proportion of man's happiness? It is

certain, at all events, that the extent of the distance between the highest point

of happiness and the lowest point of unhappiness has been established only

with  the  help  of  imaginary  things.  As  a  consequence,  this  kind  of  aconception  of  space  is  always,  under  the  influence  of  science,  becoming

smaller and smaller : in the same way as science has taught us, and is still

teaching us, to look upon the earth as small yet, to look upon the entire solar

system as a mere point.

  8

    TRANSFIGURATION.  Perplexed  sufferers,  confused  dreamers,  the

hysterically  ecstatic  here  we  have  the  three  classes  into  which  Raphael

divided mankind. We no longer consider the world in this light and Raphael

himself dare not do so : his own eyes would show him a new transfiguration.

  9

    CONCEPTION  OF  THE  MORALITY  OF  CUSTOM.  In  comparison

with the mode of life which prevailed among men for thousands of years, we

men of the present day are living in a very immoral age : the power of custom

has been weakened to a remarkable degree, and the sense of morality is so

refined and elevated that we might almost describe it as volatilised. That is

why we late comers experience such difficulty in obtaining a fundamental

conception of the origin of morality : and even if we do obtain it, our words

of explanation stick in our throats, so coarse would they sound if we uttered

them  !  or  to  so  great  an  extent  would  they  seem  to  be  a  slander  upon

morality! Thus, for example, the fundamental clause : morality is nothing else

(and,  above  all,  nothing  more)  than  obedience  to  customs,  of  whatsoever

nature they may be. But customs are simply the traditional way of acting, and

valuing. Where there is no tradition there is no morality ; and the less life is

governed by tradition, the narrower the circle of morality. The free man is

immoral, because it is his will to depend upon himself and not upon tradition

: in all the primitive states of humanity " evil " is equivalent to " individual,"

"free,"  "arbitrary,"  "unaccustomed"  "unforeseen,"  "incalculable."  In  such

primitive conditions, always measured by this standard, any action performed

not because tradition commands it, but for other reasons (eg. on account of its

individual  utility),  even  for  the  same  reasons  as  had  been  formerly

established by custom is termed immoral, and is felt to be so even by the very

man  who  performs  it,  for  it  has  not  been  done  out  of  obedience  to  the

tradition. What is tradition ? A higher authority, which is beyond, not because

it commands what is useful to us, but merely because it commands. And in

what way can this feeling for tradition be distinguished from a general feeling

of fear? It is the fear of a higher intelligence which commands, the fear of an

incomprehensible power, of something that is more than personal there issuperstition in this fear. In primitive times the domain of morality included

education and hygienics, marriage, medicine, agriculture, war, speech and

silence, the relationship between man and man, and between man and the

gods morality required that a man should observe her prescriptions without

thinking  of  himself  as  individual.  Everything,  therefore,  was  originally

custom, and whoever wished to raise himself above it, had first of all to make

himself a kind of lawgiver and medicine-man, a sort of demi-god in other

words, he had to create customs, a dangerous and fearful thing to do I Who is

the most moral man ? On the one hand, he who most frequently obeys the

law : e.g. he who, like the Brahmins, carries a consciousness of the law about

with him wherever he may go, and introduces it into the smallest divisions of

time, continually exercising his mind in finding opportunities for obeying the

law. On the other hand, he who obeys the law in the most difficult cases. The

most moral man is he who makes the greatest sacrifices to morality; but what

are the greatest sacrifices? In answering this question several different kinds

of morality will be developed : but the distinction between the morality of the

most frequent obedience and the morality of the most difficult obedience is of

the greatest importance. Let us not be deceived as to the motives of that

moral law which requires, as an indication of morality, obedience to custom

in the most difficult cases! Self-conquest is required, not by reason of its

useful consequences for the individual ; but that custom and tradition may

appear  to  be  dominant,  in  spite  of  all  individual  counter  desires  and

advantages. The individual shall sacrifice himself so demands the morality of

custom.  On  the  other  hand,  those  moralists  who,  like  the  followers  of

Socrates,  recommend  self-control  and  sobriety  to  the  individual  as  his

greatest possible advantage and the key to his greatest personal happiness, are

exceptions and if we ourselves do not think so, this is simply due to our

having been brought up under their influence. They all take a new path, and

thereby  bring  down  upon  themselves  the  utmost  disapproval  of  all  the

representatives of the morality of custom. They sever their connection with

the community, as immoralists, and are, in the fullest sense of the word, evil

ones. In the same way, every Christian who ( sought, above all things, his

own salvation," must have seemed evil to a virtuous Roman of the old school.

Wherever a community exists, and consequently also a morality of custom,

the  feeling  prevails  that  any  punishment  for  the  violation  of  a  custom  is

inflicted, above all, on the community : this punishment is a supernatural

punishment,  the  manifestations  and  limits  of  which  are  so  difficult  tounderstand, and are investigated with such superstitious fear. The community

can compel any one member of it to make good, either to an individual or to

the community itself, any ill consequences which may have followed upon

such a member's action. It can also call down a sort of vengeance upon the

head of the individual by endeavouring to show that, as the result of his

action, a storm of divine anger has burst over the community, but, above all,

it regards the guilt of the individual more particularly as its own guilt, and

bears  the  punishment  of  the  isolated  individual  as  its  own  punishment  "

Morals," they bewail in their innermost heart, " morals have grown lax, if

such  deeds  as  these  are  possible."  And  every  individual  action,  every

individual mode of thinking, causes dread. It is impossible to determine how

much the more select, rare, and original minds must have suffered in the

course of time by being considered as evil and dangerous, indeed because

they even looked upon themselves as such. Under the dominating influence

of the morality of custom, originality of every kind came to acquire a bad

conscience  ;  and  even  now  the  sky  of  the  best  minds  seems  to  be  more

overcast by this thought than it need be.

  10

    COUNTER-MOTION BETWEEN THE SENSE OF MORALITY AND

THE SENSE OF CAUSALITY. As the sense of causality increases, so does

the extent of the domain of morality decrease : for every time one has been

able to grasp the necessary effects, and to conceive them as distinct from all

incidentals and chance possibilities (post hoc), one has, at the same time,

destroyed an enormous number of imaginary causalities, which had until now

been believed in as the basis of morals the real world is much smaller than

the world of our imagination and each time also one casts away a certain

amount of one's anxiousness and coercion, and some of our reverence for the

authority of custom is lost : morality in general undergoes a diminution. He

who, on the other hand, wishes to increase it must know how to prevent

results from becoming controllable.

  11

    MORALS  AND  MEDICINES  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  Everyone  is

continuously occupied in bringing more or less influence to bear upon the

morals which prevail in a community : most of the people bring forward

example after example to show the alleged relationship between cause and

effect ', guilt and punishment, thus upholding it as well founded and adding to

the belief in it. A few make new observations upon the actions and theirconsequences,  drawing  conclusions  from  this  and  laying  down  laws  ;  a

smaller number raise objections and allow belief in these things to become

weakened.  But  they  are  all  alike  in  the  crude  and  unscientific  manner  in

which they set about their work : if it is a question of objections to a law, or

examples or observations of it, or of its proof, confirmation, expression or

refutation,  we  always  find  the  material  and  method  entirely  valueless,  as

valueless as the material and form of all popular medicine. Popular medicines

and popular morals are closely related, and should not be considered and

valued, as is still customary, in so different a way : both are most dangerous

and make-believe sciences.

  12

    CONSEQUENCE AS SUPPLEMENT. Formerly the consequences of an

action  were  considered,  not  as  the  result  of  that  action,  but  a  voluntary

adjuvant  i.e.  on  the  part  of  God.  Can  a  greater  confusion  be  imagined  ?

Entirely different practices and means have to be brought into use for actions

and effects !

  13

    TOWARDS THE NEW EDUCATION OF MANKIND. Help us, all you

who are well-disposed and willing to assist, lend your aid in the endeavor to

do away with that conception of punishment which has swept over the whole

world ! No weed more harmful than this ! It is not only to the consequences

of our actions that this conception has been applied and how horrible and

senseless it is to confuse cause and effect with cause and punishment ! but

worse has followed : the pure accidentally of events has been robbed of its

innocence  by  this  execrable  manner  of  interpreting  the  conception  of

punishment. Yet, they have even pushed their folly to such extremes that they

would  have  us  look  upon  existence  itself  as  a  punishment  from  which  it

would appear that the education of mankind had until now been confided to

cranky gaolers and hangmen.

  14

  THE  SIGNIFICATION  OF  MADNESS  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF

MORALITY.  If,  despite  that  formidable  pressure  of  the  "  morality  of

custom," under which all human communities lived thousands of years before

our own era, and during our own era up to the present day (we ourselves are

dwelling in the small world of exceptions, and, as it were, in an evil zone) :

if, I say, in spite of all this, new and divergent ideas, valuations, and impulses

have made their appearance time after time, this state of things has beenbrought about only with the assistance of a dreadful associate : it was insanity

almost everywhere that paved the way for the new thought and cast off the

spell of an old custom and superstition. Do you understand why this had to be

done through insanity ? by something which is in both voice and appearance

as horrifying and incalculable as the demoniac whims of wind and sea, and

consequently calling for like dread and respect ? by something bearing upon

it the signs of entire lack of consciousness as clearly as the convulsions and

foam of the epileptic, which appeared to typify the insane person as the mask

and speaking-trumpet of some divine being ? by something that inspired even

the  bearer  of  the  new  thought  with  awe  and  fear  of  himself,  and  that,

suppressing all remorse, drove him on to become its prophet and martyr ?

Well,  in  our  own  time,  we  continually  hear  the  statement  reiterated  that

genius is tinctured with madness instead of good sense. Men of earlier ages

were far more inclined to believe that, wherever traces of insanity showed

themselves, a certain proportion of genius and wisdom was likewise present

something " divine," as they whispered to one another. More than this, they

expressed  their  opinions  on  the  point  with  sufficient  emphasis.  "  All  the

greatest benefits of Greece have sprung from madness," said Plato, setting on

record the opinion of the entire ancient world. Let us take a step further: all

those superior men, who felt themselves irresistibly urged on to throw off the

yoke of some morality or other, had no other resource if they were not really

mad than to feign madness, or actually to become insane. And this holds

good for innovators in every department of life, and not only in religion and

politics. Even the reformer of the poetic metre was forced to justify himself

by means of madness. (Thus even down to gentler ages madness remained a

kind of convention in poets, of which Solon, for instance, took advantage

when urging the Athenians to reconquer Salamis.) "How can one make one's

self mad when one is not mad and dare not feign to be so ? " Almost all the

eminent men of antiquity have given themselves up to this dreadful mode of

reasoning : a secret doctrine of artifices and dietetic jugglery grew up around

this subject and was handed down from generation to generation, together

with  the  feeling  of  the  innocence,  even  sanctity,  of  such  plans  and

meditations, The means of becoming a medicine-man among the Indians, a

saint among Christians of the Middle Ages, an angecok among Greenlanders,

a  Pagee  among  Brazilians,  are  the  same  in  essence:  senseless  fasting,

continual  abstention  from  sexual  intercourse,  isolation  in  a  wilderness,

ascending a mountain or a pillar, " sitting on an aged willow that looks outupon a lake," and thinking of absolutely nothing but what may give rise to

ecstasy or mental derangements. Who would dare to glance at the desert of

the bitterest and most superfluous agonies of spirit, in which probably the

most productive men of all ages have pined away ? Who could listen to the

sighs of those lonely and troubled minds : " O you heavenly powers, grant me

madness  !  Madness,  that  I  at  length  may  believe  in  myself!  Vouchsafe

delirium and convulsions, sudden flashes of light and periods of darkness ;

frighten  me  with  such  shivering  and  feverishness  as  no  mortal  ever

experienced before, with clanging noises and haunting spectres ; let me growl

and whine and creep about like a beast, if only I can come to believe in

myself! I am devoured by doubt. I have slain the law, and I now dread the

law as a living person dreads a corpse. If I am not above the law, I am the

most  abandoned  of  wretches.  Whence  comes  this  new  spirit  that  dwells

within me but from you ? Prove to me, then, that I am one of you nothing but

madness will prove it to me." And only too often does such a fervour attain

its object : at the very time when Christianity was giving the greatest proof of

its fertility in the production of saints and martyrs, believing that it was thus

proving  itself,  Jerusalem  contained  large  lunatic  asylums  for  shipwrecked

saints, for those whose last spark of good sense had been quenched by the

floods of insanity.

  15

  IS THE MOST ANCIENT MEANS OF SOLACE. First stage: In every

misfortune  or  discomfort  man  sees  something  for  which  he  must  make

somebody else suffer, no matter who in this way he finds out the amount of

power still remaining to him ; and this consoles him. Second stage : In every

misfortune or discomfort, man sees a punishment, i.e. an expiation of guilt

and the means by which he may get rid of the malicious enchantment of a

real or apparent wrong. When he perceives the advantage which misfortune

brings with it, he believes he need no longer make another person suffer for it

he gives up this kind of satisfaction, because he now has another.

  16

  FIRST PRINCIPLE OF CIVILISATION. Among savage tribes there is a

certain category of customs which appear to aim at nothing but custom. They

therefore lay down strict, and, on the whole, superfluous regulations (e.g. the

rules of the Kamchadales, which forbid snow to be scraped off the boots with

a knife, coal to be stuck on the point of a knife, or a piece of iron to be put

into  the  fire  and  death  to  be  the  portion  of  everyone  who  shall  actcontrariwise !) Yet these laws serve to keep people continually reminded of

the custom, and the imperative necessity on their parts to conform to it : and

all this in support of the great principle which stands at the beginning of all

civilisation : any custom is better than none.

  17

    GOODNESS  AND  MALIGNITY.  At  first  men  imposed  their  own

personalities on Nature : everywhere they saw themselves and their like, i.e.

their  own  evil  and  capricious  temperaments,  hidden,  as  it  were,  behind

clouds, thunder-storms, wild beasts, trees, and plants : it was then that they

declared Nature was evil. Afterwards there came a time, that of Rousseau,

when they sought to distinguish themselves from Nature: they were so tired

of each other that they wished to have separate little hiding-places where man

and his misery could not penetrate: then they invented " nature is good."

  18

  THE MORALITY OF VOLUNTARY SUFFERING. What is the highest

enjoyment  for  men  living  in  a  state  of  war  in  a  small  community,  the

existence of which is continually threatened, and the morality of which is the

strictest possible ? i.e. for souls which are vigorous, vindictive, malicious,

full of suspicion, ready to face the direst events, hardened by privation and

morality  ?  The  enjoyment  of  cruelty  :  just  as,  in  such  souls  and  in  such

circumstances, it would be regarded as a virtue to be ingenious and insatiable

in  cruelty.  Such  a  community  would  find  its  delight  in  performing  cruel

deeds, casting aside, for once, the gloom of constant anxiety and precaution.

Cruelty  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  enjoyments  at  their  festivities.  As  a

consequence it is believed that the gods likewise are pleased by the sight of

cruelty and rejoice at it and in this way the belief is spread that voluntary

suffering, self-chosen martyrdom, has a high signification and value of its

own.  In  the  community  custom  gradually  brings  about  a  practice  in

conformity with this belief: henceforward people become more suspicious of

all exuberant well-being, and more confident as they find themselves in a

state of great pain ; they think that the gods may be unfavourable to them on

account of happiness, and favourable on account of pain not compassionate !

For compassion is looked upon with contempt, and unworthy of a strong and

awe-inspiring  soul  but  agreeable  to  them,  because  the  sight  of  human

suffering put these gods into good humour and makes them feel powerful,

and a cruel mind revels in the sensation of power. It was thus that the 41

  most moral man " of the community was considered as such by virtue ofhis frequent suffering, privation, laborious existence, and cruel mortification

not, to repeat it again and again, as a means of discipline or self-control or a

desire for individual happiness but as a virtue which renders the evil gods

well-disposed towards the community, a virtue which continually wafts up to

them the odour of an expiatory sacrifice. All those intellectual leaders of the

nations who reached the point of being able to stir up the sluggish though

prolific  mire  of  their  customs  had  to  possess  this  factor  of  voluntary

martyrdom as well as insanity in order to obtain belief especially, and above

all,  as  is  always  the  case,  belief  in  themselves  !  The  more  their  minds

followed  new  paths,  and  were  consequently  tormented  by  pricks  of

conscience, the more cruelly they battled against their own flesh, their own

desires, and their own health as if they were offering the gods a compensation

in  pleasure,  lest  these  gods  should  wax  wroth  at  the  neglect  of  ancient

customs and the setting up of new aims. Let no one be too hasty in thinking

that we have now entirely freed ourselves from such a logic of feeling! Let

the most heroic souls among us question themselves on this very point. The

least step forward in the domain of free thought and individual life has been

achieved  in  all  ages  to  the  accompaniment  of  physical  and  intellectual

tortures:  and  not  only  the  mere  step  forward,  no  !  but  every  form  of

movement  and,  change  has  rendered  necessary  innumerable  martyrs,

throughout the entire course of thousands of years which sought their paths

and laid down their foundation-stones, years, however, which we do not think

of when we speak about "world-history," that ridiculously small division of

mankind's existence. And even in this so-called world-history, which in the

main is merely a great deal of noise about the latest novelties, there is no

more important theme than the old, old tragedy of the martyrs who tried to

move the mire. Nothing has been more dearly bought than the minute portion

of human reason and feeling of liberty upon which we now pride ourselves.

But it is this very pride which makes it almost impossible for us to-day to be

conscious .of that enormous lapse of time, preceding the period of " world-

history " when " morality of custom " held the field, and to consider this lapse

of  time  as  the  real  and  decisive  epoch  that  established  the  character  of

mankind \ an epoch when suffering was considered as a virtue, cruelty as a

virtue, hypocrisy as a virtue, revenge as a virtue, and the denial of the reason

as a virtue, whereas, on the other hand, well-being was regarded as a danger,

longing  for  knowledge  as  a  danger,  peace  as  a  danger,  compassion  as  a

danger : an epoch when being pitied was looked upon as an insult, work as aninsult, madness as a divine attribute, and every kind of change as immoral

and pregnant with ruin ! You imagine that all this has changed, and that

humanity  must  likewise  have  changed  its  character  ?  Oh,  you  poor

psychologists, learn to know yourselves better !

  19

    MORALITY AND STUPEFACTION. Custom represents the experiences

of  men  of  earlier  times  in  regard  to  what  they  considered  as  useful  and

harmful ; but the feeling of custom (morality) does not relate to these feelings

as such, but to the age, the sanctity, and the unquestioned authority of the

custom.  Hence  this  feeling  hinders  our  acquiring  new  experiences  and

amending morals : i.e. morality is opposed to the formation of new and better

morals : it stupefies.

  20

    FREE-DOERS AND FREE-THINKERS. Compared with free-thinkers,

free-doers are at a disadvantage, because it is evident that men suffer more

from the consequences of actions than of thoughts. If we remember, however,

that  both  seek  their  own  satisfaction,  and  that  free-thinkers  have  already

found their satisfaction in reflection upon and utterance of forbidden things,

there is no difference in the motives; but in respect of the consequences the

issue will be decided against the free-thinker, provided that it be not judged

from the most superficial and vulgar external appearance, >. not as everyone

would judge it. We must make up for a good deal of the calumny with which

men have covered all those who have, by their actions, broken away from the

authority of some custom they are generally called criminals. Everyone who

has until now overthrown a law of established morality has always at first

been  considered  as  a  wicked  man  :  but  when  it  was  afterwards  found

impossible to re-establish the law, and people gradually became accustomed

to the change, the epithet was changed by slow degrees. History deals almost

exclusively with these wicked men, who later on came to be recognized as

good men.

  21

    "FULFILLMENT OF THE LAW." In cases where the observance of a

moral  precept  has  led  to  different  consequence  from  that  expected  and

promised, and does not bestow upon the moral man the happiness he had

hoped for, but leads rather to misfortune and misery, the conscientious and

timid man has always his excuse ready: "Something was lacking in the proper

carrying out of the law." If the worst comes to the worst, a deeply-sufferingand down-trodden humanity will even decree : " It is impossible to carry out

the precept faithfully : we are too weak and sinful, and, in the depths of our

soul, incapable of morality : consequently we have no claim to happiness and

success. Moral precepts and promises have been given for better beings than

ourselves."

  22

    WORKS  AND  FAITH.  Protestant  teachers  are  still  spreading  the

fundamental error that faith only is of consequence, and that works must

follow naturally upon faith. This doctrine is certainly not true, but it is so

seductive  in  appearance  that  it  has  succeeded  in  fascinating  quite  other

intellects than that of Luther (e.g. the minds of Socrates and Plato) : though

the plain evidence and experience of our daily life prove the contrary. The

most assured knowledge and faith cannot give us either the strength or the

dexterity required for action, or the practice in that subtle and complicated

mechanism which is a prerequisite for anything to be changed from an idea

into action. Then, I say, let us first and foremost have works ! and this means

practice! practice! practice! The necessary faith will come later be certain of

that !

  23

  IN WHAT RESPECT WE ARE MOST SUBTLE. By the fact that, for

thousands of years, things (nature, tools, property of all kinds) were thought

to be alive and to possess souls, and able to hinder and interfere with the

designs of man, the feeling of impotence among men has become greater and

more frequent than it need have been : for one had to secure one's things like

men and beasts, by means of force, compulsion, flattery, treaties, sacrifices

and  it  is  here  that  we  may  find  the  origin  of  the  greater  number  of

superstitious  customs,  i.e.  of  an  important,  perhaps  paramount  and

nevertheless wasted and useless division of mankind's activity ! But since the

feeling of impotence and fear was so strong, and for such a length of time in a

state of constant stimulation', the feeling of power in man has been developed

in so subtle a manner that, in this respect, he can compare favourably with the

most  delicately  adjusted  balance.  This  feeling  has  become  his  strongest

propensity : and the means he discovered for creating it form almost the

entire history of culture.

  24

  THE PROOF OF A PRECEPT. The worth or worthlessness of a recipe

that for baking bread, for example is proved, generally speaking, by the resultexpected coming to pass or not, provided, of course, that the directions given

have been carefully followed. The case is different, however, when we come

to  deal  with  moral  precepts,  for  here  the  results  cannot  be  ascertained,

interpreted, and divined. These precepts, indeed, are based upon hypotheses

of but little scientific value, the proof or refutation of which by means of

results is impossible : but in former ages, when all science was crude and

primitive, and when a matter was taken for granted on the smallest evidence,

then the worth or worthlessness of a moral recipe was determined as we now

determine any other precept : by reference to the results. If the natives of

Alaska believe in a command which says : " You shall not throw a bone into

the fire or give it to a dog," this will be proved by the warning : " If you do

you wilt have no luck when hunting." Yet, in one sense or another, it almost

invariably happens that one has " no luck when hunting." - It is no easy

matter to refute the worth of the precept in this way, the more so as it is the

community, and not the individual, which is regarded as the bearer of the

punishment; and, again, some occurrence is almost certain to happen which

seems to prove the rule.

  25

    CUSTOMS  AND  BEAUTY.  In  justice  to  custom  it  must  not  be

overlooked that, in the case of all those who conform to it whole-heartedly

from  the  very  start,  the  organs  of  attack  and  defence,  both  physical  and

intellectual, begin to waste away ; i.e. these individuals gradually become

more beautiful ! For it is the exercise of these organs and their corresponding

spending feelings that brings about ugliness and helps to preserve it. It is for

this reason that the old baboon is uglier than the young one, and that the

young female baboon most closely resembles man, and is hence the most

handsome. Let us draw from this our own conclusions as to the origin of

female beauty !

  26

    ANIMALS AND MORALS. The rules insisted upon in polite society,

such,  for  example,  as  the  avoidance  of  everything  ridiculous,  fantastic,

presumptuous ; the suppression of one's virtues just as much as of one's most

violent desires, the instant bringing of one's self down to the general level,

submitting one's self to etiquette and self-depreciation : all this, generally

speaking, is to be found, as a social morality, even in the lowest scale of the

animal world and it is only in this low scale that we see the innermost plan of

all these amiable precautionary regulations : one wishes to escape from one'spursuers and to be aided in the search for plunder. Hence animals learn to

control and to disguise themselves to such an extent that some of them can

even adapt the colour of their bodies to that of their surroundings (by means

of what is known as the " chromatic function "). Others can simulate death, or

adopt the forms and colours of other animals, or of sand, leaves, moss, or

fungi (known to English naturalists as " mimicry "), It is in this way that an

individual conceals himself behind the universality of the generic term 11

  man " or " society, 11

  or adapts and attaches himself to princes, castes, political parties, current

opinions of the time, or his surroundings : and we may easily find the animal

equivalent of all those subtle means of making ourselves happy, thankful,

powerful, and fascinating. Even that sense of truth, which is at bottom merely

the sense of security, is possessed by man in common with the animals : we

do not wish to be deceived by others or by ourselves ; we hear with some

suspicion  the  promptings  of  our  own  passions,  we  control  ourselves  and

remain on the watch against ourselves. Now, the animal does all this as well

as man ; and in the animal likewise self-control originates in the sense of

reality  (prudence).  In  the  same  way,  the  animal  observes  the  effects  it

exercises on the imagination of other beasts : it thus learns to view itself from

their position, to consider itself " objectively " ; it has its own degree of self-

knowledge.  The  animal  judges  the  movements  of  its  friends  and  foes,  it

learns their peculiarities by heart and acts accordingly : it gives up, once and

for  all,  the  struggle  against  individual  animals  of  certain  species,  and  it

likewise  recognises,  in  the  approach  of  certain  varieties,  whether  their

intentions are agreeable and peaceful. The beginnings of justice, like those of

wisdom in short, everything which we know as the Socratic virtues are of an

animal nature: a consequence of those instincts which teach us to search for

food and to avoid our enemies. If we remember that the higher man has

merely  raised  and  refined  himself  in  the  quality  of  his  food  and  in  the

conception of what is contrary to his nature, it may not be going too far to

describe the entire moral phenomenon as of an animal origin.

  27

  THE VALUE OF THE BELIEF IN SUPERHUMAN PASSIONS. The

institution of marriage stubbornly upholds the belief that love, although a

passion, is nevertheless capable of duration as such, yet, that lasting, lifelong

love may be taken as a general rule: By means of the tenacity of a noble

belief, in spite of such frequent and almost customary refutations therebybecoming  a  pia  fraus  marriage  has  elevated  love  to  a  higher  rank.  Every

institution which has conceded to a passion the belief in the duration of the

latter  >  and  responsibility  for  this  duration,  in  spite  of  the  nature  of  the

passion  itself,  has  raised  the  passion  to  a  higher  level  :  and  he  who  is

thenceforth seized with such a passion does not, as formerly, think himself

lowered in the estimation of others or brought into danger on that account,

but  on  the  contrary  believes  himself  to  be  raised,  both  in  the  opinion  of

himself and of his equals. Let us recall institutions and customs which, out of

the fiery devotion of a moment, have created eternal fidelity ; out of the

pleasure of anger, eternal vengeance ; out of despair, eternal mourning; out of

a  single  hasty  word,  eternal  obligation.  A  great  deal  of  hypocrisy  and

falsehood came into the world as the result of such transformations ; but each

time,  too,  at  the  cost  of  such  disadvantages,  a  new  and  superhuman

conception which elevates mankind

  28

  STATE OF MIND AS ARGUMENT. Whence arise? within us a cheerful

readiness for action ? such is the question which has greatly occupied the

attention of men. The most ancient answer, and one which we still hear, is :

God is the cause ; in this way He gives us to understand that He approves of

our actions. When, in former ages people consulted the oracles, they did so

that  they  might  return  home  strengthened  by  this  cheerful  readiness;  and

everyone  answered  the  doubts  which  came  to  him,  if  alternative  actions

suggested themselves, by saying : " I shall do whatever brings about that

feeling." They did not decide, in other words, for what was most reasonable,

but upon some plan the conception of which imbued the soul with courage

and hope. A cheerful outlook was placed in the scales as an argument and

proved  to  be  heavier  than  reasonableness  ;  for  the  state  of  mind  was

interpreted in a superstitious manner as the action of a god who promises

success ; and who, by this argument, lets his reason speak as the highest

reasonableness. Now, let the consequences of such a prejudice be considered

when shrewd men, thirsting for power, availed themselves of it and still do so

I " Bring about the right state of mind ! " in this way you can do without all

arguments and overcome every objection !

  29

  ACTORS  OF  VIRTUE  AND  SIN.  Among  the  ancients  who  became

celebrated for their virtue there were many, it would seem, who acted to

themselves, especially the Greeks, who, being actors by nature, must haveacted quite unconsciously, seeing no reason why they should not do so. In

addition, everyone was striving to outdo someone else's virtue with his own,

so why should they not have made use of every artifice to show off their

virtues, especially among themselves, if only for the sake of practice ! Of

what use was a virtue which one could not display, and which did not know

how to display itself! Christianity put an end to the career of these actors of

virtue ; instead it devised the disgusting ostentation and parading of sins : it

brought into the world a state of mendacious sinfulness (even at the present

day this is considered as don ton among orthodox Christians).

  30

    REFINED CRUELTY AS VIRTUE. Here we have a morality which is

based entirely upon our thirst for distinction do not therefore entertain too

high an opinion of it ! Indeed, we may well ask what kind of an impulse it is,

and what is its fundamental signification ? It is sought, by our appearance, to

grieve  our  neighbour,  to  arouse  his  envy,  and  to  awaken  his  feelings  of

impotence and degradation ; we endeavour to make him taste the bitterness of

his fate by dropping a little of our honey on his tongue, and, while conferring

this supposed benefit on him, looking sharply and triumphantly into his eyes.

Behold such a man, now become humble, and perfect in his humility and

seek  those  for  whom,  through  his  humility,  he  has  for  a  long  time  been

preparing a torture ; for you are sure to find them ! Here is another man who

shows mercy towards animate, and is admired for doing so -but there are

certain people on whom he wishes to vent his cruelty by this very means.

Look at that great artist : the pleasure he enjoyed beforehand in conceiving

the envy of the rivals he had outstripped, refused to let his powers lie dormant

until he became a great man how many bitter moments in the souls of other

men has he asked for as payment for his own greatness ! The nun's chastity :

with what threatening eyes she looks Into the faces of other women who live

differently from her ! what a vindictive joy shines in those eyes ! The theme

is short, and its variations, though they might well be innumerable, could not

easily become tiresome for it is still too paradoxical a novelty, and almost a

painful one, to affirm that the morality of distinction is nothing, at bottom,

but joy in refined cruelty When I say " at bottom," I mean here, every time in

the  first  generation.  For,  when  the  habit  of  some  distinguished  action

becomes hereditary ', its root, so to speak, is not transmitted, but only its

fruits (for only feelings, and not thoughts, can become hereditary) : and, if we

presuppose  that  this  root  is  not  reintroduced  by  education,  in  the  secondgeneration the joy in the cruelty is no longer felt : but only pleasure in the

habit as such. This joy, however, is the first degree of the " good."

  31

  PRIDE IN SPIRIT. The pride of man, which strives to oppose the theory

of our own descent from animals and establishes a wide gulf between nature

and man himself this pride is founded upon a prejudice as to what the mind is

; and this prejudice is relatively recent. In the long prehistorical period of

humanity it was supposed that the mind was everywhere, and men did not

look upon it as a particular characteristic of their own. Since, on the contrary,

everything spiritual (including all impulses, maliciousness, and inclinations)

was  regarded  as  common  property,  and  consequently  accessible  to

everybody, primitive mankind was not ashamed of being descended from

animals  or  trees  (the  noble  races  thought  themselves  honoured  by  such

legends), and saw in the spiritual that which unites us with nature, and not

that which severs us from her. Thus man was brought up in modesty and this

likewise was the result of a prejudice.

  32

  THE BRAKE. To suffer morally, and then to learn afterwards that this

kind of suffering was founded upon an error, shocks us. For there is a unique

consolation in acknowledging, by our suffering, a " deeper world of truth "

than any other world, and we would much rather suffer and feel ourselves

above reality by doing so (through the feeling that, in this way, we approach

nearer to that " deeper world of truth "), than live without suffering and hence

without this feeling of the sublime. Thus it is pride, and the habitual fashion

of  satisfying  it,  which  opposes  this  new  interpretation  of  morality.  What

power, then, must we bring into operation to get rid of this brake? Greater

pride? A new pride ?

  33

  THE CONTEMPT OF CAUSES, CONSEQUENCES, AND REALITY.

Those unfortunate occurrences which take place at times in the community,

such  as  sudden  storms,  bad  harvests,  or  plagues,  lead  members  of  the

community to suspect that offences against custom have been committed, or

that new customs must be invented to appease a new demoniac power and

caprice. Suspicion and reasoning of this kind, however, evade an inquiry into

the real and natural causes, and take the demoniac cause for granted. This is

one source of the hereditary perversion of the human intellect ; and the other

one follows in its train, for, proceeding on the same principle, people paidmuch less attention to the real and natural consequences of an action than to

the supernatural consequences (the so-called punishments and mercies of the

Divinity). It is commanded, for instance, that certain baths are to be taken at

certain times : and the baths are taken, not for the sake of cleanliness, but

because the command has been made. We are not taught to avoid the real

consequences  of  dirt,  but  merely  the  supposed  displeasure  of  the  gods

because a bath has been omitted. Under the pressure of superstitious fear,

people began to suspect that these ablutions were of much greater importance

than they seemed; they ascribed inner and supplementary meanings to them,

gradually  lost  their  sense  of  and  pleasure  in  reality,  and  finally  reality  is

considered as valuable only to the extent that it is a symbol. Hence a man

who is under the influence of the morality of custom comes to despise causes

first of all, secondly consequences, and thirdly reality, and weaves all his

higher feelings (reverence, sublimity, pride, gratitude, love) into an imaginary

world  \  the  so-called  higher  world.  And  even  to-day  we  can  see  the

consequences of this : wherever, and in whatever fashion, man's feelings are

raised, that imaginary world is in evidence. It is sad to have to say it ; but for

the time being all higher sentiments must be looked upon with suspicion by

the man of science, to so great an extent are they intermingled with illusion

and extravagance. Not that they need necessarily be suspected per se and

forever ; but there is no doubt that, of all the gradual purifications which

await humanity, the purification of the higher feelings will be one of the

slowest.

  34

    MORAL  FEELINGS  AND  CONCEPTIONS.  It  is  clear  that  moral

feelings are transmitted in such a way that children perceive in adults violent

predilections  and  aversions  for  certain  actions,  and  then,  like  born  apes,

imitate such likes and dislikes. Later on in life, when they are thoroughly

permeated  by  these  acquired  and  well-practised  feelings,  they  think  it  a

matter of propriety and decorum to provide a kind of justification for these

predilections and aversions. These " justifications," however, are in no way

connected  with  the  origin  or  the  degree  of  the  feeling  :  people  simply

accommodate themselves to the rule that, as rational beings, they must give

reasons  for  their  pros  and  cons,  reasons  which  must  be  assignable  and

acceptable into the bargain. Up to this extent the history of the moral feelings

is  entirely  different  from  the  history  of  moral  conceptions.  The  first-

mentioned are powerful before the action, and the latter especially after it, inview of the necessity for making one's self clear in regard to them.

  35

    FEELINGS AND THEIR DESCENT FROM JUDGMENTS. " Trust in

your feelings ! " But feelings comprise nothing final, original ; feelings are

based upon the judgments and valuations which are transmitted to us in the

shape of feelings (inclinations, dislikes). The inspiration which springs from

a feeling is the grandchild of a judgment often an erroneous judgment ! and

certainly not one's own judgment ! Trusting in our feelings simply means

obeying  our  grandfather  and  grandmother  more  than  the  gods  within  our

selves \ our reason and experience.

  36

  A  FOOLISH  PIETY,  WITH  A  CONCEALED  PURPOSE.  What!  the

inventors of ancient civilisations, the first makers of tools and tape lines, the

first builders of vehicles, ships, and houses, the first observers of the laws of

the  heavens  and  the  multiplication  tables  is  it  contended  that  they  were

entirely  different  from  the  inventors  and  observers  of  our  own  time,  and

superior to them ? And that the first slow steps forward were of a value which

has not been equalled by the discoveries we have made with all our travels

and circumnavigations of the earth? It is the voice of prejudice that speaks

thus, and argues in this way to depreciate the importance of the modern mind.

And yet it is plain to be seen that, in former times, hazard was the greatest of

all discoverers and observers and the benevolent prompter of these ingenious

ancients, and that, in the case of the most insignificant invention now made, a

greater  intellect,  discipline,  and  scientific  imagination  are  required  than

formerly existed throughout long ages.

  37

    WRONG  CONCLUSIONS  FROM  USEFULNESS.  When  we  have

demonstrated the highest utility of a thing, we have nevertheless made no

progress towards an explanation of its origin ; in other words, we can never

explain, by mere utility, the necessity of existence. But precisely the contrary

opinion has been maintained up to the present time, even in the domain of the

most exact science. In astronomy, for example, have we not heard it stated

that the (supposed) usefulness of the system of satellites (replacing the light

which is diminished in intensity by the greater distance of the sun, in order

that the inhabitants of the various celestial bodies should not want for light)

was the final object of this system and explained its origin ? Which may

remind us of the conclusions of Christopher Colombus: The earth has beencreated for man, ergo, if there are countries, they must be inhabited. " Is it

probable that the sun would throw his rays on nothing, and that the nocturnal

vigils of the stars should be wasted upon untravelled seas and unpeopled

countries ? "

  38

    IMPULSES TRANSFORMED BY MORAL JUDGMENTS. The same

impulse, under the impression of the blame cast upon it by custom, develops

into  the  painful  feeling  of  cowardice,  or  else  the  pleasurable  feeling  of

humility ', in case a morality, like that of Christianity, has taken it to its heart

and called it good. In other words, this instinct will fall under the influence of

either a good conscience or a bad one ! In itself, like every instinct, it does

not possess either this or indeed any other moral character and name, or even

a  definite  accompanying  feeling  of  pleasure  or  displeasure  ;  it  does  not

acquire all these qualities as its second nature until it comes into contact with

impulses which have already been baptized as good and evil, or has been

recognised  as  the  attribute  of  beings  already  weighed  and  valued  by  the

people  from  a  moral  point  of  view.  Thus  the  ancient  conception  of  envy

differed  entirely  from  ours.  Hesiod  reckons  it  among  the  qualities  of  the

good> benevolent Eris, and it was not considered as offensive to attribute

some kind of envy even to the gods. This is easy to understand in a state of

things inspired mainly by emulation, but emulation was looked upon as good,

and valued accordingly. The Greeks were likewise different from us in the

value they set upon hope : they conceived it as blind and deceitful. Hesiod in

one of his poems has made a strong reference to it a reference so strong,

indeed, that no modern commentator has quite understood it ; for it runs

contrary to the modern mind, which has learnt from Christianity to look upon

hope as a virtue. Among the Greeks, on the other hand, the portal leading to a

knowledge  of  the  future  seemed  only  partly  closed,  and,  in  innumerable

instances, it was impressed upon them as a religious obligation to inquire into

the future, in those cases where we remain satisfied with hope. It thus came

about that the Greeks, thanks to their oracles and seers, held hope in small

esteem, and even lowered it to the level of an evil and a danger. The Jews,

again, took a different view of anger from that held by us, and sanctified it :

hence  they  have  placed  the  sombre  majesty  of  the  wrathful  man  at  an

elevation so high that a European cannot conceive it. They moulded their

wrathful  and  holy  Jehovah  after  the  images  of  their  wrathful  and  holy

prophets. Compared with them, all the Europeans who have exhibited thegreatest wrath are, so to speak, only second-hand creatures.

  39

  THE  PREJUDICE  CONCERNING  "  PURE  SPIRIT."  Wherever  the

doctrine of pure spirituality has prevailed, its excesses have resulted in the

destruction  of  the  tone  of  the  nerves  :  it  taught  that  the  body  should  be

despised, neglected, or tormented, and that, on account of his impulses, man

himself  should  be  tortured  and  regarded  with  contempt.  It  gave  rise  to

gloomy, strained, and downcast souls who, besides, thought they knew the

reason of their misery and how it might possibly be relieved ! " It must be in

the body ! For it still thrives too well!" such was their conclusion, while the

fact was that the body, through its agonies, protested time after time against

this  never-ending  mockery.  Finally,  a  universal  and  chronic  hyper-

nervousness seized upon those virtuous representatives of the pure spirit: they

learned to recognise joy only in the shape of ecstasies and other preliminary

symptoms of insanity and their system reached its climax when it came to

look upon ecstasy as the highest aim of life, and as the standard by which all

earthly things must be condemned

  40

    MEDITATIONS  UPON  OBSERVANCES.  Numerous  moral  precepts,

carelessly drawn from a single event, quickly became incomprehensible ; it

was  as  difficult  a  matter  to  deduce  their  intentions  with  any  degree  of

certainty  as  it  was  to  recognise  the  punishment  which  was  to  follow  the

breaking  of  the  rule.  Doubts  were  even  held  regarding  the  order  of  the

ceremonies ; but, while people guessed at random about such matters, the

object of their investigations increased in importance, it was precisely the

greatest absurdity of an observance that developed into a holy of holies. Let

us not think too little of the energy wasted by man in this regard throughout

thousands of years, and least of all of the effects of such meditations upon

observances ! Here we find ourselves on the wide training-ground of the

intellect not only do religions develop and continue to increase within its

boundaries : but here also is the venerable, though dreadful, primeval world

of science; here grow up the poet, the thinker, the physician, the lawgiver.

The dread of the unintelligible, which, in an ambiguous fashion, demanded

ceremonies from us, gradually assumed the charm of the intricate, and where

man could not unravel he learnt to create.

  41

  TO DETERMINE THE VALUE OF THE VlTA CONTEMPLATiVA.Let us not forget, as men leading a contemplative life, what kind of evil and

misfortunes  have  overtaken  the  men  of  the  vita  activa  as  the  result  of

contemplation in short, what sort of contra-account the vita activa has to offer

us, if we exhibit too much boastfulness before it with respect to our good

deeds. It would show us, in the first place, those so-called religious natures,

who  predominate  among  the  lovers  of  contemplation  and  consequently

represent  their  commonest  type.  They  have  at  all  times  acted  in  such  a

manner as to render life difficult to practical men, and tried to make them

disgusted with it, if possible : to darken the sky, to obliterate the sun, to cast

suspicion upon joy, to depreciate hope, to paralyse the active hand all this

they knew how to do, just as, for miserable times and feelings, they had their

consolations, alms, blessings, and benedictions. In the second place, it can

show us the artists, a species of men leading the vita contemplativa, rarer than

the religious element, but still often to be met with. As beings, these people

are  usually  intolerable,  capricious,  jealous,  violent,  quarrelsome:  this,

however,  must  be  deduced  from  the  joyous  and  exalting  effects  of  their

works.  Thirdly,  we  have  the  philosophers,  men  who  unite  religious  and

artistic qualities, combined, however, with a third element, namely, dialectics

and the love of controversy. They are the authors of evil in the same sense as

the religious men and artists, in addition to which they have wearied many of

their fellow-men with their passion for dialectics, though their number has

always been very small. Fourthly, the thinkers and scientific workers. They

but rarely strove after effects, and contented themselves with silently sticking

to their own groove. Thus they brought about little envy and discomfort, and

often, as objects of mockery and derision, they served, without wishing to do

so, to make life easier for the men of the vita activa. Lastly, science ended by

becoming of much advantage to all ; and if, on account of this utility ', many

of the men who were destined for the vita activa are now slowly making their

way along the road to science in the sweat of their brow, and not without

brain-racking and maledictions, this is not the fault of the crowd of thinkers

and scientific workers : it is " self- wrought pain."

  42

    ORIGIN OF THE VITA CONTEMPLATIVA. During barbarous ages,

when  pessimistic  judgments  held  sway  over  men  and  the  world,  the

individual, in the consciousness of his full power, always endeavoured to act

in conformity with such judgments, that is to say, he put his ideas into action

by  means  of  hunting,  robbery,  surprise  attacks,  brutality,  and  murder  :including the weaker forms of such acts, as far as they are tolerated within the

community.  When  his  strength  declines,  however,  and  he  feels  tired,  ill,

melancholy, or satiated consequently becoming temporarily void of wishes or

desires he is a relatively better man, that is to say, less dangerous ; and his

pessimistic  ideas  will  now  discharge  themselves  only  in  words  and

reflections upon his companions, for example, or his wife, his life, his gods,

his judgments will be evil ones. In this frame of mind he develops into a

thinker  and  prophet,  or  he  adds  to  his  superstitions  and  invents  new

observances, or mocks his enemies. Whatever he may devise, however, all

the productions of his brain will necessarily reflect his frame of mind, such as

the increase of fear and weariness, and the lower value he attributes to action

and enjoyment. The substance of these productions must correspond to the

substance of these poetic, thoughtful, and priestly moods ; the evil judgment

must be supreme. In later years, all those who acted continuously as this man

did  in  those  special  circumstances  i.e.  those  who  gave  out  pessimistic

judgments, and lived a melancholy life, poor in action were called poets,

thinkers, priests, or " medicine-men." The general body of men would have

liked to disregard such people, because they were not active enough, and to

turn them out of the community ; but there was a certain risk in doing so :

these  inactive  men  had  found  out  and  were  following  the  tracks  of

superstition and divine power, and no one doubted that they had unknown

means of power at their disposal. This was the value which was set upon the

ancient race of contemplative natures despised as they were in just the same

degree  as  they  were  not  dreaded  !  In  such  a  masked  form,  in  such  an

ambiguous aspect, with an evil heart and often with a troubled head, did

Contemplation make its first appearance on earth : both weak and terrible at

the same time, despised in secret, and covered in public with every mark of

superstitious veneration. Here, as always, we must say : pudenda origo !

  43

  HOW MANY FORCES MUST NOW BE UNITED IN A THINKER. To

rise superior to considerations of the senses, to raise one's self to abstract

contemplations : this is what was formerly regarded as elevation ; but now it

is not practicable for us to share the same feelings. Luxuriating in the most

shadowy images of words and things ; playing with those invisible, inaudible,

imperceptible  beings,  was  considered  as  existence  in  another  and  higher

world, a world that sprang from the deep contempt felt for the world which

was perceptible to the senses, this seductive and wicked world of ours. "These abstracta no longer mislead us, but they may lead us" with such words

men soared aloft. It was not the substance of these intellectual sports, but the

sports  themselves,  which  was  looked  upon  as  "the  higher  thing"  in  the

primeval ages of science. Hence we have Plato's admiration for dialectics,

and his enthusiastic belief in the necessary relationship of dialectics to the

good man who has risen superior to the considerations of his senses. It was

not only knowledge that was discovered little by little, but also the different

means  of  acquiring  it,  the  conditions  and  operations  which  precede

knowledge  in  man.  And  it  always  seemed  as  if  the  newly-discovered

operation or the newly-experienced condition were not a means of acquiring

knowledge, but was even the substance, goal, and sum-total of everything

that  was  worth  knowing.  What  does  the  thinker  require?  imagination,

inspiration,  abstraction,  spirituality,  invention,  presentiment,  induction,

dialectics,  deduction,  criticism,  ability  to  collect  materials,  an  impersonal

mode  of  thinking,  contemplation,  comprehensiveness,  and  lastly,  but  not

least, justice, and love for everything that exists but each one of these means

was at one time considered, in the history of the vita contemplativa, as a goal

and  final  purpose,  and  they  all  secured  for  their  inventors  that  perfect

happiness which fills the human soul when its final purpose dawns upon it.

  44

    ORIGIN AND MEANING. Why does this thought come into my mind

again and again, always in more and more vivid colours ? that, in former

times, investigators, in the course of their search for the origin of things,

always thought that they found something which would be of the highest

importance  for  all  kinds  of  action  and  judgment  :  indeed,  that  they  even

invariably postulated that the salvation of mankind depended upon insight

into  the  origin  of  things  whereas  now,  on  the  other  hand,  the  more  we

examine into origins, the less do they concern our interests: on the contrary,

all the valuations and interestedness which we have placed upon things begin

to lose their meaning, the more we retrogress where knowledge is concerned

and approach the things themselves. The origin becomes of less significance

in proportion as we acquire insight into it ; while things nearest to ourselves,

around and within us, gradually begin to manifest their wealth of colours,

beauties, enigmas, and diversity of meaning, of which earlier humanity never

dreamed. In former ages thinkers used to move furiously about, like wild

animals in cages, steadily glaring at the bars which hemmed them in, and at

times springing up against them in a vain endeavour to break through them :and happy indeed was he who could look through a gap to the outer world

and could fancy that he saw something of what lay beyond and afar off.

  45

  A TRAGIC TERMINATION TO KNOWLEDGE. Of all the means of

exaltation, human sacrifices have at times done most to elevate man. And

perhaps the one powerful thought the idea of self-sacrificing humanity might

be made to prevail over every other aspiration, and thus to prove the victor

over even the most victorious. But to whom should the sacrifice be made?

We may already swear that, if ever the constellation of such an idea appeared

on the horizon, the knowledge of truth would remain the single but enormous

object  with  which  a  sacrifice  of  such  a  nature  would  be  commensurate

because no sacrifice is too great for it. In the meantime the problem has never

been expounded as to how far humanity, considered as a whole, could take

steps to encourage the advancement of knowledge ; and even less as to what

thirst for knowledge could impel humanity to the point of sacrificing itself

with the light of an anticipated wisdom in its eyes. When, perhaps, with a

view  to  the  advancement  of  knowledge,  we  are  able  to  enter  into

communication  with  the  inhabitants  of  other  stars,  and  when,  during

thousands  of  years,  wisdom  will  have  been  carried  from  star  to  star,  the

enthusiasm of knowledge may rise to such a dizzy height !

  46

  DOUBT IN DOUBT. " What a good pillow doubt is for a well-balanced

head!" This saying of Montaigne always made Pascal angry, for nobody ever

wanted a good pillow so much as he did. Whatever was the matter with him ?

  47

    WORDS BLOCK UP OUR PATH. Wherever primitive men put down a

word, they thought they had made a discovery. How different the case really

was  !  they  had  come  upon  a  problem,  and,  while  they  thought  they  had

solved it, they had in reality placed an obstacle in the way of its solution.

Now, with every new piece of knowledge, we stumble over petrified words

and mummified conceptions, and would rather break a leg than a word in

doing so.

  48

  "KNOW THYSELF" IS THE WHOLE OF SCIENCE. Only when man

shall have acquired a knowledge of all things will he be able to know himself.

For things are but the boundaries of man.

  49  THE  NEW  FUNDAMENTAL  FEELING:  OUR  FINAL

CORRUPTIBILITY. In former times people sought to show the feeling of

man's greatness by pointing to his divine descent. This, however, has now

become a forbidden path, for the ape stands at its entrance, and likewise other

fearsome animals, showing their teeth in a knowing fashion, as if to say, No

further this way ! Hence people now try the opposite direction : the road

along  which  humanity  is  proceeding  shall  stand  as  an  indication  of  their

greatness and their relationship to God. But alas I this, too, is useless ! At the

far end of this path stands the funeral urn of the last man and gravedigger

(with the inscription, Nihil humani a me alienum putd). To whatever height

mankind may have developed and perhaps in the end it will not be so high as

when they began I there is as little prospect of their attaining to a higher order

as there is for the ant and the earwig to enter into kinship with God and

eternity at the end of their career on earth. What is to come will drag behind it

that which has passed : why should any little star, or even any little species

on  that  star,  form  an  exception  to  that  eternal  drama  ?  Away  with  such

sentimentalities !

  50

  BELIEF IN INEBRIATION. Those men who have moments of sublime

ecstasy, and who, on ordinary occasions, on account of the contrast and the

excessive wearing away of their nervous forces, usually feel miserable and

desolate, come to consider such moments as the true manifestation of their

real selves, of their " ego," and their misery and dejection, on the other hand,

as the effect of the "non-ego" This is why they think of their environment, the

age in which they live, and the whole world in which they have their being,

with feelings of vindictiveness. This intoxication appears to them as their true

life, their actual ego ; and everywhere else they see only those who strive to

oppose  and  prevent  this  intoxication,  whether  of  an  intellectual,  moral,

religious, or artistic nature. Humanity owes no small part of its evils to these

fantastic  enthusiasts  ;  for  they  are  the  insatiable  sowers  of  the  weed  of

discontent with one's self and one's neighbour, of contempt for the world and

the age, and, above all, of world-lassitude. An entire hell of criminals could

not, perhaps, bring about such unfortunate and far-reaching consequences,

such heavy and disquieting effects that corrupt earth and sky, as are brought

about by that " noble " little community of unbridled, fantastic, half-mad

people of geniuses, too who cannot control themselves, or experience any

inward joy, until they have lost themselves completely : while, on the otherhand, the criminal often gives a proof of his admirable self-control, sacrifice,

and  wisdom,  and  thus  maintains  these  qualities  in  those  who  fear  him.

Through him life's sky may at times seem overcast and threatening, but the

atmosphere ever remains brisk and vigorous. Furthermore, these enthusiasts

bring their entire strength to bear on the task of imbuing mankind with belief

in inebriation as in life itself: a dreadful belief! As savages are now quickly

corrupted and ruined by "firewater," so likewise has mankind in general been

slowly  though  thoroughly  corrupted  by  these  spiritual  "  fire-waters  "  of

intoxicating feelings and by those who keep alive the craving for them. It

may yet be ruined thereby.

  51

  SUCH AS WE STILL ARE. " Let us be indulgent to the great one-eyed !

" said Stuart Mill, as if it were necessary to ask for indulgence when we are

willing to believe and almost to worship them. I say: Let us be indulgent

towards the two-eyed, both great and small ; for, such as we are now, we

shall never rise beyond indulgence !

  52

  WHERE  ARE  THE  NEW  PHYSICIANS  OF  THE  SOUL?  It  is  the

means  of  consolation  which  have  stamped  life  with  that  fundamental

melancholy character in which we now believe: the worst disease of mankind

has arisen from the struggle against diseases, and apparent remedies have in

the long run brought about worse conditions than those which it was intended

to  remove  by  their  use.  Men,  in  their  ignorance,  used  to  believe  that  the

stupefying and intoxicating means, which appeared to act immediately, the

so-called " consolations," were the true healing powers : they even failed to

observe that they had often to pay for their immediate relief by a general and

profound deterioration in health, that the sick ones had to suffer from the

after-effects of the intoxication, then from the absence of the intoxication,

and, later on, from a feeling of disquietude, depression, nervous starts, and

ill-health. Again, men whose illness had advanced to a certain extent never

recovered from it those physicians of the soul, universally believed in and

Worshipped  as  they  were,  took  care  of  that.  It  has  been  justly  said  of

Schopenhauer that he was one who again took the sufferings of humanity

seriously : where is the man who will at length take the antidotes against

these sufferings seriously, and who will pillory the unheard-of quackery with

which men, even up to our own age, and in the most sublime nomenclature,

have been wont to treat the illnesses of their souls ?  53

  ABUSE OF THE CONSCIENTIOUS ONES. It is the conscientious, and

not  the  unscrupulous,  who  have  suffered  so  greatly  from  exhortations  to

penitence  and  the  fear  of  hell,  especially  if  they  happened  to  be  men  of

imagination. In other words, a gloom has been cast over the lives of those

who had the greatest need of cheerfulness and agreeable images not only for

the sake of their own consolation and recovery from themselves, but that

humanity itself might take delight in them and absorb a ray of their beauty.

Alas, how much superfluous cruelty and torment have been brought about by

those religions which invented sin ! and by those men who, by means of such

religions, desired to reach the highest enjoyment of their power !

  54

    THOUGHTS ON DISEASE. To soothe the imagination of the patient, in

order that he may at least no longer keep on thinking about his illness, and

thus suffer more from such thoughts than from the complaint itself, which has

been the case until now that, it seems to me, is something ! and it is by no

means a trifle ! And now do you understand our task ?

  55

  THE " WAYS." So-called short cuts" have always led humanity to run

great risks : on hearing the " glad tidings " that a " short cut " had been found,

they always left the straight path and lost their way.

  56

  THE APOSTATE OF THE FREE SPIRIT. Is there any one, then, who

seriously dislikes pious people who hold formally to their belief? Do we not,

on  the  contrary,  regard  them  with  silent  esteem  and  pleasure,  deeply

regretting at the same time that these excellent people do not share our own

feelings ? But whence arises that sudden, profound, and unreasonable dislike

for the man who, having at one time possessed freedom of spirit, finally

becomes a "believer"? In thinking of him we involuntarily experience the

sensation of having beheld some loathsome spectacle, which we must quickly

efface from our recollection. Should we not turn our backs upon even the

most venerated man if we entertained the least suspicion of him in this regard

? Not, indeed, from a moral point of view, but because of sudden disgust and

horror ! Whence comes this sharpness of feeling ? Perhaps we shall be given

to understand that, at bottom, we are not quite certain of our own selves ? Or

that,  early  in  life,  we  build  round  ourselves  hedges  of  the  most  pointed

contempt, in order that, when old age makes us weak and forgetful, we maynot feel inclined to brush our own contempt away from us? Now, speaking

frankly,  this  suspicion  is  quite  erroneous,  and  whoever  forms  it  knows

nothing of what agitates and determines the free spirit : how little, to him,

does the changing of an opinion seem contemptible per se ! On the contrary,

how highly he prizes the ability to change an opinion as a rare and valuable

distinction, especially if he can retain it far into old age ! And his pride (not

his pusillanimity) even reaches so high as to be able to pluck the fruits of the

spernere se sperni and the spernere se ipsum : without his being troubled by

the sensation of fear of vain and easy-going men. Furthermore, the doctrine

of the innocence of all opinions appears to him to be as certain as the doctrine

of the innocence of all actions : how could he act as judge and hangman

before the apostate of intellectual liberty ! On the contrary, the sight of such a

person would disgust him as much as the sight of a nauseous illness disgusts

the physician : the physical repulsion caused by everything spongy, soft, and

suppurating momentarily overcomes reason and the desire to help. Hence our

goodwill is overcome by the conception of the monstrous dishonesty which

must have gained the upper hand in the apostate from the free spirit : by the

conception of a general gnawing which is eating its way down even to the

framework of the character.

  57

  OTHER FEARS, OTHER SAFETIES. Christianity overspread life with a

new and unlimited insecurity, thereby creating new safeties, enjoyments and

recreations, and new valuations of all things. Our own century denies the

existence of this insecurity, and does so with a good conscience, yet it clings

to  the  old  habit  of  Christian  certainties,  enjoyments,  recreations,  and

valuations ! even in its noblest arts and philosophies. How feeble and worn

out  must  all  this  now  seem,  how  imperfect  and  clumsy,  how  arbitrarily

fanatical, and, above all, how uncertain : now that its horrible contrast has

been  taken  away  the  ever-present  fear  of  the  Christian  for  his  eternal

salvation !

  58

    CHRISTIANITY AND THE EMOTIONS. In Christianity we may see a

great  popular  protest  against  philosophy  :  the  reasoning  of  the  sages  of

antiquity  had  withdrawn  men  from  the  influence  of  the  emotions,  but

Christianity would gladly give men their emotions back again. With this aim

in view, it denies any moral value to virtue such as philosophers understood it

as a victory of the reason over the passions generally condemns every kind ofgoodness, and calls upon the passions to manifest themselves in their full

power and glory : as love of God, fear of God, fanatic belief in God, blind

hope in God, 59

    ERROR  AS  A  CORDIAL.  Let  people  say  what  they  will,  it  is

nevertheless certain that it was the aim of Christianity to deliver mankind

from the yoke of moral engagements by indicating what it believed to be the

shortest way to perfection : exactly in the same manner as a few philosophers

thought they could dispense with tedious and laborious dialectics, and the

collection of strictly-proved facts, and point out a royal road to truth. It was

an error in both cases, but nevertheless a great cordial for those who were

worn out and despairing in the wilderness.

  60

  ALL  SPIRIT  FINALLY  BECOMES  VISIBLE.  Christianity  has

assimilated the entire spirituality of an incalculable number of men who were

by nature submissive, all those enthusiasts of humiliation and reverence, both

refined and coarse. It has in this way freed itself from its own original rustic

coarseness of which we are vividly reminded when we look at the oldest

image of St. Peter the Apostle and has become a very intellectual religion,

with thousands of wrinkles, arriere-pensees ', and masks on its face. It has

made  European  humanity  more  clever,  and  not  only  cunning  from  a

theological  standpoint.  By  the  spirit  which  it  has  thus  given  to  European

humanity in conjunction with the power of abnegation, and very often in

conjunction with the profound conviction and loyalty of that abnegation it has

perhaps chiselled and shaped the most subtle individualities which have ever

existed  in  human  society  :the  individualities  of  the  higher  ranks  of  the

Catholic  clergy,  especially  when  these  priests  have  sprung  from  a  noble

family, and have brought to their work, from the very beginning, the innate

grace of gesture, the dominating glance of the 'eye, and beautiful hands and

feet. Here the human face acquires that spiritualisation brought about by the

continual ebb and flow of two kinds of happiness (the feeling of power and

the  feeling  of  submission)  after  a  carefully-planned  manner  of  living  has

conquered the beast in man. Here an activity, which consists in blessing,

forgiving sins, and representing the Almighty, ever keeps alive in the soul,

and even in the body, the consciousness of a supreme mission ; here we find

that noble contempt concerning the perishable nature of the body, of well-

being,  and  of  happiness,  peculiar  to  born  soldiers  :  their  pride  lies  in

obedience, a distinctly aristocratic trait; their excuse and their idealism arisefrom the enormous impossibility of their task. The surpassing beauty and

subtleties of these princes of the Church have always proved to the people the

truth of the Church ; a momentary brutalisation of the clergy (such as came

about in Luther's time) always tended to encourage the contrary belief. And

would it be maintained that this result of beauty and human subtlety, shown

in harmony of figure, intellect, and task, would come to an end with religions

? and that nothing higher could be obtained, or even conceived ?

  61

  THE  NEEDFUL  SACRIFICE.  Those  earnest,  able,  and  just  men  of

profound feelings, who are still Christians at heart, owe it to themselves to

make one attempt to live for a certain space of time without Christianity I

they owe it to their faith that they should thus for once take up their abode "

in the wilderness " if for no other reason than that of being able to pronounce

on the question as to whether Christianity is needful. So far, however, they

have confined themselves to their own narrow domain and insulted everyone

who happened to be outside of it : indeed, they even become highly irritated

when it is suggested to them that beyond this little domain of theirs lies the

great world, and that Christianity is, after all, only a corner of it ! No ; your

evidence on the question will be valueless until you have lived year after year

without Christianity, and with the inmost desire to continue to exist without it

: until, indeed, you have withdrawn far, far away from it. It is not when your

nostalgia urges you back again, but when your judgment, based on a strict

comparison, drives you back, that your homecoming has any significance !

Men of coming generations will deal in this manner with all the valuations of

the  past  ;  they  must  be  voluntarily  lived  over  again,  together  with  their

contraries, in order that such men may finally acquire the right of shifting

them.

  62

  ON THE ORIGIN OF RELIGIONS. How can anyone regard his own

opinion of things as a revelation ? This is the problem of the formation of

religions : there has always been some man in whom this phenomenon was

possible.  A  postulate  is  that  such  a  man  already  believed  in  revelations.

Suddenly, however, a new idea occurs to him one day, his idea ; and the

entire  blessedness  of  a  great  personal  hypothesis,  which  embraces  all

existence and the whole world, penetrates with such force into his conscience

that  he  dare  not  think  himself  the  creator  of  such  blessedness,  and  he

therefore attributes to his God the cause of this new idea and likewise thecause of the cause, believing it to be the revelation of his God. How could a

man be the author of so great a happiness ? ask his pessimistic doubts. But

other levers are secretly at work : an opinion may be strengthened by one's

self if it be considered as a revelation ; and in this way all its hypothetic

nature is removed ; the matter is set beyond criticism and even beyond doubt

: it is sanctified. It is true that, in this way, a man lowers himself to playing

the r61e of "mouthpiece" but his thought will end by being victorious as a

divine thought the feeling of finally gaining the victory conquers the feeling

of degradation. There is also another feeling in the background : if a man

raises his products above himself, and thus apparently detracts from his own

worth, there nevertheless remains a kind of joyfulness, paternal love, and

paternal  pride,  which  compensates  man  more  than  compensates  man  for

everything.

  63

    HATRED OF ONE'S NEIGHBOUR. Supposing that we felt towards our

neighbour as he does himself Schopenhauer calls this compassion, though it

would be more correct to call it auto-passion, fellow-feeling we should be

compelled to hate him, if, like Pascal, he thought himself hateful. And this

was probably the general feeling of Pascal regarding mankind, and also that

of ancient Christianity, which, under Nero, was "convicted" of odium generis

humani, as Tacitus has recorded.

  64

  THE  BROKEN-HEARTED  ONES,  Christianity  has  the  instinct  of  a

hunter for finding out all those who may by hook or by crook be driven to

despair only a very small number of men can be brought to this despair.

Christianity lies in wait for such as those, and pursues them. Pascal made an

attempt to find out whether it was not possible, with the help of the very

subtlest knowledge, to drive everybody into despair. He failed : to his second

despair.

  65

    BRAHMINISM AND CHRISTIANITY. There are certain precepts for

obtaining a consciousness of power : on the one hand, for those who already

know how to control themselves, and who are therefore already quite used to

the feeling of power ; and, on the other hand, for those who cannot control

themselves.  Brahminism  has  given  its  care  to  the  former  type  of  man  ;

Christianity to the latter.

  66  THE FACULTY OF VISION. During the whole of the Middle Ages, the

actual and decisive sign of the highest humanity was that once was capable of

having visions that is to say, of having a grave mental trouble. And, in fact,

the rules of life of all the higher natures of the Middle Ages (the religiosi)

were  drawn  up  with  the  object  of  making  man  capable  of  vision  !  Little

wonder, then, that the exaggerated esteem for these half-mad fanatics, so-

called men of genius, has continued even to our own days. " They have seen

things that others do not see " no doubt! and this fact should inspire us with

caution where they are concerned, and not with belief!

  67

  THE  PRICE  OF  BELIEVERS.  He  who  sets  such  a  value  on  being

believed  in  has  to  promise  heaven  in  recompense  for  this  belief:  and

everyone, even a thief on the Cross, must have suffered from a terrible doubt

and experienced crucifixion in every form : otherwise he would not buy his

followers so dearly.

  68

  THE FIRST CHRISTIAN. The whole world still believes in the literary

career of the " Holy Ghost," or is still influenced by the effects of this belief:

when  we  look  into  our  Bibles  we  do  so  for  the  purpose  of  "  edifying

ourselves," to find a few words of comfort for our misery, be it great or small

in short, we read ourselves into it and out of it. But who apart from a few

learned  men  know  that  it  also  contains  the  history  of  one  of  the  most

ambitious  and  unrelenting  souls  that  ever  existed,  of  a  mind  full  of

superstition  and  cunning  :  the  history  of  the  Apostle  Paul?  Nevertheless,

without this singular history, without the tribulations and passions of such a

mind, and of such a soul, there would have been no Christian kingdom ; we

should have scarcely have even heard of a little Jewish sect, the founder of

which died on the Cross. It is true that, if this history had been understood in

time,  if  we  had  read,  really  read,  the  writings  of  St.  Paul,  not  as  the

revelations of the " Holy Ghost," but with honest and independent minds,

oblivious of all our personal troubles there were no such readers for fifteen

centuries it would have been all up with Christianity long ago : so searchingly

do these writings of the Jewish Pascal lay bare the origins of Christianity, just

as the French Pascal let us see its destiny and how it will ultimately perish.

That the ship of Christianity threw overboard no inconsiderable part of its

Jewish ballast, that it was able to sail into the waters of the heathen and

actually did do so : this is due to the history of one single man, this apostlewho was so greatly troubled in mind and so worthy of pity, but who was also

very disagreeable to himself and to others. This man suffered from a fixed

idea, or rather a fixed question, an ever-present and ever-burning question :

what  was  the  meaning  of  the  Jewish  Law  ?  and,  more  especially,  the

fulfilment  of  this  Law  ?  In  his  youth  he  had  done  his  best  to  satisfy  it,

thirsting as he did for that highest distinction which the Jews could imagine

this  people,  which  raised  the  imagination  of  moral  loftiness  to  a  greater

elevation than any other people, and which alone succeeded in uniting the

conception  of  a  holy  God  with  the  idea  of  sin  considered  as  an  offence

against this holiness. St. Paul became at once the fanatic defender and guard-

of-honour of this God and His Law. Ceaselessly battling against and lying in

wait for all transgressors of this Law and those who presumed to doubt it, he

was pitiless and cruel towards all evildoers, whom he would gladly have

punished in the most rigorous fashion possible. Now, however, he was aware

in his own person of the fact that such a man as himself violent, sensual,

melancholy,  and  malicious  in  his  hatred  could  not  fulfil  the  Law  ;  and

furthermore, what seemed strangest of all to him, he saw that his boundless

craving for power was continually provoked to break it, and that he could not

help yielding to this impulse. Was it really " the flesh " which made him a

trespasser time and again ? Was it not rather, as it afterwards occurred to him,

the Law itself, which continually showed itself to be impossible to fulfil, and

seduced men into transgression with an irresistible charm? But at that time he

had not thought of this means of escape. As he suggests here and there, he

had  many  things  on  his  conscience  hatred,  murder,  sorcery,  idolatry,

debauchery,  drunkenness,  and  orgiastic  revelry,  and  to  however  great  an

extent he tried to soothe his conscience, and, even more, his desire for power,

by the extreme fanaticism of his worship for and defence of the Law, there

were times when the thought struck him : " It is all in vain ! The anguish of

the  unfulfilled  Law  cannot  be  overcome,"  Luther  must  have  experienced

similar feelings, when, in his cloister, he endeavoured to become the ideal

man  of  his  imagination  ;  and,  as  Luther  one  day  began  to  hate  the

ecclesiastical ideal, and the Pope, and the saints, and the whole clergy, with a

hatred which was all the more deadly as he could not avow it even to himself,

an analogous feeling took possession of St. Paul. The Law was the Cross on

which he felt himself crucified. How he hated it ! What a grudge he owed it !

How  he  began  to  look  round  on  all  sides  to  find  a  means  for  its  total

annihilation, that he might no longer be obliged to fulfil it himself! And atlast  a  liberating  thought,  together  with  a  vision  which  was  only  to  be

expected in the case of an epileptic like himself flashed into his mind : to

him, the stern upholder of the Law who, in his innermost heart, was tired to

death  of  it  there  appeared  on  the  lonely  path  that  Christ,  with  the  divine

effulgence on His countenance, and Paul heard the words : " Why do you

persecute me ? " What actually took place, then, was this : his mind was

suddenly enlightened, and he said to himself: "It is unreasonable to persecute

this  Jesus  Christ  !  Here  is  my  means  of  escape,  here  is  my  complete

vengeance, here and nowhere else have I the destroyer of the Law in my

hands I " The sufferer from anguished pride felt himself restored to health all

at once, his moral despair disappeared in the air; for morality itself was blown

away, annihilated that is to say, fulfilled, there on the Cross ! Up to that time

that  ignominious  death  had  seemed  to  him  to  be  the  principal  argument

against the " Messiah-ship " proclaimed by the followers of the new doctrine

: but what if it were necessary for doing away with the Law? The enormous

consequences of this thought, of this solution of the enigma, danced before

his eyes, and he at once became the happiest of men. The destiny of the Jews,

indeed,  of  all  mankind,  seemed  to  him  to  be  intertwined  with  this

instantaneous flash of enlightenment : he held the thought of thoughts, the

key of keys, the light of lights ; history would henceforth revolve round him !

For from that time forward he would be the apostle of the annihilation of the

Law \ TQ be dead to sin that meant to be dead to the Law also ; to be in the

flesh that meant to be under the Law ! To be one with Christ that meant to

have become, like Him, the destroyer of the Law ; to be dead with Him that

meant likewise to be dead to the Law. Even if it were still possible to sin, it

would not at any rate be possible to sin against the Law : "I am above the

Law," thinks Paul ; adding, " If I were now to acknowledge the Law again

and to submit to it, I should make Christ an accomplice in the sin " ; for the

Law  was  there  for  the  purpose  of  producing  sin  and  setting  it  in  the

foreground,  as  an  emetic  produces  sickness.  God  could  not  have  decided

upon the death of Christ had it been possible to fulfil the Law without it ;

henceforth,  not  only  are  all  sins  expiated,  but  sin  itself  is  abolished  ;

henceforth the Law is dead ; henceforth " the flesh " in which it dwelt is dead

or at all events dying, gradually wasting away. To live for a short time longer

amid this decay ! this is the Christian's fate, until the time when, having

become one with Christ, he arises with Him, sharing with Christ the divine

glory, and becoming, like Christ, a " Son of God." Then Paul's exaltation wasat its height, and with it the importunity of his soul the thought of union with

Christ  made  him  lose  all  shame,  all  submission,  all  constraint,  and  his

ungovernable ambition was shown to be revelling in the expectation of divine

glories. Such was the first Christian, the inventor of Christianity! before him

there were only a few Jewish sectaries.

  69

    INIMITABLE. There is an enormous strain and distance between envy

and  friendship,  between  self-contempt  and  pride  :  the  Greek  lived  in  the

former, the Christian in the latter.

  70

  THE USE OF A COARSE INTELLECT. The Christian Church is an

encyclopaedia of primitive cults and views of the most varied origin ; and is,

in consequence, well adapted to missionary work : in former times she could

and  still  does  go  wherever  she  would,  and  in  doing  so  always  found

something  resembling  herself,  to  which  she  could  assimilate  herself  and

gradually substitute her own spirit for it. It is not to what is Christian in her

usages, but to what is universally pagan in them, that we have to attribute the

development of this universal religion. Her thoughts, which have their origin

at  once  in  the  Judaic  and  in  the  Hellenic  spirit,  were  able  from  the  very

beginning to raise themselves above the exclusiveness and subtleties of races

and nations, as above prejudices. Although we may admire the power which

makes  even  the  most  difficult  things  coalesce,  we  must  nevertheless  not

overlook the contemptible qualities of this power the astonishing coarseness

and narrowness of the Church's intellect when it was in process of formation,

a coarseness which permitted it to accommodate itself to any diet, and to

digest contradictions like pebbles.

  71

  THE CHRISTIAN VENGEANCE AGAINST ROME. Perhaps nothing is

more fatiguing than the sight of a continual conqueror: for more than two

hundred years the world had seen Rome overcoming one nation after another,

the circle was closed, all future seemed to be at an end, everything was done

with a view to its lasting for all time, yet, when the Empire built anything it

was erected with a view to being acre perennius. We, who know only the "

melancholy  of  ruins,"  can  scarcely  understand  that  totally  different

melancholy  of  eternal  buildings  from  which  men  endeavoured  to  save

themselves as best they could with the light-hearted fancy of a Horace, for

example. Others sought different consolations for the weariness which wasclosely  akin  to  despair,  against  the  deadening  knowledge  that  from

henceforth all progress of thought and heart would be hopeless, that the huge

spider sat everywhere and mercilessly continued to drink all the blood within

its reach, no matter where it might spring forth. This mute, century-old hatred

of  the  wearied  spectators  against  Rome,  wherever  Rome's  domination

extended, was at length vented in Christianity, which united Rome, " the

world," and " sin " into a single conception. The Christians took their revenge

on Rome by proclaiming the immediate and sudden destruction of the world ;

by  once  more  introducing  a  future  for  Rome  had  been  able  to  transform

everything into the history of its own past and present a future in which

Rome was no longer the most important factor ; and by dreaming of the last

judgment while the crucified Jew, as the symbol of salvation, was the greatest

derision  on  the  superb  Roman  praetors  in  the  provinces  ;  for  now  they

seemed to be only the symbols of ruin and a " world " ready to perish.

  72

  THE " LIFE AFTER DEATH." Christianity found the idea of punishment

in hell in the entire Roman Empire : for the numerous mystic cults have

hatched this idea with particular satisfaction as being the most fecund egg of

their power. Epicurus thought he could do nothing better for his followers

than to tear this belief up by the roots : his triumph found its finest echo in the

mouth of one of his disciples, the Roman Lucretius, a poet of a gloomy,

though afterwards enlightened, temperament. Alas this triumph had come too

soon : Christianity took under its special protection this belief in subterranean

horrors, which was already beginning to die away in the minds of men ; and

that was clever of it. For, without this audacious leap into the most complete

paganism, how could it have proved itself victorious over the popularity of

Mithras and Isis? In this way it managed to bring timorous folk over to its

side the most enthusiastic adherents of a new faith ! The Jews, being a people

which, like the Greeks, and even in a greater degree than the Greeks, loved

and still love life, had not cultivated that idea to any great extent: the thought

of final death as the punishment of the sinner, death without resurrection as

an extreme menace: this was sufficient to impress these peculiar men, who

did  not  wish  to  get  rid  of  their  bodies,  but  hoped,  with  their  refined

Egypticism, to preserve them forever. (A Jewish martyr, about whom we may

read in the Second Book of the Maccabees, would not think of giving up his

intestines,  which  had  been  torn  out  :  he  wanted  to  have  them  at  the

resurrection : quite a Jewish characteristic !) Thoughts of eternal damnationwere far from the minds of the early Christians : they thought they were

delivered from death, and awaited a transformation from day to day, but not

death. (What a curious effect the first death must have produced on these

expectant  people  !  How  many  different  feelings  must  have  been  mingled

together  astonishment,  exultation,  doubt,  shame,  and  passion  !  Verily,  a

subject worthy of a great artist !) St. Paul could say nothing better in praise of

his Saviour than that he had opened the gates of immortality to everybody he

did not believe in the resurrection of those who had not been saved : more

than this, by reason of his doctrine of the impossibility of carrying out the

Law, and of death considered as a consequence of sin, he even suspected that,

up to that time, no one had become immortal (or at all events only a very few,

solely owing to special grace and not to any merits of their own) : it was only

in his time that immortality had begun to open its gates and only a few of the

elect would finally gain admittance, as the pride of the elect cannot help

saying. In other places, where the impulse towards life was not so strong as

among  the  Jews  and  the  Christian  Jews,  and  where  the  prospect  of

immortality did not appear to be more valuable than the prospect of a final

death, that pagan, yet not altogether un-Jewish addition of Hell became a

very useful tool in the hands of the missionaries : then arose the new doctrine

that even the sinners and the unsaved are immortal, the doctrine of eternal

damnation, which was more powerful than the idea of a final death, which

thereafter began to fade away. It was science alone which could overcome

this idea, at the same time brushing aside all other ideas about death and an

after-life. We are poorer in one particular : the " life after death " has no

further interest for us ! an indescribable blessing, which is as yet too recent to

be  considered  as  such  throughout  the  world.  And  Epicurus  is  once  more

triumphant.

  73

  FOR THE " TRUTH " ! " The truth of Christianity was attested by the

virtuous lives of the Christians, their firmness in suffering, their unshakable

belief, and above all by the spread and increase of the faith in spite of all

calamities." That's how you talk even now. How pitiable! Learn, then, that all

this proves nothing either in favour of truth or against it ; that truth must be

demonstrated differently from conscientiousness, and that the latter is in no

respect whatever an argument in favour of the former.

  74

  A CHRISTIAN ARRIERE-PENSEE. Would not this have been a generalreservation among Christians of the first century : " It is better to persuade

ourselves into the belief that we are guilty rather than that we are innocent ;

for it is impossible to ascertain the disposition of so powerful a judge but it is

to be feared that he is looking out only for those who are conscious of guilt.

Bearing in mind his great power, it is more likely that he will pardon a guilty

person than admit that anyone is innocent, in his presence." This was the

feeling of poor provincial folk in the presence of the Roman praetor : " He is

too proud for us to dare to be innocent." And may not this very sentiment

have made its influence felt when the Christians endeavoured to picture to

themselves the aspect of the Supreme Judge ?

  75

    NEITHER EUROPEAN NOR NOBLE. There is something Oriental and

feminine in Christianity, and this is shown in the thought, " Whom the Lord

loveth, He chastens " ; for women in the Orient consider castigations and the

strict seclusion of their persons from the world as a sign of their husband's

love, and complain if these signs of love cease.

  76

  IF YOU THINK IT EVIL, YOU MAKE IT EVIL. The passions become

evil and malignant when regarded with evil and malignant eyes. It is in this

way  that  Christianity  has  succeeded  in  transforming  Eros  and  Aphrodite

sublime  powers,  capable  of  idealisation  into  hellish  genii  and  phantom

goblins, by means of the pangs which every sexual impulse was made to raise

in the conscience of the believers. Is it not a dreadful thing to transform

necessary and regular sensations into a source of inward misery, and thus

arbitrarily to render interior misery necessary and regular in the case of every

man \ Furthermore, this misery remains secret, with the result that it is all the

more  deeply  rooted  ;  for  it  is  not  all  men  who  have  the  courage,  which

Shakespeare shows in his sonnets, of making public their Christian gloom on

this point. Must a feeling, then, always be called evil against which we are

forced to struggle, which we must restrain even within certain limits, or, in

given cases, banish entirely from our minds ? Is it not the habit of vulgar

souls always to call an enemy evil ! and must we call Eros an enemy ? The

sexual feelings, like the feelings of pity and adoration, possess the particular

characteristic that, in their case, one being gratifies another by the pleasure he

enjoys it is but rarely that we meet with such a benevolent arrangement in

nature. And yet we calumniate and corrupt it all by our bad conscience ! We

connect the procreation of man with a bad conscience ! But the outcome ofthis "devil-ization" of Eros is a mere farce : the " demon " Eros becomes an

object  of  greater  interest  to  mankind  than  all  the  angels  and  saints  put

together, thanks to the mysterious Mumbo-Jumbo-ism of the Church in all

things erotic : it is due to the Church that love stories, even in our own time,

have become the one common interest which appeals to all classes of people

with  an  exaggeration  which  would  be  incomprehensible  to  antiquity,  and

which will not fail to provoke roars of laughter in coming generations. All

our poetising and thinking, from the highest to the lowest, is marked, and

more than marked, by the exaggerated importance bestowed upon the love

story as the principal item of our existence. Posterity may perhaps, on this

account, come to the conclusion that its entire legacy of Christian culture is

tainted with narrowness and insanity.

  77

  THE TORTURES OF THE SOUL. The whole world raises a shout of

horror at the present day if one man presumes to torture the body of another :

the indignation against such a being bursts forth almost spontaneously. Nay ;

we tremble even at the very thought of torture being inflicted on a man or an

animal, and we undergo unspeakable misery when we hear of such an act

having been accomplished. But the same feeling is experienced in a very

much lesser degree and extent when it is a question of the tortures of the soul

and  the  dreadfulness  of  their  infliction.  Christianity  has  introduced  such

tortures on an unprecedented scale, and still continues to preach this kind of

martyrdom yet, it even complains innocently of backsliding and indifference

when it meets with a state of soul which is free from such agonies. From all

this it now results that humanity, in the face of spiritual racks, tortures of the

mind, and instruments of punishment, behaves even to-day with the same

awesome patience and indecision which it exhibited in former times in the

presence of the cruelties practised on the bodies of men or animals. Hell has

certainly not remained merely an empty sound ; and a new kind of pity has

been devised to correspond to the newly-created fears of hell a horrible and

ponderous  compassion,  until  now  unknown  ;  with  people  "  irrevocably

condemned  to  hell,"  as,  for  example,  the  Stony  Guest  gave  Don  Juan  to

understand, and which, during the Christian era, should often have made the

very stones weep. Plutarch presents us with a gloomy picture of the state of

mind of a superstitious man in pagan times : but this picture pales when

compared with that of a Christian of the Middle Ages, who supposes that

nothing can save him from " torments everlasting." Dreadful omens appear tohim : perhaps he sees a stork holding a snake in his beak and hesitating to

swallow it. Or all nature suddenly becomes pale ; or bright, fiery colours

appear across the surface of the earth. Or the ghosts of his dead relations

approach him, with features showing traces of dreadful sufferings. Or the

dark walls of the room in which the man is sleeping are suddenly lighted up,

and there, amidst a yellow flame, he perceives instruments of torture and a

motley horde of snakes and devils. Christianity has surely turned this world

of ours into a fearful habitation by raising the crucifix in all parts and thereby

proclaiming the earth to be a place " where the just man is tortured to death !

"  And  when  the  ardour  of  some  great  preacher  for  once  disclosed  to  the

public the secret sufferings of the individual, the agonies of the lonely souls,

when, for example, Whitefield preached " like a dying man to the dying,"

now bitterly weeping, now violently stamping his feet, speaking passionately,

in abrupt and incisive tones, without fearing to turn the whole force of his

attack upon any one individual present, excluding him from the assembly

with excessive harshness then indeed did it seem as if the earth were being

transformed into a " field of evil." The huge crowds were then seen to act as

if seized with a sudden attack of madness : many were in fits of anguish ;

others lay unconscious and motionless ; others, again, trembled or rent the air

with their piercing shrieks. Everywhere there was a loud breathing, as of half-

choked people who were gasping for the breath of life. " Indeed," said an eye-

witness once, " almost all the noises appeared to come from people who were

dying  in  the  bitterest  agony."  Let  us  never  forget  that  it  was  Christianity

which first turned the death-bed into a bed of agony, and that, by the scenes

which took place there, and the terrifying sounds which were made possible

there  for  the  first  time,  it  has  poisoned  the  senses  and  the  blood  of

innumerable witnesses and their children. Imagine the ordinary man who can

never efface the recollection of words like these : " Oh, eternity ! Would that

I had no soul ! Would that I had never been born ! My soul is damned,

damned ; lost forever! Six days ago you might have helped me. But now all is

over. I belong to the devil, and with him I will go down to hell. Break, break,

you poor hearts of stone ! You will not break ? What more can be done for

hearts of stone ? I am damned that you may be saved ! There he is ! Yes ;

there he is ! Come, good devil ! Come ! "

  78

    AVENGING JUSTICE. Misfortune and guilt: these two things have been

put on one scale by Christianity ; so that, when the misfortune which followsa fault is a serious one, this fault is always judged accordingly to be a very

heinous one. But this was not the valuation of antiquity, and that is why

Greek tragedy in which misfortune and punishment are discussed at length,

and yet in another sense forms part of the great liberators of the mind to an

extent which even the ancients themselves could not realise. They remained

ingenuous enough not to set up an " adequate relation " between guilt and

misfortune. The guilt of their tragic heroes is, indeed, the little pebble that

makes them stumble, and on which account they sometimes happen to break

an arm or knock out an eye. Upon this the feeling of antiquity made the

comment, " Well, he should have gone his way with more caution and less

pride." It was reserved for Christianity, however, to say : " Here we have a

great misfortune, and behind this great misfortune there must lie a great fault,

an equally serious fault though we cannot clearly see it ! If, wretched man,

you do not feel it, it is because your heart is hardened and worse than this will

happen to you ! " Besides this, antiquity could point to examples of real

misfortunes, misfortunes that were pure and innocent ; it was only with the

advent of Christianity that all punishment became well-merited punishment :

in  addition  to  this  it  renders  the  imagination  of  the  sufferer  still  more

suffering, so that the victim, in the midst of his distress, is seized with the

feeling that he has been morally reproved and cast away. Poor humanity! The

Greeks had a special word to stand for the feeling of indignation which was

experienced  at  the  misfortune  of  another:  among  Christian  peoples  this

feeling was prohibited and was not permitted to develop ; hence the reason

why they have no name for this more virile brother of pity.

  79

  A PROPOSAL. If, according to the arguments of Pascal and Christianity,

our ego is always hateful, how can we permit and suppose other people,

whether God or men, to love it? It would be contrary to all good principles to

let ourselves be loved when we know very well that we deserve nothing but

hatred  not  to  speak  of  other  repugnant  feelings.  "  But  this  is  the  very

Kingdom of Grace." Then you look upon your love for your neighbour as a

grace? Your pity as a grace? Well, then, if you can do all this, there is no

reason why you should not go a step further : love yourselves through grace,

and then you will no longer find your God necessary, and the entire drama of

the Fall and Redemption of mankind will reach its last act in yourselves !

  80

  THE COMPASSIONATE CHRISTIAN. A Christian's compassion in thepresence of his neighbour's suffering has another side to it : viz, his profound

suspicion of all the joy of his neighbour, of his neighbour's joy in everything

that he wills and is able to do.

  81

  THE  SAINT'S  HUMANITY.  A  saint  had  fallen  into  the  company  of

believers, and could no longer stand their continually expressed hatred for

sin. At last he said to them : " God created all things, except sin : therefore it

is no wonder that He does not like it. But man has created sin, and why, then,

should he disown this only child of his merely because it is not regarded with

a friendly eye by God, its grandfather ? Is that human ? Honour to whom

honour is due but one's heart and duty must speak, above all, in favour of the

child and only in the second place for the honour of the grandfather ! "

  82

  THE THEOLOGICAL ATTACK. "You must arrange that with yourself;

for your life is at stake I " Luther it is who suddenly springs upon us with

these words and imagines that we feel the knife at our throats. But we throw

him off with the words of one higher and more considerate than he : " We

need form no opinion in regard to this or that matter, and thus save our souls

from trouble. For, by their very nature, the things themselves cannot compel

us to express an opinion."

  83

  POOR HUMANITY ! A single drop of blood too much or too little in the

brain may render our life unspeakably miserable and difficult, and we may

suffer more from this single drop of blood than Prometheus from his vulture.

But the worst is when we do not know that this drop is causing our sufferings

and we think it is " the devil ! " Or " sin ! "

  84

  THE  PHILOLOGY  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  How  little  Christianity

cultivates  the  sense  of  honesty  can  be  inferred  from  the  character  of  the

writings of its learned men. They set out their conjectures as audaciously as if

they were dogmas, and are but seldom at a disadvantage in regard to the

interpretation of Scripture. Their continual cry is : "I am right, for it is written

"  and  then  follows  an  explanation  so  shameless  and  capricious  that  a

philologist,  when  he  hears  it,  must  stand  stock-still  between  anger  and

laughter, asking himself again and again : Is it possible ? Is it honest ? Is it

even  decent  ?  It  is  only  those  who  never  or  always  attend  church  that

underestimate  the  dishonesty  with  which  this  subject  is  still  dealt  inProtestant pulpits ; in what a clumsy fashion the preacher takes advantage of

his security from interruption ; how the Bible is pinched and squeezed ; and

how  the  people  are  made  acquainted  with  every  form  of  the  art  of  false

reading. When all is said and done, however, what can be expected from the

effects of a religion which, during the centuries when it was being firmly

established,  enacted  that  huge  philological  farce  concerning  the  Old

Testament ? I refer to that attempt to tear the Old Testament from the hands

of the Jews under the pretext that it contained only Christian doctrines and

belonged to the Christians as the true people of Israel, while the Jews had

merely arrogated it to themselves without authority. This was followed by a

mania of would-be interpretation and falsification, which could not under any

circumstances have been allied with a good conscience. However strongly

Jewish savants protested, it was everywhere sedulously asserted that the Old

Testament  alluded  everywhere  to  Christ,  and  nothing  but  Christ,  more

especially His Cross, and thus, wherever reference was made to wood, a rod,

a ladder, a twig, a tree, a willow, or a staff, such a reference could not but be

a prophecy relating to the wood of the Cross ; even the setting up of the

Unicorn and the Brazen Serpent, even Moses stretching forth his hands in

prayer, indeed, the very spits on which the Easter lambs were roasted : all

these were allusions to the Cross, and, as it were, preludes to it ! Did anyone

who  kept  on  asserting  these  things  ever  believe  in  them?  Let  it  not  be

forgotten that the Church did not shrink from putting interpolations in the text

of the Septuagint (e.g. Ps. xcvi. i o), in order that she might later on make use

of these interpolated passages as Christian prophecies. They were engaged in

a struggle, and thought of their foes rather than of honesty.

  85

    SUBTLETY IN PENURY. Take care not to laugh at the mythology of the

Greeks merely because it so little resembles your own profound metaphysics

! You should admire a people who checked their quick intellect at this point,

and  for  a  long  time  afterwards  had  tact  enough  to  avoid  the  danger  of

scholasticism and hair-splitting superstition.

  86

  THE  CHRISTIAN  INTERPRETERS  OF  THE  BODY.  Whatever

originates in the stomach, the intestines, the beating of the heart, the nerves,

the bile, the seed all those indispositions, debilities, irritations, and the whole

contingency of that machine about which we know so little a Christian like

Pascal considers it all as a moral and religious phenomenon, asking himselfwhether God or the devil, good or evil, salvation or damnation, is the cause.

Alas  for  the  unfortunate  interpreter  !  How  he  must  distort  and  worry  his

system ! How he must? distort and worry himself in order to gain his point I

  87

  THE MORAL MIRACLE. In the domain of morality, Christianity knows

of nothing but the miracle : the sudden change in all valuations, the sudden

renouncement of all habits, the sudden and irresistible predilection for new

things and persons. Christianity looks upon this phenomenon as the work of

God,  and  calls  it  the  act  of  regeneration,  thus  giving  it  a  unique  and

incomparable  value.  Everything  else  which  is  called  morality,  and  which

bears  no  relation  to  this  miracle,  becomes  in  consequence  a  matter  of

indifference to the Christian, and indeed, so far as it is a feeling of well-being

and  pride,  an  object  of  fear.  The  canon  of  virtue,  of  the  fulfilled  law,  is

established in the New Testament, but in such a way as to be the canon of

impossible virtue : men who still aspire to moral perfections must come to

understand,  in  the  face  of  this  canon,  that  they  are  further  and  further

removed from their aim; they must despair of virtue, and end by throwing

themselves at the feet of the Merciful One. It is only in reaching a conclusion

like this that moral efforts on the part of the Christian can still be regarded as

possessing any value : the condition that these efforts shall always remain

sterile, painful, and melancholy is therefore indispensable ; and it is in this

way that those efforts could still avail to bring about that moment of ecstasy

when man experiences the " overflow of grace " and the moral miracle. This

struggle  for  morality  is,  however,  not  necessary  ;  for  it  is  by  no  means

uncommon for this miracle to happen to the sinner at the very moment when

he is, so to speak, wallowing in the mire of sin : yes, the leap from the

deepest and most abandoned sinfulness into its contrary seems easier, and, as

a clear proof of the miracle, even more desirable. What, for the rest, may be

the signification of such a sudden, unreasonable, and irresistible revolution,

such  a  change  from  the  depths  of  misery  into  the  heights  of  happiness?

(might it be a disguised epilepsy?) This should at all events be considered by

alienists, who have frequent opportunities of observing similar "miracles" for

example,  the  mania  of  murder  or  suicide.  The  relatively  "more  pleasant

consequences" in the case of the Christian make no important difference.

  88

    LUTHER, THE GREAT BENEFACTOR. Luther's most important result

is the suspicion which he awakened against the saints and the entire Christianvita contemplativa \ only since his day has an unchristian vita contemplativa

again become possible in Europe, only since then has contempt for laymen

and worldly activity ceased. Luther continued to be an honest miner's son

even after he had been shut up in a monastery, and there, for lack of other

depths and " borings," he descended into himself, and bored terrifying and

dark passages through his own depths finally coming to recognise that an

introspective and saintly life was impossible to him, and that his innate "

activity " in body and soul would end by being his ruin. For a long time, too

long, indeed, he endeavoured to find the way to holiness through castigations

; but at length he made up his mind, and said to himself: "There is no real vita

contemplative!, \ We have been deceived. The saints were no better than the

rest of us." This was truly a rustic way of gaining one's case ; but for the

Germans of that period it was the only proper way. How edified they felt

when they could read in their Lutheran catechism : " Apart from the Ten

Commandments there is no work which could find favour in the eyes of God

these much-boasted spiritual works of the saints are purely imaginary!"

  89

  DOUBT AS SIN. Christianity has done all it possibly could to draw a

circle round itself, and has even gone so far as to declare doubt itself to be a

sin. We are to be precipitated into faith by a miracle, without the help of

reason, after which we are to float in it as the clearest and least equivocal of

elements a mere glance at some solid ground, the thought that we exist for

some  purpose  other  than  floating,  the  least  movement  of  our  amphibious

nature : all this is a sin ! Let it be noted that, following this decision, the

proofs and demonstration of the faith, and all meditations upon its origin, are

prohibited as sinful. Christianity wants blindness and frenzy and an eternal

swan-song above the waves under which reason has been drowned !

  90

  EGOISM VERSUS EGOISM. How many are there who still come to the

conclusion : " Life would be intolerable were there no God ! " Or, as is said

in idealistic circles : " Life would be intolerable if its ethical signification

were  lacking."  Hence  there  must  be  a  God  or  an  ethical  signification  of

existence  !  In  reality  the  case  stands  thus  :  He  who  is  accustomed  to

conceptions  of  this  sort  does  not  desire  a  life  without  them,  hence  these

conceptions  are  necessary  for  him  and  his  preservation  but  what  a

presumption it is to assert that everything necessary for my preservation must

exist in reality \ As if my preservation were really necessary! What if othersheld the contrary opinion ? if they did not care to live under the conditions of

these two articles of faith, and did not regard life as worth living if they were

realised ! And that is the present position of affairs.

  91

  THE HONESTY OF GOD. An omniscient and omnipotent God who does

not even take care that His intentions shall be understood by His creatures

could He be a God of goodness ? A God, who, for thousands of years, has

permitted innumerable doubts and scruples to continue unchecked as if they

were of no importance in the salvation of mankind, and who, nevertheless,

announces the most dreadful consequences for anyone who mistakes his truth

? Would he not be a cruel god if, being himself in possession of the truth, he

could calmly contemplate mankind, in a state of miserable torment, worrying

its mind as to what was truth ? Perhaps, however, he really is a God of

goodness,  and  was  unable  to  express  Himself  more  clearly  ?  Perhaps  he

lacked intelligence enough for this? Or eloquence ? All the worse ! For in

such a cas6

  he may have been deceived himself in regard to what he calls his " truth,"

and may not be far from being another " poor, deceived devil ! " Must he not

therefore experience all the torments of hell at seeing His creatures suffering

so much here below and even more, suffering through all eternity when he

himself can neither advise nor help them, except as a deaf and dumb person,

who  makes  all  kinds  of  equivocal  signs  when  his  child  or  his  dog  is

threatened with the most fearful danger ? A distressed believer who argues

thus might be pardoned if his pity for the suffering God were greater than his

pity for his "neighbours"; for they are his neighbours no longer if that most

solitary and primeval being is also the greatest sufferer and stands most in

need of consolation. Every religion shows some traits of the fact that it owes

its origin to a state of human intellectuality which was as yet too young and

immature : they all make light of the necessity for speaking the truth : as yet

they know nothing of the duty of God, the duty of being clear and truthful in

His communications with men. No one was more eloquent than Pascal in

speaking of the " hidden God " and the reasons why He had to keep Himself

hidden, all of which indicates clearly enough that Pascal himself could never

make his mind easy on this point : but he speaks with such confidence that

one is led to imagine that he must have been let into the secret at some time

or other. He seemed to have some idea that the deus absconditus bore a few

slight traces of immorality ; and he felt too much ashamed and afraid ofacknowledging this to himself: consequently, like a man who is afraid, he

spoke as loudly as he could.

  92

  AT THE DEATH-BED OF CHRISTIANITY. All truly active men now

do without inward Christianity, and the most moderate and thoughtful men of

the intellectual middle classes possess only a kind of modified Christianity ;

that is, a peculiarly simplified Christianity. A God who, in his love, ordains

everything so that it may be best for us, a God who gives us our virtue and

our happiness and then takes them away from us, so that everything at length

goes on smoothly and there is no reason left why we should take life ill or

grumble about it : in short, resignation and modesty raised to the rank of

divinities that is the best and most lifelike remnant of Christianity now left to

us.  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  in  this  way  Christianity  has

developed into a soft moralism : instead of " God, freedom, and immortality,"

we have now a kind of benevolence and honest sentiments, and the belief

that, in the entire universe, benevolence and honest sentiments will finally

prevail : this is the euthanasia of Christianity.

  93

  WHAT IS TRUTH ? Who will not be pleased with the conclusions which

the faithful take such delight in coming to ? " Science cannot be true ; for it

denies God. Hence it does not come from God ; and consequently it cannot

be true for God is truth." It is not the deduction but the premise which is

fallacious. What if God were not exactly truth, and if this were proved ? And

if he were instead the vanity, the desire for power, the ambitions, the fear, and

the enraptured and terrified folly of mankind ?

  94

    REMEDY  FOR  THE  DISPLEASED.  Even  Paul  already  believed  that

some sacrifice was necessary to take away the deep displeasure which God

experienced  concerning  sin  :  and  ever  since  then  Christians  have  never

ceased to vent the ill-humour which they felt with themselves upon some

victim or another whether it was "the world," or " history," or " reason," or

joy, or the tranquillity of other men something good, no matter what, had to

die for their sins (even if only in effigie) !

  95

  THE HISTORICAL REFUTATION AS THE DECISIVE ONE. Formerly

it was sought to prove that there was no God now it is shown how the belief

that  a  God  existed  could  have  originated  and  by  what  means  this  beliefgained authority and importance : in this way the counterproof that there is no

God  becomes  unnecessary  and  superfluous.  In  former  times,  when  the  "

evidences of the existence of God " which had been brought forward were

refuted, a doubt still remained, namely whether better proofs could not be

found than those which had just been refuted: at that time the atheists did not

understand the art of making a tabula rasa.

  96

  " IN HOC SIGNO VINCES." To whatever degree of progress Europe

may have attained in other respects, where religious affairs are concerned it

has not yet reached the liberal naivety of the ancient Brahmins, which proves

that, in India, four thousand years ago, people meditated more profoundly

and transmitted to their descendants more pleasure in meditating than is the

case in our own days. For those Brahmins believed in the first place that the

priests were more powerful than the gods, and in the second place that it was

observances which constituted the power of the priests : as a result of which

their  poets  were  never  tired  of  glorifying  those  observances  (prayers,

ceremonies, sacrifices, chants, improvised melodies) as the real dispensers of

all  benefits.  Although  a  certain  amount  of  superstition  and  poetry  was

mingled with all this, the principles were true\ A step further, and the gods

were cast aside which Europe likewise will have to do before very long ! One

more step further, and priests and intermediaries could also be dispensed with

and then Buddha, the teacher of the religion of self-redemption, appeared.

How far Europe is still removed from this degree of culture ! When at length

all the customs and observances, upon which rests the power of gods, priests,

and saviours, shall have been destroyed, when as a consequence morality, in

the old sense, will be dead, then there will come . . . yet, what will come then

? But let us refrain from speculating ; let us rather make certain that Europe

will retrieve that which, in India, amidst this people of thinkers, was carried

out thousands of years ago as a commandment of thought ! Scattered among

the different nations of Europe there are now from ten to twenty millions of

men who no longer " believe in God " is it too much to ask that they should

give each other some indication or password? As soon as they recognise each

other in this way, they will also make themselves known to each other; and

they  will  immediately  become  a  power  in  Europe,  and,  happily,  a  power

among the nations ! among the classes ! between rich and poor ! between

those who command, and those who obey ! between the most restless and the

most tranquil, tranquillising people !                                          BOOK II

  97

  ONE BECOMES MORAL but not because one is moral ! Submission to

morals may be due to slavishness or vanity, egoism or resignation, dismal

fanaticism or thoughtlessness. It may, again, be an act of despair, such as

submission to the authority of a ruler ; but there is nothing moral about it per

se.

  98

    ALTERATIONS  IN  MORALS.  Morals  are  constantly  undergoing

changes and transformations, occasioned by successful crimes. (To these, for

example, belong all innovations in moral judgments.)

  99

    WHEREIN  WE  ARE  ALL  IRRATIONAL.  We  still  continue  to  draw

conclusions  from  judgments  which  we  consider  as  false,  or  doctrines  in

which we no longer believe, through our feelings.

  110

    AWAKING FROM A DREAM. Noble and wise men once upon a time

believed in the music of the spheres ; there are still noble and wise men who

believe in " the moral significance of existence," but there will come a day

when this music of the spheres also will no longer be audible to them. They

will awake and perceive that their ears have been dreaming.

  101

  OPEN TO DOUBT. To accept a belief simply because it is customary

implies  that  one  is  dishonest,  cowardly,  and  lazy.  Must  dishonesty,

cowardice, and laziness, therefore, be the primary conditions of morality ?

  102

  THE MOST ANCIENT MORAL JUDGMENTS. What attitude do we

assume towards the acts of our neighbour ? In the first place, we consider

how they may benefit ourselves we see them only in this light. It is this effect

which we regard as the intention of the acts, and in the end we come to look

upon these intentions of our neighbour as permanent qualities in him, and we

call him, for example, " a dangerous man." Triple error ! Triple and most

ancient mistake ! Perhaps this inheritance comes to us from the animals and

their faculty of judgment ! Must not the origin of all morality be sought in

these detestable narrow-minded conclusions : " Whatever injures me is evil

(something injurious in itself), whatever benefits me is good (beneficial and

profitable in itself), whatever injures me once or several times is hostile perse ; whatever benefits me once or several times is friendly per se" O pudenda

origo ! Is not this equivalent to interpreting the contemptible, occasional, and

often merely accidental relations of another person to us as his primary and

most essential qualities, and affirming that towards himself and everyone else

he is only capable of such actions as we ourselves have experienced at his

hands once or several times ! And is not this thorough folly based upon the

most immodest of all mental reservations : namely, that we ourselves must be

the standard of what is good, since we determine good and evil ?

  103

  THERE ARE Two CLASSES OF PEOPLE WHO DENY MORALITY.

To deny morality may mean, in the first place, to deny the moral inducements

which, men pretend, have urged them on to their actions, which is equivalent

to  saying  that  morality  merely  consists  of  words  and  forms,  part  of  that

coarse  and  subtle  deceit  (especially  self-deceit)  which  is  characteristic  of

mankind, and perhaps more especially of those men who are celebrated for

their  virtues.  In  the  second  place,  it  may  mean  our  denying  that  moral

judgments  are  founded  on  truths.  It  is  admitted  in  such  a  case  that  these

judgments are, in fact, the motives of the actions, but that in this way it is

really errors as the basis of all moral judgments which urge men on to their

moral actions. This is my point of view ; but I should be far from denying

that in very many cases a subtle suspicion in accordance with the former

point of view i.e. in the spirit of La Rochefoucauld is also justifiable, and in

any case of a high general utility. Therefore I deny morality in the same way

as I deny alchemy, i.e. I deny its hypotheses ; but I do not deny that there

have  been  alchemists  who  believed  in  these  hypotheses  and  based  their

actions upon them. I also deny immorality not that innumerable people feel

immoral, but that there is any true reason why they should feel so. I should

not, of course, deny unless I were a fool - that many actions which are called

"immoral should be avoided and resisted;, and in the same way that many

which are called moral should be performed and encouraged ; but I hold that

in both cases these actions should be performed from motives other than

those which have prevailed up to the present time. We must learn anew in

order  that  at  last,  perhaps  very  late  in  the  day,  we  may  be  able  to  do

something more : feel anew.

  104

  OUR VALUATIONS. All actions may be referred back to valuations,

and all valuations are either one's own or adopted, the latter being by far themore numerous. Why do we adopt them ? Through fear, i.e. we think it more

advisable  to  pretend  that  they  are  our  own,  and  so  well  do  we  accustom

ourselves to do so that it at last becomes second nature to us. A valuation of

our own, which is the appreciation of a thing in accordance with the pleasure

or displeasure it causes us and no one else, is something very rare indeed !

But must not our valuation of our neighbour which is prompted by the motive

that we adopt his valuation in most cases proceed from ourselves and by our

own decision ? Of course, but then we come to these decisions -during our

childhood,  and  seldom  change  them.  We  often  remain  during  our  whole

lifetime the dupes of our childish and accustomed judgments in our manner

of  judging  our  fellowmen  (their  minds,  rank,  morality,  character,  and

reprehensibility), and we find it necessary to subscribe to their valuations.

  105

    PSEUDO-EGOISM. The great majority of people, whatever they may

think and say about their " egoism," do nothing for their ego all their life

long, but only for a phantom of this ego which has been formed in regard to

them by their friends and communicated to them. As a consequence, they all

live in a haze of impersonal and half-personal opinions and of arbitrary and,

as it were, poetic valuations : the one always in the head of another, and this

head, again, in the head of somebody else a queer world of phantoms which

manages  to  give  itself  a  rational  appearance  !  This  haze  of  opinions  and

habits  grows  in  extent  and  lives  almost  independently  of  the  people  it

surrounds  ;  it  is  it  which  gives  rise  to  the  immense  effect  of  general

judgments on "man" - all those men, who do not know themselves, believe in

a bloodless abstraction which they call " man," i.e. in a fiction ; and every

change  caused  in  this  abstraction  by  the  judgments  of  powerful

individualities (such as princes and philosophers) produces an extraordinary

and irrational effect on the great majority, for the simple reason that not a

single  individual  with  this  haze  can  oppose  a  real  ego,  an  ego  which  is

accessible to and fathomed by himself, to the universal pale fiction, which he

could thereby destroy.

  106

    AGAINST DEFINITIONS OF MORAL AIMS. On all sides we now hear

the aim of morals defined as the preservation and advancement of humanity;

but this is merely the expression of a wish to have a formula and nothing

more. Preservation wherein ? advancement whither ? These are questions

which must at once be asked. Is not the most essential point, the answer tothis wherein and whither ? left out of the formula ? What results from this, so

far as our own actions and duties are concerned, which is not already tacitly

and  instinctively  understood  ?  Can  we  sufficiently  understand  from  this

formula  whether  we  must  prolong  as  far  as  possible  the  existence  of  the

human race, or bring about the greatest possible de-animalisation of man ?

How different the means, i.e. the practical morals, would have to be in the

two cases ! Supposing that the greatest possible rationality were given to

mankind, this certainly would not guarantee the longest possible existence for

them ! Or supposing that their " greatest happiness " was thought to be the

answer  to  the  questions  put,  do  we  thereby  mean  the  highest  degree  of

happiness which a few individuals might attain, or an incalculable, though

finally  attainable,  average  state  of  happiness  for  all  ?  And  why  should

morality be the way to it ? Has not morality, considered as a whole, opened

up so many sources of displeasure as to lead us to think that man up to the

present, with every new refinement of morality, has become more and more

discontented with himself, with his neighbour, and with his own lot ? Has not

the most moral of men until now believed that the only justifiable state of

mankind in the face of morals is that of the deepest misery ?

  107

  OUR RIGHT TO OUR FOLLY. How must we act ? Why must we act ?

So far as the coarse and immediate needs of the individual are concerned, it is

easy  to  answer  these  questions,  but  the  more  we  enter  upon  the  more

important and more subtle domains of action, the more does the problem

become uncertain and the more arbitrary its solution. An arbitrary decision,

however, is the very thing that must be excluded here, thus commands the

authority of morals: an obscure uneasiness and awe must relentlessly guide

man in those very actions the objects and means of which he cannot at once

perceive, This authority of morals undermines our thinking faculty in regard

to those things concerning which it might be dangerous to think wrongly, it is

in this way, at all events, that morality usually justifies itself to its accusers.

Wrong in this place means dangerous; but dangerous to whom? It is not, as a

rule, the danger of the doer of the action which the supporters of authoritative

morals have in view, but their own danger ; the loss which their power and

influence might undergo if the right to act according to their own greater or

lesser reason, however wilfully and foolishly, were accorded to all men. They

on their part make unhesitating use of their right to arbitrariness and folly,

they even command in cases where it is hardly possible, or at all events verydifficult, to answer the questions, " How must they act, why must they act ? "

And if the reason of mankind grows with such extraordinary slowness that it

was often possible to deny its growth during the whole course of humanity,

what is more to blame for this than this solemn presence, even omnipresence,

of moral commands, which do not even permit the individual question of how

and why to be asked at all ? Have we not been educated precisely in such a

way as to make us feel pathetic, and thus to obscure our vision at the very

time when our reason should be able to see as clearly and calmly as possible

i.e. in all higher and more important circumstances ?

  108

    SOME  THESES.  We  should  not  give  the  individual,  in  so  far  as  he

desires his own happiness, any precepts or recommendations as to the road

leading to happiness ; for individual happiness arises from particular laws

that  are  unknown  to  anybody,  and  such  a  man  will  only  be  hindered  or

obstructed by recommendations which come to him from outside sources.

Those  precepts  which  are  called  moral  are  in  reality  directed  against

individuals,  and  do  not  by  any  means  make  for  the  happiness  of  such

individuals. The relationship of these precepts to the " happiness and well-

being of mankind " is equally slight, for it is quite impossible to assign a

definite conception to these words, and still less can they be employed as

guiding stars on the dark sea of moral aspirations. It is a prejudice to think

that  morality  is  more  favourable  to  the  development  of  the  reason  than

immorality.  It  is  erroneous  to  suppose  that  the  unconscious  aim  in  the

development of every conscious being (namely, animal, man, humanity, etc.)

is  its  "  greatest  happiness  "  :  on  the  contrary,  there  is  a  particular  and

incomparable happiness to be attained at every stage of our development, one

that is neither high nor low, but quite an individual happiness. Evolution does

not make happiness its goal ; it aims merely at evolution, and nothing else. It

is only if humanity had a universally recognised goal that we could propose

to do this or that : for the time being there is no such goal. It follows that the

pretensions  of  morality  should  not  be  brought  into  any  relationship  with

mankind : this would be merely childish and irrational. It is quite another

thing to recommend a goal to mankind : this goal would then be something

that would depend upon our own will and pleasure. Provided that mankind in

general agreed to adopt such a goal, it could then impose a moral law upon

itself, a law which would, at all events, be imposed by their own free will. Up

to now, however, the moral law has had to be placed above our own free will:strictly speaking, men did not wish to impose this law upon themselves ; they

wished to take it from somewhere, to discover it, or to let themselves be

commanded by it from somewhere.

  109

    SELF-CONTROL  AND  MODERATION,  AND  THEIR  FINAL

MOTIVE.  I  find  not  more  than  six  essentially  different  methods  for

combating  the  vehemence  of  an  impulse.  First  of  all,  we  may  avoid  the

occasion  for  satisfying  the  impulse,  weakening  and  mortifying  it  by

refraining from satisfying it for long and ever-lengthening periods. Secondly,

we may impose a severe and regular order upon ourselves in regard to the

satisfying of our appetites. By thus regulating the impulse and limiting its ebb

and  flow  to  fixed  periods,  we  may  obtain  intervals  in  which  it  ceases  to

disturb us ; and by beginning in this way we may perhaps be able to pass on

to the first method. In the third place, we may deliberately give ourselves

over to an unrestrained and unbounded gratification of the impulse in order

that we may become disgusted with it, and to obtain by means of this very

disgust a command over the impulse: provided, of course, that we do not

imitate the rider who rides his horse to death and breaks his own neck in

doing so. For this, unhappily, is generally the outcome of the application of

this third method. In the fourth place, there is an intellectual trick, which

consists  in  associating  the  idea  of  the  gratification  so  firmly  with  some

painful thought, that after a little practice the thought of gratification is itself

immediately felt as a very painful one. (For example, when the Christian

accustoms  himself  to  think  of  the  presence  and  scorn  of  the  devil  in  the

course of sensual enjoyment, or everlasting punishment in hell for revenge by

murder ; or even merely of the contempt which he will meet with from those

of his fellow-men whom he most respects, if he steals a sum of money, or if a

man has often checked an intense desire for suicide by thinking of the grief

and self-reproaches of his relations and friends, and has thus succeeded in

balancing himself upon the edge of life : for, after some practice, these ideas

follow one another in his mind like cause and effect.) Among instances of

this kind may be mentioned the cases of Lord Byron and Napoleon, in whom

the  pride  of  man  revolted  and  took  offence  at  the  preponderance  of  one

particular passion over the collective attitude and order of reason. From this

arises the habit and joy of tyrannising over the craving and making it, as it

were, gnash its teeth. " I will not be a slave of any appetite," wrote Byron in

his diary. In the fifth place, we may bring about a dislocation of our powersby imposing upon ourselves a particularly difficult and fatiguing task, or by

deliberately submitting to some new charm and pleasure in order thus to turn

our thoughts and physical powers into other channels. It comes to the same

thing  if  we  temporarily  favour  another  impulse  by  affording  it  numerous

opportunities  of  gratification,  and  thus  rendering  it  the  squanderer  of  the

power  which  would  otherwise  be  commandeered,  so  to  speak,  by  the

tyrannical impulse. A few, perhaps, will be able to restrain the particular

passion which aspires to domination by granting their other known passions a

temporary encouragement and license in order that they may devour the food

which the tyrant wishes for himself alone. In the sixth and last place, the man

who can stand it, and thinks it reasonable to weaken and subdue his entire

physical and psychical organisation, likewise, of course, attains the goal of

weakening a single violent instinct ; as, for example, those who starve their

sensuality and at the same time their vigour, and often destroy their reason

into  the  bargain,  such  as  the  ascetics.  Hence,  shunning  the  opportunities,

regulating  the  impulse,  bringing  about  satiety  and  disgust  in  the  impulse,

associating  a  painful  idea  (such  as  that  of  discredit,  disgust,  or  offended

pride), then the dislocation of one's forces, and finally general debility and

exhaustion : these are the six methods. But the will to combat the violence of

a craving is beyond our power, equally with the method we adopt and the

success we may have in applying it. In all this process our intellect is rather

merely  the  blind  instrument  of  another  rival  craving,  whether  it  be  the

impulse to repose, or the fear of disgrace and other evil consequences, or

love. While " we " thus imagine that we are complaining of the violence of an

impulse, it is at bottom merely one impulse which is complaining of another,

i.e.  the  perception  of  the  violent  suffering  which  is  being  caused  us

presupposes that there is another equally or more violent impulse, and that a

struggle is impending in which our intellect must take part.

  110

  THAT WHICH OPPOSES. We may observe the following process in

ourselves, and I should like it to be often observed and confirmed. There

arises in us the scent of a kind of pleasure until now unknown to us, and

consequently a new craving. Now, the question is, What opposes itself to this

craving ? If it be things and considerations of a common kind, or people

whom we hold in no very high esteem, the aim of the new craving assumes

the appearance of a " noble, good, praiseworthy feeling, and one worthy of

sacrifice" : all the moral dispositions which have been inherited will adopt itand will add it to the number of those aims which we consider as moral and

now we imagine that we are no longer striving after a pleasure, but after a

morality, which greatly increases our confidence in our aspirations.

  111

  To THE ADMIRERS OF OBJECTIVENESS. He who, as a child, has

observed in his parents and acquaintances in the midst of whom he has grown

up, certain varied and strong feelings, with but little subtle discernment and

inclination  for  intellectual  justice,  and  has  therefore  employed  his  best

powers and his most precious time in imitating these feelings, will observe in

himself when he arrives at years of discretion that every new thing or man he

meets with excites in him either sympathy or aversion, envy or contempt.

Under the domination of this experience, which he is powerless to shake off,

he admires neutrality of feeling or " objectivity " as an extraordinary thing, as

something  connected  with  genius  or  a  very  rare  morality,  and  he  cannot

believe that even this neutrality is merely the product of education and habit.

  112

  ON THE NATURAL HISTORY OF DUTY AND RIGHT. Our duties are

the claims which others have upon us. How did they acquire these claims ?

By  the  fact  that  they  considered  us  as  capable  of  making  and  holding

agreements and contracts, by assuming that we were their like and equals,

and by consequently entrusting something to us, bringing us up, educating us,

and supporting us. We do our duty, i.e. we justify that conception of our

power for the sake of which all these things were done for us. We return them

in proportion as they were meted out to us. It is thus our pride that orders us

to do our duty we desire to re-establish our own independence by opposing to

that which others have done for us something that we do for them, for in that

way the others invade our sphere of power, and would forever have a hand in

it if we did not make reprisals by means of " duty," and thus encroach upon

their power. The rights of others can only have regard to that which lies

within  our  power  ;  it  would  be  unreasonable  on  their  part  to  require

something from us which does not belong to us. To put the matter more

accurately, their rights can only relate to what they imagine to be in our

power, provided that it is something that we ourselves consider as being in

our power. The same error may easily occur on either side. The feeling of

duty depends upon our having the same belief in regard to the extent of our

power  as  other  people  have,  i.e.  that  we  can  promise  certain  things  and

undertake to do them freely (" free will "). My rights consist of that part ofmy power which others have not only conceded to me, but which they wish

to maintain for me. Why do they do it ? On the one hand they are actuated by

wisdom, fear and prudence : whether they expect something similar from us

(the protection of their rights), whether they consider a struggle with us as

dangerous or inopportune, or whether they see a disadvantage to themselves

in every diminution of our power, since in that case we should be ill adapted

for an alliance with them against a hostile third power. On the other hand

rights are granted by donations and cessions. In this latter case, the other

people have not only enough power, but more than enough, so that they can

give  up  a  portion  and  guarantee  it  to  the  person  to  whom  they  give  it  :

whereby they presuppose a certain restricted sense of power in the person

upon whom they have bestowed the gift. In this way rights arise: recognised

and  guaranteed  degrees  of  power.  When  the  relations  of  powers  to  one

another are materially changed, rights disappear and new ones are formed, as

is demonstrated by the constant flux and reflux of the rights of nations. When

our power diminishes to any great extent, the feelings of those who until now

guaranteed it undergo some change : they consider whether they shall once

again restore us to our former possession, and if they do not see their way to

do this they deny our " rights " from that time forward. In the same way, if

our  power  increases  to  a  considerable  extent  the  feelings  of  those  who

previously  recognised  it,  and  whose  recognition  we  no  longer  require,

likewise  change  :  they  will  then  try  to  reduce  our  power  to  its  former

dimensions, and they will endeavour to interfere in our affairs, justifying their

interference by an appeal to their " duty." But this is merely useless word-

quibbling.  Where  right  prevails,  a  certain  state  and  degree  of  power  is

maintained, and all attempts at its augmentation and diminution are resisted.

The right of others is the concession of our feeling of power to the feeling of

power in these others. Whenever our power shows itself to be thoroughly

shattered and broken, our rights cease : on the other hand, when we have

become very much stronger, the rights of others cease in our minds to be

what we have until now admitted them to be. The man who aims at being

just, therefore, must keep a constant lookout for the changes in the indicator

of the scales in order that he may properly estimate the degrees of power and

right which, with the customary transitoriness of human things, retain their

equilibrium for only a short time and in most cases continue to rise and fall.

As a consequence it is thus very difficult to be "just," and requires much

experience, good intentions, and an unusually large amount of good sense.  113

    STRIVING FOR DISTINCTION. When we strive after distinction we

must ceaselessly keep our eyes fixed on our neighbour and endeavour to

ascertain what his feelings are ; but the sympathy and knowledge which are

necessary to satisfy this desire are far from being inspired by harmlessness,

compassion, or kindness. On the contrary, we wish to perceive or find out in

what way our neighbour suffers from us, either internally or externally, how

he loses control over himself, and yields to the impression which our hand or

even  our  mere  appearance  makes  on  him.  Even  when  he  who  aspires  to

distinction  makes  or  wishes  to  make  a  joyful,  elevating,  or  cheerful

impression, he does not enjoy this success in that he rejoices, exalts, or cheers

his neighbour, but in that he leaves his impress on the latter's soul, changing

its form and dominating it according to his will. The desire for distinction is

the  desire  to  subject  one's  neighbour,  even  if  it  be  merely  in  an  indirect

fashion, one only felt or even only dreamt of. There is a long series of stages

in this secretly-desired will to subdue, and a very complete record of them

would perhaps almost be like an excellent history of culture from the early

distortions of barbarism down to the caricatures of modern over-refinement

and sickly idealism. This desire for distinction entails upon our neighbour to

indicate only a few rungs of the long ladder torture first of all, followed by

blows,  then  terror,  anxious  surprise,  wonder,  envy,  admiration,  elevation,

pleasure, joy, laughter, derision, mockery, sneers, scourging and self-inflicted

torture. There at the very top of the ladder stands the ascetic and martyr, who

himself experiences the utmost satisfaction, because he inflicts on himself, as

a  result  of  his  desire  for  distinction,  that  pain  which  his  opposite,  the

barbarian on the first rung of the ladder, inflicts upon those others, upon

whom and before whom he wishes to distinguish himself. The triumph of the

ascetic over himself, his introspective glance, which beholds a man split up

into  a  sufferer  and  a  spectator,  and  which  henceforth  never  looks  at  the

outside world but to gather from it, as it were, wood for his own funeral pyre

: this final tragedy of the desire for distinction which shows us only one

person who, so to speak, is consumed internally that is an end worthy of the

beginning : in both cases there is an inexpressible happiness at the sight of

torture ; indeed, happiness considered as a feeling of power developed to the

utmost, has perhaps never reached a higher pitch of perfection on earth than

in the souls of superstitious ascetics. This is expressed by the Brahmins in the

story of King Visvamitra, who obtained so much strength by thousands ofyears of penance that he undertook to construct a new heaven. I believe that

in the entire category of inward experiences the people of our time are mere

novices and clumsy guessers who "try to have a shot at it " : four thousand

years ago much more was known about these execrable refinements of self-

enjoyment Perhaps at that time the creation of the world was imagined by

some Hindu dreamer to have been an ascetic operation which a god took

upon himself! Perhaps this god may have wished to join himself to a mobile

nature as an instrument of torture in order thus to feel his happiness and

power doubled ! And even supposing him to have been a god of love : what a

delight it would have been for him to create a suffering mankind in order that

he  himself  might  suffer  divinely  and  superhumanly  from  the  sight  of  the

continual torture of his creatures, and thus to tyrannise over himself! And,

again, supposing him to have been not only a god of love, but also a god of

holiness, we can scarcely conceive the ecstasies of this divine ascetic while

creating sins and sinners and eternal punishment, and an immense place of

eternal  torture  below  his  throne  where  there  is  a  continual  weeping  and

wailing and gnashing of teeth ! It is not by any means impossible that the soul

of a St. Paul, a Dante, or a Calvin, and people like them, may once have

penetrated into the terrifying secrets of such voluptuousness of power, and in

view of such souls we may well ask whether the circle of this desire for

distinction has come to a close with the ascetic. Might it not be possible for

the  course  of  this  circle  to  be  traversed  a  second  time,  by  uniting  the

fundamental idea of the ascetic, and at the same time that of a compassionate

Deity ? In other words, pain would be given to others in order that pain might

be given to one's self, so that in this way one could triumph over one's self

and one's pity to enjoy the extreme voluptuousness of power. Forgive me

these digressions, which come to my mind when I think of all the possibilities

in the vast domain of psychical debaucheries to which one may be led by the

desire for power !

  114

  ON THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE SUFFERER. The state of sick men

who have suffered long and terribly from the torture inflicted upon them by

their illness, and whose reason has nevertheless not been in any way affected,

is not without a certain amount of value in our search for knowledge quite

apart  from  the  intellectual  benefits  which  follow  upon  every  profound

solitude and every sudden and justified liberation from duties and habits. The

man who suffers severely looks forth with terrible calmness from his state ofsuffering upon outside things : all those little lying enchantments, by which

things are usually surrounded when seen through the eye of a healthy person,

have vanished from the sufferer ; his own life even lies there before him,

stripped of all bloom and colour. If by chance it has happened that up to then

he has lived in some kind of dangerous fantasy, this extreme disenchantment

through pain is the means, and possibly the only means, of extricating him

from  it.  (It  is  possible  that  this  is  what  happened  to  the  Founder  of

Christianity when suspended from the Cross ; for the bitterest words ever

pronounced, " My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me ? "

  Section 115 to 118 unfortunately are lost to us

  119

  . . . Our experiences, as I have already said, are all in this sense means of

nutriment,  but  scattered  about  with  a  careless  hand  and  without

discrimination between the hungry and the overfed. As a consequence of this

accidental  nutrition  of  each  particular  part,  the  polypus  in  its  complete

development will be something just as fortuitous as its growth. To put this

more clearly : let us suppose that an instinct or craving has reached that point

when  it  demands  gratification,  either  the  exercise  of  its  power  or  the

discharge  of  it,  or  the  filling  up  of  a  vacuum  (all  this  is  metaphorical

language), then it will examine every event that occurs in the course of the

day to ascertain how it can be utilised with the object of fulfilling its aim :

whether the man runs or rests, or is angry, or reads or speaks or fights or

rejoices,  the  unsatiated  instinct  watches,  as  it  were,  every  condition  into

which the man enters, and, as a rule, if it finds nothing for itself it must wait,

still unsatisfied. After a little while it becomes feeble, and at the end of a few

days or a few months, if it has not been satisfied, it will wither away like a

plant which has not been watered. This cruelty of chance would perhaps be

more conspicuous if all the cravings were as vehement in their demands as

hunger, which refuses to be satisfied with imaginary dishes ; but the great

majority of our instincts, especially those which are called moral, are thus

easily  satisfied,  if  it  be  permitted  to  suppose  that  our  dreams  serve  as

compensation to a certain extent for the accidental absence of " nutriment "

during the day. Why was last night's dream full of tenderness and tears, that

of the night before amusing and gay, and the previous one adventurous and

engaged in some continual obscure search ? How does it come about that in

this dream I enjoy indescribable beauties of music, and in that one I soar and

fly upwards with' the delight of an eagle to the most distant heights ? Theseinventions  in  which  our  instincts  of  tenderness,  merriment,  or

adventurousness, or our desire for music and mountains, can have free play

and scope and everyone can recall striking instances are interpretations of our

nervous irritations during sleep, very free and arbitrary interpretations of the

movements of our blood and intestines, and the pressure of our arm and the

bed coverings, or the sound of a church bell, the weathercocks, the moths,

and so on. That this text, which on the whole is very much the same for one

night as another, is so differently commented upon, that our creative reason

imagines  such  different  causes  for  the  nervous  irritations  of  one  day  as

compared with another, may be explained by the fact that the prompter of this

reason was different to-day from yesterday another instinct or craving wished

to  be  satisfied,  to  show  itself,  to  exercise  itself  and  be  refreshed  and

discharged : this particular one being at its height to-day and another one

being at its height last night. Real life has not the freedom of interpretation

possessed  by  dream  life  ;  it  is  less  poetic  and  less  unrestrained  but  is  it

necessary for me to show that our instincts, when we are awake, likewise

merely  interpret  our  nervous  irritations  and  determine  their  "  causes  "  in

accordance with their requirements? that there is no really essential difference

between waking and dreaming! that even in comparing different degrees of

culture, the freedom of the conscious interpretation of the one is not in any

way inferior to the freedom in dreams of the other ! that our moral judgments

and  valuations  are  only  images  and  fantasies  concerning  physiological

processes  unknown  to  us,  a  kind  of  habitual  language  to  describe  certain

nervous irritations ? that all our so-called consciousness is a more or less

fantastic commentary of an unknown text, one which is perhaps unknowable

but yet felt ? Consider some insignificant occurrence. Let us suppose that

some day as we pass along a public street we see someone laughing at us. In

accordance with whatever craving has reached its culminating point within us

at that moment, this incident will have this or that signification for us ; and it

will be a very different occurrence in accordance with the class of men to

which we belong. One man will take it like a drop of rain, another will shake

it off like a fly, a third person will try to pick a quarrel on account of it, a

fourth will examine his garments to see if there is anything about them likely

to  cause  laughter,  and  a  fifth  will  in  consequence  think  about  what  is

ridiculous/ se, a sixth will be pleased at having involuntarily contributed to

add a ray of sunshine and mirth to the world, in all these cases some craving

is gratified, whether anger, combativeness, meditation, or benevolence. Thisinstinct, whatever it may be, has seized upon that incident as its prey : why

that particular one ? Because, hungry and thirsty, it was lying in ambush. Not

long ago at 11

  o'clock in the morning a man suddenly collapsed and fell down in front of

me as if struck by lightning. All the women who were near at once gave

utterance to cries of horror, while I set the man on his feet again and waited

until he recovered his speech. During this time no muscle of my face moved

and I experienced no sensation of fear or pity ; I simply did what was most

urgent and reasonable and calmly proceeded on my way. Supposing someone

had told me on the previous evening that at 11

  o'clock on the following day a man would fall down in front of me like

this, I should have suffered all kinds of agonies in the interval, lying awake

all night, and at the decisive moment should also perhaps have fallen down

like the man instead of helping him ; for in the meantime all the imaginable

cravings within me would have had leisure to conceive and to comment upon

this incident. What are our experiences, then ? Much more what we attribute

to them than what they really are. Or should we perhaps say that nothing is

contained in them ? that experiences in themselves are merely works of fancy

? -

  120

  TO TRANQUILLISE THE SCEPTIC. "I don't know at all what I am

doing. I don't know in the least what I ought to do ! " You are right, but be

sure of this: you are being done at every moment ! Mankind has at all times

mistaken the active for the passive : it is its eternal grammatical blunder.

  121

  CAUSE  AND  EFFECT.  On  this  mirror  and  our  intellect  is  a  mirror

something is going on that indicates regularity : a certain thing is each time

followed by another certain thing. When we perceive this and wish to give it

a name, we call it cause and effect, fools that we are ! as if in this we had

understood  or  could  understand  anything  !  For,  of  course,  we  have  seen

nothing but the images of causes and effects, and it is just this figurativeness

which renders it impossible for us to see a more substantial relation than that

of sequence !

  122

  THE  PURPOSES  IN  NATURE.  Any  impartial  investigator  who

examines the history of the eye and its form in the lower creatures, and sees

how the visual organ was slowly developed, cannot help recognising thatsight was not the /first purpose of the eye, but probably only asserted itself

when pure hazard had contributed to bring together the apparatus. One single

example of this kind, and the " final purposes " fall from our eyes like scales.

  123

    REASON. - How did reason come into the world ? As is only proper, in

an irrational manner ; by accident. We shall have to guess at this accident as a

riddle.

  124

  WHAT is VOLITION? We laugh at a man who, stepping out of his room

at the very minute when the sun is rising, says, " It is my will that the sun

shall rise " ; or at him who, unable to stop a wheel, says, "I wish it to roll"; or,

again, at him who, thrown in a wrestling match, says, " Here I lie, but here I

wish to lie." But, joking apart, do we not act like one of these three persons

whenever we use the expression " I wish " ?

  125

  ON THE DOMAIN OF FREEDOM. We can think many more things

than we can do and experience i.e. our faculty of thinking is superficial and is

satisfied with what lies on the surface, it does not even perceive this surface.

If our intellect were strictly developed in proportion to our power, and our

exercise of this power, the primary principle of our thinking would be that we

can understand only that which we are able to do if, indeed, there is any

understanding at all. The thirsty man is without water, but the creations of his

imagination continually bring the image of water to his sight, as if nothing

could be more easily procured. The superficial and easily satisfied character

of the intellect cannot understand real need, and thus feels itself superior. It is

proud of being able to do more, to run faster, and to reach the goal almost

within the twinkling of an eye : and in this way the domain of thought, when

contrasted with the domain of action, volition, and experience, appears to be

the domain of liberty, while, as I have already stated, it is nothing but the

domain of superficiality and self-sufficiency.

  126

      FORGETFULNESS. It has never yet been proved that there is such a

thing  as  forgetfulness  :  all  that  we  know  is  that  we  have  no  power  over

recollection. In the meantime we have filled up this gap in our power with the

word " forgetfulness," exactly as if it were another faculty added to our list.

But, after all, what is within our power? If that word fills up a gap in our

power, might not the other words be found capable of filling up a gap in theknowledge which we possess of our power ?

  127

  FOR A DEFINITE PURPOSE. Of all human actions probably the least

understood are those which lire carried out for a definite purpose, because

they have always been regarded as the most intelligible and commonplace to

our  intellect.  The  great  problems  can  be  picked  up  in  the  highways  and

byways.

  128

    DREAMING  AND  RESPONSIBILITY.  You  would  wish  to  be

responsible for everything except your dreams ! What miserable weakness,

what lack of logical courage ! Nothing contains more of your own work than

your dreams ! Nothing belongs to you so much ! Substance, form, duration,

actor, spectator in these comedies you act as your complete selves ! And yet

it  is  just  here  that  you  are  afraid  and  ashamed  of  yourselves,  and  even

Oedipus, the wise Oedipus, derived consolation from the thought that we

cannot be blamed for what we dream. From this I must conclude that the

great  majority  of  men  must  have  some  dreadful  dreams  to  reproach

themselves with. If it were otherwise, to how great an extent would these

nocturnal fictions have been exploited in the interests of man's pride ! Need I

add that the wise Oedipus was right, that we are really not responsible for our

dreams any more than for our waking hours, and that the doctrine of free will

has as its parents man's pride and sense of power! Perhaps I say this too often

; but that does not prove that it is not true.

  129

  THE ALLEGED COMBAT OF MOTIVES. People speak of the " combat

of motives," but they designate by this expression that which is not a combat

of motives at all. What I mean is that, in our meditative consciousness, the

consequences of different actions which we think we are able to carry out

present themselves successively, one after the other, and we compare these

consequences in our mind. We think we have come to a decision concerning

an  action  after  we  have  established  to  our  own  satisfaction  that  the

consequences  of  this  action  will  be  favourable.  Before  we  arrive  at  this

conclusion,  however,  we  often  seriously  worry  because  of  the  great

difficulties we experience in guessing what the consequences are likely to be,

and in seeing them in their full importance, without exception and, after all

this, we must reckon up any fortuitous elements that are likely to arise. Then

comes the chief difficulty : all the consequences which we have with suchdifficulty determined one by one must be weighed on some scales against

each other ; and it only too often comes about that, owing to the difference in

the quality of all the conceivable consequences, both scales and weights are

lacking for this casuistry of advantage. Even supposing, however, that in this

case we are able to overcome the difficulty, and that mere hazard has placed

in our scales results which permit of a mutual balance, we have now, in the

idea of the consequences of a particular action, a motive for performing this

very action, but only one motive ! When we have finally decided to act,

however, we are fairly often influenced by another order of motives than

those of the " image of the consequences." What brings this about may be the

habitual working of our inner machinery, or some little encouragement on the

part of a person whom we fear or honour or love, or the love of comfort

which  prefers  to  do  that  which  lies  nearest  ;  or  some  stirring  of  the

imagination  provoked  at  the  decisive  moment  by  some  event  of  trifling

importance;  or  some  physical  influence  which  manifests  itself  quite

unexpectedly ; a mere whim brings it about ; or the outburst of a passion

which, as it accidentally happens, is ready to burst forth in a word, motives

operate  which  we  do  not  understand  very  well,  or  which  we  do  not

understand at all, and which we can never balance against one another in

advance. It is probable that a contest is going on among these motives too, a

driving backwards and forwards, a rising and lowering of the parts, and it is

this which would be the real " contest of motives," something quite invisible

and unknown to us. I have calculated the consequences and the successes,

and in doing so have set a very necessary motive in the line of combat with

the other motives, but I am as little able to draw up this battle line as to see it

: the battle itself is hidden from my sight, as likewise is the victory, as victory

; for I certainly come to know what I shall finally do, but I cannot know what

motive has in the end proved to be the victor. Nevertheless, we are decidedly

not in the habit of taking all these unconscious phenomena into account, and

we generally conceive of the preliminary stages of an action only so far as

they  are  conscious  :  thus  we  mistake  the  combat  of  the  motives  for  a

comparison of the possible consequences of different actions, a mistake that

brings with it most important consequences, and consequences that are most

fatal to the development of morals.

  130

  AIMS  ?  WILL  ?  We  have  accustomed  ourselves  to  believe  in  two

kingdoms, the domain of purposes and volition, and the domain of chance. Inthis latter domain everything is done senselessly, there is a continual going to

and fro without any one being able to say why or wherefore. We stand in awe

of this powerful realm of the great cosmic stupidity, for in most instances we

learn to know it when it falls down upon the other world, that of aims and

intentions,  like  a  slate  from  a  roof,  always  overwhelming  some  beautiful

purpose  of  ours.  This  belief  in  these  two  kingdoms  arises  from  ancient

romanticism and legend : we clever dwarfs, with all our will and aims, are

interfered with, knocked down, and very often crushed to death by those

ultra-stupid giants, the accidents, but in spite of this we -should not like to be

deprived of the fearful poetry of their proximity, for these monsters very

often make their appearance when life in the spider's web of definite aims has

become too tiresome or too anxious for us, and they sometimes bring about a

divine diversion when their hands for once tear the whole web in pieces, not

that these irrational beings ever intend to do what they do, or even observe it.

But their coarse and bony hands rend our web as if it were thin air. Moira was

the name given by the Greeks to this realm of the incalculable and of sublime

and eternal limitedness; and they set it round their gods like a horizon beyond

which they could neither see nor act, with that secret defiance of the gods

which one meets with in different nations : the gods are worshipped, but a

final trump card is held in readiness to play against them. As instances of this

we may recollect that the Indians and the Persians, who conceived all their

gods as having to depend upon the sacrifices of mortals, so that if it came to

the worst the mortals could, at least, let the gods die of starvation ; or the

gods of the stubborn and melancholy Scandinavians, who enjoyed a quiet

revenge  in  the  thought  that  a  twilight  of  the  gods  was  to  come  as  some

compensation for the perpetual fear which their evil gods caused them. The

case of Christianity was very different, for its essential feelings were not

those  of  the  Indians,  Persians,  Greeks,  or  Scandinavians.  Christianity

commanded its disciples to worship in the dust the spirit of power, and to kiss

the very dust. It gave the world to understand that this omnipotent "realm of

stupidity" was not so stupid as it seemed, and that we, on the contrary, were

stupid when we could not perceive that behind this realm stood God Himself

:  He  who,  although  fond  of  dark,  crooked,  and  wonderful  ways,  at  last

brought everything to a "glorious end." This new myth of God, who had until

now been mistaken for a race of giants or Moira, and who was now Himself

the spinner and weaver of webs and purposes even more subtle than those of

our own intellect so subtle, indeed, that they appear to be incomprehensibleand even unreasonable this myth was so bold a transformation and so daring

a paradox that the over-refined ancient world could not resist it, however

extravagant  and  contradictory  the  thing  seemed  :  for,  let  it  be  said  in

confidence, there was a contradiction in it, if our intellect cannot divine the

intellect and aims of God, how did it divine this quality of its intellect and

this quality of God's intellect ? In more modern times, indeed, the doubt has

increased as to whether the slate that falls from the roof is really thrown by "

Divine love," and mankind again harks back to the old romance of giants and

dwarfs. Let us learn then, for it is time we did so, that even in our supposed

separate domain of aims and reason the giants likewise rule. And our aims

and reason are not dwarfs, but giants. And our own webs are just as often and

as clumsily rent by ourselves as by the slate, And not everything is purpose

that is called purpose, and still less is everything will that is called will. And

if  you  come  to  the  conclusion,  "  Then  there  is  only  one  domain,  that  of

stupidity and hazard ? " it must be added that possibly there is only one

domain,  possibly  there  is  neither  will  nor  aim,  and  we  may  only  have

imagined these things. Those iron hands of necessity that shake the dice-box

of chance continue their game indefinitely : hence, it must happen that certain

throws perfectly resemble every degree of appropriateness and good sense. It

may be that our own voluntary acts and purposes are merely such throws, and

that  we  are  too  circumscribed  and  vain  to  conceive  our  extremely

circumscribed state ! that we ourselves shake the dice-box with iron hands,

and do nothing in our most deliberate actions but play the game of necessity.

Possibly ! To rise beyond this " possibly " we should indeed have been guests

in the Underworld, playing at dice and betting with Proserpine at the table of

the goddess herself.

  131

    MORAL FASHIONS. How moral judgments as a whole have changed !

The greatest marvels of the morality of antiquity, such as Epictetus, knew

nothing of the glorification, now so common, of the spirit of sacrifice, of

living for others : after the fashion of morality now prevailing we should

really call them immoral ; for they fought with all their strength for their own

ego and against all sympathy for others, especially for the sufferings and

moral imperfections of others. Perhaps they would reply to us by saying, " If

you feel yourselves to be such dull and ugly people, by all means think of

others more than yourselves. You will be quite right in doing so ! "

  132  THE LAST ECHOES OF CHRISTIANITY IN MORALS. " On n'est bon

que par la piti : il faut done qu'il y ait quelque pitte dans tous nos sentiments"

so says morality nowadays. And how does this come about? The fact that the

man who performs social, sympathetic, disinterested, and benevolent actions

is now considered as the moral man: this is perhaps the most general effect,

the most complete transformation, that Christianity has produced in Europe ;

perhaps in spite of itself, and not by any means because this was part of its

essential doctrine. But this was the residuum of those Christian feelings that

prevailed at the time when the contrary and thoroughly selfish faith in the

"one thing needful" the absolute importance of eternal and personal salvation,

together with the dogmas upon which this belief had rested, were gradually

receding,  and  when  the  auxiliary  beliefs  in  "  love  "  and  "  love  of  one's

neighbour,"  harmonising  with  the  extraordinary  practice  of  charity  by  the

Church, were thereby coming to the front. The more people gradually became

separated from the dogmas, the more did they seek some sort of justification

for this separation in a cult of the love of humanity : not to fall short in this

respect  of  the  Christian  ideal,  but  to  excel  it  if  possible,  was  the  secret

stimulus of all the French free-thinkers from Voltaire to Auguste Comte ; and

this latter with his famous moral formula "vivre pour autrui" has indeed out-

christianised even Christianity ! It was Schopenhauer in Germany and John

Stuart Mill in England who were the means of bringing into the greatest

prominence this doctrine of sympathetic affections and of pity or utility to

others as a principle of action ; but these men themselves were only echoes.

From  about  the  time  of  the  French  Revolution  these  doctrines  have

manifested  themselves  in  various  places  with  enormous  force.  Since  then

they have shown themselves in their coarsest as well as their most subtle

form, and all Socialistic principles have almost involuntarily taken their stand

on the common ground of this doctrine. At the present time there is perhaps

no more widely spread prejudice than that of thinking that we know what

really  and  truly  constitutes  morality.  everyone  now  seems  to  learn  with

satisfaction that society is beginning to adapt the individual to the general

needs, and that it is at the same time the happiness and sacrifice of each one

to consider himself as a useful member and instrument of the whole. They

have still, however, doubts as to the form in which this whole is to be looked

for,  whether  in  a  state  already  existing,  or  in  one  which  has  yet  to  be

established, or in a nation, or in an international brotherhood, or in new and

small  economic  communities.  On  this  point  there  is  still  much  reflection,doubt, struggling, excitement, and passion ; but it is pleasant and wonderful

to observe the unanimity with which the " ego " is called upon to practice

self-denial, until, in the form of adaptation to the whole, it once again secures

its  own  fixed  sphere  of  rights  and  duties,  until,  indeed,  it  has  become

something quite new and different Nothing else is being attempted, whether

admitted or not, than the complete transformation, even the weakening and

suppression of the individual : the supporters of the majority never tire of

enumerating and anathematising all that is bad, hostile, lavish, expensive, and

luxurious in the form of individual existence that has until now prevailed ;

they hope that society may be administered in a cheaper, less dangerous,

more  uniform,  and  more  harmonious  way  when  nothing  is  left  but  large

corporations and their members. All that is considered as good which in any

way corresponds to this desire for grouping men into one particular society,

and to the minor cravings which necessarily accompany this desire, this is the

chief moral current of our time; sympathy and social feelings are working

hand in glove. (Kant is still outside of this movement: he expressly teaches

that we should be insensible to the sufferings of others if our benevolence is

to have any moral value, a doctrine which Schopenhauer, very angrily, as

may easily be imagined, described as the Kantian absurdity.)

  133

  "NO LONGER THINKING OF ONE'S SELF." Let us seriously consider

why we should jump into the water to rescue someone who has just fallen in

before our eyes, although we may have no particular sympathy for him. We

do  it  for  pity's  sake;  no  one  thinks  now  but  of  his  neighbour,  so  says

thoughtlessness. Why do we experience grief and uneasiness when we see

someone spit blood, although we may be really ill-disposed towards him and

wish him no good ? Out of pity ; we have ceased to think of ourselves, so

says thoughtlessness again. The truth is that in our pity I mean by this what

we erroneously call " pity" we no longer think consciously of ourselves, but

quite unconsciously, exactly as when slipping we unconsciously make the

best counter-motions possible in order to recover our balance, and in doing so

clearly use all our intelligence. A mishap to another offends us ; it would

bring our impotence, or perhaps our cowardice, into strong relief if we could

do nothing to help him ; or in itself it would give rise to a diminution of our

honour in the eyes of others and of ourselves. Or again, accidents that happen

to  others  act  as  finger-posts  to  point  out  our  own  danger,  and  even  as

indications of human peril and frailty they can produce a painful effect uponus. We shake off this kind of pain and offence, and balance it by an act of

pity  behind  which  may  be  hidden  a  subtle  form  of  self-defence  or  even

revenge. That at bottom we strongly think of ourselves may easily be divined

from the decision that we arrive at in all cases where we can avoid the sight

of those who are suffering or starving or wailing. We make up our minds not

to avoid such people when we can approach them as powerful and helpful

ones, when we can safely reckon upon their applause, or wish to feel the

contrast of our own happiness, or, again, when we hope to get rid of our own

boredom. It is misleading to call the suffering that we experience at such a

sight, and which may be of a very different kind, commiseration. For in all

cases it is a suffering from which the suffering person before us is free : it is

our own suffering, just as his suffering is his own. It is thus only this personal

feeling of misery that we get rid of by acts of compassion. Nevertheless, we

never act thus from one single motive: as it is certain that we wish to free

ourselves from suffering thereby, it is also certain that by the same action we

yield to an impulse of pleasure. Pleasure arises at the sight of a contrast to our

own condition, at the knowledge that we should be able to help if only we

wished to do so, at the thought of the praise and gratitude which we should

gain if we did help, at the very act of helping, in so far as this might prove

successful (and because something which is gradually seen to be successful

gives pleasure to the doer) ; but even more particularly at the feeling that our

intervention brings to an end some deplorable injustice, even the outburst of

one's indignation is invigorating. All this, including even things still more

subtle, comprises "pity." How clumsily with this one word does language fall

foul of such a complex and polyphonic organism ! That pity, on the other

hand, is identical with the suffering the sight of which brings it about, or that

it has a particularly subtle and penetrating comprehension of it : this is in

contradiction to experience, and he who has glorified pity under these two

heads lacked sufficient experience in the domain of morals. That is why I am

seized with some doubts when reading of the incredible things attributed by

Schopenhauer to pity. It is obvious that he thereby wished to make us believe

in the great novelty he brought forward, namely, that pity the pity which he

observed so superficially and described so badly was the source of all and

every past and future moral action, and all this precisely because of those

faculties which he had begun by attributing to it. What is it in the end that

distinguishes men without pity from men who are really compassionate ? In

particular,  to  give  merely  an  approximate  indication,  they  have  not  thesensitive feeling for fear, the subtle faculty for perceiving danger: nor yet is

their vanity so easily wounded if something happens which they might have

been  able  to  prevent,  the  caution  of  their  pride  commands  them  not  to

interfere uselessly with the affairs of others ; they even act on the belief that

everyone should help himself and play his own cards. Again, in most cases

they are more habituated to bearing pain than compassionate men, and it does

not seem at all unjust to them that others should suffer, since they themselves

have suffered. Lastly, the state of soft-heartedness is as painful to them as is

the  state  of  stoical  impassability  to  compassionate  men:  they  have  only

disdainful words for sensitive hearts, as they think that such a state of feeling

is dangerous to their own manliness and calm bravery, they conceal their

tears from others and wipe them off, angry with themselves. They belong to a

different type of egoists from the compassionate men, but to call them, in a

distinct  sense,  evil  and  the  compassionate  ones  good,  is  merely  a  moral

fashion which has had its innings, just as the reverse fashion had also its

innings, and a long innings, too.

  134

  TO WHAT EXTENT WE MUST BEWARE OF PITY. Pity, in so far as

it actually gives rise to suffering and this must be our only point of view here

is  a  weakness,  like  every  other  indulgence  in  an  injurious  emotion.  It

increases  suffering  throughout  the  world,  and  although  here  and  there  a

certain  amount  of  suffering  may  be  indirectly  diminished  or  removed

altogether  as  a  consequence  of  pity,  we  must  not  bring  forward  these

occasional consequences, which are on the whole insignificant, to justify the

nature of pity which, as has already been stated, is prejudicial. Supposing that

it prevailed, even if only for one day, it would bring humanity to utter ruin. In

itself the nature of pity is no better than that of any other craving ; it is only

where  it  is  called  for  and  praised  and  this  happens  when  people  do  not

understand what is injurious in it, but find in it a sort of joy that a good

conscience becomes attached to it; it is only then that we willingly yield to it,

and do not shrink from acknowledging it. In other circumstances where it is

understood to be dangerous, it is looked upon as a weakness ; or, as in the

case of the Greeks, as an unhealthy periodical emotion the danger of which

might be removed by temporary and voluntary discharges. If a man were to

undertake  the  experiment  of  deliberately  devoting  his  attention  to  the

opportunities afforded by practical life for the exercise of pity, and were over

and over again to picture in his own mind the misery he might meet with inhis immediate surroundings, he would inevitably become melancholy and ill.

If,  however,  he  wished  in  any  sense  of  the  word  to  serve  humanity  as  a

physician,  he  would  have  to  take  many  precautions  with  respect  to  this

feeling, as otherwise it would paralyse him at all critical moments, undermine

the foundations of his knowledge, and unnerve his helpful and delicate hand.

  135

    AROUSING PITY. Among savages men think with a moral shudder of

the possibility of becoming an object of pity, for such a state they regard as

deprived of all virtue. Pitying is equivalent to despising : they do not want to

see a contemptible being suffer, for this would afford them no enjoyment. On

the other hand, to behold one of their enemies suffering, someone whom they

look upon as their equal in pride, but whom torture cannot induce to give up

his pride, and in general to see someone suffer who refuses to lower himself

by appealing for pity which would in their eyes be the most profound and

shameful humiliation this is the very joy of joys. Such a spectacle excites the

deepest admiration in the soul of the savage, and he ends by killing such a

brave man when it is in his power, afterwards according funeral honours to

the unbending one. If he had groaned, however; if his countenance had lost

its expression of calm disdain ; if he had shown himself to be contemptible,

well, in such a case he might have been allowed to live like a dog : he would

no longer have aroused the pride of the spectator, and pity would have taken

the place of admiration.

  136

    HAPPINESS IN PITY. If, as is the case among the Hindus, we decree the

end and aim of all intellectual activity to be the knowledge of human misery,

and  if  for  generation  after  generation  this  dreadful  resolution  be  steadily

adhered to, pity in the eyes of such men of hereditary pessimism comes to

have  a  new  value  as  a  preserver  of  life,  something  that  helps  to  make

existence  endurable,  although  it  may  seem  worthy  of  being  rejected  with

horror and disgust. Pity becomes an antidote to suicide, a sentiment which

brings pleasure with it and enables us to taste superiority in small doses. It

gives some diversion to our minds, makes our hearts full, banishes fear and

lethargy,  and  incites  us  to  speak,  to  complain,  or  to  act  :  it  is  a  relative

happiness when compared with the misery of the knowledge that hampers the

individual  on  every  side,  bewilders  him,  and  takes  away  his  breath.

Happiness, however, no matter of what nature it may be, gives us air and

light and freedom of movement.  137

  WHY DOUBLE THE " EGO " ? To view our own experiences in the

same  light  as  we  are  in  the  habit  of  looking  at  those  of  others  is  very

comforting and an advisable medicine. On the other hand, to look upon the

experiences of others and adopt them as if they were our own which is called

for by the philosophy of pity would ruin us in a very short time: let us only

make  the  experiment  without  trying  to  imagine  it  any  longer  !  The  first

maxim  is,  in  addition,  undoubtedly  more  in  accordance  with  reason  and

goodwill towards reason ; for we estimate more objectively the value and

significance of an event when it happens to others, the value, for instance, of

a death, loss of money or slander. But pity, taking as its principle of action

the injunction, " Suffer the misfortune of another as much as he himself,"

would  lead  the  point  of  view  of  the  ego  with  all  its  exaggerations  and

deviations to become the point of view of the other person, the sympathiser :

so that we should have to suffer at the same time from our own ego and the

other's ego. In this way we would voluntarily over load ourselves with a

double  irrationality,  instead  of  making  the  burden  of  our  own  as  light  as

possible.

  138

    BECOMING  MORE  TENDER.  Whenever  we  love  someone  and

venerate and admire him, and afterwards come to perceive that he is suffering

which always causes us the utmost astonishment, since we cannot but feel

that  the  happiness  we  derive  from  him  must  flow  from  a  superabundant

source of personal happiness our feelings of love, veneration, and admiration

are  essentially  changed:  they  become  more  tender  ;  that  is,  the  gap  that

separates us seems to be bridged over and there appears to be an approach to

equality. It now seems possible to give him something in return, while we

had previously imagined him as being altogether above our gratitude. Our

ability to requite him for what we have received from him arouses in us

feelings of much joy and pleasure. We endeavour to ascertain what can best

calm the grief of our friend, and we give it to him ; if he wishes for kind

words, looks, attentions, services, or presents, we give them ; but, above all,

if he would like to see us suffering from the sight of his suffering, we pretend

to suffer, for all this secures for us the enjoyment of active gratitude, which is

equivalent  in  a  way  to  good-natured  revenge.  If  he  wants  none  of  these

things, and refuses to accept them from us, we depart from him chilled and

sad, almost mortified ; it appears to us as if our gratitude had been declined,and on this point of honour even the best of men is still somewhat touchy. It

results from all this that even in the best case there is something humiliating

in suffering, and something elevating and superior in sympathy, a fact which

will keep the two feelings apart forever and ever.

  139

    HIGHER IN NAME ONLY. You say that the morality of pity is a higher

morality than that of stoicism ? Prove it ! But take care not to measure the "

higher " and " lower " degrees of morality once more by moral yardsticks ;

for there are no absolute morals. So take your yardstick from somewhere

else, and be on your guard !

  140

  PRAISE  AND  BLAME.  When  a  war  has  come  to  an  unsuccessful

conclusion we try to find the man who is to blame for the war ; when it

comes to a successful conclusion we praise the man who is responsible for it.

In all unsuccessful cases attempts are made to blame somebody, for non-

success gives rise to dejection, against which the single possible remedy is

involuntarily applied ; a new incitement of the sense of power ; and this

incitement is found in the condemnation of the " guilty " one. This guilty one

is not perhaps the scapegoat of the faults of others ; he is merely the victim of

the  feeble,  humiliated,  and  depressed  people  who  wish  to  prove  upon

someone that they have not yet lost all their power. Even self-condemnation

after a defeat may be the means of restoring the feeling of power. On the

other hand, glorification of the originator is often but an equally blind result

of  another  instinct  that  demands  its  victim,  and  in  this  case  the  sacrifice

appears to be sweet and attractive even for the victim. This happens when the

feeling of power is satiated in a nation or a society by so great and fascinating

a  success  that  a  weariness  of  victory  supervenes  and  pride  wishes  to  be

discharged : a feeling of self-sacrifice is aroused and looks for its object.

Thus,  whether  we  are  blamed  or  praised  we  merely,  as  a  rule,  provide

opportunities for the gratification of others, and are only too often caught up

and whirled away for our neighbours to discharge upon us their accumulated

feelings of praise or blame. In both cases we confer a benefit upon them for

which we deserve no credit and they no thanks.

  141

  MORE BEAUTIFUL BUT LESS VALUABLE. Picturesque morality :

such  is  the  morality  of  those  passions  characterised  by  sudden  outbursts,

abrupt transitions ; pathetic, impressive, dreadful, and solemn attitudes andgestures. It is the semi-savage stage of morality : never let us be tempted to

set it on a higher plane merely on account of its aesthetic charms.

  142

    SYMPATHY. In order to understand our neighbour, that is, in order to

reproduce his sentiments in ourselves, we often, no doubt, plumb the cause of

his feelings, as, for example, by asking ourselves, Why is he sad ? in order

that we may become sad ourselves for the same reason. But we much more

frequently neglect to act thus, and we produce these feelings in ourselves in

accordance with the effects which they exhibit in the person we are studying,

by imitating in our own body the expression of his eyes, his voice, his gait,

his attitude (or, at any rate, the likeness of these things in words, pictures, and

music), or we may at least endeavour to mimic the action of his muscles and

nervous system. A like feeling will then spring up in us as the result of an old

association  of  movements  and  sentiments  which  has  been  trained  to  run

backwards and forwards. We have developed to a very high pitch this knack

of sounding the feelings of others, and when we are in the presence of anyone

else  we  bring  this  faculty  of  ours  into  play  almost  involuntarily,  let  the

inquirer observe the animation of a woman's countenance and notice how it

vibrates and quivers with animation as the result of the continual imitation

and reflection of what is going on around her. It is music, however, more than

anything else that shows us what past-masters we are in the rapid and subtle

divination of feelings and sympathy ; for even if music is only the imitation

of an imitation of feelings, nevertheless, despite its distance and vagueness, it

often  enables  us  to  participate  in  those  feelings,  so  that  we  become  sad

without any reason for feeling so, like the fools that we are, merely because

we hear certain sounds and rhythms that somehow or other remind us of the

intonation and the movements, or perhaps even only of the behaviour, of

sorrowful people. It is related of a certain Danish king that he was wrought

up to such a pitch of warlike enthusiasm by the song of a minstrel that he

sprang to his feet and killed five persons of his assembled court : there was

neither war nor enemy ; there was rather the exact opposite; yet the power of

the retrospective inference from a feeling to the cause of it was sufficiently

strong in this king to overpower both his observation and his reason. Such,

however, is almost invariably the effect of music (provided that it thrills us),

and we have no need of such paradoxical instances to recognise this, the state

of feeling into which music transports us is almost always in contradiction to

the  appearance  of  our  actual  state,  and  of  our  reasoning  power  whichrecognises this actual state and its causes. If we inquire how it happened that

this imitation of the feelings of others has become so common, there will be

no doubt as to the answer : man being the most timid of all beings because of

his subtle and delicate nature has been made familiar through his timidity

with this sympathy for, and rapid comprehension of, the feelings of others,

even of animals. For century after century he saw danger in everything that

was unfamiliar to him, in anything that happened to be alive, and whenever

the spectacle of such things and creatures came before his eyes he imitated

their features and attitude, drawing at the same time his own conclusion as to

the  nature  of  the  evil  intentions  they  concealed.  This  interpretation  of  all

movements and all facial characteristics in the sense of intentions, man has

even brought to bear on things inanimate, urged on as he was by the illusion

that there was nothing inanimate. I believe that this is the origin of everything

that  we  now  call  a  feeling  for  nature,  that  sensation  of  joy  which  men

experience at the sight of the sky, the fields, the rocks, the forests, the storms,

the stars, the landscapes, and spring : without our old habits of fear which

forced us to suspect behind everything a kind of second and more recondite

sense, we should now experience no delight in nature, in the same way as

men and animals do not cause us to rejoice if we have not first been deterred

by  that  source  of  all  understanding,  namely,  fear.  For  joy  and  agreeable

surprise,  and  finally  the  feeling  of  ridicule,  are  the  younger  children  of

sympathy, and the much younger brothers and sisters of fear. The faculty of

rapid  perception,  which  is  based  on  the  faculty  of  rapid  dissimulation,

decreases in proud and autocratic men and nations, as they are less timid ;

but, on the other hand, every category of understanding and dissimulation is

well known to timid peoples, and among them is to be found the real home of

imitative arts and superior intelligence. When, proceeding from the theory of

sympathy such as I have just outlined, I turn my attention to the theory, now

so popular and almost sacrosanct, of a mystical process by means of which

pity  blends  two  beings  into  one,  and  thus  permits  them  immediately  to

understand  one  another,  when  I  recollect  that  even  so  clear  a  brain  as

Schopenhauer's delighted in such fantastic nonsense, and that he in his turn

transplanted  this  delight  into  other  lucid  and  semi-lucid  brains,  I  feel

unlimited astonishment and compassion. How great must be the pleasure we

experience in this senseless tomfoolery ! How near must even a sane man be

to insanity as soon as he listens to his own secret intellectual desires ! Why

did Schopenhauer really feel so grateful, so profoundly indebted to Kant ? Herevealed on one occasion the undoubted answer to this question. Someone

had spoken of the way in which the qualitas occulta of Kant's Categorical

Imperative might be got rid of, so that the theory itself might be rendered

intelligible.  Whereupon  Schopenhauer  gave  utterance  to  the  following

outburst:  "An  intelligible  Categorical  Imperative  !  Preposterous  idea  !

Stygian darkness ! God forbid that it should ever become intelligible ! The

fact that there is actually something unintelligible, that this misery of the

understanding and its conceptions is limited, conditional, final, and deceptive,

this is beyond question Kant's great gift." Let anyone consider whether a man

can be in possession of a desire to gain an insight into moral things when he

feels himself comforted from the start by a belief in the inconceivableness of

these things ! one who still honestly believes in illuminations from above, in

magic, in ghostly appearances, and in the metaphysical ugliness of the toad !

  143

  WOE TO US IF THIS IMPULSE SHOULD RAGE I Supposing that the

impulse towards devotion and care for others (" sympathetic affection ") were

doubly as strong as it now is, life on earth could not be endured. Let it only

be considered how many foolish things everyone of us does day by day and

hour by hour, merely out of solicitude and devotion for himself, and how

unbearable he seems in doing so : and what then would it be like if we were

to become for other people the object of the stupidities and importunities with

which up to the present they have only tormented themselves ! Should we not

then take precipitately to our heels as soon as one of our neighbours came

towards us ? And would it not be necessary to overwhelm this sympathetic

affection with the abuse that we now reserve for egoism ?

  144

  CLOSING OUR EARS TO THE COMPLAINTS OF OTHERS. When

we let our sky be clouded by the complaints and suffering of other mortals,

who  must  bear  the  consequences  of  such  gloom  ?  No  doubt  those  other

mortals, in addition to all their other burdens ! If we are merely to be the

echoes of their complaints, we cannot accord them either help or comfort ;

nor can we do so if we were continually keeping our ears open to listen to

them, unless we have learnt the art of the Olympians, who, instead of trying

to make themselves unhappy, endeavoured to feel edified by the misfortunes

of  mankind.  But  this  is  something  too  Olympian  for  us,  although,  in  our

enjoyment of tragedy, we have already taken a step towards this ideal divine

cannibalism.  145

  " UNEGOISTIC." This man is empty and wishes to be filled, that one is

over-full and wishes to be emptied : both of them feel themselves urged on to

look for an individual who can help them. And this phenomenon, interpreted

in a higher sense, is in both cases known by the same name, " love." Well?

and could this love be something unegoistic?

  146

    LOOKING BEYOND OUR NEIGHBOUR. What? Ought the nature of

true morality to consist for us in fixing our eyes upon the most direct and

immediate consequences of our action for other people, and in our coming to

a decision accordingly ? This is only a narrow and bourgeois morality, even

though  it  may  be  a  morality  :  but  it  seems  to  me  that  it  would  be  more

superior and liberal to look beyond these immediate consequences for our

neighbour in order to encourage more distant purposes, even at the risk of

making others suffer, as, for example, by encouraging the spirit of knowledge

in spite of the certainty that our free-thought will have the instant effect of

plunging others into doubt, grief, and even worse afflictions. Have we not at

least the right to treat our neighbour as we treat ourselves ? And if, where we

are concerned, we do not think in such a narrow and bourgeois fashion of

immediate consequences and sufferings, why should we be compelled to act

thus in regard to our neighbour ? Supposing that we felt ready to sacrifice

ourselves, what is there to prevent us from sacrificing our neighbour together

with ourselves, -just as States and Sovereigns have until now sacrificed one

citizen to the others, " for the sake of the general interest," as they say ? We

too, however, have general interests, perhaps even more general than theirs :

so why may we not sacrifice a few individuals of this generation for the

benefit  of  generations  to  come  ?  so  that  their  affliction,  anxiety,  despair,

blunders, and misery may be deemed essential because a new plough is to

break up the ground and render it fertile for all. Finally, we communicate the

disposition to our neighbour by which he is enabled to feel himself a victim :

we persuade him to carry out the task for which we employ him. Are we then

devoid of all pity? If, however, we wish to achieve a victory over ourselves

beyond our pity, is not this a higher and more liberal attitude and disposition

than  that  in  which  we  only  feel  safe  after  having  ascertained  whether  an

action benefits or harms our neighbour ? On the contrary, it is by means of

such  sacrifice  including  the  sacrifice  of  ourselves,  as  well  as  of  our

neighbours that we should strengthen and elevate the general sense of humanpower, even supposing that we attain nothing more than this. But even this

itself would be a positive increase of happiness. Then, if even this . . . but not

a word more ! You have understood me at a glance.

  147

  THE CAUSE OF " ALTRUISM." Men have on the whole spoken of love

with so much emphasis and adoration because they have until now always

had so little of it, and have never yet been satiated with this food: in this way

it became their ambrosia. If a poet wished to show universal benevolence in

the image of a Utopia, he would certainly have to describe an agonising and

ridiculous state of things, the like of which was never seen on earth, everyone

would be surrounded, importuned, and sighed for, not as at present, by one

lover, but by thousands, by everybody indeed, as the result of an irresistible

craving  which  would  then  be  as  vehemently  insulted  and  cursed  as

selfishness has been by men of past ages. The poets of this new condition of

things, if they had sufficient leisure to write, would be dreaming of nothing

but  the  blissful  and  loveless  past,  the  divine  selfishness  of  yore,  and  the

wonderful possibilities in former times of remaining alone, not being run

after by one's friends, and of even being hated and despised or any other

odious  expressions  which  the  beautiful  animal  world  in  which  we  live

chooses to coin.

  148

    LOOKING FAR AHEAD. If, in accordance with the present definition,

only those actions are moral which are done for the sake of others, and for

their sake only, then there are no moral actions at all ! If, in accordance with

another definition, only those actions are moral which spring from our own

free will, then there are no moral actions in this case either ! What is it, then,

that we designate thus, which certainly exists and wishes as a consequence to

be explained? It is the result of a few intellectual blunders ; and supposing

that  we  were  able  to  free  ourselves  from  these  errors,  what  would  then

become of " moral actions " ? It is due to these errors that we have up to the

present attributed to certain actions a value superior to what was theirs in

reality: we separated them from " egoistic " and " non-free actions. When we

now set them once more in the latter categories, as we must do, we certainly

reduce their value (their own estimate of value) even below its reasonable

level, because " egoistic " and " non-free " actions have up to the present been

undervalued  owing  to  that  alleged  profound  and  essential  difference.  In

future, then, will these very actions be less frequently performed, since they