"BEHOLD, IT COMETH, IT IS NIGH, THE GREAT NOONTIDE!"

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

  LV. THE SPIRIT OF GRAVITY.

  1.

  My mouthpiece--is of the people: too coarsely and cordially do I talk for

Angora rabbits. And still stranger soundeth my word unto all ink-fish and

pen-foxes.

  My hand--is a fool's hand: woe unto all tables and walls, and whatever

hath room for fool's sketching, fool's scrawling!

  My foot--is a horse-foot; therewith do I trample and trot over stick and

stone, in the fields up and down, and am bedevilled with delight in all fast

racing.

  My stomach--is surely an eagle's stomach? For it preferreth lamb's flesh.

Certainly it is a bird's stomach.

  Nourished with innocent things, and with few, ready and impatient to fly,

to fly away--that is now my nature: why should there not be something of

bird-nature therein!

  And  especially  that  I  am  hostile  to  the  spirit  of  gravity,  that  is  bird-

nature:--verily,  deadly  hostile,  supremely  hostile,  originally  hostile!  Oh,

whither hath my hostility not flown and misflown!

  Thereof could I sing a song--and WILL sing it: though I be alone in an

empty house, and must sing it to mine own ears.

  Other singers are there, to be sure, to whom only the full house maketh

the voice soft, the hand eloquent, the eye expressive, the heart wakeful:--

those do I not resemble.--

  2.

  He who one day teacheth men to fly will have shifted all landmarks; to

him will all landmarks themselves fly into the air; the earth will he christen

anew--as "the light body."

  The ostrich runneth faster than the fastest horse, but it also thrusteth its

head heavily into the heavy earth: thus is it with the man who cannot yet fly.

  Heavy unto him are earth and life, and so WILLETH the spirit of gravity!

But he who would become light, and be a bird, must love himself:--thus do I

teach.

  Not, to be sure, with the love of the sick and infected, for with them

stinketh even self-love!

  One must learn to love oneself--thus do I teach--with a wholesome andhealthy  love:  that  one  may  endure  to  be  with  oneself,  and  not  go  roving

about.

  Such roving about christeneth itself "brotherly love"; with these words

hath there hitherto been the best lying and dissembling, and especially by

those who have been burdensome to every one.

  And verily, it is no commandment for to-day and to-morrow to LEARN

to love oneself. Rather is it of all arts the finest, subtlest, last and patientest.

  For to its possessor is all possession well concealed, and of all treasure-

pits one's own is last excavated--so causeth the spirit of gravity.

    Almost in the cradle are we apportioned with heavy words and worths:

"good"  and  "evil"--so  calleth  itself  this  dowry.  For  the  sake  of  it  we  are

forgiven for living.

  And therefore suffereth one little children to come unto one, to forbid

them betimes to love themselves--so causeth the spirit of gravity.

  And we--we bear loyally what is apportioned unto us, on hard shoulders,

over rugged mountains! And when we sweat, then do people say to us: "Yea,

life is hard to bear!"

  But  man  himself  only  is  hard  to  bear!  The  reason  thereof  is  that  he

carrieth too many extraneous things on his shoulders. Like the camel kneeleth

he down, and letteth himself be well laden.

  Especially the strong load-bearing man in whom reverence resideth. Too

many EXTRANEOUS heavy words and worths loadeth he upon himself--

then seemeth life to him a desert!

  And verily! Many a thing also that is OUR OWN is hard to bear! And

many internal things in man are like the oyster--repulsive and slippery and

hard to grasp;--

  So that an elegant shell, with elegant adornment, must plead for them. But

this art also must one learn: to HAVE a shell, and a fine appearance, and

sagacious blindness!

  Again, it deceiveth about many things in man, that many a shell is poor

and pitiable, and too much of a shell. Much concealed goodness and power is

never dreamt of; the choicest dainties find no tasters!

  Women know that, the choicest of them: a little fatter a little leaner-- oh,

how much fate is in so little!

  Man is difficult to discover, and unto himself most difficult of all; often

lieth the spirit concerning the soul. So causeth the spirit of gravity.

  He, however, hath discovered himself who saith: This is MY good andevil: therewith hath he silenced the mole and the dwarf, who say: "Good for

all, evil for all."

  Verily, neither do I like those who call everything good, and this world

the best of all. Those do I call the all-satisfied.

    All-satisfiedness, which knoweth how to taste everything,--that is not the

best taste! I honour the refractory, fastidious tongues and stomachs, which

have learned to say "I" and "Yea" and "Nay."

  To  chew  and  digest  everything,  however--that  is  the  genuine  swine-

nature! Ever to say YE-A--that hath only the ass learnt, and those like it!--

  Deep yellow and hot red--so wanteth MY taste--it mixeth blood with all

colours.  He,  however,  who  whitewasheth  his  house,  betrayeth  unto  me  a

whitewashed soul.

  With  mummies,  some  fall  in  love;  others  with  phantoms:  both  alike

hostile to all flesh and blood--oh, how repugnant are both to my taste! For I

love blood.

  And  there  will  I  not  reside  and  abide  where  every  one  spitteth  and

speweth:  that  is  now  MY  taste,--rather  would  I  live  amongst  thieves  and

perjurers. Nobody carrieth gold in his mouth.

  Still more repugnant unto me, however, are all lickspittles; and the most

repugnant animal of man that I found, did I christen "parasite": it would not

love, and would yet live by love.

  Unhappy do I call all those who have only one choice: either to become

evil  beasts,  or  evil  beast-tamers.  Amongst  such  would  I  not  build  my

tabernacle.

  Unhappy  do  I  also  call  those  who  have  ever  to  WAIT,--they  are

repugnant to my taste--all the toll-gatherers and traders, and kings, and other

landkeepers and shopkeepers.

  Verily, I learned waiting also, and thoroughly so,--but only waiting for

MYSELF. And above all did I learn standing and walking and running and

leaping and climbing and dancing.

  This however is my teaching: he who wisheth one day to fly, must first

learn standing and walking and running and climbing and dancing:--one doth

not fly into flying!

  With rope-ladders learned I to reach many a window, with nimble legs

did I climb high masts: to sit on high masts of perception seemed to me no

small bliss;--

  --To flicker like small flames on high masts: a small light, certainly, but agreat comfort to cast-away sailors and ship-wrecked ones!

  By divers ways and wendings did I arrive at my truth; not by one ladder

did I mount to the height where mine eye roveth into my remoteness.

  And unwillingly only did I ask my way--that was always counter to my

taste! Rather did I question and test the ways themselves.

  A testing and a questioning hath been all my travelling:--and verily, one

must also LEARN to answer such questioning! That, however,--is my taste:

  --Neither a good nor a bad taste, but MY taste, of which I have no longer

either shame or secrecy.

  "This--is now MY way,--where is yours?" Thus did I answer those who

asked me "the way." For THE way--it doth not exist!

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

  LVI. OLD AND NEW TLES.

  1.

  Here do I sit and wait, old broken tables around me and also new half-

written tables. When cometh mine hour?

  --The hour of my descent, of my down-going: for once more will I go

unto men.

  For that hour do I now wait: for first must the signs come unto me that it

is MINE hour--namely, the laughing lion with the flock of doves.

    Meanwhile do I talk to myself as one who hath time. No one telleth me

anything new, so I tell myself mine own story.

  2.

  When I came unto men, then found I them resting on an old infatuation:

all of them thought they had long known what was good and bad for men.

  An old wearisome business seemed to them all discourse about virtue;

and he who wished to sleep well spake of "good" and "bad" ere retiring to

rest.

  This  somnolence  did  I  disturb  when  I  taught  that  NO  ONE  YET

KNOWETH what is good and bad:--unless it be the creating one!

  --It is he, however, who createth man's goal, and giveth to the earth its

meaning and its future: he only EFFECTETH it THAT aught is good or bad.

  And I bade them upset their old academic chairs, and wherever that old

infatuation had sat; I bade them laugh at their great moralists, their saints,

their poets, and their Saviours.

  At  their  gloomy  sages  did  I  bid  them  laugh,  and  whoever  had  sat

admonishing as a black scarecrow on the tree of life.  On  their  great  grave-highway  did  I  seat  myself,  and  even  beside  the

carrion  and  vultures--and  I  laughed  at  all  their  bygone  and  its  mellow

decaying glory.

  Verily, like penitential preachers and fools did I cry wrath and shame on

all their greatness and smallness. Oh, that their best is so very small! Oh, that

their worst is so very small! Thus did I laugh.

  Thus did my wise longing, born in the mountains, cry and laugh in me; a

wild wisdom, verily!--my great pinion-rustling longing.

  And oft did it carry me off and up and away and in the midst of laughter;

then flew I quivering like an arrow with sun-intoxicated rapture:

  --Out into distant futures, which no dream hath yet seen, into warmer

souths  than  ever  sculptor  conceived,--where  gods  in  their  dancing  are

ashamed of all clothes:

  (That I may speak in parables and halt and stammer like the poets: and

verily I am ashamed that I have still to be a poet!)

  Where all becoming seemed to me dancing of Gods, and wantoning of

Gods, and the world unloosed and unbridled and fleeing back to itself:--

  --As an eternal self-fleeing and re-seeking of one another of many Gods,

as the blessed self-contradicting, recommuning, and refraternising with one

another of many Gods:--

  Where  all  time  seemed  to  me  a  blessed  mockery  of  moments,  where

necessity  was  freedom  itself,  which  played  happily  with  the  goad  of

freedom:--

  Where I also found again mine old devil and arch-enemy, the spirit of

gravity, and all that it created: constraint, law, necessity and consequence and

purpose and will and good and evil:--

  For must there not be that which is danced OVER, danced beyond? Must

there not, for the sake of the nimble, the nimblest,--be moles and clumsy

dwarfs?--

  3.

  There was it also where I picked up from the path the word "Superman,"

and that man is something that must be surpassed.

  --That man is a bridge and not a goal--rejoicing over his noontides and

evenings, as advances to new rosy dawns:

  --The Zarathustra word of the great noontide, and whatever else I have

hung up over men like purple evening-afterglows.

  Verily, also new stars did I make them see, along with new nights; andover cloud and day and night, did I spread out laughter like a gay-coloured

canopy.

  I taught them all MY poetisation and aspiration: to compose and collect

into unity what is fragment in man, and riddle and fearful chance;--

  --As composer, riddle-reader, and redeemer of chance, did I teach them to

create the future, and all that HATH BEEN--to redeem by creating.

  The past of man to redeem, and every "It was" to transform, until the Will

saith: "But so did I will it! So shall I will it--"

  --This did I call redemption; this alone taught I them to call redemption.--

  Now do I await MY redemption--that I may go unto them for the last

time.

  For once more will I go unto men: AMONGST them will my sun set; in

dying will I give them my choicest gift!

  From the sun did I learn this, when it goeth down, the exuberant one: gold

doth it then pour into the sea, out of inexhaustible riches,--

  --So that the poorest fisherman roweth even with GOLDEN oars! For this

did I once see, and did not tire of weeping in beholding it.--

  Like  the  sun  will  also  Zarathustra  go  down:  now  sitteth  he  here  and

waiteth, old broken tables around him, and also new tables--half-written.

  4.

    Behold, here is a new table; but where are my brethren who will carry it

with me to the valley and into hearts of flesh?--

  Thus  demandeth  my  great  love  to  the  remotest  ones:  BE  NOT

CONSIDERATE OF THY NEIGHBOUR! Man is something that must be

surpassed.

  There are many divers ways and modes of surpassing: see THOU thereto!

But only a buffoon thinketh: "man can also be OVERLEAPT."

  Surpass thyself even in thy neighbour: and a right which thou canst seize

upon, shalt thou not allow to be given thee!

  What thou doest can no one do to thee again. Lo, there is no requital.

  He  who  cannot  command  himself  shall  obey.  And  many  a  one  CAN

command himself, but still sorely lacketh self-obedience!

  5.

  Thus  wisheth  the  type  of  noble  souls:  they  desire  to  have  nothing

GRATUITOUSLY, least of all, life.

  He  who  is  of  the  populace  wisheth  to  live  gratuitously;  we  others,

however, to whom life hath given itself--we are ever considering WHAT wecan best give IN RETURN!

  And verily, it is a noble dictum which saith: "What life promiseth US,

that promise will WE keep--to life!"

  One  should  not  wish  to  enjoy  where  one  doth  not  contribute  to  the

enjoyment. And one should not WISH to enjoy!

  For enjoyment and innocence are the most bashful things. Neither like to

be sought for. One should HAVE them,--but one should rather SEEK for

guilt and pain!--

  6.

  O my brethren, he who is a firstling is ever sacrificed. Now, however, are

we firstlings!

  We all bleed on secret sacrificial altars, we all burn and broil in honour of

ancient idols.

  Our best is still young: this exciteth old palates. Our flesh is tender, our

skin is only lambs' skin:--how could we not excite old idol-priests!

  IN OURSELVES dwelleth he still, the old idol-priest, who broileth our

best  for  his  banquet.  Ah,  my  brethren,  how  could  firstlings  fail  to  be

sacrifices!

  But so wisheth our type; and I love those who do not wish to preserve

themselves, the down-going ones do I love with mine entire love: for they go

beyond.--

  7.

  To be true--that CAN few be! And he who can, will not! Least of all,

however, can the good be true.

  Oh, those good ones! GOOD MEN NEVER SPEAK THE TRUTH. For

the spirit, thus to be good, is a malady.

  They  yield,  those  good  ones,  they  submit  themselves;  their  heart

repeateth,  their  soul  obeyeth:  HE,  however,  who  obeyeth,  DOTH  NOT

LISTEN TO HIMSELF!

  All that is called evil by the good, must come together in order that one

truth may be born. O my brethren, are ye also evil enough for THIS truth?

  The daring venture, the prolonged distrust, the cruel Nay, the tedium, the

cutting-into-the-quick--how seldom do THESE come together! Out of such

seed, however--is truth produced!

    BESIDE  the  bad  conscience  hath  hitherto  grown  all  KNOWLEDGE!

Break up, break up, ye discerning ones, the old tables!

  8.  When the water hath planks, when gangways and railings o'erspan the

stream, verily, he is not believed who then saith: "All is in flux."

  But even the simpletons contradict him. "What?" say the simpletons, "all

in flux? Planks and railings are still OVER the stream!

    "OVER the stream all is stable, all the values of things, the bridges and

bearings, all 'good' and 'evil': these are all STLE!"--

  Cometh, however, the hard winter, the stream-tamer, then learn even the

wittiest distrust, and verily, not only the simpletons then say: "Should not

everything--STAND STILL?"

    "Fundamentally standeth everything still"--that is an appropriate winter

doctrine, good cheer for an unproductive period, a great comfort for winter-

sleepers and fireside-loungers.

    "Fundamentally  standeth  everything  still"--:  but  CONTRARY  thereto,

preacheth the thawing wind!

  The thawing wind, a bullock, which is no ploughing bullock--a furious

bullock,  a  destroyer,  which  with  angry  horns  breaketh  the  ice!  The  ice

however--BREAKETH GANGWAYS!

  O my brethren, is not everything AT PRESENT IN FLUX? Have not all

railings and gangways fallen into the water? Who would still HOLD ON to

"good" and "evil"?

  "Woe to us! Hail to us! The thawing wind bloweth!"--Thus preach, my

brethren, through all the streets!

  9.

  There is an old illusion--it is called good and evil. Around soothsayers

and astrologers hath hitherto revolved the orbit of this illusion.

  Once  did  one  BELIEVE  in  soothsayers  and  astrologers;  and

THEREFORE  did  one  believe,  "Everything  is  fate:  thou  shalt,  for  thou

must!"

  Then  again  did  one  distrust  all  soothsayers  and  astrologers;  and

THEREFORE did one believe, "Everything is freedom: thou canst, for thou

willest!"

  O my brethren, concerning the stars and the future there hath hitherto

been only illusion, and not knowledge; and THEREFORE concerning good

and evil there hath hitherto been only illusion and not knowledge!

  10.

  "Thou  shalt  not  rob!  Thou  shalt  not  slay!"--such  precepts  were  once

called holy; before them did one bow the knee and the head, and take offone's shoes.

  But I ask you: Where have there ever been better robbers and slayers in

the world than such holy precepts?

  Is there not even in all life--robbing and slaying? And for such precepts to

be called holy, was not TRUTH itself thereby--slain?

  --Or  was  it  a  sermon  of  death  that  called  holy  what  contradicted  and

dissuaded  from  life?--O  my  brethren,  break  up,  break  up  for  me  the  old

tables!

  11.

  It is my sympathy with all the past that I see it is abandoned,--

    --Abandoned to the favour, the spirit and the madness of every generation

that cometh, and reinterpreteth all that hath been as its bridge!

  A great potentate might arise, an artful prodigy, who with approval and

disapproval could strain and constrain all the past, until it became for him a

bridge, a harbinger, a herald, and a cock-crowing.

  This however is the other danger, and mine other sympathy:--he who is of

the populace, his thoughts go back to his grandfather,--with his grandfather,

however, doth time cease.

  Thus is all the past abandoned: for it might some day happen for the

populace to become master, and drown all time in shallow waters.

    Therefore, O my brethren, a NEW NOBILITY is needed, which shall be

the adversary of all populace and potentate rule, and shall inscribe anew the

word "noble" on new tables.

  For many noble ones are needed, and many kinds of noble ones, FOR A

NEW NOBILITY! Or, as I once said in parable: "That is just divinity, that

there are Gods, but no God!"

  12.

  O my brethren, I consecrate you and point you to a new nobility: ye shall

become procreators and cultivators and sowers of the future;--

    --Verily,  not  to  a  nobility  which  ye  could  purchase  like  traders  with

traders' gold; for little worth is all that hath its price.

  Let it not be your honour henceforth whence ye come, but whither ye go!

Your Will and your feet which seek to surpass you--let these be your new

honour!

  Verily,  not  that  ye  have  served  a  prince--of  what  account  are  princes

now!--nor that ye have become a bulwark to that which standeth, that it may

stand more firmly.  Not that your family have become courtly at courts, and that ye have

learned--gay-coloured,  like  the  flamingo--to  stand  long  hours  in  shallow

pools:

    (FLITY-to-stand is a merit in courtiers; and all courtiers believe that unto

blessedness after death pertaineth--PERMISSION-to-sit!)

  Nor even that a Spirit called Holy, led your forefathers into promised

lands, which I do not praise: for where the worst of all trees grew--the cross,-

-in that land there is nothing to praise!--

  --And verily, wherever this "Holy Spirit" led its knights, always in such

campaigns  did--goats  and  geese,  and  wryheads  and  guyheads  run

FOREMOST!--

  O my brethren, not backward shall your nobility gaze, but OUTWARD!

Exiles shall ye be from all fatherlands and forefather-lands!

  Your  CHILDREN'S  LAND  shall  ye  love:  let  this  love  be  your  new

nobility,--the undiscovered in the remotest seas! For it do I bid your sails

search and search!

  Unto your children shall ye MAKE AMENDS for being the children of

your fathers: all the past shall ye THUS redeem! This new table do I place

over you!

  13.

  "Why should one live? All is vain! To live--that is to thrash straw; to live-

-that is to burn oneself and yet not get warm."--

  Such  ancient  babbling  still  passeth  for  "wisdom";  because  it  is  old,

however, and smelleth mustily, THEREFORE is it the more honoured. Even

mould ennobleth.--

  Children  might  thus  speak:  they  SHUN  the  fire  because  it  hath  burnt

them! There is much childishness in the old books of wisdom.

  And he who ever "thrasheth straw," why should he be allowed to rail at

thrashing! Such a fool one would have to muzzle!

  Such persons sit down to the table and bring nothing with them, not even

good hunger:--and then do they rail: "All is vain!"

  But to eat and drink well, my brethren, is verily no vain art! Break up,

break up for me the tables of the never-joyous ones!

  14.

  "To the clean are all things clean"--thus say the people. I, however, say

unto you: To the swine all things become swinish!

  Therefore preach the visionaries and bowed-heads (whose hearts are alsobowed down): "The world itself is a filthy monster."

  For these are all unclean spirits; especially those, however, who have no

peace  or  rest,  unless  they  see  the  world  FROM  THE  BACKSIDE--the

backworldsmen!

  TO THOSE do I say it to the face, although it sound unpleasantly: the

world resembleth man, in that it hath a backside,--SO MUCH is true!

  There is in the world much filth: SO MUCH is true! But the world itself

is not therefore a filthy monster!

  There  is  wisdom  in  the  fact  that  much  in  the  world  smelleth  badly:

loathing itself createth wings, and fountain-divining powers!

  In the best there is still something to loathe; and the best is still something

that must be surpassed!--

  O my brethren, there is much wisdom in the fact that much filth is in the

world!--

  15.

  Such sayings did I hear pious backworldsmen speak to their consciences,

and  verily  without  wickedness  or  guile,--although  there  is  nothing  more

guileful in the world, or more wicked.

  "Let the world be as it is! Raise not a finger against it!"

  "Let whoever will choke and stab and skin and scrape the people: raise

not a finger against it! Thereby will they learn to renounce the world."

  "And thine own reason--this shalt thou thyself stifle and choke; for it is a

reason of this world,--thereby wilt thou learn thyself to renounce the world."-

-

    --Shatter, shatter, O my brethren, those old tables of the pious! Tatter the

maxims of the world-maligners!--

  16.

  "He who learneth much unlearneth all violent cravings"--that do people

now whisper to one another in all the dark lanes.

  "Wisdom wearieth, nothing is worth while; thou shalt not crave!"--this

new table found I hanging even in the public markets.

  Break up for me, O my brethren, break up also that NEW table! The

weary-o'-the-world put it up, and the preachers of death and the jailer: for lo,

it is also a sermon for slavery:--

  Because they learned badly and not the best, and everything too early and

everything too fast; because they ATE badly: from thence hath resulted their

ruined stomach;--  --For a ruined stomach, is their spirit: IT persuadeth to death! For verily,

my brethren, the spirit IS a stomach!

  Life is a well of delight, but to him in whom the ruined stomach speaketh,

the father of affliction, all fountains are poisoned.

  To discern: that is DELIGHT to the lion-willed! But he who hath become

weary, is himself merely "willed"; with him play all the waves.

  And such is always the nature of weak men: they lose themselves on their

way. And at last asketh their weariness: "Why did we ever go on the way?

All is indifferent!"

  TO THEM soundeth it pleasant to have preached in their ears: "Nothing

is worth while! Ye shall not will!" That, however, is a sermon for slavery.

  O my brethren, a fresh blustering wind cometh Zarathustra unto all way-

weary ones; many noses will he yet make sneeze!

  Even  through  walls  bloweth  my  free  breath,  and  in  into  prisons  and

imprisoned spirits!

  Willing emancipateth: for willing is creating: so do I teach. And ONLY

for creating shall ye learn!

  And also the learning shall ye LEARN only from me, the learning well!--

He who hath ears let him hear!

  17.

  There  standeth  the  boat--thither  goeth  it  over,  perhaps  into  vast

nothingness--but who willeth to enter into this "Perhaps"?

  None of you want to enter into the death-boat! How should ye then be

WORLD-WEARY ones!

    World-weary ones! And have not even withdrawn from the earth! Eager

did I ever find you for the earth, amorous still of your own earth-weariness!

  Not in vain doth your lip hang down:--a small worldly wish still sitteth

thereon! And in your eye--floateth there not a cloudlet of unforgotten earthly

bliss?

  There are on the earth many good inventions, some useful, some pleasant:

for their sake is the earth to be loved.

  And many such good inventions are there, that they are like woman's

breasts: useful at the same time, and pleasant.

  Ye world-weary ones, however! Ye earth-idlers! You, shall one beat with

stripes! With stripes shall one again make you sprightly limbs.

  For  if  ye  be  not  invalids,  or  decrepit  creatures,  of  whom  the  earth  is

weary, then are ye sly sloths, or dainty, sneaking pleasure-cats. And if ye willnot again RUN gaily, then shall ye--pass away!

  To  the  incurable  shall  one  not  seek  to  be  a  physician:  thus  teacheth

Zarathustra:--so shall ye pass away!

  But more COURAGE is needed to make an end than to make a new

verse: that do all physicians and poets know well.--

  18.

  O my brethren, there are tables which weariness framed, and tables which

slothfulness framed, corrupt slothfulness: although they speak similarly, they

want to be heard differently.--

  See this languishing one! Only a span-breadth is he from his goal; but

from weariness hath he lain down obstinately in the dust, this brave one!

  From weariness yawneth he at the path, at the earth, at the goal, and at

himself: not a step further will he go,--this brave one!

  Now gloweth the sun upon him, and the dogs lick at his sweat: but he

lieth there in his obstinacy and preferreth to languish:--

  --A span-breadth from his goal, to languish! Verily, ye will have to drag

him into his heaven by the hair of his head--this hero!

  Better still that ye let him lie where he hath lain down, that sleep may

come unto him, the comforter, with cooling patter-rain.

  Let  him  lie,  until  of  his  own  accord  he  awakeneth,--until  of  his  own

accord he repudiateth all weariness, and what weariness hath taught through

him!

  Only, my brethren, see that ye scare the dogs away from him, the idle

skulkers, and all the swarming vermin:--

  --All the swarming vermin of the "cultured," that--feast on the sweat of

every hero!--

  19.

  I form circles around me and holy boundaries; ever fewer ascend with me

ever  higher  mountains:  I  build  a  mountain-range  out  of  ever  holier

mountains.--

  But wherever ye would ascend with me, O my brethren, take care lest a

PARASITE ascend with you!

  A parasite: that is a reptile, a creeping, cringing reptile, that trieth to fatten

on your infirm and sore places.

  And THIS is its art: it divineth where ascending souls are weary, in your

trouble and dejection, in your sensitive modesty, doth it build its loathsome

nest.  Where  the  strong  are  weak,  where  the  noble  are  all-too-gentle--there

buildeth it its loathsome nest; the parasite liveth where the great have small

sore-places.

  What is the highest of all species of being, and what is the lowest? The

parasite is the lowest species; he, however, who is of the highest species

feedeth most parasites.

  For the soul which hath the longest ladder, and can go deepest down: how

could there fail to be most parasites upon it?--

  --The  most  comprehensive  soul,  which  can  run  and  stray  and  rove

furthest in itself; the most necessary soul, which out of joy flingeth itself into

chance:--

  --The soul in Being, which plungeth into Becoming; the possessing soul,

which SEEKETH to attain desire and longing:--

  --The soul fleeing from itself, which overtaketh itself in the widest circuit;

the wisest soul, unto which folly speaketh most sweetly:--

  --The soul most self-loving, in which all things have their current and

counter-current, their ebb and their flow:--oh, how could THE LOFTIEST

SOUL fail to have the worst parasites?

  20.

  O my brethren, am I then cruel? But I say: What falleth, that shall one

also push!

    Everything of to-day--it falleth, it decayeth; who would preserve it! But I-

-I wish also to push it!

  Know ye the delight which rolleth stones into precipitous depths?--Those

men of to-day, see just how they roll into my depths!

  A  prelude  am  I  to  better  players,  O  my  brethren!  An  example!  DO

according to mine example!

  And  him  whom  ye  do  not  teach  to  fly,  teach  I  pray  you--TO  FALL

FASTER!--

  21.

  I love the brave: but it is not enough to be a swordsman,--one must also

know WHEREON to use swordsmanship!

  And often is it greater bravery to keep quiet and pass by, that THEREBY

one may reserve oneself for a worthier foe!

  Ye shall only have foes to be hated; but not foes to be despised: ye must

be proud of your foes. Thus have I already taught.

  For  the  worthier  foe,  O  my  brethren,  shall  ye  reserve  yourselves:therefore must ye pass by many a one,--

    --Especially  many  of  the  rabble,  who  din  your  ears  with  noise  about

people and peoples.

  Keep your eye clear of their For and Against! There is there much right,

much wrong: he who looketh on becometh wroth.

  Therein  viewing,  therein  hewing--they  are  the  same  thing:  therefore

depart into the forests and lay your sword to sleep!

  Go YOUR ways! and let the people and peoples go theirs!--gloomy ways,

verily, on which not a single hope glinteth any more!

  Let there the trader rule, where all that still glittereth is--traders' gold. It is

the  time  of  kings  no  longer:  that  which  now  calleth  itself  the  people  is

unworthy of kings.

  See how these peoples themselves now do just like the traders: they pick

up the smallest advantage out of all kinds of rubbish!

  They lay lures for one another, they lure things out of one another,--that

they call "good neighbourliness." O blessed remote period when a people said

to itself: "I will be--MASTER over peoples!"

  For, my brethren, the best shall rule, the best also WILLETH to rule! And

where the teaching is different, there--the best is LACKING.

  22.

  If THEY had--bread for nothing, alas! for what would THEY cry! Their

maintainment--that is their true entertainment; and they shall have it hard!

  Beasts of prey, are they: in their "working"--there is even plundering, in

their "earning"--there is even overreaching! Therefore shall they have it hard!

  Better beasts of prey shall they thus become, subtler, cleverer, MORE

MAN-LIKE: for man is the best beast of prey.

  All the animals hath man already robbed of their virtues: that is why of all

animals it hath been hardest for man.

  Only the birds are still beyond him. And if man should yet learn to fly,

alas! TO WHAT HEIGHT--would his rapacity fly!

  23.

  Thus would I have man and woman: fit for war, the one; fit for maternity,

the other; both, however, fit for dancing with head and legs.

  And lost be the day to us in which a measure hath not been danced. And

false be every truth which hath not had laughter along with it!

  24.

  Your marriage-arranging: see that it be not a bad ARRANGING! Ye havearranged too hastily: so there FOLLOWETH therefrom--marriage-breaking!

  And  better  marriage-breaking  than  marriage-bending,  marriage-lying!--

Thus spake a woman unto me: "Indeed, I broke the marriage, but first did the

marriage break--me!

  The badly paired found I ever the most revengeful: they make every one

suffer for it that they no longer run singly.

  On that account want I the honest ones to say to one another: "We love

each other: let us SEE TO IT that we maintain our love! Or shall our pledging

be blundering?"

  --"Give us a set term and a small marriage, that we may see if we are fit

for the great marriage! It is a great matter always to be twain."

  Thus do I counsel all honest ones; and what would be my love to the

Superman, and to all that is to come, if I should counsel and speak otherwise!

  Not only to propagate yourselves onwards but UPWARDS--thereto, O

my brethren, may the garden of marriage help you!

  25.

  He who hath grown wise concerning old origins, lo, he will at last seek

after the fountains of the future and new origins.--

  O my brethren, not long will it be until NEW PEOPLES shall arise and

new fountains shall rush down into new depths.

  For  the  earthquake--it  choketh  up  many  wells,  it  causeth  much

languishing: but it bringeth also to light inner powers and secrets.

  The earthquake discloseth new fountains. In the earthquake of old peoples

new fountains burst forth.

  And whoever calleth out: "Lo, here is a well for many thirsty ones, one

heart for many longing ones, one will for many instruments":--around him

collecteth a PEOPLE, that is to say, many attempting ones.

  Who can command, who must obey--THAT IS THERE ATTEMPTED!

Ah,  with  what  long  seeking  and  solving  and  failing  and  learning  and  re-

attempting!

    Human society: it is an attempt--so I teach--a long seeking: it seeketh

however the ruler!--

  --An  attempt,  my  brethren!  And  NO  "contract"!  Destroy,  I  pray  you,

destroy that word of the soft-hearted and half-and-half!

  26.

  O my brethren! With whom lieth the greatest danger to the whole human

future? Is it not with the good and just?--  --As those who say and feel in their hearts: "We already know what is

good and just, we possess it also; woe to those who still seek thereafter!

  And  whatever  harm  the  wicked  may  do,  the  harm  of  the  good  is  the

harmfulest harm!

  And whatever harm the world-maligners may do, the harm of the good is

the harmfulest harm!

  O my brethren, into the hearts of the good and just looked some one once

on a time, who said: "They are the Pharisees." But people did not understand

him.

  The good and just themselves were not free to understand him; their spirit

was  imprisoned  in  their  good  conscience.  The  stupidity  of  the  good  is

unfathomably wise.

  It is the truth, however, that the good MUST be Pharisees--they have no

choice!

  The good MUST crucify him who deviseth his own virtue! That IS the

truth!

  The  second  one,  however,  who  discovered  their  country--the  country,

heart and soil of the good and just,--it was he who asked: "Whom do they

hate most?"

  The CREATOR, hate they most, him who breaketh the tables and old

values, the breaker,--him they call the law-breaker.

  For the good--they CANNOT create; they are always the beginning of the

end:--

  --They crucify him who writeth new values on new tables, they sacrifice

UNTO THEMSELVES the future--they crucify the whole human future!

  The good--they have always been the beginning of the end.--

  27.

  O my brethren, have ye also understood this word? And what I once said

of the "last man"?--

  With whom lieth the greatest danger to the whole human future? Is it not

with the good and just?

  BREAK UP, BREAK UP, I PRAY YOU, THE GOOD AND JUST!--O

my brethren, have ye understood also this word?

  28.

  Ye flee from me? Ye are frightened? Ye tremble at this word?

  O my brethren, when I enjoined you to break up the good, and the tables

of the good, then only did I embark man on his high seas.  And now only cometh unto him the great terror, the great outlook, the

great sickness, the great nausea, the great sea-sickness.

  False shores and false securities did the good teach you; in the lies of the

good were ye born and bred. Everything hath been radically contorted and

distorted by the good.

  But he who discovered the country of "man," discovered also the country

of "man's future." Now shall ye be sailors for me, brave, patient!

  Keep yourselves up betimes, my brethren, learn to keep yourselves up!

The sea stormeth: many seek to raise themselves again by you.

  The sea stormeth: all is in the sea. Well! Cheer up! Ye old seaman-hearts!

  What  of  fatherland!  THITHER  striveth  our  helm  where  our

CHILDREN'S LAND is! Thitherwards, stormier than the sea, stormeth our

great longing!--

  29.

  "Why so hard!"--said to the diamond one day the charcoal; "are we then

not near relatives?"--

  Why so soft? O my brethren; thus do I ask you: are ye then not--my

brethren?

  Why so soft, so submissive and yielding? Why is there so much negation

and abnegation in your hearts? Why is there so little fate in your looks?

  And if ye will not be fates and inexorable ones, how can ye one day--

conquer with me?

  And if your hardness will not glance and cut and chip to pieces, how can

ye one day--create with me?

  For the creators are hard. And blessedness must it seem to you to press

your hand upon millenniums as upon wax,--

    --Blessedness  to  write  upon  the  will  of  millenniums  as  upon  brass,--

harder than brass, nobler than brass. Entirely hard is only the noblest.

  This new table, O my brethren, put I up over you: BECOME HARD!--

  30.

  O thou, my Will! Thou change of every need, MY needfulness! Preserve

me from all small victories!

  Thou  fatedness  of  my  soul,  which  I  call  fate!  Thou  In-me!  Over-me!

Preserve and spare me for one great fate!

  And thy last greatness, my Will, spare it for thy last--that thou mayest be

inexorable IN thy victory! Ah, who hath not succumbed to his victory!

  Ah, whose eye hath not bedimmed in this intoxicated twilight! Ah, whosefoot hath not faltered and forgotten in victory--how to stand!--

  --That I may one day be ready and ripe in the great noontide: ready and

ripe like the glowing ore, the lightning-bearing cloud, and the swelling milk-

udder:--

  --Ready for myself and for my most hidden Will: a bow eager for its

arrow, an arrow eager for its star:--

  --A  star,  ready  and  ripe  in  its  noontide,  glowing,  pierced,  blessed,  by

annihilating sun-arrows:--

  --A  sun  itself,  and  an  inexorable  sun-will,  ready  for  annihilation  in

victory!

  O Will, thou change of every need, MY needfulness! Spare me for one

great victory!---

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

  LVII. THE CONVALESCENT.

  1.

  One morning, not long after his return to his cave, Zarathustra sprang up

from his couch like a madman, crying with a frightful voice, and acting as if

some one still lay on the couch who did not wish to rise. Zarathustra's voice

also resounded in such a manner that his animals came to him frightened, and

out of all the neighbouring caves and lurking-places all the creatures slipped

away--flying, fluttering, creeping or leaping, according to their variety of foot

or wing. Zarathustra, however, spake these words:

  Up, abysmal thought out of my depth! I am thy cock and morning dawn,

thou overslept reptile: Up! Up! My voice shall soon crow thee awake!

  Unbind the fetters of thine ears: listen! For I wish to hear thee! Up! Up!

There is thunder enough to make the very graves listen!

  And rub the sleep and all the dimness and blindness out of thine eyes!

Hear me also with thine eyes: my voice is a medicine even for those born

blind.

  And once thou art awake, then shalt thou ever remain awake. It is not MY

custom to awake great-grandmothers out of their sleep that I may bid them--

sleep on!

  Thou stirrest, stretchest thyself, wheezest? Up! Up! Not wheeze, shalt

thou,--but speak unto me! Zarathustra calleth thee, Zarathustra the godless!

  I,  Zarathustra,  the  advocate  of  living,  the  advocate  of  suffering,  the

advocate of the circuit--thee do I call, my most abysmal thought!

  Joy  to  me!  Thou  comest,--I  hear  thee!  Mine  abyss  SPEAKETH,  mylowest depth have I turned over into the light!

  Joy to me! Come hither! Give me thy hand--ha! let be! aha!--Disgust,

disgust, disgust--alas to me!

  2.

  Hardly, however, had Zarathustra spoken these words, when he fell down

as one dead, and remained long as one dead. When however he again came to

himself, then was he pale and trembling, and remained lying; and for long he

would neither eat nor drink. This condition continued for seven days; his

animals, however, did not leave him day nor night, except that the eagle flew

forth to fetch food. And what it fetched and foraged, it laid on Zarathustra's

couch: so that Zarathustra at last lay among yellow and red berries, grapes,

rosy apples, sweet-smelling herbage, and pine-cones. At his feet, however,

two lambs were stretched, which the eagle had with difficulty carried off

from their shepherds.

  At last, after seven days, Zarathustra raised himself upon his couch, took

a rosy apple in his hand, smelt it and found its smell pleasant. Then did his

animals think the time had come to speak unto him.

  "O Zarathustra," said they, "now hast thou lain thus for seven days with

heavy eyes: wilt thou not set thyself again upon thy feet?

  Step out of thy cave: the world waiteth for thee as a garden. The wind

playeth with heavy fragrance which seeketh for thee; and all brooks would

like to run after thee.

  All things long for thee, since thou hast remained alone for seven days--

step forth out of thy cave! All things want to be thy physicians!

  Did  perhaps  a  new  knowledge  come  to  thee,  a  bitter,  grievous

knowledge?  Like  leavened  dough  layest  thou,  thy  soul  arose  and  swelled

beyond all its bounds.--"

  --O mine animals, answered Zarathustra, talk on thus and let me listen! It

refresheth me so to hear your talk: where there is talk, there is the world as a

garden unto me.

  How charming it is that there are words and tones; are not words and

tones rainbows and seeming bridges 'twixt the eternally separated?

  To each soul belongeth another world; to each soul is every other soul a

back-world.

  Among the most alike doth semblance deceive most delightfully: for the

smallest gap is most difficult to bridge over.

  For me--how could there be an outside-of-me? There is no outside! Butthis we forget on hearing tones; how delightful it is that we forget!

  Have not names and tones been given unto things that man may refresh

himself with them? It is a beautiful folly, speaking; therewith danceth man

over everything.

  How lovely is all speech and all falsehoods of tones! With tones danceth

our love on variegated rainbows.--

  --"O  Zarathustra,"  said  then  his  animals,  "to  those  who  think  like  us,

things all dance themselves: they come and hold out the hand and laugh and

flee--and return.

    Everything  goeth,  everything  returneth;  eternally  rolleth  the  wheel  of

existence.  Everything  dieth,  everything  blossometh  forth  again;  eternally

runneth on the year of existence.

    Everything  breaketh,  everything  is  integrated  anew;  eternally  buildeth

itself the same house of existence. All things separate, all things again greet

one another; eternally true to itself remaineth the ring of existence.

  Every moment beginneth existence, around every 'Here' rolleth the ball

'There.' The middle is everywhere. Crooked is the path of eternity."--

  --O ye wags and barrel-organs! answered Zarathustra, and smiled once

more, how well do ye know what had to be fulfilled in seven days:--

  --And how that monster crept into my throat and choked me! But I bit off

its head and spat it away from me.

  And ye--ye have made a lyre-lay out of it? Now, however, do I lie here,

still exhausted with that biting and spitting-away, still sick with mine own

salvation.

  AND YE LOOKED ON AT IT ALL? O mine animals, are ye also cruel?

Did ye like to look at my great pain as men do? For man is the cruellest

animal.

  At tragedies, bull-fights, and crucifixions hath he hitherto been happiest

on earth; and when he invented his hell, behold, that was his heaven on earth.

  When the great man crieth--: immediately runneth the little man thither,

and  his  tongue  hangeth  out  of  his  mouth  for  very  lusting.  He,  however,

calleth it his "pity."

  The little man, especially the poet--how passionately doth he accuse life

in words! Hearken to him, but do not fail to hear the delight which is in all

accusation!

  Such accusers of life--them life overcometh with a glance of the eye.

"Thou lovest me?" saith the insolent one; "wait a little, as yet have I no timefor thee."

    Towards  himself  man  is  the  cruellest  animal;  and  in  all  who  call

themselves  "sinners"  and  "bearers  of  the  cross"  and  "penitents,"  do  not

overlook the voluptuousness in their plaints and accusations!

  And I myself--do I thereby want to be man's accuser? Ah, mine animals,

this only have I learned hitherto, that for man his baddest is necessary for his

best,--

  --That all that is baddest is the best POWER, and the hardest stone for the

highest creator; and that man must become better AND badder:--

  Not to THIS torture-stake was I tied, that I know man is bad,--but I cried,

as no one hath yet cried:

  "Ah, that his baddest is so very small! Ah, that his best is so very small!"

  The great disgust at man--IT strangled me and had crept into my throat:

and what the soothsayer had presaged: "All is alike, nothing is worth while,

knowledge strangleth."

  A long twilight limped on before me, a fatally weary, fatally intoxicated

sadness, which spake with yawning mouth.

    "Eternally he returneth, the man of whom thou art weary, the small man"-

-so yawned my sadness, and dragged its foot and could not go to sleep.

  A cavern, became the human earth to me; its breast caved in; everything

living became to me human dust and bones and mouldering past.

  My  sighing  sat  on  all  human  graves,  and  could  no  longer  arise:  my

sighing and questioning croaked and choked, and gnawed and nagged day

and night:

  --"Ah, man returneth eternally! The small man returneth eternally!"

  Naked had I once seen both of them, the greatest man and the smallest

man: all too like one another--all too human, even the greatest man!

  All too small, even the greatest man!--that was my disgust at man! And

the  eternal  return  also  of  the  smallest  man!--that  was  my  disgust  at  all

existence!

  Ah, Disgust! Disgust! Disgust!--Thus spake Zarathustra, and sighed and

shuddered; for he remembered his sickness. Then did his animals prevent him

from speaking further.

  "Do not speak further, thou convalescent!"--so answered his animals, "but

go out where the world waiteth for thee like a garden.

  Go  out  unto  the  roses,  the  bees,  and  the  flocks  of  doves!  Especially,

however, unto the singing-birds, to learn SINGING from them!  For singing is for the convalescent; the sound ones may talk. And when

the sound also want songs, then want they other songs than the convalescent."

  --"O ye wags and barrel-organs, do be silent!" answered Zarathustra, and

smiled at his animals. "How well ye know what consolation I devised for

myself in seven days!

  That I have to sing once more--THAT consolation did I devise for myself,

and THIS convalescence: would ye also make another lyre-lay thereof?"

  --"Do not talk further," answered his animals once more; "rather, thou

convalescent, prepare for thyself first a lyre, a new lyre!

  For behold, O Zarathustra! For thy new lays there are needed new lyres.

  Sing and bubble over, O Zarathustra, heal thy soul with new lays: that

thou mayest bear thy great fate, which hath not yet been any one's fate!

  For thine animals know it well, O Zarathustra, who thou art and must

become:  behold,  THOU  ART  THE  TEACHER  OF  THE  ETERNAL

RETURN,--that is now THY fate!

  That thou must be the first to teach this teaching--how could this great

fate not be thy greatest danger and infirmity!

    Behold, we know what thou teachest: that all things eternally return, and

ourselves with them, and that we have already existed times without number,

and all things with us.

  Thou teachest that there is a great year of Becoming, a prodigy of a great

year; it must, like a sand-glass, ever turn up anew, that it may anew run down

and run out:--

  --So that all those years are like one another in the greatest and also in the

smallest, so that we ourselves, in every great year, are like ourselves in the

greatest and also in the smallest.

  And if thou wouldst now die, O Zarathustra, behold, we know also how

thou wouldst then speak to thyself:--but thine animals beseech thee not to die

yet!

  Thou wouldst speak, and without trembling, buoyant rather with bliss, for

a great weight and worry would be taken from thee, thou patientest one!--

  'Now do I die and disappear,' wouldst thou say, 'and in a moment I am

nothing. Souls are as mortal as bodies.

  But  the  plexus  of  causes  returneth  in  which  I  am  intertwined,--it  will

again create me! I myself pertain to the causes of the eternal return.

  I  come  again  with  this  sun,  with  this  earth,  with  this  eagle,  with  this

serpent--NOT to a new life, or a better life, or a similar life:  --I come again eternally to this identical and selfsame life, in its greatest

and its smallest, to teach again the eternal return of all things,--

  --To speak again the word of the great noontide of earth and man, to

announce again to man the Superman.

  I  have  spoken  my  word.  I  break  down  by  my  word:  so  willeth  mine

eternal fate--as announcer do I succumb!

  The  hour  hath  now  come  for  the  down-goer  to  bless  himself.  Thus--

ENDETH Zarathustra's down-going.'"--

  When the animals had spoken these words they were silent and waited, so

that Zarathustra might say something to them: but Zarathustra did not hear

that they were silent. On the contrary, he lay quietly with closed eyes like a

person sleeping, although he did not sleep; for he communed just then with

his soul. The serpent, however, and the eagle, when they found him silent in

such wise, respected the great stillness around him, and prudently retired.

  LVIII. THE GREAT LONGING.

  O my soul, I have taught thee to say "to-day" as "once on a time" and

"formerly," and to dance thy measure over every Here and There and Yonder.

  O my soul, I delivered thee from all by-places, I brushed down from thee

dust and spiders and twilight.

  O my soul, I washed the petty shame and the by-place virtue from thee,

and persuaded thee to stand naked before the eyes of the sun.

  With the storm that is called "spirit" did I blow over thy surging sea; all

clouds did I blow away from it; I strangled even the strangler called "sin."

  O my soul, I gave thee the right to say Nay like the storm, and to say Yea

as the open heaven saith Yea: calm as the light remainest thou, and now

walkest through denying storms.

  O my soul, I restored to thee liberty over the created and the uncreated;

and who knoweth, as thou knowest, the voluptuousness of the future?

  O my soul, I taught thee the contempt which doth not come like worm-

eating,  the  great,  the  loving  contempt,  which  loveth  most  where  it

contemneth most.

  O my soul, I taught thee so to persuade that thou persuadest even the

grounds themselves to thee: like the sun, which persuadeth even the sea to its

height.

  O my soul, I have taken from thee all obeying and knee-bending and

homage-paying; I have myself given thee the names, "Change of need" and

"Fate."  O my soul, I have given thee new names and gay-coloured playthings, I

have called thee "Fate" and "the Circuit of circuits" and "the Navel-string of

time" and "the Azure bell."

  O my soul, to thy domain gave I all wisdom to drink, all new wines, and

also all immemorially old strong wines of wisdom.

  O my soul, every sun shed I upon thee, and every night and every silence

and every longing:--then grewest thou up for me as a vine.

  O my soul, exuberant and heavy dost thou now stand forth, a vine with

swelling udders and full clusters of brown golden grapes:--

  --Filled and weighted by thy happiness, waiting from superabundance,

and yet ashamed of thy waiting.

  O my soul, there is nowhere a soul which could be more loving and more

comprehensive and more extensive! Where could future and past be closer

together than with thee?

  O my soul, I have given thee everything, and all my hands have become

empty  by  thee:--and  now!  Now  sayest  thou  to  me,  smiling  and  full  of

melancholy: "Which of us oweth thanks?--

  --Doth  the  giver  not  owe  thanks  because  the  receiver  received?  Is

bestowing not a necessity? Is receiving not--pitying?"--

  O  my  soul,  I  understand  the  smiling  of  thy  melancholy:  thine  over-

abundance itself now stretcheth out longing hands!

  Thy fulness looketh forth over raging seas, and seeketh and waiteth: the

longing of over-fulness looketh forth from the smiling heaven of thine eyes!

  And verily, O my soul! Who could see thy smiling and not melt into

tears? The angels themselves melt into tears through the over-graciousness of

thy smiling.

  Thy graciousness and over-graciousness, is it which will not complain

and  weep:  and  yet,  O  my  soul,  longeth  thy  smiling  for  tears,  and  thy

trembling mouth for sobs.

  "Is not all weeping complaining? And all complaining, accusing?" Thus

speakest thou to thyself; and therefore, O my soul, wilt thou rather smile than

pour forth thy grief--

  --Than in gushing tears pour forth all thy grief concerning thy fulness,

and concerning the craving of the vine for the vintager and vintage-knife!

  But wilt thou not weep, wilt thou not weep forth thy purple melancholy,

then  wilt  thou  have  to  SING,  O  my  soul!--Behold,  I  smile  myself,  who

foretell thee this:  --Thou wilt have to sing with passionate song, until all seas turn calm to

hearken unto thy longing,--

  --Until over calm longing seas the bark glideth, the golden marvel, around

the gold of which all good, bad, and marvellous things frisk:--

  --Also  many  large  and  small  animals,  and  everything  that  hath  light

marvellous feet, so that it can run on violet-blue paths,--

  --Towards the golden marvel, the spontaneous bark, and its master: he,

however, is the vintager who waiteth with the diamond vintage-knife,--

  --Thy  great  deliverer,  O  my  soul,  the  nameless  one--for  whom  future

songs only will find names! And verily, already hath thy breath the fragrance

of future songs,--

    --Already glowest thou and dreamest, already drinkest thou thirstily at all

deep echoing wells of consolation, already reposeth thy melancholy in the

bliss of future songs!--

  O my soul, now have I given thee all, and even my last possession, and

all my hands have become empty by thee:--THAT I BADE THEE SING,

behold, that was my last thing to give!

  That I bade thee sing,--say now, say: WHICH of us now--oweth thanks?--

Better still, however: sing unto me, sing, O my soul! And let me thank thee!--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                        LIX. THE SECOND DANCE-SONG.

  1.

  "Into thine eyes gazed I lately, O Life: gold saw I gleam in thy night-

eyes,--my heart stood still with delight:

  --A golden bark saw I gleam on darkened waters, a sinking, drinking,

reblinking, golden swing-bark!

  At my dance-frantic foot, dost thou cast a glance, a laughing, questioning,

melting, thrown glance:

  Twice only movedst thou thy rattle with thy little hands--then did my feet

swing with dance-fury.--

  My heels reared aloft, my toes they hearkened,--thee they would know:

hath not the dancer his ear--in his toe!

  Unto thee did I spring: then fledst thou back from my bound; and towards

me waved thy fleeing, flying tresses round!

  Away from thee did I spring, and from thy snaky tresses: then stoodst

thou there half-turned, and in thine eye caresses.

  With crooked glances--dost thou teach me crooked courses; on crookedcourses learn my feet--crafty fancies!

  I  fear  thee  near,  I  love  thee  far;  thy  flight  allureth  me,  thy  seeking

secureth me:--I suffer, but for thee, what would I not gladly bear!

  For  thee,  whose  coldness  inflameth,  whose  hatred  misleadeth,  whose

flight enchaineth, whose mockery--pleadeth:

  --Who would not hate thee, thou great bindress, inwindress, temptress,

seekress, findress! Who would not love thee, thou innocent, impatient, wind-

swift, child-eyed sinner!

  Whither  pullest  thou  me  now,  thou  paragon  and  tomboy?  And  now

foolest thou me fleeing; thou sweet romp dost annoy!

  I dance after thee, I follow even faint traces lonely. Where art thou? Give

me thy hand! Or thy finger only!

  Here are caves and thickets: we shall go astray!--Halt! Stand still! Seest

thou not owls and bats in fluttering fray?

  Thou bat! Thou owl! Thou wouldst play me foul? Where are we? From

the dogs hast thou learned thus to bark and howl.

  Thou gnashest on me sweetly with little white teeth; thine evil eyes shoot

out upon me, thy curly little mane from underneath!

  This is a dance over stock and stone: I am the hunter,--wilt thou be my

hound, or my chamois anon?

  Now beside me! And quickly, wickedly springing! Now up! And over!--

Alas! I have fallen myself overswinging!

  Oh, see me lying, thou arrogant one, and imploring grace! Gladly would I

walk with thee--in some lovelier place!

  --In the paths of love, through bushes variegated, quiet, trim! Or there

along the lake, where gold-fishes dance and swim!

  Thou art now a-weary? There above are sheep and sun-set stripes: is it not

sweet to sleep--the shepherd pipes?

  Thou art so very weary? I carry thee thither; let just thine arm sink! And

art thou thirsty--I should have something; but thy mouth would not like it to

drink!--

  --Oh, that cursed, nimble, supple serpent and lurking-witch! Where art

thou gone? But in my face do I feel through thy hand, two spots and red

blotches itch!

  I am verily weary of it, ever thy sheepish shepherd to be. Thou witch, if I

have hitherto sung unto thee, now shalt THOU--cry unto me!

  To the rhythm of my whip shalt thou dance and cry! I forget not mywhip?--Not I!"--

  2.

  Then did Life answer me thus, and kept thereby her fine ears closed:

  "O Zarathustra! Crack not so terribly with thy whip! Thou knowest surely

that  noise  killeth  thought,--and  just  now  there  came  to  me  such  delicate

thoughts.

  We are both of us genuine ne'er-do-wells and ne'er-do-ills. Beyond good

and  evil  found  we  our  island  and  our  green  meadow--we  two  alone!

Therefore must we be friendly to each other!

  And even should we not love each other from the bottom of our hearts,--

must we then have a grudge against each other if we do not love each other

perfectly?

  And that I am friendly to thee, and often too friendly, that knowest thou:

and the reason is that I am envious of thy Wisdom. Ah, this mad old fool,

Wisdom!

  If thy Wisdom should one day run away from thee, ah! then would also

my love run away from thee quickly."--

  Thereupon did Life look thoughtfully behind and around, and said softly:

"O Zarathustra, thou art not faithful enough to me!

  Thou lovest me not nearly so much as thou sayest; I know thou thinkest

of soon leaving me.

  There is an old heavy, heavy, booming-clock: it boometh by night up to

thy cave:--

  --When thou hearest this clock strike the hours at midnight, then thinkest

thou between one and twelve thereon--

  --Thou thinkest thereon, O Zarathustra, I know it--of soon leaving me!"--

  "Yea," answered I, hesitatingly, "but thou knowest it also"--And I said

something into her ear, in amongst her confused, yellow, foolish tresses.

  "Thou KNOWEST that, O Zarathustra? That knoweth no one--"

  And we gazed at each other, and looked at the green meadow o'er which

the cool evening was just passing, and we wept together.--Then, however,

was Life dearer unto me than all my Wisdom had ever been.--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

  3.

  One!

  O man! Take heed!

  Two!  What saith deep midnight's voice indeed?

  Three!

  "I slept my sleep--

  Four!

  "From deepest dream I've woke and plead:--

  Five!

  "The world is deep,

  Six!

  "And deeper than the day could read.

  Seven!

  "Deep is its woe--

  Eight!

    "Joy--deeper still than grief can be:

  Nine!

  "Woe saith: Hence! Go!

  Ten!

  "But joys all want eternity--

  Eleven!

  "Want deep profound eternity!"

  Twelve!

                              LX. THE SEVEN SEALS.

  (OR THE YEA AND AMEN LAY.)

  1.

  If I be a diviner and full of the divining spirit which wandereth on high

mountain-ridges, 'twixt two seas,--

    Wandereth  'twixt  the  past  and  the  future  as  a  heavy  cloud--hostile  to

sultry plains, and to all that is weary and can neither die nor live:

  Ready for lightning in its dark bosom, and for the redeeming flash of

light, charged with lightnings which say Yea! which laugh Yea! ready for

divining flashes of lightning:--

    --Blessed, however, is he who is thus charged! And verily, long must he

hang like a heavy tempest on the mountain, who shall one day kindle the light

of the future!--

  Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity and for the marriage-ring of

rings--the ring of the return?

  Never  yet  have  I  found  the  woman  by  whom  I  should  like  to  have

children, unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!  FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

  2.

  If  ever  my  wrath  hath  burst  graves,  shifted  landmarks,  or  rolled  old

shattered tables into precipitous depths:

  If ever my scorn hath scattered mouldered words to the winds, and if I

have come like a besom to cross-spiders, and as a cleansing wind to old

charnel-houses:

  If ever I have sat rejoicing where old Gods lie buried, world-blessing,

world-loving, beside the monuments of old world-maligners:--

  --For even churches and Gods'-graves do I love, if only heaven looketh

through their ruined roofs with pure eyes; gladly do I sit like grass and red

poppies on ruined churches--

  Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of

rings--the ring of the return?

  Never  yet  have  I  found  the  woman  by  whom  I  should  like  to  have

children, unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

  FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

  3.

  If  ever  a  breath  hath  come  to  me  of  the  creative  breath,  and  of  the

heavenly necessity which compelleth even chances to dance star-dances:

  If ever I have laughed with the laughter of the creative lightning, to which

the long thunder of the deed followeth, grumblingly, but obediently:

  If ever I have played dice with the Gods at the divine table of the earth, so

that the earth quaked and ruptured, and snorted forth fire-streams:--

  --For a divine table is the earth, and trembling with new creative dictums

and dice-casts of the Gods:

  Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of

rings--the ring of the return?

  Never  yet  have  I  found  the  woman  by  whom  I  should  like  to  have

children, unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

  FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

  4.

  If ever I have drunk a full draught of the foaming spice- and confection-

bowl in which all things are well mixed:

  If ever my hand hath mingled the furthest with the nearest, fire with spirit,

joy with sorrow, and the harshest with the kindest:

  If I myself am a grain of the saving salt which maketh everything in theconfection-bowl mix well:--

  --For there is a salt which uniteth good with evil; and even the evilest is

worthy, as spicing and as final over-foaming:--

  Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of

rings--the ring of the return?

  Never  yet  have  I  found  the  woman  by  whom  I  should  like  to  have

children, unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

  FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

  5.

  If I be fond of the sea, and all that is sealike, and fondest of it when it

angrily contradicteth me:

  If  the  exploring  delight  be  in  me,  which  impelleth  sails  to  the

undiscovered, if the seafarer's delight be in my delight:

  If ever my rejoicing hath called out: "The shore hath vanished,--now hath

fallen from me the last chain--

  The boundless roareth around me, far away sparkle for me space and

time,--well! cheer up! old heart!"--

  Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of

rings--the ring of the return?

  Never  yet  have  I  found  the  woman  by  whom  I  should  like  to  have

children, unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

  FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

  6.

  If my virtue be a dancer's virtue, and if I have often sprung with both feet

into golden-emerald rapture:

  If my wickedness be a laughing wickedness, at home among rose-banks

and hedges of lilies:

  --For in laughter is all evil present, but it is sanctified and absolved by its

own bliss:--

  And if it be my Alpha and Omega that everything heavy shall become

light, every body a dancer, and every spirit a bird: and verily, that is my

Alpha and Omega!--

  Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of

rings--the ring of the return?

  Never  yet  have  I  found  the  woman  by  whom  I  should  like  to  have

children, unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

  FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!  7.

  If ever I have spread out a tranquil heaven above me, and have flown into

mine own heaven with mine own pinions:

  If  I  have  swum  playfully  in  profound  luminous  distances,  and  if  my

freedom's avian wisdom hath come to me:--

  --Thus however speaketh avian wisdom:--"Lo, there is no above and no

below! Throw thyself about,--outward, backward, thou light one! Sing! speak

no more!

  --Are not all words made for the heavy? Do not all words lie to the light

ones? Sing! speak no more!"--

  Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of

rings--the ring of the return?

  Never  yet  have  I  found  the  woman  by  whom  I  should  like  to  have

children, unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

  FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

                              FOURTH AND LAST PART.

  Ah,  where  in  the  world  have  there  been  greater  follies  than  with  the

pitiful? And what in the world hath caused more suffering than the follies of

the pitiful?

  Woe unto all loving ones who have not an elevation which is above their

pity!

  Thus spake the devil unto me, once on a time: "Even God hath his hell: it

is his love for man."

  And lately did I hear him say these words: "God is dead: of his pity for

man hath God died."--ZARATHUSTRA, II., "The Pitiful."

                          LXI. THE HONEY SACRIFICE.

  --And  again  passed  moons  and  years  over  Zarathustra's  soul,  and  he

heeded it not; his hair, however, became white. One day when he sat on a

stone  in  front  of  his  cave,  and  gazed  calmly  into  the  distance--one  there

gazeth  out  on  the  sea,  and  away  beyond  sinuous  abysses,--then  went  his

animals thoughtfully round about him, and at last set themselves in front of

him.

  "O Zarathustra," said they, "gazest thou out perhaps for thy happiness?"--

"Of what account is my happiness!" answered he, "I have long ceased to

strive any more for happiness, I strive for my work."--"O Zarathustra," said

the animals once more, "that sayest thou as one who hath overmuch of good

things. Liest thou not in a sky-blue lake of happiness?"--"Ye wags," answeredZarathustra, and smiled, "how well did ye choose the simile! But ye know

also  that  my  happiness  is  heavy,  and  not  like  a  fluid  wave  of  water:  it

presseth me and will not leave me, and is like molten pitch."--

  Then  went  his  animals  again  thoughtfully  around  him,  and  placed

themselves  once  more  in  front  of  him.  "O  Zarathustra,"  said  they,  "it  is

consequently  FOR  THAT  REASON  that  thou  thyself  always  becometh

yellower and darker, although thy hair looketh white and flaxen? Lo, thou

sittest  in  thy  pitch!"--"What  do  ye  say,  mine  animals?"  said  Zarathustra,

laughing; "verily I reviled when I spake of pitch. As it happeneth with me, so

is it with all fruits that turn ripe. It is the HONEY in my veins that maketh my

blood  thicker,  and  also  my  soul  stiller."--"So  will  it  be,  O  Zarathustra,"

answered his animals, and pressed up to him; "but wilt thou not to-day ascend

a high mountain? The air is pure, and to-day one seeth more of the world than

ever."--"Yea,  mine  animals,"  answered  he,  "ye  counsel  admirably  and

according to my heart: I will to-day ascend a high mountain! But see that

honey is there ready to hand, yellow, white, good, ice-cool, golden-comb-

honey. For know that when aloft I will make the honey-sacrifice."--

  When Zarathustra, however, was aloft on the summit, he sent his animals

home that had accompanied him, and found that he was now alone:--then he

laughed from the bottom of his heart, looked around him, and spake thus:

  That I spake of sacrifices and honey-sacrifices, it was merely a ruse in

talking and verily, a useful folly! Here aloft can I now speak freer than in

front of mountain-caves and anchorites' domestic animals.

  What  to  sacrifice!  I  squander  what  is  given  me,  a  squanderer  with  a

thousand hands: how could I call that--sacrificing?

  And  when  I  desired  honey  I  only  desired  bait,  and  sweet  mucus  and

mucilage, for which even the mouths of growling bears, and strange, sulky,

evil birds, water:

  --The best bait, as huntsmen and fishermen require it. For if the world be

as a gloomy forest of animals, and a pleasure-ground for all wild huntsmen, it

seemeth to me rather--and preferably--a fathomless, rich sea;

  --A sea full of many-hued fishes and crabs, for which even the Gods

might long, and might be tempted to become fishers in it, and casters of nets,-

-so rich is the world in wonderful things, great and small!

  Especially the human world, the human sea:--towards IT do I now throw

out my golden angle-rod and say: Open up, thou human abyss!

  Open up, and throw unto me thy fish and shining crabs! With my best baitshall I allure to myself to-day the strangest human fish!

  --My happiness itself do I throw out into all places far and wide 'twixt

orient, noontide, and occident, to see if many human fish will not learn to hug

and tug at my happiness;--

  Until, biting at my sharp hidden hooks, they have to come up unto MY

height, the motleyest abyss-groundlings, to the wickedest of all fishers of

men.

  For THIS am I from the heart and from the beginning--drawing, hither-

drawing, upward-drawing, upbringing; a drawer, a trainer, a training-master,

who not in vain counselled himself once on a time: "Become what thou art!"

  Thus may men now come UP to me; for as yet do I await the signs that it

is time for my down-going; as yet do I not myself go down, as I must do,

amongst men.

  Therefore do I here wait, crafty and scornful upon high mountains, no

impatient one, no patient one; rather one who hath even unlearnt patience,--

because he no longer "suffereth."

  For my fate giveth me time: it hath forgotten me perhaps? Or doth it sit

behind a big stone and catch flies?

  And verily, I am well-disposed to mine eternal fate, because it doth not

hound and hurry me, but leaveth me time for merriment and mischief; so that

I have to-day ascended this high mountain to catch fish.

  Did ever any one catch fish upon high mountains? And though it be a

folly what I here seek and do, it is better so than that down below I should

become solemn with waiting, and green and yellow--

  --A  posturing  wrath-snorter  with  waiting,  a  holy  howl-storm  from  the

mountains, an impatient one that shouteth down into the valleys: "Hearken,

else I will scourge you with the scourge of God!"

  Not  that  I  would  have  a  grudge  against  such  wrathful  ones  on  that

account: they are well enough for laughter to me! Impatient must they now

be, those big alarm-drums, which find a voice now or never!

  Myself, however, and my fate--we do not talk to the Present, neither do

we talk to the Never: for talking we have patience and time and more than

time. For one day must it yet come, and may not pass by.

  What must one day come and may not pass by? Our great Hazar, that is to

say,  our  great,  remote  human-kingdom,  the  Zarathustra-kingdom  of  a

thousand years--

  How remote may such "remoteness" be? What doth it concern me? Buton that account it is none the less sure unto me--, with both feet stand I secure

on this ground;

  --On an eternal ground, on hard primary rock, on this highest, hardest,

primary  mountain-ridge,  unto  which  all  winds  come,  as  unto  the  storm-

parting, asking Where? and Whence? and Whither?

  Here laugh, laugh, my hearty, healthy wickedness! From high mountains

cast down thy glittering scorn-laughter! Allure for me with thy glittering the

finest human fish!

  And whatever belongeth unto ME in all seas, my in-and-for-me in all

things--fish THAT out for me, bring THAT up to me: for that do I wait, the

wickedest of all fish-catchers.

  Out! out! my fishing-hook! In and down, thou bait of my happiness! Drip

thy sweetest dew, thou honey of my heart! Bite, my fishing-hook, into the

belly of all black affliction!

  Look out, look out, mine eye! Oh, how many seas round about me, what

dawning  human  futures!  And  above  me--what  rosy  red  stillness!  What

unclouded silence!

                            LXII. THE CRY OF DISTRESS.

  The next day sat Zarathustra again on the stone in front of his cave, whilst

his animals roved about in the world outside to bring home new food,--also

new honey: for Zarathustra had spent and wasted the old honey to the very

last particle. When he thus sat, however, with a stick in his hand, tracing the

shadow of his figure on the earth, and reflecting--verily! not upon himself

and his shadow,--all at once he startled and shrank back: for he saw another

shadow beside his own. And when he hastily looked around and stood up,

behold, there stood the soothsayer beside him, the same whom he had once

given to eat and drink at his table, the proclaimer of the great weariness, who

taught: "All is alike, nothing is worth while, the world is without meaning,

knowledge  strangleth."  But  his  face  had  changed  since  then;  and  when

Zarathustra looked into his eyes, his heart was startled once more: so much

evil announcement and ashy-grey lightnings passed over that countenance.

  The soothsayer, who had perceived what went on in Zarathustra's soul,

wiped his face with his hand, as if he would wipe out the impression; the

same  did  also  Zarathustra.  And  when  both  of  them  had  thus  silently

composed and strengthened themselves, they gave each other the hand, as a

token that they wanted once more to recognise each other.

    "Welcome  hither,"  said  Zarathustra,  "thou  soothsayer  of  the  greatweariness, not in vain shalt thou once have been my messmate and guest. Eat

and drink also with me to-day, and forgive it that a cheerful old man sitteth

with thee at table!"--"A cheerful old man?" answered the soothsayer, shaking

his head, "but whoever thou art, or wouldst be, O Zarathustra, thou hast been

here aloft the longest time,--in a little while thy bark shall no longer rest on

dry land!"--"Do I then rest on dry land?"--asked Zarathustra, laughing.--"The

waves around thy mountain," answered the soothsayer, "rise and rise, the

waves of great distress and affliction: they will soon raise thy bark also and

carry thee away."--Thereupon was Zarathustra silent and wondered.--"Dost

thou still hear nothing?" continued the soothsayer: "doth it not rush and roar

out of the depth?"--Zarathustra was silent once more and listened: then heard

he a long, long cry, which the abysses threw to one another and passed on;

for none of them wished to retain it: so evil did it sound.

  "Thou ill announcer," said Zarathustra at last, "that is a cry of distress,

and the cry of a man; it may come perhaps out of a black sea. But what doth

human distress matter to me! My last sin which hath been reserved for me,--

knowest thou what it is called?"

    --"PITY!" answered the soothsayer from an overflowing heart, and raised

both his hands aloft--"O Zarathustra, I have come that I may seduce thee to

thy last sin!"--

  And hardly had those words been uttered when there sounded the cry

once more, and longer and more alarming than before--also much nearer.

"Hearest thou? Hearest thou, O Zarathustra?" called out the soothsayer, "the

cry concerneth thee, it calleth thee: Come, come, come; it is time, it is the

highest time!"--

    Zarathustra  was  silent  thereupon,  confused  and  staggered;  at  last  he

asked, like one who hesitateth in himself: "And who is it that there calleth

me?"

  "But thou knowest it, certainly," answered the soothsayer warmly, "why

dost thou conceal thyself? It is THE HIGHER MAN that crieth for thee!"

  "The higher man?" cried Zarathustra, horror-stricken: "what wanteth HE?

What wanteth HE? The higher man! What wanteth he here?"--and his skin

covered with perspiration.

  The soothsayer, however, did not heed Zarathustra's alarm, but listened

and listened in the downward direction. When, however, it had been still

there  for  a  long  while,  he  looked  behind,  and  saw  Zarathustra  standing

trembling.  "O Zarathustra," he began, with sorrowful voice, "thou dost not stand

there like one whose happiness maketh him giddy: thou wilt have to dance

lest thou tumble down!

  But although thou shouldst dance before me, and leap all thy side-leaps,

no one may say unto me: 'Behold, here danceth the last joyous man!'

  In vain would any one come to this height who sought HIM here: caves

would he find, indeed, and back-caves, hiding-places for hidden ones; but not

lucky mines, nor treasure-chambers, nor new gold-veins of happiness.

    Happiness--how  indeed  could  one  find  happiness  among  such  buried-

alive and solitary ones! Must I yet seek the last happiness on the Happy Isles,

and far away among forgotten seas?

  But all is alike, nothing is worth while, no seeking is of service, there are

no longer any Happy Isles!"--

  Thus sighed the soothsayer; with his last sigh, however, Zarathustra again

became serene and assured, like one who hath come out of a deep chasm into

the light. "Nay! Nay! Three times Nay!" exclaimed he with a strong voice,

and stroked his beard--"THAT do I know better! There are still Happy Isles!

Silence THEREON, thou sighing sorrow-sack!

  Cease to splash THEREON, thou rain-cloud of the forenoon! Do I not

already stand here wet with thy misery, and drenched like a dog?

  Now do I shake myself and run away from thee, that I may again become

dry: thereat mayest thou not wonder! Do I seem to thee discourteous? Here

however is MY court.

  But as regards the higher man: well! I shall seek him at once in those

forests: FROM THENCE came his cry. Perhaps he is there hard beset by an

evil beast.

  He is in MY domain: therein shall he receive no scath! And verily, there

are many evil beasts about me."--

  With  those  words  Zarathustra  turned  around  to  depart.  Then  said  the

soothsayer: "O Zarathustra, thou art a rogue!

  I know it well: thou wouldst fain be rid of me! Rather wouldst thou run

into the forest and lay snares for evil beasts!

  But what good will it do thee? In the evening wilt thou have me again: in

thine own cave will I sit, patient and heavy like a block--and wait for thee!"

  "So be it!" shouted back Zarathustra, as he went away: "and what is mine

in my cave belongeth also unto thee, my guest!

  Shouldst  thou  however  find  honey  therein,  well!  just  lick  it  up,  thougrowling bear, and sweeten thy soul! For in the evening we want both to be

in good spirits;

  --In good spirits and joyful, because this day hath come to an end! And

thou thyself shalt dance to my lays, as my dancing-bear.

  Thou dost not believe this? Thou shakest thy head? Well! Cheer up, old

bear! But I also--am a soothsayer."

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                          LXIII. TALK WITH THE KINGS.

  1.

  Ere Zarathustra had been an hour on his way in the mountains and forests,

he saw all at once a strange procession. Right on the path which he was about

to  descend  came  two  kings  walking,  bedecked  with  crowns  and  purple

girdles, and variegated like flamingoes: they drove before them a laden ass.

"What do these kings want in my domain?" said Zarathustra in astonishment

to his heart, and hid himself hastily behind a thicket. When however the kings

approached to him, he said half-aloud, like one speaking only to himself:

"Strange! Strange! How doth this harmonise? Two kings do I see--and only

one ass!"

  Thereupon the two kings made a halt; they smiled and looked towards the

spot whence the voice proceeded, and afterwards looked into each other's

faces. "Such things do we also think among ourselves," said the king on the

right, "but we do not utter them."

  The  king  on  the  left,  however,  shrugged  his  shoulders  and  answered:

"That may perhaps be a goat-herd. Or an anchorite who hath lived too long

among rocks and trees. For no society at all spoileth also good manners."

  "Good manners?" replied angrily and bitterly the other king: "what then

do we run out of the way of? Is it not 'good manners'? Our 'good society'?

  Better,  verily,  to  live  among  anchorites  and  goat-herds,  than  with  our

gilded, false, over-rouged populace--though it call itself 'good society.'

    --Though it call itself 'nobility.' But there all is false and foul, above all

the blood--thanks to old evil diseases and worse curers.

  The best and dearest to me at present is still a sound peasant, coarse,

artful, obstinate and enduring: that is at present the noblest type.

  The peasant is at present the best; and the peasant type should be master!

But  it  is  the  kingdom  of  the  populace--I  no  longer  allow  anything  to  be

imposed upon me. The populace, however--that meaneth, hodgepodge.

    Populace-hodgepodge: therein is everything mixed with everything, saintand swindler, gentleman and Jew, and every beast out of Noah's ark.

  Good manners! Everything is false and foul with us. No one knoweth any

longer how to reverence: it is THAT precisely that we run away from. They

are fulsome obtrusive dogs; they gild palm-leaves.

  This loathing choketh me, that we kings ourselves have become false,

draped and disguised with the old faded pomp of our ancestors, show-pieces

for the stupidest, the craftiest, and whosoever at present trafficketh for power.

  We  ARE  NOT  the  first  men--and  have  nevertheless  to  STAND  FOR

them: of this imposture have we at last become weary and disgusted.

  From the rabble have we gone out of the way, from all those bawlers and

scribe-blowflies,  from  the  trader-stench,  the  ambition-fidgeting,  the  bad

breath--: fie, to live among the rabble;

  --Fie, to stand for the first men among the rabble! Ah, loathing! Loathing!

Loathing! What doth it now matter about us kings!"--

  "Thine old sickness seizeth thee," said here the king on the left, "thy

loathing seizeth thee, my poor brother. Thou knowest, however, that some

one heareth us."

    Immediately thereupon, Zarathustra, who had opened ears and eyes to

this talk, rose from his hiding-place, advanced towards the kings, and thus

began:

  "He who hearkeneth unto you, he who gladly hearkeneth unto you, is

called Zarathustra.

  I am Zarathustra who once said: 'What doth it now matter about kings!'

Forgive me; I rejoiced when ye said to each other: 'What doth it matter about

us kings!'

  Here, however, is MY domain and jurisdiction: what may ye be seeking

in my domain? Perhaps, however, ye have FOUND on your way what I seek:

namely, the higher man."

  When the kings heard this, they beat upon their breasts and said with one

voice: "We are recognised!

  With the sword of thine utterance severest thou the thickest darkness of

our hearts. Thou hast discovered our distress; for lo! we are on our way to

find the higher man--

  --The man that is higher than we, although we are kings. To him do we

convey this ass. For the highest man shall also be the highest lord on earth.

  There is no sorer misfortune in all human destiny, than when the mighty

of the earth are not also the first men. Then everything becometh false anddistorted and monstrous.

  And when they are even the last men, and more beast than man, then

riseth and riseth the populace in honour, and at last saith even the populace-

virtue: 'Lo, I alone am virtue!'"--

  What have I just heard? answered Zarathustra. What wisdom in kings! I

am  enchanted,  and  verily,  I  have  already  promptings  to  make  a  rhyme

thereon:--

  --Even if it should happen to be a rhyme not suited for every one's ears. I

unlearned long ago to have consideration for long ears. Well then! Well now!

  (Here,  however,  it  happened  that  the  ass  also  found  utterance:  it  said

distinctly and with malevolence, Y-E-A.)

  'Twas  once--methinks  year  one  of  our  blessed  Lord,--Drunk  without

wine, the Sybil thus deplored:--"How ill things go! Decline! Decline! Ne'er

sank the world so low! Rome now hath turned harlot and harlot-stew, Rome's

Caesar a beast, and God--hath turned Jew!

  2.

  With those rhymes of Zarathustra the kings were delighted; the king on

the right, however, said: "O Zarathustra, how well it was that we set out to

see thee!

  For thine enemies showed us thy likeness in their mirror: there lookedst

thou with the grimace of a devil, and sneeringly: so that we were afraid of

thee.

  But what good did it do! Always didst thou prick us anew in heart and ear

with thy sayings. Then did we say at last: What doth it matter how he look!

  We must HEAR him; him who teacheth: 'Ye shall love peace as a means

to new wars, and the short peace more than the long!'

  No one ever spake such warlike words: 'What is good? To be brave is

good. It is the good war that halloweth every cause.'

  O Zarathustra, our fathers' blood stirred in our veins at such words: it was

like the voice of spring to old wine-casks.

  When the swords ran among one another like red-spotted serpents, then

did our fathers become fond of life; the sun of every peace seemed to them

languid and lukewarm, the long peace, however, made them ashamed.

  How  they  sighed,  our  fathers,  when  they  saw  on  the  wall  brightly

furbished, dried-up swords! Like those they thirsted for war. For a sword

thirsteth to drink blood, and sparkleth with desire."--

  --When the kings thus discoursed and talked eagerly of the happiness oftheir fathers, there came upon Zarathustra no little desire to mock at their

eagerness: for evidently they were very peaceable kings whom he saw before

him, kings with old and refined features. But he restrained himself. "Well!"

said he, "thither leadeth the way, there lieth the cave of Zarathustra; and this

day is to have a long evening! At present, however, a cry of distress calleth

me hastily away from you.

  It will honour my cave if kings want to sit and wait in it: but, to be sure,

ye will have to wait long!

  Well! What of that! Where doth one at present learn better to wait than at

courts? And the whole virtue of kings that hath remained unto them--is it not

called to-day:LITY to wait?"

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                  LXIV. THE LEECH.

  And Zarathustra went thoughtfully on, further and lower down, through

forests and past moory bottoms; as it happeneth, however, to every one who

meditateth upon hard matters, he trod thereby unawares upon a man. And lo,

there spurted into his face all at once a cry of pain, and two curses and twenty

bad invectives, so that in his fright he raised his stick and also struck the

trodden one. Immediately afterwards, however, he regained his composure,

and his heart laughed at the folly he had just committed.

    "Pardon me," said he to the trodden one, who had got up enraged, and had

seated himself, "pardon me, and hear first of all a parable.

  As a wanderer who dreameth of remote things on a lonesome highway,

runneth unawares against a sleeping dog, a dog which lieth in the sun:

  --As  both  of  them  then  start  up  and  snap  at  each  other,  like  deadly

enemies, those two beings mortally frightened--so did it happen unto us.

  And yet! And yet--how little was lacking for them to caress each other,

that dog and that lonesome one! Are they not both--lonesome ones!"

  --"Whoever thou art," said the trodden one, still enraged, "thou treadest

also too nigh me with thy parable, and not only with thy foot!

  Lo! am I then a dog?"--And thereupon the sitting one got up, and pulled

his naked arm out of the swamp. For at first he had lain outstretched on the

ground, hidden and indiscernible, like those who lie in wait for swamp-game.

  "But whatever art thou about!" called out Zarathustra in alarm, for he saw

a deal of blood streaming over the naked arm,--"what hath hurt thee? Hath an

evil beast bit thee, thou unfortunate one?"

  The bleeding one laughed, still angry, "What matter is it to thee!" said he,and was about to go on. "Here am I at home and in my province. Let him

question me whoever will: to a dolt, however, I shall hardly answer."

  "Thou art mistaken," said Zarathustra sympathetically, and held him fast;

"thou art mistaken. Here thou art not at home, but in my domain, and therein

shall no one receive any hurt.

  Call  me  however  what  thou  wilt--I  am  who  I  must  be.  I  call  myself

Zarathustra.

  Well! Up thither is the way to Zarathustra's cave: it is not far,--wilt thou

not attend to thy wounds at my home?

  It hath gone badly with thee, thou unfortunate one, in this life: first a

beast bit thee, and then--a man trod upon thee!"--

  When however the trodden one had heard the name of Zarathustra he was

transformed. "What happeneth unto me!" he exclaimed, "WHO preoccupieth

me so much in this life as this one man, namely Zarathustra, and that one

animal that liveth on blood, the leech?

  For the sake of the leech did I lie here by this swamp, like a fisher, and

already had mine outstretched arm been bitten ten times, when there biteth a

still finer leech at my blood, Zarathustra himself!

  O happiness! O miracle! Praised be this day which enticed me into the

swamp! Praised be the best, the livest cupping-glass, that at present liveth;

praised be the great conscience-leech Zarathustra!"--

  Thus spake the trodden one, and Zarathustra rejoiced at his words and

their refined reverential style. "Who art thou?" asked he, and gave him his

hand,  "there  is  much  to  clear  up  and  elucidate  between  us,  but  already

methinketh pure clear day is dawning."

  "I am THE SPIRITUALLY CONSCIENTIOUS ONE," answered he who

was asked, "and in matters of the spirit it is difficult for any one to take it

more  rigorously,  more  restrictedly,  and  more  severely  than  I,  except  him

from whom I learnt it, Zarathustra himself.

  Better know nothing than half-know many things! Better be a fool on

one's own account, than a sage on other people's approbation! I--go to the

basis:

  --What matter if it be great or small? If it be called swamp or sky? A

handbreadth of basis is enough for me, if it be actually basis and ground!

  --A handbreadth of basis: thereon can one stand. In the true knowing-

knowledge there is nothing great and nothing small."

  "Then thou art perhaps an expert on the leech?" asked Zarathustra; "andthou investigatest the leech to its ultimate basis, thou conscientious one?"

  "O  Zarathustra,"  answered  the  trodden  one,  "that  would  be  something

immense; how could I presume to do so!

  That, however, of which I am master and knower, is the BRAIN of the

leech:--that is MY world!

  And it is also a world! Forgive it, however, that my pride here findeth

expression, for here I have not mine equal. Therefore said I: 'here am I at

home.'

  How long have I investigated this one thing, the brain of the leech, so that

here the slippery truth might no longer slip from me! Here is MY domain!

  --For the sake of this did I cast everything else aside, for the sake of this

did everything else become indifferent to me; and close beside my knowledge

lieth my black ignorance.

  My spiritual conscience requireth from me that it should be so--that I

should know one thing, and not know all else: they are a loathing unto me, all

the semi-spiritual, all the hazy, hovering, and visionary.

  Where mine honesty ceaseth, there am I blind, and want also to be blind.

Where I want to know, however, there want I also to be honest--namely,

severe, rigorous, restricted, cruel and inexorable.

  Because THOU once saidest, O Zarathustra: 'Spirit is life which itself

cutteth into life';--that led and allured me to thy doctrine. And verily, with

mine own blood have I increased mine own knowledge!"

  --"As  the  evidence  indicateth,"  broke  in  Zarathustra;  for  still  was  the

blood flowing down on the naked arm of the conscientious one. For there had

ten leeches bitten into it.

  "O thou strange fellow, how much doth this very evidence teach me--

namely, thou thyself! And not all, perhaps, might I pour into thy rigorous ear!

  Well then! We part here! But I would fain find thee again. Up thither is

the way to my cave: to-night shalt thou there be my welcome guest!

  Fain would I also make amends to thy body for Zarathustra treading upon

thee with his feet: I think about that. Just now, however, a cry of distress

calleth me hastily away from thee."

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                LXV. THE MAGICIAN.

  1.

  When however Zarathustra had gone round a rock, then saw he on the

same  path,  not  far  below  him,  a  man  who  threw  his  limbs  about  like  amaniac, and at last tumbled to the ground on his belly. "Halt!" said then

Zarathustra to his heart, "he there must surely be the higher man, from him

came  that  dreadful  cry  of  distress,--I  will  see  if  I  can  help  him."  When,

however, he ran to the spot where the man lay on the ground, he found a

trembling old man, with fixed eyes; and in spite of all Zarathustra's efforts to

lift him and set him again on his feet, it was all in vain. The unfortunate one,

also, did not seem to notice that some one was beside him; on the contrary, he

continually  looked  around  with  moving  gestures,  like  one  forsaken  and

isolated  from  all  the  world.  At  last,  however,  after  much  trembling,  and

convulsion, and curling-himself-up, he began to lament thus:

  Who  warm'th  me,  who  lov'th  me  still?  Give  ardent  fingers!  Give

heartening charcoal-warmers! Prone, outstretched, trembling, Like him, half

dead  and  cold,  whose  feet  one  warm'th--  And  shaken,  ah!  by  unfamiliar

fevers, Shivering with sharpened, icy-cold frost-arrows, By thee pursued, my

fancy!  Ineffable!  Recondite!  Sore-frightening!  Thou  huntsman  'hind  the

cloud-banks! Now lightning-struck by thee, Thou mocking eye that me in

darkness watcheth: --Thus do I lie, Bend myself, twist myself, convulsed

With  all  eternal  torture,  And  smitten  By  thee,  cruellest  huntsman,  Thou

unfamiliar--GOD...

  Smite deeper! Smite yet once more! Pierce through and rend my heart!

What  mean'th  this  torture  With  dull,  indented  arrows?  Why  look'st  thou

hither, Of human pain not weary, With mischief-loving, godly flash-glances?

Not  murder  wilt  thou,  But  torture,  torture?  For  why--ME  torture,  Thou

mischief-loving, unfamiliar God?--

  Ha! Ha! Thou stealest nigh In midnight's gloomy hour?... What wilt thou?

Speak! Thou crowdst me, pressest-- Ha! now far too closely! Thou hearst me

breathing, Thou o'erhearst my heart, Thou ever jealous one! --Of what, pray,

ever jealous? Off! Off! For why the ladder? Wouldst thou GET IN? To heart

in-clamber? To mine own secretest Conceptions in-clamber? Shameless one!

Thou unknown one!--Thief! What seekst thou by thy stealing? What seekst

thou by thy hearkening? What seekst thou by thy torturing? Thou torturer!

Thou--hangman-God! Or shall I, as the mastiffs do, Roll me before thee?

And cringing, enraptured, frantical, My tail friendly--waggle!

  In vain! Goad further! Cruellest goader! No dog--thy game just am I,

Cruellest huntsman! Thy proudest of captives, Thou robber 'hind the cloud-

banks...  Speak  finally!  Thou  lightning-veiled  one!  Thou  unknown  one!

Speak! What wilt thou, highway-ambusher, from--ME? What WILT thou,unfamiliar--God? What? Ransom-gold? How much of ransom-gold? Solicit

much--that bid'th my pride! And be concise--that bid'th mine other pride!

  Ha! Ha! ME--wantst thou? me? --Entire?...

  Ha! Ha! And torturest me, fool that thou art, Dead-torturest quite my

pride? Give LOVE to me--who warm'th me still? Who lov'th me still?-- Give

ardent fingers Give heartening charcoal-warmers, Give me, the lonesomest,

The ice (ah! seven-fold frozen ice For very enemies, For foes, doth make one

thirst). Give, yield to me, Cruellest foe, --THYSELF!--

  Away! There fled he surely, My final, only comrade, My greatest foe,

Mine unfamiliar-- My hangman-God!...

  --Nay! Come thou back! WITH all of thy great tortures! To me the last of

lonesome ones, Oh, come thou back! All my hot tears in streamlets trickle

Their course to thee! And all my final hearty fervour-- Up-glow'th to THEE!

Oh, come thou back, Mine unfamiliar God! my PAIN! My final bliss!

  2.

    --Here, however, Zarathustra could no longer restrain himself; he took his

staff and struck the wailer with all his might. "Stop this," cried he to him with

wrathful laughter, "stop this, thou stage-player! Thou false coiner! Thou liar

from the very heart! I know thee well!

  I will soon make warm legs to thee, thou evil magician: I know well how-

-to make it hot for such as thou!"

  --"Leave off," said the old man, and sprang up from the ground, "strike

me no more, O Zarathustra! I did it only for amusement!

  That kind of thing belongeth to mine art. Thee thyself, I wanted to put to

the proof when I gave this performance. And verily, thou hast well detected

me!

  But  thou  thyself--hast  given  me  no  small  proof  of  thyself:  thou  art

HARD, thou wise Zarathustra! Hard strikest thou with thy 'truths,' thy cudgel

forceth from me--THIS truth!"

  --"Flatter not," answered Zarathustra, still excited and frowning, "thou

stage-player from the heart! Thou art false: why speakest thou--of truth!

  Thou  peacock  of  peacocks,  thou  sea  of  vanity;  WHAT  didst  thou

represent before me, thou evil magician; WHOM was I meant to believe in

when thou wailedst in such wise?"

  "THE  PENITENT  IN  SPIRIT,"  said  the  old  man,  "it  was  him--I

represented; thou thyself once devisedst this expression--

  --The poet and magician who at last turneth his spirit against himself, thetransformed one who freezeth to death by his bad science and conscience.

  And  just  acknowledge  it:  it  was  long,  O  Zarathustra,  before  thou

discoveredst my trick and lie! Thou BELIEVEDST in my distress when thou

heldest my head with both thy hands,--

  --I heard thee lament 'we have loved him too little, loved him too little!'

Because I so far deceived thee, my wickedness rejoiced in me."

  "Thou mayest have deceived subtler ones than I," said Zarathustra sternly.

"I am not on my guard against deceivers; I HAVE TO BE without precaution:

so willeth my lot.

  Thou, however,--MUST deceive: so far do I know thee! Thou must ever

be equivocal, trivocal, quadrivocal, and quinquivocal! Even what thou hast

now confessed, is not nearly true enough nor false enough for me!

  Thou bad false coiner, how couldst thou do otherwise! Thy very malady

wouldst thou whitewash if thou showed thyself naked to thy physician.

  Thus didst thou whitewash thy lie before me when thou saidst: 'I did so

ONLY for amusement!' There was also SERIOUSNESS therein, thou ART

something of a penitent-in-spirit!

  I divine thee well: thou hast become the enchanter of all the world; but

for thyself thou hast no lie or artifice left,--thou art disenchanted to thyself!

  Thou hast reaped disgust as thy one truth. No word in thee is any longer

genuine, but thy mouth is so: that is to say, the disgust that cleaveth unto thy

mouth."--

  --"Who art thou at all!" cried here the old magician with defiant voice,

"who dareth to speak thus unto ME, the greatest man now living?"--and a

green  flash  shot  from  his  eye  at  Zarathustra.  But  immediately  after  he

changed, and said sadly:

  "O Zarathustra, I am weary of it, I am disgusted with mine arts, I am not

GREAT,  why  do  I  dissemble!  But  thou  knowest  it  well--I  sought  for

greatness!

  A great man I wanted to appear, and persuaded many; but the lie hath

been beyond my power. On it do I collapse.

  O  Zarathustra,  everything  is  a  lie  in  me;  but  that  I  collapse--this  my

collapsing is GENUINE!"--

  "It  honoureth  thee,"  said  Zarathustra  gloomily,  looking  down  with

sidelong glance, "it honoureth thee that thou soughtest for greatness, but it

betrayeth thee also. Thou art not great.

  Thou  bad  old  magician,  THAT  is  the  best  and  the  honestest  thing  Ihonour in thee, that thou hast become weary of thyself, and hast expressed it:

'I am not great.'

    THEREIN do I honour thee as a penitent-in-spirit, and although only for

the twinkling of an eye, in that one moment wast thou--genuine.

  But tell me, what seekest thou here in MY forests and rocks? And if thou

hast put thyself in MY way, what proof of me wouldst thou have?--

  --Wherein didst thou put ME to the test?"

  Thus spake Zarathustra, and his eyes sparkled. But the old magician kept

silence for a while; then said he: "Did I put thee to the test? I--seek only.

  O  Zarathustra,  I  seek  a  genuine  one,  a  right  one,  a  simple  one,  an

unequivocal one, a man of perfect honesty, a vessel of wisdom, a saint of

knowledge, a great man!

  Knowest thou it not, O Zarathustra? I SEEK ZARATHUSTRA."

  --And  here  there  arose  a  long  silence  between  them:  Zarathustra,

however, became profoundly absorbed in thought, so that he shut his eyes.

But  afterwards  coming  back  to  the  situation,  he  grasped  the  hand  of  the

magician, and said, full of politeness and policy:

  "Well! Up thither leadeth the way, there is the cave of Zarathustra. In it

mayest thou seek him whom thou wouldst fain find.

  And ask counsel of mine animals, mine eagle and my serpent: they shall

help thee to seek. My cave however is large.

  I myself, to be sure--I have as yet seen no great man. That which is great,

the acutest eye is at present insensible to it. It is the kingdom of the populace.

  Many a one have I found who stretched and inflated himself, and the

people cried: 'Behold; a great man!' But what good do all bellows do! The

wind cometh out at last.

  At last bursteth the frog which hath inflated itself too long: then cometh

out the wind. To prick a swollen one in the belly, I call good pastime. Hear

that, ye boys!

  Our to-day is of the populace: who still KNOWETH what is great and

what is small! Who could there seek successfully for greatness! A fool only:

it succeedeth with fools.

  Thou seekest for great men, thou strange fool? Who TAUGHT that to

thee? Is to-day the time for it? Oh, thou bad seeker, why dost thou--tempt

me?"--

  Thus spake Zarathustra, comforted in his heart, and went laughing on his

way.                              LXVI. OUT OF SERVICE.

  Not long, however, after Zarathustra had freed himself from the magician,

he again saw a person sitting beside the path which he followed, namely a

tall, black man, with a haggard, pale countenance: THIS MAN grieved him

exceedingly. "Alas," said he to his heart, "there sitteth disguised affliction;

methinketh  he  is  of  the  type  of  the  priests:  what  do  THEY  want  in  my

domain?

  What!  Hardly  have  I  escaped  from  that  magician,  and  must  another

necromancer again run across my path,--

    --Some sorcerer with laying-on-of-hands, some sombre wonder-worker

by the grace of God, some anointed world-maligner, whom, may the devil

take!

  But the devil is never at the place which would be his right place: he

always cometh too late, that cursed dwarf and club-foot!"--

  Thus cursed Zarathustra impatiently in his heart, and considered how with

averted look he might slip past the black man. But behold, it came about

otherwise. For at the same moment had the sitting one already perceived him;

and not unlike one whom an unexpected happiness overtaketh, he sprang to

his feet, and went straight towards Zarathustra.

    "Whoever thou art, thou traveller," said he, "help a strayed one, a seeker,

an old man, who may here easily come to grief!

  The world here is strange to me, and remote; wild beasts also did I hear

howling; and he who could have given me protection--he is himself no more.

  I was seeking the pious man, a saint and an anchorite, who, alone in his

forest, had not yet heard of what all the world knoweth at present."

  "WHAT doth all the world know at present?" asked Zarathustra. "Perhaps

that the old God no longer liveth, in whom all the world once believed?"

  "Thou sayest it," answered the old man sorrowfully. "And I served that

old God until his last hour.

  Now, however, am I out of service, without master, and yet not free;

likewise am I no longer merry even for an hour, except it be in recollections.

  Therefore did I ascend into these mountains, that I might finally have a

festival for myself once more, as becometh an old pope and church-father: for

know it, that I am the last pope!--a festival of pious recollections and divine

services.

  Now, however, is he himself dead, the most pious of men, the saint in the

forest, who praised his God constantly with singing and mumbling.  He himself found I no longer when I found his cot--but two wolves found

I therein, which howled on account of his death,--for all animals loved him.

Then did I haste away.

  Had I thus come in vain into these forests and mountains? Then did my

heart determine that I should seek another, the most pious of all those who

believe not in God--, my heart determined that I should seek Zarathustra!"

  Thus spake the hoary man, and gazed with keen eyes at him who stood

before  him.  Zarathustra  however  seized  the  hand  of  the  old  pope  and

regarded it a long while with admiration.

  "Lo! thou venerable one," said he then, "what a fine and long hand! That

is the hand of one who hath ever dispensed blessings. Now, however, doth it

hold fast him whom thou seekest, me, Zarathustra.

  It is I, the ungodly Zarathustra, who saith: 'Who is ungodlier than I, that I

may enjoy his teaching?'"--

  Thus spake Zarathustra, and penetrated with his glances the thoughts and

arrear-thoughts of the old pope. At last the latter began:

  "He who most loved and possessed him hath now also lost him most--:

  --Lo, I myself am surely the most godless of us at present? But who could

rejoice at that!"--

  --"Thou servedst him to the last?" asked Zarathustra thoughtfully, after a

deep silence, "thou knowest HOW he died? Is it true what they say, that

sympathy choked him;

  --That he saw how MAN hung on the cross, and could not endure it;--that

his love to man became his hell, and at last his death?"--

  The old pope however did not answer, but looked aside timidly, with a

painful and gloomy expression.

  "Let him go," said Zarathustra, after prolonged meditation, still looking

the old man straight in the eye.

  "Let him go, he is gone. And though it honoureth thee that thou speakest

only in praise of this dead one, yet thou knowest as well as I WHO he was,

and that he went curious ways."

  "To speak before three eyes," said the old pope cheerfully (he was blind

of  one  eye),  "in  divine  matters  I  am  more  enlightened  than  Zarathustra

himself--and may well be so.

  My love served him long years, my will followed all his will. A good

servant, however, knoweth everything, and many a thing even which a master

hideth from himself.  He was a hidden God, full of secrecy. Verily, he did not come by his son

otherwise than by secret ways. At the door of his faith standeth adultery.

  Whoever extolleth him as a God of love, doth not think highly enough of

love itself. Did not that God want also to be judge? But the loving one loveth

irrespective of reward and requital.

  When he was young, that God out of the Orient, then was he harsh and

revengeful, and built himself a hell for the delight of his favourites.

  At last, however, he became old and soft and mellow and pitiful, more

like a grandfather than a father, but most like a tottering old grandmother.

  There did he sit shrivelled in his chimney-corner, fretting on account of

his weak legs, world-weary, will-weary, and one day he suffocated of his all-

too-great pity."--

  "Thou  old  pope,"  said  here  Zarathustra  interposing,  "hast  thou  seen

THAT with thine eyes? It could well have happened in that way: in that way,

AND also otherwise. When Gods die they always die many kinds of death.

  Well! At all events, one way or other--he is gone! He was counter to the

taste of mine ears and eyes; worse than that I should not like to say against

him.

  I love everything that looketh bright and speaketh honestly. But he--thou

knowest it, forsooth, thou old priest, there was something of thy type in him,

the priest-type--he was equivocal.

  He was also indistinct. How he raged at us, this wrath-snorter, because we

understood him badly! But why did he not speak more clearly?

  And if the fault lay in our ears, why did he give us ears that heard him

badly? If there was dirt in our ears, well! who put it in them?

  Too  much  miscarried  with  him,  this  potter  who  had  not  learned

thoroughly! That he took revenge on his pots and creations, however, because

they turned out badly--that was a sin against GOOD TASTE.

  There is also good taste in piety: THIS at last said: 'Away with SUCH a

God! Better to have no God, better to set up destiny on one's own account,

better to be a fool, better to be God oneself!'"

    --"What  do  I  hear!"  said  then  the  old  pope,  with  intent  ears;  "O

Zarathustra, thou art more pious than thou believest, with such an unbelief!

Some God in thee hath converted thee to thine ungodliness.

  Is it not thy piety itself which no longer letteth thee believe in a God?

And thine over-great honesty will yet lead thee even beyond good and evil!

    Behold, what hath been reserved for thee? Thou hast eyes and hands andmouth, which have been predestined for blessing from eternity. One doth not

bless with the hand alone.

  Nigh unto thee, though thou professest to be the ungodliest one, I feel a

hale and holy odour of long benedictions: I feel glad and grieved thereby.

  Let me be thy guest, O Zarathustra, for a single night! Nowhere on earth

shall I now feel better than with thee!"--

  "Amen! So shall it be!" said Zarathustra, with great astonishment; "up

thither leadeth the way, there lieth the cave of Zarathustra.

  Gladly, forsooth, would I conduct thee thither myself, thou venerable one;

for I love all pious men. But now a cry of distress calleth me hastily away

from thee.

  In my domain shall no one come to grief; my cave is a good haven. And

best of all would I like to put every sorrowful one again on firm land and firm

legs.

  Who, however, could take THY melancholy off thy shoulders? For that I

am too weak. Long, verily, should we have to wait until some one re-awoke

thy God for thee.

  For that old God liveth no more: he is indeed dead."--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                            LXVII. THE UGLIEST MAN.

  --And again did Zarathustra's feet run through mountains and forests, and

his  eyes  sought  and  sought,  but  nowhere  was  he  to  be  seen  whom  they

wanted to see--the sorely distressed sufferer and crier. On the whole way,

however,  he  rejoiced  in  his  heart  and  was  full  of  gratitude.  "What  good

things," said he, "hath this day given me, as amends for its bad beginning!

What strange interlocutors have I found!

  At their words will I now chew a long while as at good corn; small shall

my teeth grind and crush them, until they flow like milk into my soul!"--

  When,  however,  the  path  again  curved  round  a  rock,  all  at  once  the

landscape  changed,  and  Zarathustra  entered  into  a  realm  of  death.  Here

bristled aloft black and red cliffs, without any grass, tree, or bird's voice. For

it was a valley which all animals avoided, even the beasts of prey, except that

a species of ugly, thick, green serpent came here to die when they became

old. Therefore the shepherds called this valley: "Serpent-death."

    Zarathustra,  however,  became  absorbed  in  dark  recollections,  for  it

seemed  to  him  as  if  he  had  once  before  stood  in  this  valley.  And  much

heaviness settled on his mind, so that he walked slowly and always moreslowly, and at last stood still. Then, however, when he opened his eyes, he

saw something sitting by the wayside shaped like a man, and hardly like a

man, something nondescript. And all at once there came over Zarathustra a

great shame, because he had gazed on such a thing. Blushing up to the very

roots of his white hair, he turned aside his glance, and raised his foot that he

might leave this ill-starred place. Then, however, became the dead wilderness

vocal: for from the ground a noise welled up, gurgling and rattling, as water

gurgleth and rattleth at night through stopped-up water-pipes; and at last it

turned into human voice and human speech:--it sounded thus:

    "Zarathustra!  Zarathustra!  Read  my  riddle!  Say,  say!  WHAT  IS  THE

REVENGE ON THE WITNESS?

  I entice thee back; here is smooth ice! See to it, see to it, that thy pride

doth not here break its legs!

  Thou thinkest thyself wise, thou proud Zarathustra! Read then the riddle,

thou hard nut-cracker,--the riddle that I am! Say then: who am I!"

  --When however Zarathustra had heard these words,--what think ye then

took place in his soul? PITY OVERCAME HIM; and he sank down all at

once,  like  an  oak  that  hath  long  withstood  many  tree-fellers,--heavily,

suddenly, to the terror even of those who meant to fell it. But immediately he

got up again from the ground, and his countenance became stern.

  "I  know  thee  well,"  said  he,  with  a  brazen  voice,  "THOU  ART  THE

MURDERER OF GOD! Let me go.

  Thou couldst not ENDURE him who beheld THEE,--who ever beheld

thee through and through, thou ugliest man. Thou tookest revenge on this

witness!"

  Thus spake Zarathustra and was about to go; but the nondescript grasped

at a corner of his garment and began anew to gurgle and seek for words.

"Stay," said he at last--

  --"Stay! Do not pass by! I have divined what axe it was that struck thee to

the ground: hail to thee, O Zarathustra, that thou art again upon thy feet!

  Thou hast divined, I know it well, how the man feeleth who killed him,--

the murderer of God. Stay! Sit down here beside me; it is not to no purpose.

  To whom would I go but unto thee? Stay, sit down! Do not however look

at me! Honour thus--mine ugliness!

  They  persecute  me:  now  art  THOU  my  last  refuge.  NOT  with  their

hatred, NOT with their bailiffs;--Oh, such persecution would I mock at, and

be proud and cheerful!  Hath not all success hitherto been with the well-persecuted ones? And he

who persecuteth well learneth readily to be OBSEQUENT--when once he is--

put behind! But it is their PITY--

  --Their pity is it from which I flee away and flee to thee. O Zarathustra,

protect me, thou, my last refuge, thou sole one who divinedst me:

  --Thou hast divined how the man feeleth who killed HIM. Stay! And if

thou wilt go, thou impatient one, go not the way that I came. THAT way is

bad.

  Art thou angry with me because I have already racked language too long?

Because I have already counselled thee? But know that it is I, the ugliest

man,

  --Who have also the largest, heaviest feet. Where I have gone, the way is

bad. I tread all paths to death and destruction.

  But that thou passedst me by in silence, that thou blushedst--I saw it well:

thereby did I know thee as Zarathustra.

  Every one else would have thrown to me his alms, his pity, in look and

speech. But for that--I am not beggar enough: that didst thou divine.

  For that I am too RICH, rich in what is great, frightful, ugliest, most

unutterable! Thy shame, O Zarathustra, HONOURED me!

  With difficulty did I get out of the crowd of the pitiful,--that I might find

the  only  one  who  at  present  teacheth  that  'pity  is  obtrusive'--  thyself,  O

Zarathustra!

  --Whether it be the pity of a God, or whether it be human pity, it is

offensive  to  modesty.  And  unwillingness  to  help  may  be  nobler  than  the

virtue that rusheth to do so.

  THAT however--namely, pity--is called virtue itself at present by all petty

people:--they have no reverence for great misfortune, great ugliness, great

failure.

  Beyond all these do I look, as a dog looketh over the backs of thronging

flocks of sheep. They are petty, good-wooled, good-willed, grey people.

  As the heron looketh contemptuously at shallow pools, with backward-

bent head, so do I look at the throng of grey little waves and wills and souls.

  Too long have we acknowledged them to be right, those petty people: SO

we have at last given them power as well;--and now do they teach that 'good

is only what petty people call good.'

  And 'truth' is at present what the preacher spake who himself sprang from

them, that singular saint and advocate of the petty people, who testified ofhimself: 'I--am the truth.'

  That immodest one hath long made the petty people greatly puffed up,--

he who taught no small error when he taught: 'I--am the truth.'

  Hath  an  immodest  one  ever  been  answered  more  courteously?--Thou,

however, O Zarathustra, passedst him by, and saidst: 'Nay! Nay! Three times

Nay!'

  Thou warnedst against his error; thou warnedst--the first to do so--against

pity:--not every one, not none, but thyself and thy type.

  Thou art ashamed of the shame of the great sufferer; and verily when thou

sayest: 'From pity there cometh a heavy cloud; take heed, ye men!'

  --When thou teachest: 'All creators are hard, all great love is beyond their

pity:' O Zarathustra, how well versed dost thou seem to me in weather-signs!

  Thou thyself, however,--warn thyself also against THY pity! For many

are on their way to thee, many suffering, doubting, despairing, drowning,

freezing ones--

  I warn thee also against myself. Thou hast read my best, my worst riddle,

myself, and what I have done. I know the axe that felleth thee.

  But  he--HAD  TO  die:  he  looked  with  eyes  which  beheld

EVERYTHING,--he beheld men's depths and dregs, all his hidden ignominy

and ugliness.

  His pity knew no modesty: he crept into my dirtiest corners. This most

prying, over-intrusive, over-pitiful one had to die.

  He ever beheld ME: on such a witness I would have revenge--or not live

myself.

  The God who beheld everything, AND ALSO MAN: that God had to die!

Man cannot ENDURE it that such a witness should live."

  Thus spake the ugliest man. Zarathustra however got up, and prepared to

go on: for he felt frozen to the very bowels.

  "Thou  nondescript,"  said  he,  "thou  warnedst  me  against  thy  path.  As

thanks  for  it  I  praise  mine  to  thee.  Behold,  up  thither  is  the  cave  of

Zarathustra.

  My cave is large and deep and hath many corners; there findeth he that is

most  hidden  his  hiding-place.  And  close  beside  it,  there  are  a  hundred

lurking-places and by-places for creeping, fluttering, and hopping creatures.

  Thou outcast, who hast cast thyself out, thou wilt not live amongst men

and men's pity? Well then, do like me! Thus wilt thou learn also from me;

only the doer learneth.  And talk first and foremost to mine animals! The proudest animal and the

wisest animal--they might well be the right counsellors for us both!"--

  Thus spake Zarathustra and went his way, more thoughtfully and slowly

even than before: for he asked himself many things, and hardly knew what to

answer.

  "How  poor  indeed  is  man,"  thought  he  in  his  heart,  "how  ugly,  how

wheezy, how full of hidden shame!

  They tell me that man loveth himself. Ah, how great must that self-love

be! How much contempt is opposed to it!

  Even this man hath loved himself, as he hath despised himself,--a great

lover methinketh he is, and a great despiser.

  No one have I yet found who more thoroughly despised himself: even

THAT is elevation. Alas, was THIS perhaps the higher man whose cry I

heard?

  I love the great despisers. Man is something that hath to be surpassed."--

                      LXVIII. THE VOLUNTARY BEGGAR.

  When  Zarathustra  had  left  the  ugliest  man,  he  was  chilled  and  felt

lonesome: for much coldness and lonesomeness came over his spirit, so that

even his limbs became colder thereby. When, however, he wandered on and

on, uphill and down, at times past green meadows, though also sometimes

over  wild  stony  couches  where  formerly  perhaps  an  impatient  brook  had

made its bed, then he turned all at once warmer and heartier again.

  "What hath happened unto me?" he asked himself, "something warm and

living quickeneth me; it must be in the neighbourhood.

  Already  am  I  less  alone;  unconscious  companions  and  brethren  rove

around me; their warm breath toucheth my soul."

  When,  however,  he  spied  about  and  sought  for  the  comforters  of  his

lonesomeness,  behold,  there  were  kine  there  standing  together  on  an

eminence,  whose  proximity  and  smell  had  warmed  his  heart.  The  kine,

however, seemed to listen eagerly to a speaker, and took no heed of him who

approached. When, however, Zarathustra was quite nigh unto them, then did

he  hear  plainly  that  a  human  voice  spake  in  the  midst  of  the  kine,  and

apparently all of them had turned their heads towards the speaker.

  Then ran Zarathustra up speedily and drove the animals aside; for he

feared that some one had here met with harm, which the pity of the kine

would hardly be able to relieve. But in this he was deceived; for behold, there

sat a man on the ground who seemed to be persuading the animals to have nofear of him, a peaceable man and Preacher-on-the-Mount, out of whose eyes

kindness itself preached. "What dost thou seek here?" called out Zarathustra

in astonishment.

  "What do I here seek?" answered he: "the same that thou seekest, thou

mischief-maker; that is to say, happiness upon earth.

  To that end, however, I would fain learn of these kine. For I tell thee that

I have already talked half a morning unto them, and just now were they about

to give me their answer. Why dost thou disturb them?

  Except we be converted and become as kine, we shall in no wise enter

into the kingdom of heaven. For we ought to learn from them one thing:

ruminating.

  And verily, although a man should gain the whole world, and yet not

learn one thing, ruminating, what would it profit him! He would not be rid of

his affliction,

  --His great affliction: that, however, is at present called DISGUST. Who

hath not at present his heart, his mouth and his eyes full of disgust? Thou

also! Thou also! But behold these kine!"--

  Thus  spake  the  Preacher-on-the-Mount,  and  turned  then  his  own  look

towards Zarathustra--for hitherto it had rested lovingly on the kine--: then,

however, he put on a different expression. "Who is this with whom I talk?" he

exclaimed frightened, and sprang up from the ground.

  "This  is  the  man  without  disgust,  this  is  Zarathustra  himself,  the

surmounter of the great disgust, this is the eye, this is the mouth, this is the

heart of Zarathustra himself."

  And whilst he thus spake he kissed with o'erflowing eyes the hands of

him  with  whom  he  spake,  and  behaved  altogether  like  one  to  whom  a

precious gift and jewel hath fallen unawares from heaven. The kine, however,

gazed at it all and wondered.

  "Speak not of me, thou strange one; thou amiable one!" said Zarathustra,

and restrained his affection, "speak to me firstly of thyself! Art thou not the

voluntary beggar who once cast away great riches,--

  --Who was ashamed of his riches and of the rich, and fled to the poorest

to bestow upon them his abundance and his heart? But they received him

not."

  "But they received me not," said the voluntary beggar, "thou knowest it,

forsooth. So I went at last to the animals and to those kine."

  "Then learnedst thou," interrupted Zarathustra, "how much harder it is togive properly than to take properly, and that bestowing well is an ART--the

last, subtlest master-art of kindness."

    "Especially nowadays," answered the voluntary beggar: "at present, that

is to say, when everything low hath become rebellious and exclusive and

haughty in its manner--in the manner of the populace.

  For the hour hath come, thou knowest it forsooth, for the great, evil, long,

slow mob-and-slave-insurrection: it extendeth and extendeth!

  Now doth it provoke the lower classes, all benevolence and petty giving;

and the overrich may be on their guard!

  Whoever at present drip, like bulgy bottles out of all-too-small necks:--of

such bottles at present one willingly breaketh the necks.

  Wanton avidity, bilious envy, careworn revenge, populace-pride: all these

struck mine eye. It is no longer true that the poor are blessed. The kingdom of

heaven, however, is with the kine."

  "And why is it not with the rich?" asked Zarathustra temptingly, while he

kept back the kine which sniffed familiarly at the peaceful one.

  "Why dost thou tempt me?" answered the other. "Thou knowest it thyself

better even than I. What was it drove me to the poorest, O Zarathustra? Was

it not my disgust at the richest?

  --At the culprits of riches, with cold eyes and rank thoughts, who pick up

profit out of all kinds of rubbish--at this rabble that stinketh to heaven,

  --At this gilded, falsified populace, whose fathers were pickpockets, or

carrion-crows, or rag-pickers, with wives compliant, lewd and forgetful:--for

they are all of them not far different from harlots--

  Populace above, populace below! What are 'poor' and 'rich' at present!

That distinction did I unlearn,--then did I flee away further and ever further,

until I came to those kine."

  Thus spake the peaceful one, and puffed himself and perspired with his

words: so that the kine wondered anew. Zarathustra, however, kept looking

into his face with a smile, all the time the man talked so severely--and shook

silently his head.

  "Thou doest violence to thyself, thou Preacher-on-the-Mount, when thou

usest such severe words. For such severity neither thy mouth nor thine eye

have been given thee.

  Nor, methinketh, hath thy stomach either: unto IT all such rage and hatred

and foaming-over is repugnant. Thy stomach wanteth softer things: thou art

not a butcher.  Rather seemest thou to me a plant-eater and a root-man. Perhaps thou

grindest corn. Certainly, however, thou art averse to fleshly joys, and thou

lovest honey."

  "Thou  hast  divined  me  well,"  answered  the  voluntary  beggar,  with

lightened heart. "I love honey, I also grind corn; for I have sought out what

tasteth sweetly and maketh pure breath:

  --Also what requireth a long time, a day's-work and a mouth's-work for

gentle idlers and sluggards.

  Furthest,  to  be  sure,  have  those  kine  carried  it:  they  have  devised

ruminating and lying in the sun. They also abstain from all heavy thoughts

which inflate the heart."

    --"Well!" said Zarathustra, "thou shouldst also see MINE animals, mine

eagle and my serpent,--their like do not at present exist on earth.

    Behold, thither leadeth the way to my cave: be to-night its guest. And talk

to mine animals of the happiness of animals,--

  --Until I myself come home. For now a cry of distress calleth me hastily

away  from  thee.  Also,  shouldst  thou  find  new  honey  with  me,  ice-cold,

golden-comb-honey, eat it!

  Now, however, take leave at once of thy kine, thou strange one! thou

amiable one! though it be hard for thee. For they are thy warmest friends and

preceptors!"--

  --"One  excepted,  whom  I  hold  still  dearer,"  answered  the  voluntary

beggar. "Thou thyself art good, O Zarathustra, and better even than a cow!"

    "Away,  away  with  thee!  thou  evil  flatterer!"  cried  Zarathustra

mischievously, "why dost thou spoil me with such praise and flattery-honey?

    "Away, away from me!" cried he once more, and heaved his stick at the

fond beggar, who, however, ran nimbly away.

                                LXIX. THE SHADOW.

  Scarcely  however  was  the  voluntary  beggar  gone  in  haste,  and

Zarathustra again alone, when he heard behind him a new voice which called

out:  "Stay!  Zarathustra!  Do  wait!  It  is  myself,  forsooth,  O  Zarathustra,

myself, thy shadow!" But Zarathustra did not wait; for a sudden irritation

came over him on account of the crowd and the crowding in his mountains.

"Whither hath my lonesomeness gone?" spake he.

  "It  is  verily  becoming  too  much  for  me;  these  mountains  swarm;  my

kingdom is no longer of THIS world; I require new mountains.

  My shadow calleth me? What matter about my shadow! Let it run afterme! I--run away from it."

  Thus spake Zarathustra to his heart and ran away. But the one behind

followed after him, so that immediately there were three runners, one after

the  other--namely,  foremost  the  voluntary  beggar,  then  Zarathustra,  and

thirdly,  and  hindmost,  his  shadow.  But  not  long  had  they  run  thus  when

Zarathustra became conscious of his folly, and shook off with one jerk all his

irritation and detestation.

  "What!" said he, "have not the most ludicrous things always happened to

us old anchorites and saints?

  Verily, my folly hath grown big in the mountains! Now do I hear six old

fools' legs rattling behind one another!

  But  doth  Zarathustra  need  to  be  frightened  by  his  shadow?  Also,

methinketh that after all it hath longer legs than mine."

  Thus spake Zarathustra, and, laughing with eyes and entrails, he stood

still  and  turned  round  quickly--and  behold,  he  almost  thereby  threw  his

shadow and follower to the ground, so closely had the latter followed at his

heels, and so weak was he. For when Zarathustra scrutinised him with his

glance  he  was  frightened  as  by  a  sudden  apparition,  so  slender,  swarthy,

hollow and worn-out did this follower appear.

  "Who art thou?" asked Zarathustra vehemently, "what doest thou here?

And why callest thou thyself my shadow? Thou art not pleasing unto me."

  "Forgive me," answered the shadow, "that it is I; and if I please thee not--

well, O Zarathustra! therein do I admire thee and thy good taste.

  A wanderer am I, who have walked long at thy heels; always on the way,

but without a goal, also without a home: so that verily, I lack little of being

the eternally Wandering Jew, except that I am not eternal and not a Jew.

  What? Must I ever be on the way? Whirled by every wind, unsettled,

driven about? O earth, thou hast become too round for me!

  On every surface have I already sat, like tired dust have I fallen asleep on

mirrors  and  window-panes:  everything  taketh  from  me,  nothing  giveth;  I

become thin--I am almost equal to a shadow.

  After thee, however, O Zarathustra, did I fly and hie longest; and though I

hid myself from thee, I was nevertheless thy best shadow: wherever thou hast

sat, there sat I also.

  With thee have I wandered about in the remotest, coldest worlds, like a

phantom that voluntarily haunteth winter roofs and snows.

  With  thee  have  I  pushed  into  all  the  forbidden,  all  the  worst  and  thefurthest: and if there be anything of virtue in me, it is that I have had no fear

of any prohibition.

  With thee have I broken up whatever my heart revered; all boundary-

stones  and  statues  have  I  o'erthrown;  the  most  dangerous  wishes  did  I

pursue,--verily, beyond every crime did I once go.

  With thee did I unlearn the belief in words and worths and in great names.

When the devil casteth his skin, doth not his name also fall away? It is also

skin. The devil himself is perhaps--skin.

    'Nothing is true, all is permitted': so said I to myself. Into the coldest

water did I plunge with head and heart. Ah, how oft did I stand there naked

on that account, like a red crab!

  Ah, where have gone all my goodness and all my shame and all my belief

in the good! Ah, where is the lying innocence which I once possessed, the

innocence of the good and of their noble lies!

  Too oft, verily, did I follow close to the heels of truth: then did it kick me

on the face. Sometimes I meant to lie, and behold! then only did I hit--the

truth.

  Too much hath become clear unto me: now it doth not concern me any

more. Nothing liveth any longer that I love,--how should I still love myself?

  'To live as I incline, or not to live at all': so do I wish; so wisheth also the

holiest. But alas! how have I still--inclination?

  Have I--still a goal? A haven towards which MY sail is set?

  A good wind? Ah, he only who knoweth WHITHER he saileth, knoweth

what wind is good, and a fair wind for him.

  What still remaineth to me? A heart weary and flippant; an unstable will;

fluttering wings; a broken backbone.

  This  seeking  for  MY  home:  O  Zarathustra,  dost  thou  know  that  this

seeking hath been MY home-sickening; it eateth me up.

    'WHERE is--MY home?' For it do I ask and seek, and have sought, but

have not found it. O eternal everywhere, O eternal nowhere, O eternal--in-

vain!"

  Thus spake the shadow, and Zarathustra's countenance lengthened at his

words. "Thou art my shadow!" said he at last sadly.

  "Thy danger is not small, thou free spirit and wanderer! Thou hast had a

bad day: see that a still worse evening doth not overtake thee!

  To such unsettled ones as thou, seemeth at last even a prisoner blessed.

Didst thou ever see how captured criminals sleep? They sleep quietly, theyenjoy their new security.

  Beware  lest  in  the  end  a  narrow  faith  capture  thee,  a  hard,  rigorous

delusion! For now everything that is narrow and fixed seduceth and tempteth

thee.

  Thou hast lost thy goal. Alas, how wilt thou forego and forget that loss?

Thereby--hast thou also lost thy way!

  Thou poor rover and rambler, thou tired butterfly! wilt thou have a rest

and a home this evening? Then go up to my cave!

    Thither leadeth the way to my cave. And now will I run quickly away

from thee again. Already lieth as it were a shadow upon me.

  I will run alone, so that it may again become bright around me. Therefore

must I still be a long time merrily upon my legs. In the evening, however,

there will be--dancing with me!"--

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                                    LXX. NOONTIDE.

  --And Zarathustra ran and ran, but he found no one else, and was alone

and  ever  found  himself  again;  he  enjoyed  and  quaffed  his  solitude,  and

thought  of  good  things--for  hours.  About  the  hour  of  noontide,  however,

when the sun stood exactly over Zarathustra's head, he passed an old, bent

and gnarled tree, which was encircled round by the ardent love of a vine, and

hidden  from  itself;  from  this  there  hung  yellow  grapes  in  abundance,

confronting the wanderer. Then he felt inclined to quench a little thirst, and to

break off for himself a cluster of grapes. When, however, he had already his

arm out-stretched for that purpose, he felt still more inclined for something

else--namely, to lie down beside the tree at the hour of perfect noontide and

sleep.

  This Zarathustra did; and no sooner had he laid himself on the ground in

the stillness and secrecy of the variegated grass, than he had forgotten his

little thirst, and fell asleep. For as the proverb of Zarathustra saith: "One thing

is more necessary than the other." Only that his eyes remained open:--for they

never grew weary of viewing and admiring the tree and the love of the vine.

In falling asleep, however, Zarathustra spake thus to his heart:

  "Hush!  Hush!  Hath  not  the  world  now  become  perfect?  What  hath

happened unto me?

  As a delicate wind danceth invisibly upon parqueted seas, light, feather-

light, so--danceth sleep upon me.

  No eye doth it close to me, it leaveth my soul awake. Light is it, verily,feather-light.

  It  persuadeth  me,  I  know  not  how,  it  toucheth  me  inwardly  with  a

caressing hand, it constraineth me. Yea, it constraineth me, so that my soul

stretcheth itself out:--

  --How long and weary it becometh, my strange soul! Hath a seventh-day

evening come to it precisely at noontide? Hath it already wandered too long,

blissfully, among good and ripe things?

  It stretcheth itself out, long--longer! it lieth still, my strange soul. Too

many good things hath it already tasted; this golden sadness oppresseth it, it

distorteth its mouth.

  --As a ship that putteth into the calmest cove:--it now draweth up to the

land, weary of long voyages and uncertain seas. Is not the land more faithful?

  As such a ship huggeth the shore, tuggeth the shore:--then it sufficeth for

a spider to spin its thread from the ship to the land. No stronger ropes are

required there.

  As such a weary ship in the calmest cove, so do I also now repose, nigh to

the earth, faithful, trusting, waiting, bound to it with the lightest threads.

  O happiness! O happiness! Wilt thou perhaps sing, O my soul? Thou liest

in the grass. But this is the secret, solemn hour, when no shepherd playeth his

pipe.

  Take care! Hot noontide sleepeth on the fields. Do not sing! Hush! The

world is perfect.

  Do not sing, thou prairie-bird, my soul! Do not even whisper! Lo--hush!

The old noontide sleepeth, it moveth its mouth: doth it not just now drink a

drop of happiness--

  --An  old  brown  drop  of  golden  happiness,  golden  wine?  Something

whisketh over it, its happiness laugheth. Thus--laugheth a God. Hush!--

  --'For happiness, how little sufficeth for happiness!' Thus spake I once

and thought myself wise. But it was a blasphemy: THAT have I now learned.

Wise fools speak better.

  The least thing precisely, the gentlest thing, the lightest thing, a lizard's

rustling,  a  breath,  a  whisk,  an  eye-glance--LITTLE  maketh  up  the  BEST

happiness. Hush!

  --What hath befallen me: Hark! Hath time flown away? Do I not fall?

Have I not fallen--hark! into the well of eternity?

  --What happeneth to me? Hush! It stingeth me--alas--to the heart? To the

heart! Oh, break up, break up, my heart, after such happiness, after such asting!

  --What? Hath not the world just now become perfect? Round and ripe?

Oh, for the golden round ring--whither doth it fly? Let me run after it! Quick!

  Hush--"  (and  here  Zarathustra  stretched  himself,  and  felt  that  he  was

asleep.)

  "Up!"  said  he  to  himself,  "thou  sleeper!  Thou  noontide  sleeper!  Well

then, up, ye old legs! It is time and more than time; many a good stretch of

road is still awaiting you--

  Now have ye slept your fill; for how long a time? A half-eternity! Well

then, up now, mine old heart! For how long after such a sleep mayest thou--

remain awake?"

  (But then did he fall asleep anew, and his soul spake against him and

defended itself, and lay down again)--"Leave me alone! Hush! Hath not the

world just now become perfect? Oh, for the golden round ball!--

  "Get up," said Zarathustra, "thou little thief, thou sluggard! What! Still

stretching thyself, yawning, sighing, falling into deep wells?

  Who art thou then, O my soul!" (and here he became frightened, for a

sunbeam shot down from heaven upon his face.)

  "O heaven above me," said he sighing, and sat upright, "thou gazest at

me? Thou hearkenest unto my strange soul?

  When wilt thou drink this drop of dew that fell down upon all earthly

things,--when wilt thou drink this strange soul--

  --When, thou well of eternity! thou joyous, awful, noontide abyss! when

wilt thou drink my soul back into thee?"

  Thus spake Zarathustra, and rose from his couch beside the tree, as if

awakening from a strange drunkenness: and behold! there stood the sun still

exactly  above  his  head.  One  might,  however,  rightly  infer  therefrom  that

Zarathustra had not then slept long.

                                LXXI. THE GREETING.

  It  was  late  in  the  afternoon  only  when  Zarathustra,  after  long  useless

searching and strolling about, again came home to his cave. When, however,

he stood over against it, not more than twenty paces therefrom, the thing

happened which he now least of all expected: he heard anew the great CRY

OF DISTRESS. And extraordinary! this time the cry came out of his own

cave.  It  was  a  long,  manifold,  peculiar  cry,  and  Zarathustra  plainly

distinguished  that  it  was  composed  of  many  voices:  although  heard  at  a

distance it might sound like the cry out of a single mouth.  Thereupon Zarathustra rushed forward to his cave, and behold! what a

spectacle awaited him after that concert! For there did they all sit together

whom he had passed during the day: the king on the right and the king on the

left,  the  old  magician,  the  pope,  the  voluntary  beggar,  the  shadow,  the

intellectually conscientious one, the sorrowful soothsayer, and the ass; the

ugliest man, however, had set a crown on his head, and had put round him

two purple girdles,--for he liked, like all ugly ones, to disguise himself and

play the handsome person. In the midst, however, of that sorrowful company

stood Zarathustra's eagle, ruffled and disquieted, for it had been called upon

to answer too much for which its pride had not any answer; the wise serpent

however hung round its neck.

  All this did Zarathustra behold with great astonishment; then however he

scrutinised each individual guest with courteous curiosity, read their souls

and wondered anew. In the meantime the assembled ones had risen from their

seats,  and  waited  with  reverence  for  Zarathustra  to  speak.  Zarathustra

however spake thus:

  "Ye despairing ones! Ye strange ones! So it was YOUR cry of distress

that I heard? And now do I know also where he is to be sought, whom I have

sought for in vain to-day: THE HIGHER MAN--:

  --In mine own cave sitteth he, the higher man! But why do I wonder!

Have not I myself allured him to me by honey-offerings and artful lure-calls

of my happiness?

  But it seemeth to me that ye are badly adapted for company: ye make one

another's hearts fretful, ye that cry for help, when ye sit here together? There

is one that must first come,

  --One who will make you laugh once more, a good jovial buffoon, a

dancer, a wind, a wild romp, some old fool:--what think ye?

  Forgive me, however, ye despairing ones, for speaking such trivial words

before you, unworthy, verily, of such guests! But ye do not divine WHAT

maketh my heart wanton:--

  --Ye  yourselves  do  it,  and  your  aspect,  forgive  it  me!  For  every  one

becometh  courageous  who  beholdeth  a  despairing  one.  To  encourage  a

despairing one--every one thinketh himself strong enough to do so.

  To  myself  have  ye  given  this  power,--a  good  gift,  mine  honourable

guests! An excellent guest's-present! Well, do not then upbraid when I also

offer you something of mine.

  This is mine empire and my dominion: that which is mine, however, shallthis evening and tonight be yours. Mine animals shall serve you: let my cave

be your resting-place!

  At house and home with me shall no one despair: in my purlieus do I

protect every one from his wild beasts. And that is the first thing which I

offer you: security!

  The second thing, however, is my little finger. And when ye have THAT,

then take the whole hand also, yea, and the heart with it! Welcome here,

welcome to you, my guests!"

  Thus spake Zarathustra, and laughed with love and mischief. After this

greeting his guests bowed once more and were reverentially silent; the king

on the right, however, answered him in their name.

  "O Zarathustra, by the way in which thou hast given us thy hand and thy

greeting, we recognise thee as Zarathustra. Thou hast humbled thyself before

us; almost hast thou hurt our reverence--:

  --Who however could have humbled himself as thou hast done, with such

pride?  THAT  uplifteth  us  ourselves;  a  refreshment  is  it,  to  our  eyes  and

hearts.

  To behold this, merely, gladly would we ascend higher mountains than

this.  For  as  eager  beholders  have  we  come;  we  wanted  to  see  what

brighteneth dim eyes.

  And lo! now is it all over with our cries of distress. Now are our minds

and hearts open and enraptured. Little is lacking for our spirits to become

wanton.

  There is nothing, O Zarathustra, that groweth more pleasingly on earth

than a lofty, strong will: it is the finest growth. An entire landscape refresheth

itself at one such tree.

  To the pine do I compare him, O Zarathustra, which groweth up like thee-

-tall, silent, hardy, solitary, of the best, supplest wood, stately,--

  --In the end, however, grasping out for ITS dominion with strong, green

branches, asking weighty questions of the wind, the storm, and whatever is at

home on high places;

    --Answering more weightily, a commander, a victor! Oh! who should not

ascend high mountains to behold such growths?

  At thy tree, O Zarathustra, the gloomy and ill-constituted also refresh

themselves;  at  thy  look  even  the  wavering  become  steady  and  heal  their

hearts.

  And verily, towards thy mountain and thy tree do many eyes turn to-day;a  great  longing  hath  arisen,  and  many  have  learned  to  ask:  'Who  is

Zarathustra?'

  And those into whose ears thou hast at any time dripped thy song and thy

honey: all the hidden ones, the lone-dwellers and the twain-dwellers, have

simultaneously said to their hearts:

  'Doth Zarathustra still live? It is no longer worth while to live, everything

is indifferent, everything is useless: or else--we must live with Zarathustra!'

  'Why doth he not come who hath so long announced himself?' thus do

many people ask; 'hath solitude swallowed him up? Or should we perhaps go

to him?'

  Now  doth  it  come  to  pass  that  solitude  itself  becometh  fragile  and

breaketh open, like a grave that breaketh open and can no longer hold its

dead. Everywhere one seeth resurrected ones.

  Now do the waves rise and rise around thy mountain, O Zarathustra. And

however high be thy height, many of them must rise up to thee: thy boat shall

not rest much longer on dry ground.

  And that we despairing ones have now come into thy cave, and already

no longer despair:--it is but a prognostic and a presage that better ones are on

the way to thee,--

  --For they themselves are on the way to thee, the last remnant of God

among men--that is to say, all the men of great longing, of great loathing, of

great satiety,

  --All who do not want to live unless they learn again to HOPE--unless

they learn from thee, O Zarathustra, the GREAT hope!"

  Thus spake the king on the right, and seized the hand of Zarathustra in

order to kiss it; but Zarathustra checked his veneration, and stepped back

frightened,  fleeing  as  it  were,  silently  and  suddenly  into  the  far  distance.

After a little while, however, he was again at home with his guests, looked at

them with clear scrutinising eyes, and said:

  "My guests, ye higher men, I will speak plain language and plainly with

you. It is not for YOU that I have waited here in these mountains."

  ("'Plain language and plainly?' Good God!" said here the king on the left

to himself; "one seeth he doth not know the good Occidentals, this sage out of

the Orient!

  But he meaneth 'blunt language and bluntly'--well! That is not the worst

taste in these days!")

  "Ye may, verily, all of you be higher men," continued Zarathustra; "butfor me--ye are neither high enough, nor strong enough.

  For me, that is to say, for the inexorable which is now silent in me, but

will not always be silent. And if ye appertain to me, still it is not as my right

arm.

  For he who himself standeth, like you, on sickly and tender legs, wisheth

above all to be TREATED INDULGENTLY, whether he be conscious of it

or hide it from himself.

  My arms and my legs, however, I do not treat indulgently, I DO NOT

TREAT MY WARRIORS INDULGENTLY: how then could ye be fit for

MY warfare?

  With you I should spoil all my victories. And many of you would tumble

over if ye but heard the loud beating of my drums.

    Moreover, ye are not sufficiently beautiful and well-born for me. I require

pure,  smooth  mirrors  for  my  doctrines;  on  your  surface  even  mine  own

likeness is distorted.

  On your shoulders presseth many a burden, many a recollection; many a

mischievous dwarf squatteth in your corners. There is concealed populace

also in you.

  And though ye be high and of a higher type, much in you is crooked and

misshapen. There is no smith in the world that could hammer you right and

straight for me.

  Ye are only bridges: may higher ones pass over upon you! Ye signify

steps: so do not upbraid him who ascendeth beyond you into HIS height!

  Out  of  your  seed  there  may  one  day  arise  for  me  a  genuine  son  and

perfect heir: but that time is distant. Ye yourselves are not those unto whom

my heritage and name belong.

  Not  for  you  do  I  wait  here  in  these  mountains;  not  with  you  may  I

descend for the last time. Ye have come unto me only as a presage that higher

ones are on the way to me,--

  --NOT the men of great longing, of great loathing, of great satiety, and

that which ye call the remnant of God;

  --Nay!  Nay!  Three  times  Nay!  For  OTHERS  do  I  wait  here  in  these

mountains, and will not lift my foot from thence without them;

  --For  higher  ones,  stronger  ones,  triumphanter  ones,  merrier  ones,  for

such as are built squarely in body and soul: LAUGHING LIONS must come!

  O my guests, ye strange ones--have ye yet heard nothing of my children?

And that they are on the way to me?  Do speak unto me of my gardens, of my Happy Isles, of my new beautiful

race--why do ye not speak unto me thereof?

  This guests'-present do I solicit of your love, that ye speak unto me of my

children.  For  them  am  I  rich,  for  them  I  became  poor:  what  have  I  not

surrendered,

  --What  would  I  not  surrender  that  I  might  have  one  thing:  THESE

children, THIS living plantation, THESE life-trees of my will and of my

highest hope!"

  Thus spake Zarathustra, and stopped suddenly in his discourse: for his

longing came over him, and he closed his eyes and his mouth, because of the

agitation of his heart. And all his guests also were silent, and stood still and

confounded: except only that the old soothsayer made signs with his hands

and his gestures.

                                  LXXII. THE SUPPER.

  For at this point the soothsayer interrupted the greeting of Zarathustra and

his  guests:  he  pressed  forward  as  one  who  had  no  time  to  lose,  seized

Zarathustra's hand and exclaimed: "But Zarathustra!

  One thing is more necessary than the other, so sayest thou thyself: well,

one thing is now more necessary UNTO ME than all others.

  A word at the right time: didst thou not invite me to TLE? And here are

many who have made long journeys. Thou dost not mean to feed us merely

with discourses?

    Besides,  all  of  you  have  thought  too  much  about  freezing,  drowning,

suffocating, and other bodily dangers: none of you, however, have thought of

MY danger, namely, perishing of hunger-"

  (Thus spake the soothsayer. When Zarathustra's animals, however, heard

these words, they ran away in terror. For they saw that all they had brought

home during the day would not be enough to fill the one soothsayer.)

    "Likewise perishing of thirst," continued the soothsayer. "And although I

hear water splashing here like words of wisdom--that is to say, plenteously

and unweariedly, I--want WINE!

  Not every one is a born water-drinker like Zarathustra. Neither doth water

suit weary and withered ones: WE deserve wine--IT alone giveth immediate

vigour and improvised health!"

  On this occasion, when the soothsayer was longing for wine, it happened

that the king on the left, the silent one, also found expression for once. "WE

took care," said he, "about wine, I, along with my brother the king on theright: we have enough of wine,--a whole ass-load of it. So there is nothing

lacking but bread."

    "Bread,"  replied  Zarathustra,  laughing  when  he  spake,  "it  is  precisely

bread that anchorites have not. But man doth not live by bread alone, but also

by the flesh of good lambs, of which I have two:

    --THESE shall we slaughter quickly, and cook spicily with sage: it is so

that I like them. And there is also no lack of roots and fruits, good enough

even for the fastidious and dainty,--nor of nuts and other riddles for cracking.

  Thus will we have a good repast in a little while. But whoever wish to eat

with  us  must  also  give  a  hand  to  the  work,  even  the  kings.  For  with

Zarathustra even a king may be a cook."

  This proposal appealed to the hearts of all of them, save that the voluntary

beggar objected to the flesh and wine and spices.

  "Just hear this glutton Zarathustra!" said he jokingly: "doth one go into

caves and high mountains to make such repasts?

  Now indeed do I understand what he once taught us: Blessed be moderate

poverty!' And why he wisheth to do away with beggars."

  "Be of good cheer," replied Zarathustra, "as I am. Abide by thy customs,

thou excellent one: grind thy corn, drink thy water, praise thy cooking,--if

only it make thee glad!

  I am a law only for mine own; I am not a law for all. He, however, who

belongeth unto me must be strong of bone and light of foot,--

  --Joyous in fight and feast, no sulker, no John o' Dreams, ready for the

hardest task as for the feast, healthy and hale.

  The best belongeth unto mine and me; and if it be not given us, then do

we take it:--the best food, the purest sky, the strongest thoughts, the fairest

women!"--

  Thus spake Zarathustra; the king on the right however answered and said:

"Strange! Did one ever hear such sensible things out of the mouth of a wise

man?

  And verily, it is the strangest thing in a wise man, if over and above, he

be still sensible, and not an ass."

  Thus spake the king on the right and wondered; the ass however, with ill-

will, said YE-A to his remark. This however was the beginning of that long

repast which is called "The Supper" in the history-books. At this there was

nothing else spoken of but THE HIGHER MAN.

                            LXXIII. THE HIGHER MAN.  1.

  When I came unto men for the first time, then did I commit the anchorite

folly, the great folly: I appeared on the market-place.

  And when I spake unto all, I spake unto none. In the evening, however,

rope-dancers  were  my  companions,  and  corpses;  and  I  myself  almost  a

corpse.

  With the new morning, however, there came unto me a new truth: then

did I learn to say: "Of what account to me are market-place and populace and

populace-noise and long populace-ears!"

  Ye  higher  men,  learn  THIS  from  me:  On  the  market-place  no  one

believeth in higher men. But if ye will speak there, very well! The populace,

however, blinketh: "We are all equal."

  "Ye higher men,"--so blinketh the populace--"there are no higher men, we

are all equal; man is man, before God--we are all equal!"

  Before God!--Now, however, this God hath died. Before the populace,

however, we will not be equal. Ye higher men, away from the market-place!

  2.

  Before God!--Now however this God hath died! Ye higher men, this God

was your greatest danger.

  Only since he lay in the grave have ye again arisen. Now only cometh the

great noontide, now only doth the higher man become--master!

  Have ye understood this word, O my brethren? Ye are frightened: do your

hearts turn giddy? Doth the abyss here yawn for you? Doth the hell-hound

here yelp at you?

  Well! Take heart! ye higher men! Now only travaileth the mountain of the

human future. God hath died: now do WE desire--the Superman to live.

  3.

  The most careful ask to-day: "How is man to be maintained?" Zarathustra

however asketh, as the first and only one: "How is man to be SURPASSED?"

  The Superman, I have at heart; THAT is the first and only thing to me--

and NOT man: not the neighbour, not the poorest, not the sorriest, not the

best.--

  O my brethren, what I can love in man is that he is an over-going and a

down-going. And also in you there is much that maketh me love and hope.

  In that ye have despised, ye higher men, that maketh me hope. For the

great despisers are the great reverers.

  In  that  ye  have  despaired,  there  is  much  to  honour.  For  ye  have  notlearned to submit yourselves, ye have not learned petty policy.

  For  to-day  have  the  petty  people  become  master:  they  all  preach

submission and humility and policy and diligence and consideration and the

long et cetera of petty virtues.

    Whatever is of the effeminate type, whatever originateth from the servile

type,  and  especially  the  populace-mishmash:--THAT  wisheth  now  to  be

master of all human destiny--O disgust! Disgust! Disgust!

  THAT  asketh  and  asketh  and  never  tireth:  "How  is  man  to  maintain

himself best, longest, most pleasantly?" Thereby--are they the masters of to-

day.

  These  masters  of  to-day--surpass  them,  O  my  brethren--these  petty

people: THEY are the Superman's greatest danger!

    Surpass, ye higher men, the petty virtues, the petty policy, the sand-grain

considerateness,  the  ant-hill  trumpery,  the  pitiable  comfortableness,  the

"happiness of the greatest number"--!

  And  rather  despair  than  submit  yourselves.  And  verily,  I  love  you,

because ye know not to-day how to live, ye higher men! For thus do YE live-

-best!

  4.

  Have ye courage, O my brethren? Are ye stout-hearted? NOT the courage

before witnesses, but anchorite and eagle courage, which not even a God any

longer beholdeth?

  Cold souls, mules, the blind and the drunken, I do not call stout-hearted.

He  hath  heart  who  knoweth  fear,  but  VANQUISHETH  it;  who  seeth  the

abyss, but with PRIDE.

  He who seeth the abyss, but with eagle's eyes,--he who with eagle's talons

GRASPETH the abyss: he hath courage.--

  5.

  "Man is evil"--so said to me for consolation, all the wisest ones. Ah, if

only it be still true to-day! For the evil is man's best force.

  "Man  must  become  better  and  eviler"--so  do  I  teach.  The  evilest  is

necessary for the Superman's best.

  It may have been well for the preacher of the petty people to suffer and be

burdened  by  men's  sin.  I,  however,  rejoice  in  great  sin  as  my  great

CONSOLATION.--

  Such things, however, are not said for long ears. Every word, also, is not

suited for every mouth. These are fine far-away things: at them sheep's clawsshall not grasp!

  6.

  Ye higher men, think ye that I am here to put right what ye have put

wrong?

  Or that I wished henceforth to make snugger couches for you sufferers?

Or  show  you  restless,  miswandering,  misclimbing  ones,  new  and  easier

footpaths?

  Nay! Nay! Three times Nay! Always more, always better ones of your

type shall succumb,--for ye shall always have it worse and harder. Thus only-

-

  --Thus only groweth man aloft to the height where the lightning striketh

and shattereth him: high enough for the lightning!

    Towards the few, the long, the remote go forth my soul and my seeking:

of what account to me are your many little, short miseries!

  Ye do not yet suffer enough for me! For ye suffer from yourselves, ye

have not yet suffered FROM MAN. Ye would lie if ye spake otherwise!

None of you suffereth from what I have suffered.--

  7.

  It is not enough for me that the lightning no longer doeth harm. I do not

wish to conduct it away: it shall learn--to work for ME.--

  My wisdom hath accumulated long like a cloud, it becometh stiller and

darker. So doeth all wisdom which shall one day bear LIGHTNINGS.--

  Unto  these  men  of  to-day  will  I  not  be  LIGHT,  nor  be  called  light.

THEM--will I blind: lightning of my wisdom! put out their eyes!

  8.

  Do not will anything beyond your power: there is a bad falseness in those

who will beyond their power.

  Especially when they will great things! For they awaken distrust in great

things, these subtle false-coiners and stage-players:--

  --Until  at  last  they  are  false  towards  themselves,  squint-eyed,  whited

cankers, glossed over with strong words, parade virtues and brilliant false

deeds.

  Take good care there, ye higher men! For nothing is more precious to me,

and rarer, than honesty.

  Is this to-day not that of the populace? The populace however knoweth

not what is great and what is small, what is straight and what is honest: it is

innocently crooked, it ever lieth.  9.

  Have a good distrust to-day ye, higher men, ye enheartened ones! Ye

open-hearted ones! And keep your reasons secret! For this to-day is that of

the populace.

  What the populace once learned to believe without reasons, who could--

refute it to them by means of reasons?

  And on the market-place one convinceth with gestures. But reasons make

the populace distrustful.

  And when truth hath once triumphed there, then ask yourselves with good

distrust: "What strong error hath fought for it?"

  Be on your guard also against the learned! They hate you, because they

are unproductive! They have cold, withered eyes before which every bird is

unplumed.

  Such persons vaunt about not lying: but inability to lie is still far from

being love to truth. Be on your guard!

  Freedom from fever is still far from being knowledge! Refrigerated spirits

I do not believe in. He who cannot lie, doth not know what truth is.

  10.

  If ye would go up high, then use your own legs! Do not get yourselves

CARRIED aloft; do not seat yourselves on other people's backs and heads!

  Thou hast mounted, however, on horseback? Thou now ridest briskly up

to  thy  goal?  Well,  my  friend!  But  thy  lame  foot  is  also  with  thee  on

horseback!

  When  thou  reachest  thy  goal,  when  thou  alightest  from  thy  horse:

precisely on thy HEIGHT, thou higher man,--then wilt thou stumble!

  11.

  Ye creating ones, ye higher men! One is only pregnant with one's own

child.

  Do not let yourselves be imposed upon or put upon! Who then is YOUR

neighbour? Even if ye act "for your neighbour"--ye still do not create for

him!

    Unlearn, I pray you, this "for," ye creating ones: your very virtue wisheth

you  to  have  naught  to  do  with  "for"  and  "on  account  of"  and  "because."

Against these false little words shall ye stop your ears.

  "For one's neighbour," is the virtue only of the petty people: there it is

said "like and like," and "hand washeth hand":--they have neither the right

nor the power for YOUR self-seeking!  In  your  self-seeking,  ye  creating  ones,  there  is  the  foresight  and

foreseeing of the pregnant! What no one's eye hath yet seen, namely, the

fruit--this, sheltereth and saveth and nourisheth your entire love.

  Where your entire love is, namely, with your child, there is also your

entire virtue! Your work, your will is YOUR "neighbour": let no false values

impose upon you!

  12.

  Ye creating ones, ye higher men! Whoever hath to give birth is sick;

whoever hath given birth, however, is unclean.

  Ask women: one giveth birth, not because it giveth pleasure. The pain

maketh hens and poets cackle.

  Ye creating ones, in you there is much uncleanliness. That is because ye

have had to be mothers.

  A new child: oh, how much new filth hath also come into the world! Go

apart! He who hath given birth shall wash his soul!

  13.

  Be not virtuous beyond your powers! And seek nothing from yourselves

opposed to probability!

  Walk in the footsteps in which your fathers' virtue hath already walked!

How would ye rise high, if your fathers' will should not rise with you?

  He, however, who would be a firstling, let him take care lest he also

become a lastling! And where the vices of your fathers are, there should ye

not set up as saints!

  He whose fathers were inclined for women, and for strong wine and flesh

of wildboar swine; what would it be if he demanded chastity of himself?

  A folly would it be! Much, verily, doth it seem to me for such a one, if he

should be the husband of one or of two or of three women.

  And if he founded monasteries, and inscribed over their portals: "The way

to holiness,"--I should still say: What good is it! it is a new folly!

  He hath founded for himself a penance-house and refuge-house: much

good may it do! But I do not believe in it.

  In solitude there groweth what any one bringeth into it--also the brute in

one's nature. Thus is solitude inadvisable unto many.

  Hath  there  ever  been  anything  filthier  on  earth  than  the  saints  of  the

wilderness?  AROUND  THEM  was  not  only  the  devil  loose--but  also  the

swine.

  14.  Shy, ashamed, awkward, like the tiger whose spring hath failed--thus, ye

higher men, have I often seen you slink aside. A CAST which ye made had

failed.

  But what doth it matter, ye dice-players! Ye had not learned to play and

mock, as one must play and mock! Do we not ever sit at a great table of

mocking and playing?

  And  if  great  things  have  been  a  failure  with  you,  have  ye  yourselves

therefore--been a failure? And if ye yourselves have been a failure, hath man

therefore--been a failure? If man, however, hath been a failure: well then!

never mind!

  15.

  The higher its type, always the seldomer doth a thing succeed. Ye higher

men here, have ye not all--been failures?

  Be of good cheer; what doth it matter? How much is still possible! Learn

to laugh at yourselves, as ye ought to laugh!

  What wonder even that ye have failed and only half-succeeded, ye half-

shattered ones! Doth not--man's FUTURE strive and struggle in you?

  Man's furthest, profoundest, star-highest issues, his prodigious powers--

do not all these foam through one another in your vessel?

  What wonder that many a vessel shattereth! Learn to laugh at yourselves,

as ye ought to laugh! Ye higher men, O, how much is still possible!

  And verily, how much hath already succeeded! How rich is this earth in

small, good, perfect things, in well-constituted things!

  Set around you small, good, perfect things, ye higher men. Their golden

maturity healeth the heart. The perfect teacheth one to hope.

  16.

  What hath hitherto been the greatest sin here on earth? Was it not the

word of him who said: "Woe unto them that laugh now!"

  Did he himself find no cause for laughter on the earth? Then he sought

badly. A child even findeth cause for it.

  He--did not love sufficiently: otherwise would he also have loved us, the

laughing ones! But he hated and hooted us; wailing and teeth-gnashing did he

promise us.

  Must one then curse immediately, when one doth not love? That--seemeth

to me bad taste. Thus did he, however, this absolute one. He sprang from the

populace.

  And he himself just did not love sufficiently; otherwise would he haveraged less because people did not love him. All great love doth not SEEK

love:--it seeketh more.

  Go out of the way of all such absolute ones! They are a poor sickly type,

a populace-type: they look at this life with ill-will, they have an evil eye for

this earth.

  Go out of the way of all such absolute ones! They have heavy feet and

sultry hearts:--they do not know how to dance. How could the earth be light

to such ones!

  17.

    Tortuously do all good things come nigh to their goal. Like cats they

curve their backs, they purr inwardly with their approaching happiness,--all

good things laugh.

  His step betrayeth whether a person already walketh on HIS OWN path:

just see me walk! He, however, who cometh nigh to his goal, danceth.

  And verily, a statue have I not become, not yet do I stand there stiff,

stupid and stony, like a pillar; I love fast racing.

  And though there be on earth fens and dense afflictions, he who hath light

feet runneth even across the mud, and danceth, as upon well-swept ice.

  Lift up your hearts, my brethren, high, higher! And do not forget your

legs! Lift up also your legs, ye good dancers, and better still, if ye stand upon

your heads!

  18.

  This crown of the laughter, this rose-garland crown: I myself have put on

this crown, I myself have consecrated my laughter. No one else have I found

to-day potent enough for this.

    Zarathustra the dancer, Zarathustra the light one, who beckoneth with his

pinions, one ready for flight, beckoning unto all birds, ready and prepared, a

blissfully light-spirited one:--

    Zarathustra the soothsayer, Zarathustra the sooth-laugher, no impatient

one, no absolute one, one who loveth leaps and side-leaps; I myself have put

on this crown!

  19.

  Lift up your hearts, my brethren, high, higher! And do not forget your

legs! Lift up also your legs, ye good dancers, and better still if ye stand upon

your heads!

  There are also heavy animals in a state of happiness, there are club-footed

ones from the beginning. Curiously do they exert themselves, like an elephantwhich endeavoureth to stand upon its head.

  Better,  however,  to  be  foolish  with  happiness  than  foolish  with

misfortune, better to dance awkwardly than walk lamely. So learn, I pray

you, my wisdom, ye higher men: even the worst thing hath two good reverse

sides,--

  --Even the worst thing hath good dancing-legs: so learn, I pray you, ye

higher men, to put yourselves on your proper legs!

  So unlearn, I pray you, the sorrow-sighing, and all the populace-sadness!

Oh, how sad the buffoons of the populace seem to me to-day! This to-day,

however, is that of the populace.

  20.

  Do like unto the wind when it rusheth forth from its mountain-caves: unto

its own piping will it dance; the seas tremble and leap under its footsteps.

  That  which  giveth  wings  to  asses,  that  which  milketh  the  lionesses:--

praised be that good, unruly spirit, which cometh like a hurricane unto all the

present and unto all the populace,--

  --Which is hostile to thistle-heads and puzzle-heads, and to all withered

leaves and weeds:--praised be this wild, good, free spirit of the storm, which

danceth upon fens and afflictions, as upon meadows!

  Which hateth the consumptive populace-dogs, and all the ill-constituted,

sullen brood:--praised be this spirit of all free spirits, the laughing storm,

which bloweth dust into the eyes of all the melanopic and melancholic!

  Ye higher men, the worst thing in you is that ye have none of you learned

to dance as ye ought to dance--to dance beyond yourselves! What doth it

matter that ye have failed!

  How  many  things  are  still  possible!  So  LEARN  to  laugh  beyond

yourselves! Lift up your hearts, ye good dancers, high! higher! And do not

forget the good laughter!

  This crown of the laughter, this rose-garland crown: to you my brethren

do I cast this crown! Laughing have I consecrated; ye higher men, LEARN, I

pray you--to laugh!

                      LXXIV. THE SONG OF MELANCHOLY.

  1.

  When Zarathustra spake these sayings, he stood nigh to the entrance of

his cave; with the last words, however, he slipped away from his guests, and

fled for a little while into the open air.

  "O pure odours around me," cried he, "O blessed stillness around me! Butwhere are mine animals? Hither, hither, mine eagle and my serpent!

  Tell me, mine animals: these higher men, all of them--do they perhaps not

SMELL well? O pure odours around me! Now only do I know and feel how I

love you, mine animals."

  --And Zarathustra said once more: "I love you, mine animals!" The eagle,

however, and the serpent pressed close to him when he spake these words,

and looked up to him. In this attitude were they all three silent together, and

sniffed and sipped the good air with one another. For the air here outside was

better than with the higher men.

  2.

  Hardly, however, had Zarathustra left the cave when the old magician got

up, looked cunningly about him, and said: "He is gone!

  And already, ye higher men--let me tickle you with this complimentary

and flattering name, as he himself doeth--already doth mine evil spirit of

deceit and magic attack me, my melancholy devil,

  --Which is an adversary to this Zarathustra from the very heart: forgive it

for this! Now doth it wish to conjure before you, it hath just ITS hour; in vain

do I struggle with this evil spirit.

  Unto  all  of  you,  whatever  honours  ye  like  to  assume  in  your  names,

whether  ye  call  yourselves  'the  free  spirits'  or  'the  conscientious,'  or  'the

penitents of the spirit,' or 'the unfettered,' or 'the great longers,'--

  --Unto all of you, who like me suffer FROM THE GREAT LOATHING,

to whom the old God hath died, and as yet no new God lieth in cradles and

swaddling  clothes--unto  all  of  you  is  mine  evil  spirit  and  magic-devil

favourable.

  I know you, ye higher men, I know him,--I know also this fiend whom I

love in spite of me, this Zarathustra: he himself often seemeth to me like the

beautiful mask of a saint,

  --Like a new strange mummery in which mine evil spirit, the melancholy

devil, delighteth:--I love Zarathustra, so doth it often seem to me, for the sake

of mine evil spirit.--

  But already doth IT attack me and constrain me, this spirit of melancholy,

this evening-twilight devil: and verily, ye higher men, it hath a longing--

  --Open your eyes!--it hath a longing to come NAKED, whether male or

female, I do not yet know: but it cometh, it constraineth me, alas! open your

wits!

  The day dieth out, unto all things cometh now the evening, also unto thebest things; hear now, and see, ye higher men, what devil--man or woman--

this spirit of evening-melancholy is!"

  Thus  spake  the  old  magician,  looked  cunningly  about  him,  and  then

seized his harp.

  3.

  In evening's limpid air, What time the dew's soothings Unto the earth

downpour, Invisibly and unheard-- For tender shoe-gear wear The soothing

dews,  like  all  that's  kind-gentle--:  Bethinkst  thou  then,  bethinkst  thou,

burning heart, How once thou thirstedest For heaven's kindly teardrops and

dew's  down-droppings,  All  singed  and  weary  thirstedest,  What  time  on

yellow grass-pathways Wicked, occidental sunny glances Through sombre

trees about thee sported, Blindingly sunny glow-glances, gladly-hurting?

  "Of TRUTH the wooer? Thou?"--so taunted they-- "Nay! Merely poet! A

brute  insidious,  plundering,  grovelling,  That  aye  must  lie,  That  wittingly,

wilfully,  aye  must  lie:  For  booty  lusting,  Motley  masked,  Self-hidden,

shrouded, Himself his booty-- HE--of truth the wooer? Nay! Mere fool! Mere

poet!  Just  motley  speaking,  From  mask  of  fool  confusedly  shouting,

Circumambling  on  fabricated  word-bridges,  On  motley  rainbow-arches,

'Twixt the spurious heavenly, And spurious earthly, Round us roving, round

us soaring,-- MERE FOOL! MERE POET!

  HE--of  truth  the  wooer?  Not  still,  stiff,  smooth  and  cold,  Become  an

image, A godlike statue, Set up in front of temples, As a God's own door-

guard: Nay! hostile to all such truthfulness-statues, In every desert homelier

than at temples, With cattish wantonness, Through every window leaping

Quickly  into  chances,  Every  wild  forest  a-sniffing,  Greedily-longingly,

sniffing,  That  thou,  in  wild  forests,  'Mong  the  motley-speckled  fierce

creatures, Shouldest rove, sinful-sound and fine-coloured, With longing lips

smacking,  Blessedly  mocking,  blessedly  hellish,  blessedly  bloodthirsty,

Robbing, skulking, lying--roving:--

  Or  unto  eagles  like  which  fixedly,  Long  adown  the  precipice  look,

Adown  THEIR  precipice:--  Oh,  how  they  whirl  down  now,  Thereunder,

therein, To ever deeper profoundness whirling!-- Then, Sudden, With aim

aright, With quivering flight, On LAMBKINS pouncing, Headlong down,

sore-hungry, For lambkins longing, Fierce 'gainst all lamb-spirits, Furious-

fierce  all  that  look  Sheeplike,  or  lambeyed,  or  crisp-woolly,  --Grey,  with

lambsheep kindliness!

  Even  thus,  Eaglelike,  pantherlike,  Are  the  poet's  desires,  Are  THINEOWN desires 'neath a thousand guises, Thou fool! Thou poet! Thou who all

mankind viewedst-- So God, as sheep--: The God TO REND within mankind,

As the sheep in mankind, And in rending LAUGHING--

  THAT,  THAT  is  thine  own  blessedness!  Of  a  panther  and  eagle--

blessedness! Of a poet and fool--the blessedness!--

  In evening's limpid air, What time the moon's sickle, Green, 'twixt the

purple-glowings, And jealous, steal'th forth: --Of day the foe, With every step

in  secret,  The  rosy  garland-hammocks  Downsickling,  till  they've  sunken

Down nightwards, faded, downsunken:--

  Thus had I sunken one day From mine own truth-insanity, From mine

own  fervid  day-longings,  Of  day  aweary,  sick  of  sunshine,  --Sunk

downwards, evenwards, shadowwards: By one sole trueness All scorched and

thirsty: --Bethinkst thou still, bethinkst thou, burning heart, How then thou

thirstedest?--  THAT  I  SHOULD  BANNED  BE  FROM  ALL  THE

TRUENESS! MERE FOOL! MERE POET!

                                    LXXV. SCIENCE.

  Thus  sang  the  magician;  and  all  who  were  present  went  like  birds

unawares into the net of his artful and melancholy voluptuousness. Only the

spiritually conscientious one had not been caught: he at once snatched the

harp  from  the  magician  and  called  out:  "Air!  Let  in  good  air!  Let  in

Zarathustra!  Thou  makest  this  cave  sultry  and  poisonous,  thou  bad  old

magician!

  Thou seducest, thou false one, thou subtle one, to unknown desires and

deserts.  And  alas,  that  such  as  thou  should  talk  and  make  ado  about  the

TRUTH!

  Alas,  to  all  free  spirits  who  are  not  on  their  guard  against  SUCH

magicians! It is all over with their freedom: thou teachest and temptest back

into prisons,--

  --Thou old melancholy devil, out of thy lament soundeth a lurement: thou

resemblest  those  who  with  their  praise  of  chastity  secretly  invite  to

voluptuousness!"

  Thus  spake  the  conscientious  one;  the  old  magician,  however,  looked

about  him,  enjoying  his  triumph,  and  on  that  account  put  up  with  the

annoyance which the conscientious one caused him. "Be still!" said he with

modest voice, "good songs want to re-echo well; after good songs one should

be long silent.

  Thus do all those present, the higher men. Thou, however, hast perhapsunderstood but little of my song? In thee there is little of the magic spirit.

  "Thou praisest me," replied the conscientious one, "in that thou separatest

me from thyself; very well! But, ye others, what do I see? Ye still sit there, all

of you, with lusting eyes--:

  Ye free spirits, whither hath your freedom gone! Ye almost seem to me to

resemble those who have long looked at bad girls dancing naked: your souls

themselves dance!

  In you, ye higher men, there must be more of that which the magician

calleth his evil spirit of magic and deceit:--we must indeed be different.

  And verily, we spake and thought long enough together ere Zarathustra

came home to his cave, for me not to be unaware that we ARE different.

  We SEEK different things even here aloft, ye and I. For I seek more

SECURITY; on that account have I come to Zarathustra. For he is still the

most steadfast tower and will--

  --To-day,  when  everything  tottereth,  when  all  the  earth  quaketh.  Ye,

however, when I see what eyes ye make, it almost seemeth to me that ye seek

MORE INSECURITY,

  --More horror, more danger, more earthquake. Ye long (it almost seemeth

so to me--forgive my presumption, ye higher men)--

  --Ye  long  for  the  worst  and  dangerousest  life,  which  frighteneth  ME

most,--for  the  life  of  wild  beasts,  for  forests,  caves,  steep  mountains  and

labyrinthine gorges.

  And it is not those who lead OUT OF danger that please you best, but

those who lead you away from all paths, the misleaders. But if such longing

in you be ACTUAL, it seemeth to me nevertheless to be IMPOSSIBLE.

  For  fear--that  is  man's  original  and  fundamental  feeling;  through  fear

everything is explained, original sin and original virtue. Through fear there

grew also MY virtue, that is to say: Science.

  For fear of wild animals--that hath been longest fostered in man, inclusive

of the animal which he concealeth and feareth in himself:--Zarathustra calleth

it 'the beast inside.'

  Such  prolonged  ancient  fear,  at  last  become  subtle,  spiritual  and

intellectual--at present, me thinketh, it is called SCIENCE."--

  Thus spake the conscientious one; but Zarathustra, who had just come

back into his cave and had heard and divined the last discourse, threw a

handful of roses to the conscientious one, and laughed on account of his

"truths." "Why!" he exclaimed, "what did I hear just now? Verily, it seemethto me, thou art a fool, or else I myself am one: and quietly and quickly will I

put thy 'truth' upside down.

  For FEAR--is an exception with us. Courage, however, and adventure,

and delight in the uncertain, in the unattempted--COURAGE seemeth to me

the entire primitive history of man.

  The wildest and most courageous animals hath he envied and robbed of

all their virtues: thus only did he become--man.

  THIS courage, at last become subtle, spiritual and intellectual, this human

courage, with eagle's pinions and serpent's wisdom: THIS, it seemeth to me,

is called at present--"

      "ZARATHUSTRA!" cried all of them there assembled, as if with one

voice,  and  burst  out  at  the  same  time  into  a  great  laughter;  there  arose,

however, from them as it were a heavy cloud. Even the magician laughed,

and said wisely: "Well! It is gone, mine evil spirit!

  And  did  I  not  myself  warn  you  against  it  when  I  said  that  it  was  a

deceiver, a lying and deceiving spirit?

  Especially when it showeth itself naked. But what can I do with regard to

its tricks! Have I created it and the world?

  Well! Let us be good again, and of good cheer! And although Zarathustra

looketh with evil eye--just see him! he disliketh me--:

  --Ere night cometh will he again learn to love and laud me; he cannot live

long without committing such follies.

    HE--loveth his enemies: this art knoweth he better than any one I have

seen. But he taketh revenge for it--on his friends!"

  Thus spake the old magician, and the higher men applauded him; so that

Zarathustra went round, and mischievously and lovingly shook hands with

his friends,--like one who hath to make amends and apologise to every one

for something. When however he had thereby come to the door of his cave,

lo, then had he again a longing for the good air outside, and for his animals,--

and wished to steal out.

                LXXVI. AMONG DAUGHTERS OF THE DESERT.

  1.

  "Go not away!" said then the wanderer who called himself Zarathustra's

shadow, "abide with us--otherwise the old gloomy affliction might again fall

upon us.

  Now hath that old magician given us of his worst for our good, and lo!

the good, pious pope there hath tears in his eyes, and hath quite embarkedagain upon the sea of melancholy.

  Those kings may well put on a good air before us still: for that have

THEY learned best of us all at present! Had they however no one to see

them, I wager that with them also the bad game would again commence,--

  --The  bad  game  of  drifting  clouds,  of  damp  melancholy,  of  curtained

heavens, of stolen suns, of howling autumn-winds,

  --The bad game of our howling and crying for help! Abide with us, O

Zarathustra!  Here  there  is  much  concealed  misery  that  wisheth  to  speak,

much evening, much cloud, much damp air!

  Thou hast nourished us with strong food for men, and powerful proverbs:

do not let the weakly, womanly spirits attack us anew at dessert!

  Thou alone makest the air around thee strong and clear! Did I ever find

anywhere on earth such good air as with thee in thy cave?

  Many lands have I seen, my nose hath learned to test and estimate many

kinds of air: but with thee do my nostrils taste their greatest delight!

  Unless it be,--unless it be--, do forgive an old recollection! Forgive me an

old  after-dinner  song,  which  I  once  composed  amongst  daughters  of  the

desert:--

  For with them was there equally good, clear, Oriental air; there was I

furthest from cloudy, damp, melancholy Old-Europe!

  Then  did  I  love  such  Oriental  maidens  and  other  blue  kingdoms  of

heaven, over which hang no clouds and no thoughts.

  Ye would not believe how charmingly they sat there, when they did not

dance,  profound,  but  without  thoughts,  like  little  secrets,  like  beribboned

riddles, like dessert-nuts--

    Many-hued and foreign, forsooth! but without clouds: riddles which can

be guessed: to please such maidens I then composed an after-dinner psalm."

  Thus spake the wanderer who called himself Zarathustra's shadow; and

before any one answered him, he had seized the harp of the old magician,

crossed his legs, and looked calmly and sagely around him:--with his nostrils,

however, he inhaled the air slowly and questioningly, like one who in new

countries tasteth new foreign air. Afterward he began to sing with a kind of

roaring.

  2.

  THE DESERTS GROW: WOE HIM WHO DOTH THEM HIDE!

  --Ha! Solemnly! In effect solemnly! A worthy beginning! Afric manner,

solemnly! Of a lion worthy, Or perhaps of a virtuous howl-monkey-- --Butit's naught to you, Ye friendly damsels dearly loved, At whose own feet to

me,  The  first  occasion,  To  a  European  under  palm-trees,  A  seat  is  now

granted. Selah.

    Wonderful, truly! Here do I sit now, The desert nigh, and yet I am So far

still from the desert, Even in naught yet deserted: That is, I'm swallowed

down By this the smallest oasis--: --It opened up just yawning, Its loveliest

mouth agape, Most sweet-odoured of all mouthlets: Then fell I right in, Right

down, right through--in 'mong you, Ye friendly damsels dearly loved! Selah.

  Hail! hail! to that whale, fishlike, If it thus for its guest's convenience

Made things nice!--(ye well know, Surely, my learned allusion?) Hail to its

belly, If it had e'er A such loveliest oasis-belly As this is: though however I

doubt about it, --With this come I out of Old-Europe, That doubt'th more

eagerly than doth any Elderly married woman. May the Lord improve it!

Amen!

  Here do I sit now, In this the smallest oasis, Like a date indeed, Brown,

quite sweet, gold-suppurating, For rounded mouth of maiden longing, But yet

still more for youthful, maidlike, Ice-cold and snow-white and incisory Front

teeth: and for such assuredly, Pine the hearts all of ardent date-fruits. Selah.

  To the there-named south-fruits now, Similar, all-too-similar, Do I lie

here; by little Flying insects Round-sniffled and round-played, And also by

yet littler, Foolisher, and peccabler Wishes and phantasies,-- Environed by

you,  Ye  silent,  presentientest  Maiden-kittens,  Dudu  and  Suleika,  --

ROUNDSPHINXED, that into one word I may crowd much feeling: (Forgive

me, O God, All such speech-sinning!) --Sit I here the best of air sniffling,

Paradisal air, truly, Bright and buoyant air, golden-mottled, As goodly air as

ever  From  lunar  orb  downfell--  Be  it  by  hazard,  Or  supervened  it  by

arrogancy? As the ancient poets relate it. But doubter, I'm now calling it In

question:  with  this  do  I  come  indeed  Out  of  Europe,  That  doubt'th  more

eagerly than doth any Elderly married woman. May the Lord improve it!

Amen.

  This  the  finest  air  drinking,  With  nostrils  out-swelled  like  goblets,

Lacking  future,  lacking  remembrances  Thus  do  I  sit  here,  ye  Friendly

damsels dearly loved, And look at the palm-tree there, How it, to a dance-

girl, like, Doth bow and bend and on its haunches bob, --One doth it too,

when one view'th it long!-- To a dance-girl like, who as it seem'th to me, Too

long, and dangerously persistent, Always, always, just on SINGLE leg hath

stood? --Then forgot she thereby, as it seem'th to me, The OTHER leg? Forvainly I, at least, Did search for the amissing Fellow-jewel --Namely, the

other leg-- In the sanctified precincts, Nigh her very dearest, very tenderest,

Flapping  and  fluttering  and  flickering  skirting.  Yea,  if  ye  should,  ye

beauteous friendly ones, Quite take my word: She hath, alas! LOST it! Hu!

Hu! Hu! Hu! Hu! It is away! For ever away! The other leg! Oh, pity for that

loveliest  other  leg!  Where  may  it  now  tarry,  all-forsaken  weeping?  The

lonesomest leg? In fear perhaps before a Furious, yellow, blond and curled

Leonine  monster?  Or  perhaps  even  Gnawed  away,  nibbled  badly--  Most

wretched, woeful! woeful! nibbled badly! Selah.

  Oh, weep ye not, Gentle spirits! Weep ye not, ye Date-fruit spirits! Milk-

bosoms! Ye sweetwood-heart Purselets! Weep ye no more, Pallid Dudu! Be a

man,  Suleika!  Bold!  Bold!  --Or  else  should  there  perhaps  Something

strengthening,  heart-strengthening,  Here  most  proper  be?  Some  inspiring

text?  Some  solemn  exhortation?--  Ha!  Up  now!  honour!  Moral  honour!

European honour! Blow again, continue, Bellows-box of virtue! Ha! Once

more thy roaring, Thy moral roaring! As a virtuous lion Nigh the daughters

of deserts roaring! --For virtue's out-howl, Ye very dearest maidens, Is more

than every European fervour, European hot-hunger! And now do I stand here,

As European, I can't be different, God's help to me! Amen!

  THE DESERTS GROW: WOE HIM WHO DOTH THEM HIDE!

                            LXXVII. THE AWAKENING.

  1.

  After the song of the wanderer and shadow, the cave became all at once

full  of  noise  and  laughter:  and  since  the  assembled  guests  all  spake

simultaneously, and even the ass, encouraged thereby, no longer remained

silent,  a  little  aversion  and  scorn  for  his  visitors  came  over  Zarathustra,

although  he  rejoiced  at  their  gladness.  For  it  seemed  to  him  a  sign  of

convalescence. So he slipped out into the open air and spake to his animals.

  "Whither  hath  their  distress  now  gone?"  said  he,  and  already  did  he

himself feel relieved of his petty disgust--"with me, it seemeth that they have

unlearned their cries of distress!

    --Though, alas! not yet their crying." And Zarathustra stopped his ears,

for just then did the YE-A of the ass mix strangely with the noisy jubilation

of those higher men.

  "They are merry," he began again, "and who knoweth? perhaps at their

host's expense; and if they have learned of me to laugh, still it is not MY

laughter they have learned.  But what matter about that! They are old people: they recover in their

own way, they laugh in their own way; mine ears have already endured worse

and have not become peevish.

  This day is a victory: he already yieldeth, he fleeth, THE SPIRIT OF

GRAVITY, mine old arch-enemy! How well this day is about to end, which

began so badly and gloomily!

  And itOUT TO end. Already cometh the evening: over the sea rideth it

hither, the good rider! How it bobbeth, the blessed one, the home-returning

one, in its purple saddles!

  The sky gazeth brightly thereon, the world lieth deep. Oh, all ye strange

ones who have come to me, it is already worth while to have lived with me!"

  Thus spake Zarathustra. And again came the cries and laughter of the

higher men out of the cave: then began he anew:

  "They  bite  at  it,  my  bait  taketh,  there  departeth  also  from  them  their

enemy, the spirit of gravity. Now do they learn to laugh at themselves: do I

hear rightly?

  My virile food taketh effect, my strong and savoury sayings: and verily, I

did not nourish them with flatulent vegetables! But with warrior-food, with

conqueror-food: new desires did I awaken.

  New hopes are in their arms and legs, their hearts expand. They find new

words, soon will their spirits breathe wantonness.

  Such  food  may  sure  enough  not  be  proper  for  children,  nor  even  for

longing girls old and young. One persuadeth their bowels otherwise; I am not

their physician and teacher.

  The DISGUST departeth from these higher men; well! that is my victory.

In my domain they become assured; all stupid shame fleeth away; they empty

themselves.

  They empty their hearts, good times return unto them, they keep holiday

and ruminate,--they become THANKFUL.

  THAT do I take as the best sign: they become thankful. Not long will it

be ere they devise festivals, and put up memorials to their old joys.

  They are CONVALESCENTS!" Thus spake Zarathustra joyfully to his

heart  and  gazed  outward;  his  animals,  however,  pressed  up  to  him,  and

honoured his happiness and his silence.

  2.

  All on a sudden however, Zarathustra's ear was frightened: for the cave

which had hitherto been full of noise and laughter, became all at once still asdeath;--his nose, however, smelt a sweet-scented vapour and incense-odour,

as if from burning pine-cones.

  "What happeneth? What are they about?" he asked himself, and stole up

to  the  entrance,  that  he  might  be  able  unobserved  to  see  his  guests.  But

wonder upon wonder! what was he then obliged to behold with his own eyes!

  "They  have  all  of  them  become  PIOUS  again,  they  PRAY,  they  are

mad!"--said he, and was astonished beyond measure. And forsooth! all these

higher men, the two kings, the pope out of service, the evil magician, the

voluntary  beggar,  the  wanderer  and  shadow,  the  old  soothsayer,  the

spiritually conscientious one, and the ugliest man--they all lay on their knees

like children and credulous old women, and worshipped the ass. And just

then began the ugliest man to gurgle and snort, as if something unutterable in

him tried to find expression; when, however, he had actually found words,

behold! it was a pious, strange litany in praise of the adored and censed ass.

And the litany sounded thus:

  Amen! And glory and honour and wisdom and thanks and praise and

strength be to our God, from everlasting to everlasting!

  --The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

  He carrieth our burdens, he hath taken upon him the form of a servant, he

is patient of heart and never saith Nay; and he who loveth his God chastiseth

him.

  --The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

  He speaketh not: except that he ever saith Yea to the world which he

created: thus doth he extol his world. It is his artfulness that speaketh not:

thus is he rarely found wrong.

  --The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

  Uncomely goeth he through the world. Grey is the favourite colour in

which he wrappeth his virtue. Hath he spirit, then doth he conceal it; every

one, however, believeth in his long ears.

  --The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

  What hidden wisdom it is to wear long ears, and only to say Yea and

never Nay! Hath he not created the world in his own image, namely, as stupid

as possible?

  --The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

  Thou  goest  straight  and  crooked  ways;  it  concerneth  thee  little  what

seemeth  straight  or  crooked  unto  us  men.  Beyond  good  and  evil  is  thy

domain. It is thine innocence not to know what innocence is.  --The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

  Lo! how thou spurnest none from thee, neither beggars nor kings. Thou

sufferest little children to come unto thee, and when the bad boys decoy thee,

then sayest thou simply, YE-A.

  --The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

  Thou lovest she-asses and fresh figs, thou art no food-despiser. A thistle

tickleth thy heart when thou chancest to be hungry. There is the wisdom of a

God therein.

  --The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

                            LXXVIII. THE ASS-FESTIVAL.

  1.

  At this place in the litany, however, Zarathustra could no longer control

himself; he himself cried out YE-A, louder even than the ass, and sprang into

the midst of his maddened guests. "Whatever are you about, ye grown-up

children?" he exclaimed, pulling up the praying ones from the ground. "Alas,

if any one else, except Zarathustra, had seen you:

  Every one would think you the worst blasphemers, or the very foolishest

old women, with your new belief!

  And thou thyself, thou old pope, how is it in accordance with thee, to

adore an ass in such a manner as God?"--

  "O Zarathustra," answered the pope, "forgive me, but in divine matters I

am more enlightened even than thou. And it is right that it should be so.

  Better to adore God so, in this form, than in no form at all! Think over

this saying, mine exalted friend: thou wilt readily divine that in such a saying

there is wisdom.

  He who said 'God is a Spirit'--made the greatest stride and slide hitherto

made on earth towards unbelief: such a dictum is not easily amended again

on earth!

  Mine old heart leapeth and boundeth because there is still something to

adore on earth. Forgive it, O Zarathustra, to an old, pious pontiff-heart!--"

  --"And thou," said Zarathustra to the wanderer and shadow, "thou callest

and thinkest thyself a free spirit? And thou here practisest such idolatry and

hierolatry?

  Worse verily, doest thou here than with thy bad brown girls, thou bad,

new believer!"

  "It is sad enough," answered the wanderer and shadow, "thou art right:

but how can I help it! The old God liveth again, O Zarathustra, thou maystsay what thou wilt.

  The ugliest man is to blame for it all: he hath reawakened him. And if he

say that he once killed him, with Gods DEATH is always just a prejudice."

  --"And thou," said Zarathustra, "thou bad old magician, what didst thou

do! Who ought to believe any longer in thee in this free age, when THOU

believest in such divine donkeyism?

  It was a stupid thing that thou didst; how couldst thou, a shrewd man, do

such a stupid thing!"

  "O Zarathustra," answered the shrewd magician, "thou art right, it was a

stupid thing,--it was also repugnant to me."

  --"And thou even," said Zarathustra to the spiritually conscientious one,

"consider,  and  put  thy  finger  to  thy  nose!  Doth  nothing  go  against  thy

conscience here? Is thy spirit not too cleanly for this praying and the fumes of

those devotees?"

  "There is something therein," said the spiritually conscientious one, and

put his finger to his nose, "there is something in this spectacle which even

doeth good to my conscience.

  Perhaps I dare not believe in God: certain it is however, that God seemeth

to me most worthy of belief in this form.

  God is said to be eternal, according to the testimony of the most pious: he

who hath so much time taketh his time. As slow and as stupid as possible:

THEREBY can such a one nevertheless go very far.

  And  he  who  hath  too  much  spirit  might  well  become  infatuated  with

stupidity and folly. Think of thyself, O Zarathustra!

  Thou  thyself--verily!  even  thou  couldst  well  become  an  ass  through

superabundance of wisdom.

  Doth  not  the  true  sage  willingly  walk  on  the  crookedest  paths?  The

evidence teacheth it, O Zarathustra,--THINE OWN evidence!"

  --"And thou thyself, finally," said Zarathustra, and turned towards the

ugliest man, who still lay on the ground stretching up his arm to the ass (for

he gave it wine to drink). "Say, thou nondescript, what hast thou been about!

  Thou  seemest  to  me  transformed,  thine  eyes  glow,  the  mantle  of  the

sublime covereth thine ugliness: WHAT didst thou do?

  Is it then true what they say, that thou hast again awakened him? And

why? Was he not for good reasons killed and made away with?

  Thou thyself seemest to me awakened: what didst thou do? why didst

THOU  turn  round?  Why  didst  THOU  get  converted?  Speak,  thounondescript!"

  "O Zarathustra," answered the ugliest man, "thou art a rogue!

  Whether HE yet liveth, or again liveth, or is thoroughly dead--which of us

both knoweth that best? I ask thee.

  One  thing  however  do  I  know,--from  thyself  did  I  learn  it  once,  O

Zarathustra: he who wanteth to kill most thoroughly, LAUGHETH.

  'Not by wrath but by laughter doth one kill'--thus spakest thou once, O

Zarathustra, thou hidden one, thou destroyer without wrath, thou dangerous

saint,--thou art a rogue!"

  2.

  Then, however, did it come to pass that Zarathustra, astonished at such

merely roguish answers, jumped back to the door of his cave, and turning

towards all his guests, cried out with a strong voice:

  "O ye wags, all of you, ye buffoons! Why do ye dissemble and disguise

yourselves before me!

  How  the  hearts  of  all  of  you  convulsed  with  delight  and  wickedness,

because ye had at last become again like little children--namely, pious,--

  --Because ye at last did again as children do--namely, prayed, folded your

hands and said 'good God'!

  But now leave, I pray you, THIS nursery, mine own cave, where to-day

all  childishness  is  carried  on.  Cool  down,  here  outside,  your  hot  child-

wantonness and heart-tumult!

  To be sure: except ye become as little children ye shall not enter into

THAT kingdom of heaven." (And Zarathustra pointed aloft with his hands.)

  "But we do not at all want to enter into the kingdom of heaven: we have

become men,--SO WE WANT THE KINGDOM OF EARTH."

  3.

  And once more began Zarathustra to speak. "O my new friends," said he,-

- "ye strange ones, ye higher men, how well do ye now please me,--

  --Since  ye  have  again  become  joyful!  Ye  have,  verily,  all  blossomed

forth: it seemeth to me that for such flowers as you, NEW FESTIVALS are

required.

  --A little valiant nonsense, some divine service and ass-festival, some old

joyful Zarathustra fool, some blusterer to blow your souls bright.

  Forget not this night and this ass-festival, ye higher men! THAT did ye

devise when with me, that do I take as a good omen,--such things only the

convalescents devise!  And  should  ye  celebrate  it  again,  this  ass-festival,  do  it  from  love  to

yourselves, do it also from love to me! And in remembrance of me!"

  Thus spake Zarathustra.

                          LXXIX. THE DRUNKEN SONG.

  1.

    Meanwhile one after another had gone out into the open air, and into the

cool, thoughtful night; Zarathustra himself, however, led the ugliest man by

the hand, that he might show him his night-world, and the great round moon,

and the silvery water-falls near his cave. There they at last stood still beside

one another; all of them old people, but with comforted, brave hearts, and

astonished in themselves that it was so well with them on earth; the mystery

of the night, however, came nigher and nigher to their hearts. And anew

Zarathustra thought to himself: "Oh, how well do they now please me, these

higher men!"--but he did not say it aloud, for he respected their happiness and

their silence.--

  Then, however, there happened that which in this astonishing long day

was most astonishing: the ugliest man began once more and for the last time

to gurgle and snort, and when he had at length found expression, behold!

there sprang a question plump and plain out of his mouth, a good, deep, clear

question, which moved the hearts of all who listened to him.

  "My friends, all of you," said the ugliest man, "what think ye? For the

sake of this day--I am for the first time content to have lived mine entire life.

  And that I testify so much is still not enough for me. It is worth while

living on the earth: one day, one festival with Zarathustra, hath taught me to

love the earth.

  'Was THAT--life?' will I say unto death. 'Well! Once more!'

  My friends, what think ye? Will ye not, like me, say unto death: 'Was

THAT--life? For the sake of Zarathustra, well! Once more!'"--

  Thus spake the ugliest man; it was not, however, far from midnight. And

what took place then, think ye? As soon as the higher men heard his question,

they became all at once conscious of their transformation and convalescence,

and of him who was the cause thereof: then did they rush up to Zarathustra,

thanking, honouring, caressing him, and kissing his hands, each in his own

peculiar  way;  so  that  some  laughed  and  some  wept.  The  old  soothsayer,

however, danced with delight; and though he was then, as some narrators

suppose, full of sweet wine, he was certainly still fuller of sweet life, and had

renounced all weariness. There are even those who narrate that the ass thendanced: for not in vain had the ugliest man previously given it wine to drink.

That may be the case, or it may be otherwise; and if in truth the ass did not

dance  that  evening,  there  nevertheless  happened  then  greater  and  rarer

wonders than the dancing of an ass would have been. In short, as the proverb

of Zarathustra saith: "What doth it matter!"

  2.

  When, however, this took place with the ugliest man, Zarathustra stood

there like one drunken: his glance dulled, his tongue faltered and his feet

staggered.  And  who  could  divine  what  thoughts  then  passed  through

Zarathustra's  soul?  Apparently,  however,  his  spirit  retreated  and  fled  in

advance and was in remote distances, and as it were "wandering on high

mountain-ridges," as it standeth written, "'twixt two seas,

    --Wandering 'twixt the past and the future as a heavy cloud." Gradually,

however,  while  the  higher  men  held  him  in  their  arms,  he  came  back  to

himself a little, and resisted with his hands the crowd of the honouring and

caring ones; but he did not speak. All at once, however, he turned his head

quickly,  for  he  seemed  to  hear  something:  then  laid  he  his  finger  on  his

mouth and said: "COME!"

  And immediately it became still and mysterious round about; from the

depth however there came up slowly the sound of a clock-bell. Zarathustra

listened thereto, like the higher men; then, however, laid he his finger on his

mouth the second time, and said again: "COME! COME! IT IS GETTING

ON  TO  MIDNIGHT!"--and  his  voice  had  changed.  But  still  he  had  not

moved from the spot. Then it became yet stiller and more mysterious, and

everything hearkened, even the ass, and Zarathustra's noble animals, the eagle

and the serpent,--likewise the cave of Zarathustra and the big cool moon, and

the night itself. Zarathustra, however, laid his hand upon his mouth for the

third time, and said:

  COME! COME! COME! LET US NOW WANDER! IT IS THE HOUR:

LET US WANDER INTO THE NIGHT!

  3.

  Ye higher men, it is getting on to midnight: then will I say something into

your ears, as that old clock-bell saith it into mine ear,--

  --As mysteriously, as frightfully, and as cordially as that midnight clock-

bell speaketh it to me, which hath experienced more than one man:

  --Which hath already counted the smarting throbbings of your fathers'

hearts--ah! ah! how it sigheth! how it laugheth in its dream! the old, deep,deep midnight!

  Hush! Hush! Then is there many a thing heard which may not be heard by

day; now however, in the cool air, when even all the tumult of your hearts

hath become still,--

  --Now doth it speak, now is it heard, now doth it steal into overwakeful,

nocturnal souls: ah! ah! how the midnight sigheth! how it laugheth in its

dream!

    --Hearest thou not how it mysteriously, frightfully, and cordially speaketh

unto THEE, the old deep, deep midnight?

  O MAN, TAKE HEED!

  4.

  Woe to me! Whither hath time gone? Have I not sunk into deep wells?

The world sleepeth--

  Ah! Ah! The dog howleth, the moon shineth. Rather will I die, rather will

I die, than say unto you what my midnight-heart now thinketh.

  Already have I died. It is all over. Spider, why spinnest thou around me?

Wilt thou have blood? Ah! Ah! The dew falleth, the hour cometh--

  --The  hour  in  which  I  frost  and  freeze,  which  asketh  and  asketh  and

asketh: "Who hath sufficient courage for it?

  --Who is to be master of the world? Who is going to say: THUS shall ye

flow, ye great and small streams!"

  --The hour approacheth: O man, thou higher man, take heed! this talk is

for fine ears, for thine ears--WHAT SAITH DEEP MIDNIGHT'S VOICE

INDEED?

  5.

  It carrieth me away, my soul danceth. Day's-work! Day's-work! Who is to

be master of the world?

  The moon is cool, the wind is still. Ah! Ah! Have ye already flown high

enough? Ye have danced: a leg, nevertheless, is not a wing.

  Ye good dancers, now is all delight over: wine hath become lees, every

cup hath become brittle, the sepulchres mutter.

  Ye have not flown high enough: now do the sepulchres mutter: "Free the

dead! Why is it so long night? Doth not the moon make us drunken?"

  Ye higher men, free the sepulchres, awaken the corpses! Ah, why doth

the worm still burrow? There approacheth, there approacheth, the hour,--

  --There  boometh  the  clock-bell,  there  thrilleth  still  the  heart,  there

burroweth still the wood-worm, the heart-worm. Ah! Ah! THE WORLD ISDEEP!

  6.

  Sweet lyre! Sweet lyre! I love thy tone, thy drunken, ranunculine tone!--

how long, how far hath come unto me thy tone, from the distance, from the

ponds of love!

  Thou  old  clock-bell,  thou  sweet  lyre!  Every  pain  hath  torn  thy  heart,

father-pain, fathers'-pain, forefathers'-pain; thy speech hath become ripe,--

  --Ripe  like  the  golden  autumn  and  the  afternoon,  like  mine  anchorite

heart--now sayest thou: The world itself hath become ripe, the grape turneth

brown,

  --Now doth it wish to die, to die of happiness. Ye higher men, do ye not

feel it? There welleth up mysteriously an odour,

  --A  perfume  and  odour  of  eternity,  a  rosy-blessed,  brown,  gold-wine-

odour of old happiness,

  --Of drunken midnight-death happiness, which singeth: the world is deep,

AND DEEPER THAN THE DAY COULD READ!

  7.

  Leave me alone! Leave me alone! I am too pure for thee. Touch me not!

Hath not my world just now become perfect?

  My skin is too pure for thy hands. Leave me alone, thou dull, doltish,

stupid day! Is not the midnight brighter?

  The purest are to be masters of the world, the least known, the strongest,

the midnight-souls, who are brighter and deeper than any day.

  O day, thou gropest for me? Thou feelest for my happiness? For thee am I

rich, lonesome, a treasure-pit, a gold chamber?

  O world, thou wantest ME? Am I worldly for thee? Am I spiritual for

thee? Am I divine for thee? But day and world, ye are too coarse,--

  --Have  cleverer  hands,  grasp  after  deeper  happiness,  after  deeper

unhappiness, grasp after some God; grasp not after me:

  --Mine unhappiness, my happiness is deep, thou strange day, but yet am I

no God, no God's-hell: DEEP IS ITS WOE.

  8.

  God's woe is deeper, thou strange world! Grasp at God's woe, not at me!

What am I! A drunken sweet lyre,--

  --A midnight-lyre, a bell-frog, which no one understandeth, but which

MUST speak before deaf ones, ye higher men! For ye do not understand me!

  Gone! Gone! O youth! O noontide! O afternoon! Now have come eveningand night and midnight,--the dog howleth, the wind:

  --Is the wind not a dog? It whineth, it barketh, it howleth. Ah! Ah! how

she sigheth! how she laugheth, how she wheezeth and panteth, the midnight!

  How  she  just  now  speaketh  soberly,  this  drunken  poetess!  hath  she

perhaps overdrunk her drunkenness? hath she become overawake? doth she

ruminate?

  --Her woe doth she ruminate over, in a dream, the old, deep midnight--

and still more her joy. For joy, although woe be deep, JOY IS DEEPER

STILL THAN GRIEF CAN BE.

  9.

  Thou grape-vine! Why dost thou praise me? Have I not cut thee! I am

cruel, thou bleedest--: what meaneth thy praise of my drunken cruelty?

    "Whatever hath become perfect, everything mature--wanteth to die!" so

sayest thou. Blessed, blessed be the vintner's knife! But everything immature

wanteth to live: alas!

  Woe saith: "Hence! Go! Away, thou woe!" But everything that suffereth

wanteth to live, that it may become mature and lively and longing,

    --Longing for the further, the higher, the brighter. "I want heirs," so saith

everything that suffereth, "I want children, I do not want MYSELF,"--

  Joy, however, doth not want heirs, it doth not want children,--joy wanteth

itself,  it  wanteth  eternity,  it  wanteth  recurrence,  it  wanteth  everything

eternally-like-itself.

  Woe saith: "Break, bleed, thou heart! Wander, thou leg! Thou wing, fly!

Onward!  upward!  thou  pain!"  Well!  Cheer  up!  O  mine  old  heart:  WOE

SAITH: "HENCE! GO!"

  10.

  Ye higher men, what think ye? Am I a soothsayer? Or a dreamer? Or a

drunkard? Or a dream-reader? Or a midnight-bell?

  Or a drop of dew? Or a fume and fragrance of eternity? Hear ye it not?

Smell ye it not? Just now hath my world become perfect, midnight is also

mid-day,--

  Pain is also a joy, curse is also a blessing, night is also a sun,--go away!

or ye will learn that a sage is also a fool.

  Said ye ever Yea to one joy? O my friends, then said ye Yea also unto

ALL woe. All things are enlinked, enlaced and enamoured,--

    --Wanted ye ever once to come twice; said ye ever: "Thou pleasest me,

happiness! Instant! Moment!" then wanted ye ALL to come back again!  --All anew, all eternal, all enlinked, enlaced and enamoured, Oh, then did

ye LOVE the world,--

  --Ye eternal ones, ye love it eternally and for all time: and also unto woe

do  ye  say:  Hence!  Go!  but  come  back!  FOR  JOYS  ALL  WANT--

ETERNITY!

  11.

  All joy wanteth the eternity of all things, it wanteth honey, it wanteth

lees, it wanteth drunken midnight, it wanteth graves, it wanteth grave-tears'

consolation, it wanteth gilded evening-red--

  --WHAT  doth  not  joy  want!  it  is  thirstier,  heartier,  hungrier,  more

frightful, more mysterious, than all woe: it wanteth ITSELF, it biteth into

ITSELF, the ring's will writheth in it,--

  --It wanteth love, it wanteth hate, it is over-rich, it bestoweth, it throweth

away, it beggeth for some one to take from it, it thanketh the taker, it would

fain be hated,--

  --So rich is joy that it thirsteth for woe, for hell, for hate, for shame, for

the lame, for the WORLD,--for this world, Oh, ye know it indeed!

  Ye higher men, for you doth it long, this joy, this irrepressible, blessed

joy--for your woe, ye failures! For failures, longeth all eternal joy.

  For  joys  all  want  themselves,  therefore  do  they  also  want  grief!  O

happiness, O pain! Oh break, thou heart! Ye higher men, do learn it, that joys

want eternity.

  --Joys want the eternity of ALL things, they WANT DEEP, PROFOUND

ETERNITY!

  12.

  Have ye now learned my song? Have ye divined what it would say? Well!

Cheer up! Ye higher men, sing now my roundelay!

  Sing now yourselves the song, the name of which is "Once more," the

signification  of  which  is  "Unto  all  eternity!"--sing,  ye  higher  men,

Zarathustra's roundelay!

  O man! Take heed! What saith deep midnight's voice indeed? "I slept my

sleep--, "From deepest dream I've woke, and plead:-- "The world is deep,

"And deeper than the day could read. "Deep is its woe--, "Joy--deeper still

than grief can be: "Woe saith: Hence! Go! "But joys all want eternity-, "-

Want deep, profound eternity!"

                                    LXXX. THE SIGN.

  In the morning, however, after this night, Zarathustra jumped up from hiscouch, and, having girded his loins, he came out of his cave glowing and

strong, like a morning sun coming out of gloomy mountains.

  "Thou great star," spake he, as he had spoken once before, "thou deep eye

of happiness, what would be all thy happiness if thou hadst not THOSE for

whom thou shinest!

  And if they remained in their chambers whilst thou art already awake, and

comest and bestowest and distributest, how would thy proud modesty upbraid

for it!

  Well! they still sleep, these higher men, whilst I am awake: THEY are not

my proper companions! Not for them do I wait here in my mountains.

  At my work I want to be, at my day: but they understand not what are the

signs of my morning, my step--is not for them the awakening-call.

  They  still  sleep  in  my  cave;  their  dream  still  drinketh  at  my  drunken

songs. The audient ear for ME--the OBEDIENT ear, is yet lacking in their

limbs."

  --This  had  Zarathustra  spoken  to  his  heart  when  the  sun  arose:  then

looked he inquiringly aloft, for he heard above him the sharp call of his eagle.

"Well!"  called  he  upwards,  "thus  is  it  pleasing  and  proper  to  me.  Mine

animals are awake, for I am awake.

  Mine eagle is awake, and like me honoureth the sun. With eagle-talons

doth it grasp at the new light. Ye are my proper animals; I love you.

  But still do I lack my proper men!"--

  Thus spake Zarathustra; then, however, it happened that all on a sudden

he became aware that he was flocked around and fluttered around, as if by

innumerable  birds,--the  whizzing  of  so  many  wings,  however,  and  the

crowding around his head was so great that he shut his eyes. And verily, there

came down upon him as it were a cloud, like a cloud of arrows which poureth

upon a new enemy. But behold, here it was a cloud of love, and showered

upon a new friend.

  "What happeneth unto me?" thought Zarathustra in his astonished heart,

and slowly seated himself on the big stone which lay close to the exit from

his cave. But while he grasped about with his hands, around him, above him

and below him, and repelled the tender birds, behold, there then happened to

him something still stranger: for he grasped thereby unawares into a mass of

thick, warm, shaggy hair; at the same time, however, there sounded before

him a roar,--a long, soft lion-roar.

  "THE SIGN COMETH," said Zarathustra, and a change came over hisheart.  And  in  truth,  when  it  turned  clear  before  him,  there  lay  a  yellow,

powerful animal at his feet, resting its head on his knee,--unwilling to leave

him out of love, and doing like a dog which again findeth its old master. The

doves,  however,  were  no  less  eager  with  their  love  than  the  lion;  and

whenever a dove whisked over its nose, the lion shook its head and wondered

and laughed.

  When all this went on Zarathustra spake only a word: "MY CHILDREN

ARE  NIGH,  MY  CHILDREN"--,  then  he  became  quite  mute.  His  heart,

however, was loosed, and from his eyes there dropped down tears and fell

upon his hands. And he took no further notice of anything, but sat there

motionless, without repelling the animals further. Then flew the doves to and

fro, and perched on his shoulder, and caressed his white hair, and did not tire

of their tenderness and joyousness. The strong lion, however, licked always

the tears that fell on Zarathustra's hands, and roared and growled shyly. Thus

did these animals do.--

  All this went on for a long time, or a short time: for properly speaking,

there is NO time on earth for such things--. Meanwhile, however, the higher

men had awakened in Zarathustra's cave, and marshalled themselves for a

procession to go to meet Zarathustra, and give him their morning greeting:

for they had found when they awakened that he no longer tarried with them.

When, however, they reached the door of the cave and the noise of their steps

had preceded them, the lion started violently; it turned away all at once from

Zarathustra, and roaring wildly, sprang towards the cave. The higher men,

however, when they heard the lion roaring, cried all aloud as with one voice,

fled back and vanished in an instant.

    Zarathustra himself, however, stunned and strange, rose from his seat,

looked around him, stood there astonished, inquired of his heart, bethought

himself, and remained alone. "What did I hear?" said he at last, slowly, "what

happened unto me just now?"

  But soon there came to him his recollection, and he took in at a glance all

that  had  taken  place  between  yesterday  and  to-day.  "Here  is  indeed  the

stone," said he, and stroked his beard, "on IT sat I yester-morn; and here

came the soothsayer unto me, and here heard I first the cry which I heard just

now, the great cry of distress.

  O ye higher men, YOUR distress was it that the old soothsayer foretold to

me yester-morn,--

  --Unto your distress did he want to seduce and tempt me: 'O Zarathustra,'said he to me, 'I come to seduce thee to thy last sin.'

  To my last sin?" cried Zarathustra, and laughed angrily at his own words:

"WHAT hath been reserved for me as my last sin?"

  --And once more Zarathustra became absorbed in himself, and sat down

again on the big stone and meditated. Suddenly he sprang up,--

    "FELLOW-SUFFERING!  FELLOW-SUFFERING  WITH  THE

HIGHER  MEN!"  he  cried  out,  and  his  countenance  changed  into  brass.

"Well! THAT--hath had its time!

  My  suffering  and  my  fellow-suffering--what  matter  about  them!  Do  I

then strive after HAPPINESS? I strive after my WORK!

  Well! The lion hath come, my children are nigh, Zarathustra hath grown

ripe, mine hour hath come:--

  This is MY morning, MY day beginneth: ARISE NOW, ARISE, THOU

GREAT NOONTIDE!"--

  Thus  spake  Zarathustra  and  left  his  cave,  glowing  and  strong,  like  a

morning sun coming out of gloomy mountains.

      NOTES ON "THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA" BY ANTHONY M.

                                      LUDOVICI.

  I have had some opportunities of studying the conditions under which

Nietzsche is read in Germany, France, and England, and I have found that, in

each of these countries, students of his philosophy, as if actuated by precisely

similar motives and desires, and misled by the same mistaken tactics on the

part of most publishers, all proceed in the same happy-go-lucky style when

"taking him up." They have had it said to them that he wrote without any

system, and they very naturally conclude that it does not matter in the least

whether they begin with his first, third, or last book, provided they can obtain

a few vague ideas as to what his leading and most sensational principles

were.

  Now,  it  is  clear  that  the  book  with  the  most  mysterious,  startling,  or

suggestive  title,  will  always  stand  the  best  chance  of  being  purchased  by

those who have no other criteria to guide them in their choice than the aspect

of a title-page; and this explains why "Thus Spake Zarathustra" is almost

always the first and often the only one of Nietzsche's books that falls into the

hands of the uninitiated.

  The title suggests all kinds of mysteries; a glance at the Chapter-headings

quickly confirms the suspicions already aroused, and the sub-title: "A Book

for  All  and  None",  generally  succeeds  in  dissipating  the  last  doubts  theprospective purchaser may entertain concerning his fitness for the book or its

fitness for him. And what happens?

  "Thus Spake Zarathustra" is taken home; the reader, who perchance may

know no more concerning Nietzsche than a magazine article has told him,

tries to read it and, understanding less than half he reads, probably never gets

further than the second or third part,--and then only to feel convinced that

Nietzsche himself was "rather hazy" as to what he was talking about. Such

Chapters as "The Child with the Mirror", "In the Happy Isles", "The Grave-

Song," "Immaculate Perception," "The Stillest Hour", "The Seven Seals", and

many others, are almost utterly devoid of meaning to all those who do not

know something of Nietzsche's life, his aims and his friendships.

  As a matter of fact, "Thus Spake Zarathustra", though it is unquestionably

Nietzsche's opus magnum, is by no means the first of Nietzsche's works that

the beginner ought to undertake to read. The author himself refers to it as the

deepest work ever offered to the German public, and elsewhere speaks of his

other writings as being necessary for the understanding of it. But when it is

remembered that in Zarathustra we not only have the history of his most

intimate experiences, friendships, feuds, disappointments, triumphs and the

like, but that the very form in which they are narrated is one which tends

rather to obscure than to throw light upon them, the difficulties which meet

the reader who starts quite unprepared will be seen to be really formidable.

    Zarathustra,  then,--this  shadowy,  allegorical  personality,  speaking  in

allegories and parables, and at times not even refraining from relating his

own dreams--is a figure we can understand but very imperfectly if we have

no knowledge of his creator and counterpart, Friedrich Nietzsche; and it were

therefore well, previous to our study of the more abstruse parts of this book,

if we were to turn to some authoritative book on Nietzsche's life and works

and to read all that is there said on the subject. Those who can read German

will  find  an  excellent  guide,  in  this  respect,  in  Frau  Foerster-Nietzsche's

exhaustive  and  highly  interesting  biography  of  her  brother:  "Das  Leben

Friedrich Nietzsche's" (published by Naumann); while the works of Deussen,

Raoul Richter, and Baroness Isabelle von Unger-Sternberg, will be found to

throw useful and necessary light upon many questions which it would be

difficult for a sister to touch upon.

  In regard to the actual philosophical views expounded in this work, there

is an excellent way of clearing up any difficulties they may present, and that

is by an appeal to Nietzsche's other works. Again and again, of course, hewill be found to express himself so clearly that all reference to his other

writings may be dispensed with; but where this is not the case, the advice he

himself gives is after all the best to be followed here, viz.:--to regard such

works as: "Joyful Science", "Beyond Good and Evil", "The Genealogy of

Morals", "The Twilight of the Idols", "The Antichrist", "The Will to Power",

etc., etc., as the necessary preparation for "Thus Spake Zarathustra".

  These directions, though they are by no means simple to carry out, seem

at  least  to  possess  the  quality  of  definiteness  and  straightforwardness.

"Follow them and all will be clear," I seem to imply. But I regret to say that

this is not really the case. For my experience tells me that even after the

above  directions  have  been  followed  with  the  greatest  possible  zeal,  the

student will still halt in perplexity before certain passages in the book before

us, and wonder what they mean. Now, it is with the view of giving a little

additional help to all those who find themselves in this position that I proceed

to put forth my own personal interpretation of the more abstruse passages in

this work.

  In offering this little commentary to the Nietzsche student, I should like it

to be understood that I make no claim as to its infallibility or indispensability.

It represents but an attempt on my part--a very feeble one perhaps--to give

the reader what little help I can in surmounting difficulties which a long study

of Nietzsche's life and works has enabled me, partially I hope, to overcome.

  ...

  Perhaps it would be as well to start out with a broad and rapid sketch of

Nietzsche as a writer on Morals, Evolution, and Sociology, so that the reader

may be prepared to pick out for himself, so to speak, all passages in this work

bearing in any way upon Nietzsche's views in those three important branches

of knowledge.

                              (A.) Nietzsche and Morality.

  In morality, Nietzsche starts out by adopting the position of the relativist.

He says there are no absolute values "good" and "evil"; these are mere means

adopted by all in order to acquire power to maintain their place in the world,

or to become supreme. It is the lion's good to devour an antelope. It is the

dead-leaf butterfly's good to tell a foe a falsehood. For when the dead-leaf

butterfly is in danger, it clings to the side of a twig, and what it says to its foe

is practically this: "I am not a butterfly, I am a dead leaf, and can be of no use

to thee." This is a lie which is good to the butterfly, for it preserves it. In

nature every species of organic being instinctively adopts and practises thoseacts which most conduce to the prevalence or supremacy of its kind. Once the

most favourable order of conduct is found, proved efficient and established, it

becomes the ruling morality of the species that adopts it and bears them along

to victory. All species must not and cannot value alike, for what is the lion's

good is the antelope's evil and vice versa.

    Concepts of good and evil are therefore, in their origin, merely a means to

an end, they are expedients for acquiring power.

    Applying this principle to mankind, Nietzsche attacked Christian moral

values. He declared them to be, like all other morals, merely an expedient for

protecting a certain type of man. In the case of Christianity this type was,

according to Nietzsche, a low one.

    Conflicting moral codes have been no more than the conflicting weapons

of different classes of men; for in mankind there is a continual war between

the powerful, the noble, the strong, and the well-constituted on the one side,

and the impotent, the mean, the weak, and the ill-constituted on the other.

The war is a war of moral principles. The morality of the powerful class,

Nietzsche calls NOBLE- or MASTER-MORALITY; that of the weak and

subordinate class he calls SLAVE-MORALITY. In the first morality it is the

eagle which, looking down upon a browsing lamb, contends that "eating lamb

is good." In the second, the slave-morality, it is the lamb which, looking up

from the sward, bleats dissentingly: "Eating lamb is evil."

                  (B.) The Master- and Slave-Morality Compared.

  The first morality is active, creative, Dionysian. The second is passive,

defensive,--to it belongs the "struggle for existence."

  Where attempts have not been made to reconcile the two moralities, they

may  be  described  as  follows:--All  is  GOOD  in  the  noble  morality  which

proceeds from strength, power, health, well-constitutedness, happiness, and

awfulness;  for,  the  motive  force  behind  the  people  practising  it  is  "the

struggle for power." The antithesis "good and bad" to this first class means

the same as "noble" and "despicable." "Bad" in the master-morality must be

applied to the coward, to all acts that spring from weakness, to the man with

"an eye to the main chance," who would forsake everything in order to live.

  With the second, the slave-morality, the case is different. There, inasmuch

as the community is an oppressed, suffering, unemancipated, and weary one,

all THAT will be held to be good which alleviates the state of suffering. Pity,

the obliging hand, the warm heart, patience, industry, and humility--these are

unquestionably  the  qualities  we  shall  here  find  flooded  with  the  light  ofapproval and admiration; because they are the most USEFUL qualities--; they

make life endurable, they are of assistance in the "struggle for existence"

which is the motive force behind the people practising this morality. To this

class,  all  that  is  AWFUL  is  bad,  in  fact  it  is  THE  evil  par  excellence.

Strength, health, superabundance of animal spirits and power, are regarded

with hate, suspicion, and fear by the subordinate class.

  Now Nietzsche believed that the first or the noble-morality conduced to

an ascent in the line of life; because it was creative and active. On the other

hand,  he  believed  that  the  second  or  slave-morality,  where  it  became

paramount,  led  to  degeneration,  because  it  was  passive  and  defensive,

wanting  merely  to  keep  those  who  practised  it  alive.  Hence  his  earnest

advocacy of noble-morality.

                            (C.) Nietzsche and Evolution.

  Nietzsche as an evolutionist I shall have occasion to define and discuss in

the course of these notes (see Notes on Chapter LVI., par.10, and on Chapter

LVII.).  For  the  present  let  it  suffice  for  us  to  know  that  he  accepted  the

"Development Hypothesis" as an explanation of the origin of species: but he

did not halt where most naturalists have halted. He by no means regarded

man as the highest possible being which evolution could arrive at; for though

his physical development may have reached its limit, this is not the case with

his  mental  or  spiritual  attributes.  If  the  process  be  a  fact;  if  things  have

BECOME what they are, then, he contends, we may describe no limit to

man's aspirations. If he struggled up from barbarism, and still more remotely

from the lower Primates, his ideal should be to surpass man himself and

reach Superman (see especially the Prologue).

                            (D.) Nietzsche and Sociology.

  Nietzsche as a sociologist aims at an aristocratic arrangement of society.

He  would  have  us  rear  an  ideal  race.  Honest  and  truthful  in  intellectual

matters, he could not even think that men are equal. "With these preachers of

equality will I not be mixed up and confounded. For thus speaketh justice

unto ME: 'Men are not equal.'" He sees precisely in this inequality a purpose

to be served, a condition to be exploited. "Every elevation of the type 'man,'"

he writes in "Beyond Good and Evil", "has hitherto been the work of an

aristocratic society--and so will it always be--a society believing in a long

scale of gradations of rank and differences of worth among human beings."

  Those who are sufficiently interested to desire to read his own detailed

account of the society he would fain establish, will find an excellent passagein Aphorism 57 of "The Antichrist".

  ...

                              PART I. THE PROLOGUE.

  In Part I. including the Prologue, no very great difficulties will appear.

Zarathustra's habit of designating a whole class of men or a whole school of

thought by a single fitting nickname may perhaps lead to a little confusion at

first; but, as a rule, when the general drift of his arguments is grasped, it

requires  but  a  slight  effort  of  the  imagination  to  discover  whom  he  is

referring to. In the ninth paragraph of the Prologue, for instance, it is quite

obvious that "Herdsmen" in the verse "Herdsmen, I say, etc., etc.," stands for

all those to-day who are the advocates of gregariousness--of the ant-hill. And

when  our  author  says:  "A  robber  shall  Zarathustra  be  called  by  the

herdsmen," it is clear that these words may be taken almost literally from one

whose ideal was the rearing of a higher aristocracy. Again, "the good and

just," throughout the book, is the expression used in referring to the self-

righteous of modern times,--those who are quite sure that they know all that

is to be known concerning good and evil, and are satisfied that the values

their little world of tradition has handed down to them, are destined to rule

mankind as long as it lasts.

  In  the  last  paragraph  of  the  Prologue,  verse  7,  Zarathustra  gives  us  a

foretaste  of  his  teaching  concerning  the  big  and  the  little  sagacities,

expounded subsequently. He says he would he were as wise as his serpent;

this desire will be found explained in the discourse entitled "The Despisers of

the Body", which I shall have occasion to refer to later.

  ...

                                  THE DISCOURSES.

                        Chapter I. The Three Metamorphoses.

  This opening discourse is a parable in which Zarathustra discloses the

mental development of all creators of new values. It is the story of a life

which reaches its consummation in attaining to a second ingenuousness or in

returning  to  childhood.  Nietzsche,  the  supposed  anarchist,  here  plainly

disclaims all relationship whatever to anarchy, for he shows us that only by

bearing the burdens of the existing law and submitting to it patiently, as the

camel submits to being laden, does the free spirit acquire that ascendancy

over  tradition  which  enables  him  to  meet  and  master  the  dragon  "Thou

shalt,"--the dragon with the values of a thousand years glittering on its scales.

There are two lessons in this discourse: first, that in order to create one mustbe as a little child; secondly, that it is only through existing law and order that

one  attains  to  that  height  from  which  new  law  and  new  order  may  be

promulgated.

                    Chapter II. The Academic Chairs of Virtue.

    Almost the whole of this is quite comprehensible. It is a discourse against

all those who confound virtue with tameness and smug ease, and who regard

as virtuous only that which promotes security and tends to deepen sleep.

                        Chapter IV. The Despisers of the Body.

  Here Zarathustra gives names to the intellect and the instincts; he calls the

one  "the  little  sagacity"  and  the  latter  "the  big  sagacity."  Schopenhauer's

teaching concerning the intellect is fully endorsed here. "An instrument of thy

body is also thy little sagacity, my brother, which thou callest 'spirit,'" says

Zarathustra. From beginning to end it is a warning to those who would think

too lightly of the instincts and unduly exalt the intellect and its derivatives:

Reason and Understanding.

                          Chapter IX. The Preachers of Death.

  This is an analysis of the psychology of all those who have the "evil eye"

and are pessimists by virtue of their constitutions.

                    Chapter XV. The Thousand and One Goals.

  In  this  discourse  Zarathustra  opens  his  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of

relativity in morality, and declares all morality to be a mere means to power.

Needless to say that verses 9, 10, 11, and 12 refer to the Greeks, the Persians,

the Jews, and the Germans respectively. In the penultimate verse he makes

known  his  discovery  concerning  the  root  of  modern  Nihilism  and

indifference,--i.e., that modern man has no goal, no aim, no ideals (see Note

A).

                      Chapter XVIII. Old and Young Women.

  Nietzsche's views on women have either to be loved at first sight or they

become  perhaps  the  greatest  obstacle  in  the  way  of  those  who  otherwise

would be inclined to accept his philosophy. Women especially, of course,

have been taught to dislike them, because it has been rumoured that his views

are  unfriendly  to  themselves.  Now,  to  my  mind,  all  this  is  pure

misunderstanding and error.

  German philosophers, thanks to Schopenhauer, have earned rather a bad

name for their views on women. It is almost impossible for one of them to

write a line on the subject, however kindly he may do so, without being

suspected of wishing to open a crusade against the fair sex. Despite the fact,therefore, that all Nietzsche's views in this respect were dictated to him by the

profoundest  love;  despite  Zarathustra's  reservation  in  this  discourse,  that

"with women nothing (that can be said) is impossible," and in the face of

other  overwhelming  evidence  to  the  contrary,  Nietzsche  is  universally

reported to have mis son pied dans le plat, where the female sex is concerned.

And  what  is  the  fundamental  doctrine  which  has  given  rise  to  so  much

bitterness  and  aversion?--Merely  this:  that  the  sexes  are  at  bottom

ANTAGONISTIC--that is to say, as different as blue is from yellow, and that

the best possible means of rearing anything approaching a desirable race is to

preserve  and  to  foster  this  profound  hostility.  What  Nietzsche  strives  to

combat and to overthrow is the modern democratic tendency which is slowly

labouring to level all things--even the sexes. His quarrel is not with women--

what indeed could be more undignified?--it is with those who would destroy

the natural relationship between the sexes, by modifying either the one or the

other with a view to making them more alike. The human world is just as

dependent upon women's powers as upon men's. It is women's strongest and

most valuable instincts which help to determine who are to be the fathers of

the next generation. By destroying these particular instincts, that is to say by

attempting to masculinise woman, and to feminise men, we jeopardise the

future of our people. The general democratic movement of modern times, in

its frantic struggle to mitigate all differences, is now invading even the world

of sex. It is against this movement that Nietzsche raises his voice; he would

have woman become ever more woman and man become ever more man.

Only thus, and he is undoubtedly right, can their combined instincts lead to

the excellence of humanity. Regarded in this light, all his views on woman

appear not only necessary but just (see Note on Chapter LVI., par. 21.)

  It is interesting to observe that the last line of the discourse, which has so

frequently  been  used  by  women  as  a  weapon  against  Nietzsche's  views

concerning them, was suggested to Nietzsche by a woman (see "Das Leben F.

Nietzsche's").

                            Chapter XXI. Voluntary Death.

  In regard to this discourse, I should only like to point out that Nietzsche

had a particular aversion to the word "suicide"--self-murder. He disliked the

evil it suggested, and in rechristening the act Voluntary Death, i.e., the death

that comes from no other hand than one's own, he was desirous of elevating it

to  the  position  it  held  in  classical  antiquity  (see  Aphorism  36  in  "The

Twilight of the Idols").                        Chapter XXII. The Bestowing Virtue.

  An important aspect of Nietzsche's philosophy is brought to light in this

discourse. His teaching, as is well known, places the Aristotelian man of

spirit,  above  all  others  in  the  natural  divisions  of  man.  The  man  with

overflowing  strength,  both  of  mind  and  body,  who  must  discharge  this

strength or perish, is the Nietzschean ideal. To such a man, giving from his

overflow becomes a necessity; bestowing develops into a means of existence,

and this is the only giving, the only charity, that Nietzsche recognises. In

paragraph 3 of the discourse, we read Zarathustra's healthy exhortation to his

disciples to become independent thinkers and to find themselves before they

learn any more from him (see Notes on Chapters LVI., par. 5, and LXXIII.,

pars. 10, 11).

  ...

                                          PART II.

                      Chapter XXIII. The Child with the Mirror.

  Nietzsche tells us here, in a poetical form, how deeply grieved he was by

the manifold misinterpretations and misunderstandings which were becoming

rife concerning his publications. He does not recognise himself in the mirror

of public opinion, and recoils terrified from the distorted reflection of his

features. In verse 20 he gives us a hint which it were well not to pass over too

lightly; for, in the introduction to "The Genealogy of Morals" (written in

1887)  he  finds  it  necessary  to  refer  to  the  matter  again  and  with  greater

precision. The point is this, that a creator of new values meets with his surest

and  strongest  obstacles  in  the  very  spirit  of  the  language  which  is  at  his

disposal.  Words,  like  all  other  manifestations  of  an  evolving  race,  are

stamped with the values that have long been paramount in that race. Now, the

original thinker who finds himself compelled to use the current speech of his

country in order to impart new and hitherto untried views to his fellows,

imposes a task upon the natural means of communication which it is totally

unfitted  to  perform,--hence  the  obscurities  and  prolixities  which  are  so

frequently met with in the writings of original thinkers. In the "Dawn of

Day", Nietzsche actually cautions young writers against THE DANGER OF

ALLOWING THEIR THOUGHTS TO BE MOULDED BY THE WORDS

AT THEIR DISPOSAL.

                          Chapter XXIV. In the Happy Isles.

  While writing this, Nietzsche is supposed to have been thinking of the

island  of  Ischia  which  was  ultimately  destroyed  by  an  earthquake.  Histeaching here is quite clear. He was among the first thinkers of Europe to

overcome the pessimism which godlessness generally brings in its wake. He

points  to  creating  as  the  surest  salvation  from  the  suffering  which  is  a

concomitant of all higher life. "What would there be to create," he asks, "if

there  were--Gods?"  His  ideal,  the  Superman,  lends  him  the  cheerfulness

necessary  to  the  overcoming  of  that  despair  usually  attendant  upon

godlessness and upon the apparent aimlessness of a world without a god.

                            Chapter XXIX. The Tarantulas.

  The tarantulas are the Socialists and Democrats. This discourse offers us

an analysis of their mental attitude. Nietzsche refuses to be confounded with

those resentful and revengeful ones who condemn society FROM BELOW,

and whose criticism is only suppressed envy. "There are those who preach

my doctrine of life," he says of the Nietzschean Socialists, "and are at the

same time preachers of equality and tarantulas" (see Notes on Chapter XL.

and Chapter LI.).

                        Chapter XXX. The Famous Wise Ones.

  This refers to all those philosophers hitherto, who have run in the harness

of established values and have not risked their reputation with the people in

pursuit of truth. The philosopher, however, as Nietzsche understood him, is a

man who creates new values, and thus leads mankind in a new direction.

                          Chapter XXXIII. The Grave-Song.

  Here  Zarathustra  sings  about  the  ideals  and  friendships  of  his  youth.

Verses 27 to 31 undoubtedly refer to Richard Wagner (see Note on Chapter

TOCFLXV.).

                          Chapter XXXIV. Self-Surpassing.

  In  this  discourse  we  get  the  best  exposition  in  the  whole  book  of

Nietzsche's doctrine of the Will to Power. I go into this question thoroughly

in the Note on Chapter LVII.

  Nietzsche was not an iconoclast from choice. Those who hastily class him

with  the  anarchists  (or  the  Progressivists  of  the  last  century)  fail  to

understand the high esteem in which he always held both law and discipline.

In verse 41 of this most decisive discourse he truly explains his position when

he says: "...he who hath to be a creator in good and evil--verily he hath first to

be a destroyer, and break values in pieces." This teaching in regard to self-

control is evidence enough of his reverence for law.

                          Chapter XXXV. The Sublime Ones.

  These belong to a type which Nietzsche did not altogether dislike, butwhich he would fain have rendered more subtle and plastic. It is the type that

takes  life  and  itself  too  seriously,  that  never  surmounts  the  camel-stage

mentioned in the first discourse, and that is obdurately sublime and earnest.

To  be  able  to  smile  while  speaking  of  lofty  things  and  NOT  TO  BE

OPPRESSED  by  them,  is  the  secret  of  real  greatness.  He  whose  hand

trembles when it lays hold of a beautiful thing, has the quality of reverence,

without the artist's unembarrassed friendship with the beautiful. Hence the

mistakes  which  have  arisen  in  regard  to  confounding  Nietzsche  with  his

extreme opposites the anarchists and agitators. For what they dare to touch

and  break  with  the  impudence  and  irreverence  of  the  unappreciative,  he

seems likewise to touch and break,--but with other fingers--with the fingers

of  the  loving  and  unembarrassed  artist  who  is  on  good  terms  with  the

beautiful and who feels able to create it and to enhance it with his touch. The

question  of  taste  plays  an  important  part  in  Nietzsche's  philosophy,  and

verses 9, 10 of this discourse exactly state Nietzsche's ultimate views on the

subject. In the "Spirit of Gravity", he actually cries:--"Neither a good nor a

bad taste, but MY taste, of which I have no longer either shame or secrecy."

                        Chapter XXXVI. The Land of Culture.

  This is a poetical epitome of some of the scathing criticism of scholars

which appears in the first of the "Thoughts out of Season"--the polemical

pamphlet  (written  in  1873)  against  David  Strauss  and  his  school.  He

reproaches his former colleagues with being sterile and shows them that their

sterility is the result of their not believing in anything. "He who had to create,

had always his presaging dreams and astral premonitions--and believed in

believing!" (See Note on Chapter TOCFLXXVII.) In the last two verses he

reveals the nature of his altruism. How far it differs from that of Christianity

we have already read in the discourse "Neighbour-Love", but here he tells us

definitely  the  nature  of  his  love  to  mankind;  he  explains  why  he  was

compelled to assail the Christian values of pity and excessive love of the

neighbour,  not  only  because  they  are  slave-values  and  therefore  tend  to

promote  degeneration  (see  Note  B.),  but  because  he  could  only  love  his

children's land, the undiscovered land in a remote sea; because he would fain

retrieve the errors of his fathers in his children.

                      Chapter XXXVII. Immaculate Perception.

  An important feature of Nietzsche's interpretation of Life is disclosed in

this  discourse.  As  Buckle  suggests  in  his  "Influence  of  Women  on  the

Progress of Knowledge", the scientific spirit of the investigator is both helpedand supplemented by the latter's emotions and personality, and the divorce of

all  emotionalism  and  individual  temperament  from  science  is  a  fatal  step

towards  sterility.  Zarathustra  abjures  all  those  who  would  fain  turn  an

IMPERSONAL eye upon nature and contemplate her phenomena with that

pure objectivity to which the scientific idealists of to-day would so much like

to attain. He accuses such idealists of hypocrisy and guile; he says they lack

innocence in their desires and therefore slander all desiring.

                              Chapter XXXVIII. Scholars.

  This is a record of Nietzsche's final breach with his former colleagues--

the  scholars  of  Germany.  Already  after  the  publication  of  the  "Birth  of

Tragedy", numbers of German philologists and professional philosophers had

denounced  him  as  one  who  had  strayed  too  far  from  their  flock,  and  his

lectures at the University of Bale were deserted in consequence; but it was

not until 1879, when he finally severed all connection with University work,

that he may be said to have attained to the freedom and independence which

stamp this discourse.

                                  Chapter XXXIX. Poets.

  People have sometimes said that Nietzsche had no sense of humour. I

have no intention of defending him here against such foolish critics; I should

only like to point out to the reader that we have him here at his best, poking

fun at himself, and at his fellow-poets (see Note on Chapter LXIII., pars. 16,

17, 18, 19, 20).

                                Chapter XL. Great Events.

  Here we seem to have a puzzle. Zarathustra himself, while relating his

experience with the fire-dog to his disciples, fails to get them interested in his

narrative, and we also may be only too ready to turn over these pages under

the  impression  that  they  are  little  more  than  a  mere  phantasy  or  poetical

flight.  Zarathustra's  interview  with  the  fire-dog  is,  however,  of  great

importance. In it we find Nietzsche face to face with the creature he most

sincerely  loathes--the  spirit  of  revolution,  and  we  obtain  fresh  hints

concerning his hatred of the anarchist and rebel. "'Freedom' ye all roar most

eagerly," he says to the fire-dog, "but I have unlearned the belief in 'Great

Events' when there is much roaring and smoke about them. Not around the

inventors of new noise, but around the inventors of new values, doth the

world revolve; INAUDIBLY it revolveth."

                              Chapter XLI. The Soothsayer.

  This refers, of course, to Schopenhauer. Nietzsche, as is well known, wasat one time an ardent follower of Schopenhauer. He overcame Pessimism by

discovering an object in existence; he saw the possibility of raising society to

a higher level and preached the profoundest Optimism in consequence.

                                Chapter XLII. Redemption.

    Zarathustra here addresses cripples. He tells them of other cripples--the

GREAT  MEN  in  this  world  who  have  one  organ  or  faculty  inordinately

developed at the cost of their other faculties. This is doubtless a reference to a

fact which is too often noticeable in the case of so many of the world's giants

in art, science, or religion. In verse 19 we are told what Nietzsche called

Redemption--that is to say, the ability to say of all that is past: "Thus would I

have  it."  The  in  ability  to  say  this,  and  the  resentment  which  results

therefrom, he regards as the source of all our feelings of revenge, and all our

desires to punish--punishment meaning to him merely a euphemism for the

word  revenge,  invented  in  order  to  still  our  consciences.  He  who  can  be

proud of his enemies, who can be grateful to them for the obstacles they have

put in his way; he who can regard his worst calamity as but the extra strain on

the bow of his life, which is to send the arrow of his longing even further than

he could have hoped;--this man knows no revenge, neither does he know

despair, he truly has found redemption and can turn on the worst in his life

and even in himself, and call it his best (see Notes on Chapter LVII.).

                            Chapter XLIII. Manly Prudence.

  This discourse is very important. In "Beyond Good and Evil" we hear

often enough that the select and superior man must wear a mask, and here we

find  this  injunction  explained.  "And  he  who  would  not  languish  amongst

men, must learn to drink out of all glasses: and he who would keep clean

amongst men, must know how to wash himself even with dirty water." This, I

venture to suggest, requires some explanation. At a time when individuality is

supposed to be shown most tellingly by putting boots on one's hands and

gloves  on  one's  feet,  it  is  somewhat  refreshing  to  come  across  a  true

individualist who feels the chasm between himself and others so deeply, that

he must perforce adapt himself to them outwardly, at least, in all respects, so

that the inner difference should be overlooked. Nietzsche practically tells us

here  that  it  is  not  he  who  intentionally  wears  eccentric  clothes  or  does

eccentric things who is truly the individualist. The profound man, who is by

nature differentiated from his fellows, feels this difference too keenly to call

attention to it by any outward show. He is shamefast and bashful with those

who  surround  him  and  wishes  not  to  be  discovered  by  them,  just  as  oneinstinctively avoids all lavish display of comfort or wealth in the presence of

a poor friend.

                            Chapter XLIV. The Stillest Hour.

  This seems to me to give an account of the great struggle which must

have  taken  place  in  Nietzsche's  soul  before  he  finally  resolved  to  make

known the more esoteric portions of his teaching. Our deepest feelings crave

silence. There is a certain self-respect in the serious man which makes him

hold his profoundest feelings sacred. Before they are uttered they are full of

the modesty of a virgin, and often the oldest sage will blush like a girl when

this virginity is violated by an indiscretion which forces him to reveal his

deepest thoughts.

  ...

                                          PART III.

  This is perhaps the most important of all the four parts. If it contained

only "The Vision and the Enigma" and "The Old and New Tables" I should

still be of this opinion; for in the former of these discourses we meet with

what Nietzsche regarded as the crowning doctrine of his philosophy and in

"The Old and New Tables" we have a valuable epitome of practically all his

leading principles.

                    Chapter XLVI. The Vision and the Enigma.

  "The Vision and the Enigma" is perhaps an example of Nietzsche in his

most obscure vein. We must know how persistently he inveighed against the

oppressing  and  depressing  influence  of  man's  sense  of  guilt  and

consciousness of sin in order fully to grasp the significance of this discourse.

Slowly but surely, he thought the values of Christianity and Judaic traditions

had done their work in the minds of men. What were once but expedients

devised for the discipline of a certain portion of humanity, had now passed

into man's blood and had become instincts. This oppressive and paralysing

sense of guilt and of sin is what Nietzsche refers to when he speaks of "the

spirit of gravity." This creature half-dwarf, half-mole, whom he bears with

him a certain distance on his climb and finally defies, and whom he calls his

devil  and  arch-enemy,  is  nothing  more  than  the  heavy  millstone  "guilty

conscience," together with the concept of sin which at present hangs round

the neck of men. To rise above it--to soar--is the most difficult of all things

to-day.  Nietzsche  is  able  to  think  cheerfully  and  optimistically  of  the

possibility of life in this world recurring again and again, when he has once

cast  the  dwarf  from  his  shoulders,  and  he  announces  his  doctrine  of  theEternal Recurrence of all things great and small to his arch-enemy and in

defiance of him.

  That there is much to be said for Nietzsche's hypothesis of the Eternal

Recurrence of all things great and small, nobody who has read the literature

on  the  subject  will  doubt  for  an  instant;  but  it  remains  a  very  daring

conjecture notwithstanding and even in its ultimate effect, as a dogma, on the

minds of men, I venture to doubt whether Nietzsche ever properly estimated

its worth (see Note on Chapter LVII.).

  What  follows  is  clear  enough.  Zarathustra  sees  a  young  shepherd

struggling on the ground with a snake holding fast to the back of his throat.

The sage, assuming that the snake must have crawled into the young man's

mouth while he lay sleeping, runs to his help and pulls at the loathsome

reptile with all his might, but in vain. At last, in despair, Zarathustra appeals

to the young man's will. Knowing full well what a ghastly operation he is

recommending, he nevertheless cries, "Bite! Bite! Its head off! Bite!" as the

only possible solution of the difficulty. The young shepherd bites, and far

away he spits the snake's head, whereupon he rises, "No longer shepherd, no

longer man--a transfigured being, a light-surrounded being, that LAUGHED!

Never on earth laughed a man as he laughed!"

  In this parable the young shepherd is obviously the man of to-day; the

snake that chokes him represents the stultifying and paralysing social values

that  threaten  to  shatter  humanity,  and  the  advice  "Bite!  Bite!"  is  but

Nietzsche's exasperated cry to mankind to alter their values before it is too

late.

                          Chapter XLVII. Involuntary Bliss.

  This, like "The Wanderer", is one of the many introspective passages in

the work, and is full of innuendos and hints as to the Nietzschean outlook on

life.

                            Chapter XLVIII. Before Sunrise.

  Here we have a record of Zarathustra's avowal of optimism, as also the

important statement concerning "Chance" or "Accident" (verse 27). Those

who are familiar with Nietzsche's philosophy will not require to be told what

an important role his doctrine of chance plays in his teaching. The Giant

Chance has hitherto played with the puppet "man,"--this is the fact he cannot

contemplate with equanimity. Man shall now exploit chance, he says again

and again, and make it fall on its knees before him! (See verse 33 in "On the

Olive Mount", and verses 9-10 in "The Bedwarfing Virtue").                        Chapter XLIX. The Bedwarfing Virtue.

  This requires scarcely any comment. It is a satire on modern man and his

belittling virtues. In verses 23 and 24 of the second part of the discourse we

are reminded of Nietzsche's powerful indictment of the great of to-day, in the

Antichrist (Aphorism 43):--"At present nobody has any longer the courage

for separate rights, for rights of domination, for a feeling of reverence for

himself and his equals,--FOR PATHOS OF DISTANCE...Our politics are

MORBID from this want of courage!--The aristocracy of character has been

undermined most craftily by the lie of the equality of souls; and if the belief

in the 'privilege of the many,' makes revolutions and WILL CONTINUE TO

MAKE  them,  it  is  Christianity,  let  us  not  doubt  it,  it  is  CHRISTIAN

valuations, which translate every revolution merely into blood and crime!"

(see also "Beyond Good and Evil", pages 120, 121). Nietzsche thought it was

a  bad  sign  of  the  times  that  even  rulers  have  lost  the  courage  of  their

positions, and that a man of Frederick the Great's power and distinguished

gifts should have been able to say: "Ich bin der erste Diener des Staates" (I

am the first servant of the State.) To this utterance of the great sovereign,

verse 24 undoubtedly refers. "Cowardice" and "Mediocrity," are the names

with which he labels modern notions of virtue and moderation.

  In Part III., we get the sentiments of the discourse "In the Happy Isles",

but perhaps in stronger terms. Once again we find Nietzsche thoroughly at

ease, if not cheerful, as an atheist, and speaking with vertiginous daring of

making chance go on its knees to him. In verse 20, Zarathustra makes yet

another attempt at defining his entirely anti-anarchical attitude, and unless

such  passages  have  been  completely  overlooked  or  deliberately  ignored

hitherto  by  those  who  will  persist  in  laying  anarchy  at  his  door,  it  is

impossible  to  understand  how  he  ever  became  associated  with  that  foul

political party.

  The last verse introduces the expression, "THE GREAT NOONTIDE!" In

the poem to be found at the end of "Beyond Good and Evil", we meet with

the  expression  again,  and  we  shall  find  it  occurring  time  and  again  in

Nietzsche's works. It will be found fully elucidated in the fifth part of "The

Twilight of the Idols"; but for those who cannot refer to this book, it were

well to point out that Nietzsche called the present period--our period--the

noon of man's history. Dawn is behind us. The childhood of mankind is over.

Now we KNOW; there is now no longer any excuse for mistakes which will

tend to botch and disfigure the type man. "With respect to what is past," hesays,  "I  have,  like  all  discerning  ones,  great  toleration,  that  is  to  say,

GENEROUS self-control...But my feeling changes suddenly, and breaks out

as soon as I enter the modern period, OUR period. Our age KNOWS..." (See

Note on Chapter LXX.).

                                Chapter LI. On Passing-by.

  Here we find Nietzsche confronted with his extreme opposite, with him

therefore  for  whom  he  is  most  frequently  mistaken  by  the  unwary.

"Zarathustra's ape" he is called in the discourse. He is one of those at whose

hands Nietzsche had to suffer most during his life-time, and at whose hands

his philosophy has suffered most since his death. In this respect it may seem a

little trivial to speak of extremes meeting; but it is wonderfully apt. Many

have adopted Nietzsche's mannerisms and word-coinages, who had nothing

in common with him beyond the ideas and "business" they plagiarised; but

the superficial observer and a large portion of the public, not knowing of

these things,--not knowing perhaps that there are iconoclasts who destroy out

of love and are therefore creators, and that there are others who destroy out of

resentment  and  revengefulness  and  who  are  therefore  revolutionists  and

anarchists,--are prone to confound the two, to the detriment of the nobler

type.

  If we now read what the fool says to Zarathustra, and note the tricks of

speech  he  has  borrowed  from  him:  if  we  carefully  follow  the  attitude  he

assumes, we shall understand why Zarathustra finally interrupts him. "Stop

this  at  once,"  Zarathustra  cries,  "long  have  thy  speech  and  thy  species

disgusted me...Out of love alone shall my contempt and my warning bird take

wing; BUT NOT OUT OF THE SWAMP!" It were well if this discourse

were taken to heart by all those who are too ready to associate Nietzsche with

lesser and noiser men,--with mountebanks and mummers.

                              Chapter LII. The Apostates.

  It is clear that this applies to all those breathless and hasty "tasters of

everything," who plunge too rashly into the sea of independent thought and

"heresy," and who, having miscalculated their strength, find it impossible to

keep their head above water. "A little older, a little colder," says Nietzsche.

They  soon  clamber  back  to  the  conventions  of  the  age  they  intended

reforming. The French then say "le diable se fait hermite," but these men, as a

rule, have never been devils, neither do they become angels; for, in order to

be really good or evil, some strength and deep breathing is required. Those

who are more interested in supporting orthodoxy than in being over niceconcerning the kind of support they give it, often refer to these people as

evidence in favour of the true faith.

                            Chapter LIII. The Return Home.

  This is an example of a class of writing which may be passed over too

lightly by those whom poetasters have made distrustful of poetry. From first

to last it is extremely valuable as an autobiographical note. The inevitable

superficiality  of  the  rabble  is  contrasted  with  the  peaceful  and  profound

depths of the anchorite. Here we first get a direct hint concerning Nietzsche's

fundamental passion--the main force behind all his new values and scathing

criticism of existing values. In verse 30 we are told that pity was his greatest

danger. The broad altruism of the law-giver, thinking over vast eras of time,

was continually being pitted by Nietzsche, in himself, against that transient

and meaner sympathy for the neighbour which he more perhaps than any of

his contemporaries had suffered from, but which he was certain involved

enormous dangers not only for himself but also to the next and subsequent

generations (see Note B., where "pity" is mentioned among the degenerate

virtues). Later in the book we shall see how his profound compassion leads

him into temptation, and how frantically he struggles against it. In verses 31

and 32, he tells us to what extent he had to modify himself in order to be

endured  by  his  fellows  whom  he  loved  (see  also  verse  12  in  "Manly

Prudence"). Nietzsche's great love for his fellows, which he confesses in the

Prologue, and which is at the root of all his teaching, seems rather to elude

the  discerning  powers  of  the  average  philanthropist  and  modern  man.  He

cannot see the wood for the trees. A philanthropy that sacrifices the minority

of the present-day for the majority constituting posterity, completely evades

his mental grasp, and Nietzsche's philosophy, because it declares Christian

values to be a danger to the future of our kind, is therefore shelved as brutal,

cold, and hard (see Note on Chapter XXXVI.). Nietzsche tried to be all things

to all men; he was sufficiently fond of his fellows for that: in the Return

Home he describes how he ultimately returns to loneliness in order to recover

from the effects of his experiment.

                        Chapter LIV. The Three Evil Things.

  Nietzsche is here completely in his element. Three things hitherto best-

cursed and most calumniated on earth, are brought forward to be weighed.

Voluptuousness,  thirst  of  power,  and  selfishness,--the  three  forces  in

humanity  which  Christianity  has  done  most  to  garble  and  besmirch,--

Nietzsche  endeavours  to  reinstate  in  their  former  places  of  honour.Voluptuousness,  or  sensual  pleasure,  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  discuss

nowadays.  If  we  mention  it  with  favour  we  may  be  regarded,  however

unjustly,  as  the  advocate  of  savages,  satyrs,  and  pure  sensuality.  If  we

condemn it, we either go over to the Puritans or we join those who are wont

to come to table with no edge to their appetites and who therefore grumble at

all  good  fare.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  value  of  healthy  innocent

voluptuousness,  like  the  value  of  health  itself,  must  have  been  greatly

discounted by all those who, resenting their inability to partake of this world's

goods, cried like St Paul: "I would that all men were even as I myself." Now

Nietzsche's philosophy might be called an attempt at giving back to healthy

and normal men innocence and a clean conscience in their desires--NOT to

applaud  the  vulgar  sensualists  who  respond  to  every  stimulus  and  whose

passions  are  out  of  hand;  not  to  tell  the  mean,  selfish  individual,  whose

selfishness is a pollution (see Aphorism 33, "Twilight of the Idols"), that he is

right, nor to assure the weak, the sick, and the crippled, that the thirst of

power, which they gratify by exploiting the happier and healthier individuals,

is  justified;--but  to  save  the  clean  healthy  man  from  the  values  of  those

around him, who look at everything through the mud that is in their own

bodies,--to give him, and him alone, a clean conscience in his manhood and

the  desires  of  his  manhood.  "Do  I  counsel  you  to  slay  your  instincts?  I

counsel to innocence in your instincts." In verse 7 of the second paragraph (as

in verse I of paragraph 19 in "The Old and New Tables") Nietzsche gives us a

reason for his occasional obscurity (see also verses 3 to 7 of "Poets"). As I

have already pointed out, his philosophy is quite esoteric. It can serve no

purpose with the ordinary, mediocre type of man. I, personally, can no longer

have any doubt that Nietzsche's only object, in that part of his philosophy

where he bids his friends stand "Beyond Good and Evil" with him, was to

save higher men, whose growth and scope might be limited by the too strict

observance  of  modern  values  from  foundering  on  the  rocks  of  a

"Compromise" between their own genius and traditional conventions. The

only possible way in which the great man can achieve greatness is by means

of  exceptional  freedom--the  freedom  which  assists  him  in  experiencing

HIMSELF. Verses 20 to 30 afford an excellent supplement to Nietzsche's

description of the attitude of the noble type towards the slaves in Aphorism

260 of the work "Beyond Good and Evil" (see also Note B.)

                          Chapter LV. The Spirit of Gravity.

  (See Note on Chapter XLVI.) In Part II. of this discourse we meet with adoctrine not touched upon hitherto, save indirectly;--I refer to the doctrine of

self-love. We should try to understand this perfectly before proceeding; for it

is precisely views of this sort which, after having been cut out of the original

context, are repeated far and wide as internal evidence proving the general

unsoundness of Nietzsche's philosophy. Already in the last of the "Thoughts

out  of  Season"  Nietzsche  speaks  as  follows  about  modern  men:  "...these

modern creatures wish rather to be hunted down, wounded and torn to shreds,

than to live alone with themselves in solitary calm. Alone with oneself!--this

thought terrifies the modern soul; it is his one anxiety, his one ghastly fear"

(English Edition, page 141). In his feverish scurry to find entertainment and

diversion,  whether  in  a  novel,  a  newspaper,  or  a  play,  the  modern  man

condemns his own age utterly; for he shows that in his heart of hearts he

despises himself. One cannot change a condition of this sort in a day; to

become endurable to oneself an inner transformation is necessary. Too long

have we lost ourselves in our friends and entertainments to be able to find

ourselves so soon at another's bidding. "And verily, it is no commandment for

to-day and to-morrow to LEARN to love oneself. Rather is it of all arts the

finest, subtlest, last, and patientest."

  In the last verse Nietzsche challenges us to show that our way is the right

way. In his teaching he does not coerce us, nor does he overpersuade; he

simply says: "I am a law only for mine own, I am not a law for all. This--is

now MY way,--where is yours?"

                      Chapter LVI. Old and New Tables. Par. 2.

  Nietzsche himself declares this to be the most decisive portion of the

whole of "Thus Spake Zarathustra". It is a sort of epitome of his leading

doctrines. In verse 12 of the second paragraph, we learn how he himself

would fain have abandoned the poetical method of expression had he not

known only too well that the only chance a new doctrine has of surviving,

nowadays, depends upon its being given to the world in some kind of art-

form. Just as prophets, centuries ago, often had to have recourse to the mask

of madness in order to mitigate the hatred of those who did not and could not

see as they did; so, to-day, the struggle for existence among opinions and

values is so great, that an art-form is practically the only garb in which a new

philosophy can dare to introduce itself to us.

  Pars. 3 and 4.

  Many of the paragraphs will be found to be merely reminiscent of former

discourses. For instance, par. 3 recalls "Redemption". The last verse of par. 4is  important.  Freedom  which,  as  I  have  pointed  out  before,  Nietzsche

considered a dangerous acquisition in inexperienced or unworthy hands, here

receives its death-blow as a general desideratum. In the first Part we read

under "The Way of the Creating One", that freedom as an end in itself does

not concern Zarathustra at all. He says there: "Free from what? What doth

that matter to Zarathustra? Clearly, however, shall thine eye answer me: free

FOR WHAT?" And in "The Bedwarfing Virtue": "Ah that ye understood my

word: 'Do ever what ye will--but first be such as CAN WILL.'"

  Par. 5.

  Here we have a description of the kind of altruism Nietzsche exacted

from higher men. It is really a comment upon "The Bestowing Virtue" (see

Note on Chapter XXII.).

  Par. 6.

  This refers, of course, to the reception pioneers of Nietzsche's stamp meet

with at the hands of their contemporaries.

  Par. 8.

  Nietzsche teaches that nothing is stable,--not even values,--not even the

concepts good and evil. He likens life unto a stream. But foot-bridges and

railings span the stream, and they seem to stand firm. Many will be reminded

of good and evil when they look upon these structures; for thus these same

values  stand  over  the  stream  of  life,  and  life  flows  on  beneath  them  and

leaves  them  standing.  When,  however,  winter  comes  and  the  stream  gets

frozen,  many  inquire:  "Should  not  everything--STAND  STILL?

Fundamentally everything standeth still." But soon the spring cometh and

with it the thaw-wind. It breaks the ice, and the ice breaks down the foot-

bridges  and  railings,  whereupon  everything  is  swept  away.  This  state  of

affairs, according to Nietzsche, has now been reached. "Oh, my brethren, is

not  everything  AT  PRESENT  IN  FLUX?  Have  not  all  railings  and  foot-

bridges  fallen  into  the  water?  Who  would  still  HOLD  ON  to  'good'  and

'evil'?"

  Par. 9.

  This is complementary to the first three verses of par. 2.

  Par. 10.

  So far, this is perhaps the most important paragraph. It is a protest against

reading  a  moral  order  of  things  in  life.  "Life  is  something  essentially

immoral!" Nietzsche tells us in the introduction to the "Birth of Tragedy".

Even  to  call  life  "activity,"  or  to  define  it  further  as  "the  continuousadjustment  of  internal  relations  to  external  relations,"  as  Spencer  has  it,

Nietzsche characterises as a "democratic idiosyncracy." He says to define it

in this way, "is to mistake the true nature and function of life, which is Will

to  Power...Life  is  ESSENTIALLY  appropriation,  injury,  conquest  of  the

strange  and  weak,  suppression,  severity,  obtrusion  of  its  own  forms,

incorporation  and  at  least,  putting  it  mildest,  exploitation."  Adaptation  is

merely a secondary activity, a mere re-activity (see Note on Chapter LVII.).

  Pars. 11, 12.

  These deal with Nietzsche's principle of the desirability of rearing a select

race.  The  biological  and  historical  grounds  for  his  insistence  upon  this

principle are, of course, manifold. Gobineau in his great work, "L'Inegalite

des Races Humaines", lays strong emphasis upon the evils which arise from

promiscuous  and  inter-social  marriages.  He  alone  would  suffice  to  carry

Nietzsche's point against all those who are opposed to the other conditions, to

the conditions which would have saved Rome, which have maintained the

strength  of  the  Jewish  race,  and  which  are  strictly  maintained  by  every

breeder of animals throughout the world. Darwin in his remarks relative to

the degeneration of CULTIVATED types of animals through the action of

promiscuous breeding, brings Gobineau support from the realm of biology.

  The last two verses of par. 12 were discussed in the Notes on Chapters

TOCFXXXVI. and LIII.

  Par. 13.

  This, like the first part of "The Soothsayer", is obviously a reference to

the Schopenhauerian Pessimism.

  Pars. 14, 15, 16, 17.

  These are supplementary to the discourse "Backworld's-men".

  Par. 18.

  We must be careful to separate this paragraph, in sense, from the previous

four paragraphs. Nietzsche is still dealing with Pessimism here; but it is the

pessimism of the hero--the man most susceptible of all to desperate views of

life, owing to the obstacles that are arrayed against him in a world where men

of his kind are very rare and are continually being sacrificed. It was to save

this  man  that  Nietzsche  wrote.  Heroism  foiled,  thwarted,  and  wrecked,

hoping  and  fighting  until  the  last,  is  at  length  overtaken  by  despair,  and

renounces  all  struggle  for  sleep.  This  is  not  the  natural  or  constitutional

pessimism which proceeds from an unhealthy body--the dyspeptic's lack of

appetite; it is rather the desperation of the netted lion that ultimately stops allmovement, because the more it moves the more involved it becomes.

  Par. 20.

  "All that increases power is good, all that springs from weakness is bad.

The weak and ill-constituted shall perish: first principle of our charity. And

one  shall  also  help  them  thereto."  Nietzsche  partly  divined  the  kind  of

reception moral values of this stamp would meet with at the hands of the

effeminate manhood of Europe. Here we see that he had anticipated the most

likely form their criticism would take (see also the last two verses of par. 17).

  Par. 21.

  The first ten verses, here, are reminiscent of "War and Warriors" and of

"The Flies in the Market-place." Verses 11 and 12, however, are particularly

important. There is a strong argument in favour of the sharp differentiation of

castes and of races (and even of sexes; see Note on Chapter XVIII.) running

all  through  Nietzsche's  writings.  But  sharp  differentiation  also  implies

antagonism in some form or other--hence Nietzsche's fears for modern men.

What modern men desire above all, is peace and the cessation of pain. But

neither great races nor great castes have ever been built up in this way. "Who

still wanteth to rule?" Zarathustra asks in the "Prologue". "Who still wanteth

to obey? Both are too burdensome." This is rapidly becoming everybody's

attitude to-day. The tame moral reading of the face of nature, together with

such democratic interpretations of life as those suggested by Herbert Spencer,

are signs of a physiological condition which is the reverse of that bounding

and irresponsible healthiness in which harder and more tragic values rule.

  Par. 24.

  This should be read in conjunction with "Child and Marriage". In the fifth

verse we shall recognise our old friend "Marriage on the ten-years system,"

which George Meredith suggested some years ago. This, however, must not

be  taken  too  literally.  I  do  not  think  Nietzsche's  profoundest  views  on

marriage were ever intended to be given over to the public at all, at least not

for the present. They appear in the biography by his sister, and although their

wisdom is unquestionable, the nature of the reforms he suggests render it

impossible for them to become popular just now.

  Pars. 26, 27.

  See Note on "The Prologue".

  Par. 28.

  Nietzsche was not an iconoclast from predilection. No bitterness or empty

hate dictated his vituperations against existing values and against the dogmasof his parents and forefathers. He knew too well what these things meant to

the millions who profess them, to approach the task of uprooting them with

levity or even with haste. He saw what modern anarchists and revolutionists

do NOT see--namely, that man is in danger of actual destruction when his

customs and values are broken. I need hardly point out, therefore, how deeply

he was conscious of the responsibility he threw upon our shoulders when he

invited us to reconsider our position. The lines in this paragraph are evidence

enough of his earnestness.

                            Chapter LVII. The Convalescent.

  We meet with several puzzles here. Zarathustra calls himself the advocate

of the circle (the Eternal Recurrence of all things), and he calls this doctrine

his abysmal thought. In the last verse of the first paragraph, however, after

hailing his deepest thought, he cries: "Disgust, disgust, disgust!" We know

Nietzsche's ideal man was that "world-approving, exuberant, and vivacious

creature, who has not only learnt to compromise and arrange with that which

was and is, but wishes to have it again, AS IT WAS AND IS, for all eternity

insatiably calling out da capo, not only to himself, but to the whole piece and

play" (see Note on Chapter XLII.). But if one ask oneself what the conditions

to such an attitude are, one will realise immediately how utterly different

Nietzsche  was  from  his  ideal.  The  man  who  insatiably  cries  da  capo  to

himself and to the whole of his mise-en-scene, must be in a position to desire

every  incident  in  his  life  to  be  repeated,  not  once,  but  again  and  again

eternally. Now, Nietzsche's life had been too full of disappointments, illness,

unsuccessful struggles, and snubs, to allow of his thinking of the Eternal

Recurrence without loathing--hence probably the words of the last verse.

  In verses 15 and 16, we have Nietzsche declaring himself an evolutionist

in the broadest sense--that is to say, that he believes in the Development

Hypothesis  as  the  description  of  the  process  by  which  species  have

originated.  Now,  to  understand  his  position  correctly  we  must  show  his

relationship to the two greatest of modern evolutionists--Darwin and Spencer.

As a philosopher, however, Nietzsche does not stand or fall by his objections

to the Darwinian or Spencerian cosmogony. He never laid claim to a very

profound knowledge of biology, and his criticism is far more valuable as the

attitude of a fresh mind than as that of a specialist towards the question.

Moreover, in his objections many difficulties are raised which are not settled

by  an  appeal  to  either  of  the  men  above  mentioned.  We  have  given

Nietzsche's definition of life in the Note on Chapter LVI., par. 10. Still, thereremains a hope that Darwin and Nietzsche may some day become reconciled

by  a  new  description  of  the  processes  by  which  varieties  occur.  The

appearance  of  varieties  among  animals  and  of  "sporting  plants"  in  the

vegetable kingdom, is still shrouded in mystery, and the question whether this

is not precisely the ground on which Darwin and Nietzsche will meet, is an

interesting one. The former says in his "Origin of Species", concerning the

causes  of  variability:  "...there  are  two  factors,  namely,  the  nature  of  the

organism, and the nature of the conditions. THE FORMER SEEMS TO BE

MUCH THE MORE IMPORTANT (The italics are mine.), for nearly similar

variations  sometimes  arise  under,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  dissimilar

conditions; and on the other hand, dissimilar variations arise under conditions

which appear to be nearly uniform." Nietzsche, recognising this same truth,

would ascribe practically all the importance to the "highest functionaries in

the  organism,  in  which  the  life-will  appears  as  an  active  and  formative

principle," and except in certain cases (where passive organisms alone are

concerned)  would  not  give  such  a  prominent  place  to  the  influence  of

environment. Adaptation, according to him, is merely a secondary activity, a

mere re-activity, and he is therefore quite opposed to Spencer's definition:

"Life is the continuous adjustment of internal relations to external relations."

Again in the motive force behind animal and plant life, Nietzsche disagrees

with Darwin. He transforms the "Struggle for Existence"--the passive and

involuntary  condition--into  the  "Struggle  for  Power,"  which  is  active  and

creative, and much more in harmony with Darwin's own view, given above,

concerning the importance of the organism itself. The change is one of such

far-reaching importance that we cannot dispose of it in a breath, as a mere

play upon words. "Much is reckoned higher than life itself by the living one."

Nietzsche  says  that  to  speak  of  the  activity  of  life  as  a  "struggle  for

existence," is to state the case inadequately. He warns us not to confound

Malthus with nature. There is something more than this struggle between the

organic beings on this earth; want, which is supposed to bring this struggle

about, is not so common as is supposed; some other force must be operative.

The Will to Power is this force, "the instinct of self-preservation is only one

of the indirect and most frequent results thereof." A certain lack of acumen in

psychological questions and the condition of affairs in England at the time

Darwin wrote, may both, according to Nietzsche, have induced the renowned

naturalist to describe the forces of nature as he did in his "Origin of Species".

  In verses 28, 29, and 30 of the second portion of this discourse we meetwith  a  doctrine  which,  at  first  sight,  seems  to  be  merely  "le  manoir  a

l'envers," indeed one English critic has actually said of Nietzsche, that "Thus

Spake  Zarathustra"  is  no  more  than  a  compendium  of  modern  views  and

maxims turned upside down. Examining these heterodox pronouncements a

little more closely, however, we may possibly perceive their truth. Regarding

good and evil as purely relative values, it stands to reason that what may be

bad or evil in a given man, relative to a certain environment, may actually be

good if not highly virtuous in him relative to a certain other environment. If

this hypothetical man represent the ascending line of life--that is to say, if he

promise all that which is highest in a Graeco-Roman sense, then it is likely

that he will be condemned as wicked if introduced into the society of men

representing the opposite and descending line of life.

  By  depriving  a  man  of  his  wickedness--more  particularly  nowadays--

therefore, one may unwittingly be doing violence to the greatest in him. It

may be an outrage against his wholeness, just as the lopping-off of a leg

would be. Fortunately, the natural so-called "wickedness" of higher men has

in a certain measure been able to resist this lopping process which successive

slave-moralities have practised; but signs are not wanting which show that

the  noblest  wickedness  is  fast  vanishing  from  society--the  wickedness  of

courage and determination--and that Nietzsche had good reasons for crying:

"Ah, that (man's) baddest is so very small! Ah, that his best is so very small.

What is good? To be brave is good! It is the good war which halloweth every

cause!" (see also par. 5, "Higher Man").

                              Chapter LX. The Seven Seals.

  This is a final paean which Zarathustra sings to Eternity and the marriage-

ring of rings, the ring of the Eternal Recurrence.

  ...

                                          PART IV.

  In my opinion this part is Nietzsche's open avowal that all his philosophy,

together with all his hopes, enthusiastic outbursts, blasphemies, prolixities,

and obscurities, were merely so many gifts laid at the feet of higher men. He

had no desire to save the world. What he wished to determine was: Who is to

be master of the world? This is a very different thing. He came to save higher

men;--to give them that freedom by which, alone, they can develop and reach

their zenith (see Note on Chapter LIV., end). It has been argued, and with

considerable force, that no such philosophy is required by higher men, that,

as a matter of fact, higher men, by virtue of their constitutions always, dostand Beyond Good and Evil, and never allow anything to stand in the way of

their complete growth. Nietzsche, however, was evidently not so confident

about this. He would probably have argued that we only see the successful

cases.  Being  a  great  man  himself,  he  was  well  aware  of  the  dangers

threatening  greatness  in  our  age.  In  "Beyond  Good  and  Evil"  he  writes:

"There are few pains so grievous as to have seen, divined, or experienced

how an exceptional man has missed his way and deteriorated..." He knew

"from  his  painfullest  recollections  on  what  wretched  obstacles  promising

developments of the highest rank have hitherto usually gone to pieces, broken

down, sunk, and become contemptible." Now in Part IV. we shall find that

his  strongest  temptation  to  descend  to  the  feeling  of  "pity"  for  his

contemporaries, is the "cry for help" which he hears from the lips of the

higher men exposed to the dreadful danger of their modern environment.

                          Chapter LXI. The Honey Sacrifice.

  In the fourteenth verse of this discourse Nietzsche defines the solemn

duty he imposed upon himself: "Become what thou art." Surely the criticism

which has been directed against this maxim must all fall to the ground when

it  is  remembered,  once  and  for  all,  that  Nietzsche's  teaching  was  never

intended to be other than an esoteric one. "I am a law only for mine own," he

says emphatically, "I am not a law for all." It is of the greatest importance to

humanity that its highest individuals should be allowed to attain to their full

development; for, only by means of its heroes can the human race be led

forward step by step to higher and yet higher levels. "Become what thou art"

applied  to  all,  of  course,  becomes  a  vicious  maxim;  it  is  to  be  hoped,

however, that we may learn in time that the same action performed by a given

number  of  men,  loses  its  identity  precisely  that  same  number  of  times.--

"Quod licet Jovi, non licet bovi."

  At  the  last  eight  verses  many  readers  may  be  tempted  to  laugh.  In

England  we  almost  always  laugh  when  a  man  takes  himself  seriously  at

anything save sport. And there is of course no reason why the reader should

not be hilarious.--A certain greatness is requisite, both in order to be sublime

and to have reverence for the sublime. Nietzsche earnestly believed that the

  Zarathustra-kingdom--his dynasty of a thousand years--would one day come;

if he had not believed it so earnestly, if every artist in fact had not believed so

earnestly in his Hazar, whether of ten, fifteen, a hundred, or a thousand years,

we should have lost all our higher men; they would have become pessimists,

suicides, or merchants. If the minor poet and philosopher has made us shy ofthe prophetic seriousness which characterized an Isaiah or a Jeremiah, it is

surely our loss and the minor poet's gain.

                          Chapter LXII. The Cry of Distress.

  We  now  meet  with  Zarathustra  in  extraordinary  circumstances.  He  is

confronted with Schopenhauer and tempted by the old Soothsayer to commit

the sin of pity. "I have come that I may seduce thee to thy last sin!" says the

Soothsayer  to  Zarathustra.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  Schopenhauer's

ethics,  pity  is  elevated  to  the  highest  place  among  the  virtues,  and  very

consistently  too,  seeing  that  the  Weltanschauung  is  a  pessimistic  one.

Schopenhauer  appeals  to  Nietzsche's  deepest  and  strongest  sentiment--his

sympathy for higher men. "Why dost thou conceal thyself?" he cries. "It is

THE HIGHER MAN that calleth for thee!" Zarathustra is almost overcome

by the Soothsayer's pleading, as he had been once already in the past, but he

resists him step by step. At length he can withstand him no longer, and, on

the  plea  that  the  higher  man  is  on  his  ground  and  therefore  under  his

protection,  Zarathustra  departs  in  search  of  him,  leaving  Schopenhauer--a

higher man in Nietzsche's opinion--in the cave as a guest.

                          Chapter LXIII. Talk with the Kings.

  On his way Zarathustra meets two more higher men of his time; two

kings  cross  his  path.  They  are  above  the  average  modern  type;  for  their

instincts tell them what real ruling is, and they despise the mockery which

they have been taught to call "Reigning." "We ARE NOT the first men," they

say, "and have nevertheless to STAND FOR them: of this imposture have we

at last become weary and disgusted." It is the kings who tell Zarathustra:

"There is no sorer misfortune in all human destiny than when the mighty of

the earth are not also the first men. There everything becometh false and

distorted and monstrous." The kings are also asked by Zarathustra to accept

the shelter of his cave, whereupon he proceeds on his way.

                                Chapter LXIV. The Leech.

  Among  the  higher  men  whom  Zarathustra  wishes  to  save,  is  also  the

scientific  specialist--the  man  who  honestly  and  scrupulously  pursues  his

investigations, as Darwin did, in one department of knowledge. "I love him

who liveth in order to know, and seeketh to know in order that the Superman

may hereafter live. Thus seeketh he his own down-going." "The spiritually

conscientious one," he is called in this discourse. Zarathustra steps on him

unawares, and the slave of science, bleeding from the violence he has done to

himself  by  his  self-imposed  task,  speaks  proudly  of  his  little  sphere  ofknowledge--his  little  hand's  breadth  of  ground  on  Zarathustra's  territory,

philosophy. "Where mine honesty ceaseth," says the true scientific specialist,

"there am I blind and want also to be blind. Where I want to know, however,

there want I also to be honest--namely, severe, rigorous, restricted, cruel, and

inexorable." Zarathustra greatly respecting this man, invites him too to the

cave, and then vanishes in answer to another cry for help.

                              Chapter LXV. The Magician.

  The Magician is of course an artist, and Nietzsche's intimate knowledge

of perhaps the greatest artist of his age rendered the selection of Wagner, as

the type in this discourse, almost inevitable. Most readers will be acquainted

with the facts relating to Nietzsche's and Wagner's friendship and ultimate

separation. As a boy and a youth Nietzsche had shown such a remarkable gift

for  music  that  it  had  been  a  question  at  one  time  whether  he  should  not

perhaps give up everything else in order to develop this gift, but he became a

scholar notwithstanding, although he never entirely gave up composing, and

playing  the  piano.  While  still  in  his  teens,  he  became  acquainted  with

Wagner's  music  and  grew  passionately  fond  of  it.  Long  before  he  met

Wagner he must have idealised him in his mind to an extent which only a

profoundly artistic nature could have been capable of. Nietzsche always had

high ideals for humanity. If one were asked whether, throughout his many

changes, there was yet one aim, one direction, and one hope to which he held

fast, one would be forced to reply in the affirmative and declare that aim,

direction, and hope to have been "the elevation of the type man." Now, when

Nietzsche met Wagner he was actually casting about for an incarnation of his

dreams for the German people, and we have only to remember his youth (he

was twenty-one when he was introduced to Wagner), his love of Wagner's

music, and the undoubted power of the great musician's personality, in order

to realise how very uncritical his attitude must have been in the first flood of

his enthusiasm. Again, when the friendship ripened, we cannot well imagine

Nietzsche,  the  younger  man,  being  anything  less  than  intoxicated  by  his

senior's attention and love, and we are therefore not surprised to find him

pressing Wagner forward as the great Reformer and Saviour of mankind.

"Wagner  in  Bayreuth"  (English  Edition,  1909)  gives  us  the  best  proof  of

Nietzsche's  infatuation,  and  although  signs  are  not  wanting  in  this  essay

which show how clearly and even cruelly he was sub-consciously "taking

stock" of his friend--even then, the work is a record of what great love and

admiration can do in the way of endowing the object of one's affection withall the qualities and ideals that a fertile imagination can conceive.

  When the blow came it was therefore all the more severe. Nietzsche at

length realised that the friend of his fancy and the real Richard Wagner--the

composer  of  Parsifal--were  not  one;  the  fact  dawned  upon  him  slowly;

disappointment upon disappointment, revelation after revelation, ultimately

brought it home to him, and though his best instincts were naturally opposed

to it at first, the revulsion of feeling at last became too strong to be ignored,

and Nietzsche was plunged into the blackest despair. Years after his break

with  Wagner,  he  wrote  "The  Case  of  Wagner",  and  "Nietzsche  contra

Wagner", and these works are with us to prove the sincerity and depth of his

views on the man who was the greatest event of his life.

  The poem in this discourse is, of course, reminiscent of Wagner's own

poetical  manner,  and  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  whole  was  written

subsequent to Nietzsche's final break with his friend. The dialogue between

Zarathustra and the Magician reveals pretty fully what it was that Nietzsche

grew  to  loathe  so  intensely  in  Wagner,--viz.,  his  pronounced  histrionic

tendencies, his dissembling powers, his inordinate vanity, his equivocalness,

his falseness. "It honoureth thee," says Zarathustra, "that thou soughtest for

greatness, but it betrayeth thee also. Thou art not great." The Magician is

nevertheless sent as a guest to Zarathustra's cave; for, in his heart, Zarathustra

believed until the end that the Magician was a higher man broken by modern

values.

                            Chapter LXVI. Out of Service.

    Zarathustra  now  meets  the  last  pope,  and,  in  a  poetical  form,  we  get

Nietzsche's description of the course Judaism and Christianity pursued before

they reached their final break-up in Atheism, Agnosticism, and the like. The

God of a strong, warlike race--the God of Israel--is a jealous, revengeful God.

He  is  a  power  that  can  be  pictured  and  endured  only  by  a  hardy  and

courageous race, a race rich enough to sacrifice and to lose in sacrifice. The

image  of  this  God  degenerates  with  the  people  that  appropriate  it,  and

gradually He becomes a God of love--"soft and mellow," a lower middle-

class  deity,  who  is  "pitiful."  He  can  no  longer  be  a  God  who  requires

sacrifice, for we ourselves are no longer rich enough for that. The tables are

therefore turned upon Him; HE must sacrifice to us. His pity becomes so

great that he actually does sacrifice something to us--His only begotten Son.

Such a process carried to its logical conclusions must ultimately end in His

own destruction, and thus we find the pope declaring that God was one daysuffocated  by  His  all-too-great  pity.  What  follows  is  clear  enough.

Zarathustra recognises another higher man in the ex-pope and sends him too

as a guest to the cave.

                          Chapter LXVII. The Ugliest Man.

  This discourse contains perhaps the boldest of Nietzsche's suggestions

concerning Atheism, as well as some extremely penetrating remarks upon the

sentiment of pity. Zarathustra comes across the repulsive creature sitting on

the wayside, and what does he do? He manifests the only correct feelings that

can be manifested in the presence of any great misery--that is to say, shame,

reverence, embarrassment. Nietzsche detested the obtrusive and gushing pity

that goes up to misery without a blush either on its cheek or in its heart--the

pity which is only another form of self-glorification. "Thank God that I am

not like thee!"--only this self-glorifying sentiment can lend a well-constituted

man the impudence to SHOW his pity for the cripple and the ill-constituted.

In the presence of the ugliest man Nietzsche blushes,--he blushes for his race;

his own particular kind of altruism--the altruism that might have prevented

the existence of this man--strikes him with all its force. He will have the

world otherwise. He will have a world where one need not blush for one's

fellows--hence  his  appeal  to  us  to  love  only  our  children's  land,  the  land

undiscovered in the remotest sea.

    Zarathustra calls the ugliest man the murderer of God! Certainly, this is

one aspect of a certain kind of Atheism--the Atheism of the man who reveres

beauty to such an extent that his own ugliness, which outrages him, must be

concealed  from  every  eye  lest  it  should  not  be  respected  as  Zarathustra

respected it. If there be a God, He too must be evaded. His pity must be

foiled.  But  God  is  ubiquitous  and  omniscient.  Therefore,  for  the  really

GREAT ugly man, He must not exist. "Their pity IS it from which I flee

away," he says--that is to say: "It is from their want of reverence and lack of

shame in presence of my great misery!" The ugliest man despises himself;

but Zarathustra said in his Prologue: "I love the great despisers because they

are the great adorers, and arrows of longing for the other shore." He therefore

honours the ugliest man: sees height in his self-contempt, and invites him to

join the other higher men in the cave.

                      Chapter LXVIII. The Voluntary Beggar.

  In this discourse, we undoubtedly have the ideal Buddhist, if not Gautama

Buddha himself. Nietzsche had the greatest respect for Buddhism, and almost

wherever he refers to it in his works, it is in terms of praise. He recognisedthat though Buddhism is undoubtedly a religion for decadents, its decadent

values emanate from the higher and not, as in Christianity, from the lower

grades  of  society.  In  Aphorism  20  of  "The  Antichrist",  he  compares  it

exhaustively  with  Christianity,  and  the  result  of  his  investigation  is  very

much in favour of the older religion. Still, he recognised a most decided

Buddhistic influence in Christ's teaching, and the words in verses 29, 30, and

31 are very reminiscent of his views in regard to the Christian Savior.

  The figure of Christ has been introduced often enough into fiction, and

many scholars have undertaken to write His life according to their own lights,

but few perhaps have ever attempted to present Him to us bereft of all those

characteristics  which  a  lack  of  the  sense  of  harmony  has  attached  to  His

person  through  the  ages  in  which  His  doctrines  have  been  taught.  Now

Nietzsche disagreed entirely with Renan's view, that Christ was "le grand

maitre  en  ironie";  in  Aphorism  31  of  "The  Antichrist",  he  says  that  he

(Nietzsche) always purged his picture of the Humble Nazarene of all those

bitter and spiteful outbursts which, in view of the struggle the first Christians

went through, may very well have been added to the original character by

Apologists and Sectarians who, at that time, could ill afford to consider nice

psychological  points,  seeing  that  what  they  needed,  above  all,  was  a

wrangling and abusive deity. These two conflicting halves in the character of

the Christ of the Gospels, which no sound psychology can ever reconcile,

Nietzsche always kept distinct in his own mind; he could not credit the same

man with sentiments sometimes so noble and at other times so vulgar, and in

presenting us with this new portrait of the Saviour, purged of all impurities,

Nietzsche rendered military honours to a foe, which far exceed in worth all

that His most ardent disciples have ever claimed for Him. In verse 26 we are

vividly reminded of Herbert Spencer's words "'Le mariage de convenance' is

legalised prostitution."

                              Chapter LXIX. The Shadow.

  Here we have a description of that courageous and wayward spirit that

literally haunts the footsteps of every great thinker and every great leader;

sometimes with the result that it loses all aims, all hopes, and all trust in a

definite goal. It is the case of the bravest and most broad-minded men of to-

day. These literally shadow the most daring movements in the science and art

of  their  generation;  they  completely  lose  their  bearings  and  actually  find

themselves, in the end, without a way, a goal, or a home. "On every surface

have I already sat!...I become thin, I am almost equal to a shadow!" At last, indespair, such men do indeed cry out: "Nothing is true; all is permitted," and

then they become mere wreckage. "Too much hath become clear unto me:

now  nothing  mattereth  to  me  any  more.  Nothing  liveth  any  longer  that  I

love,--how  should  I  still  love  myself!  Have  I  still  a  goal?  Where  is  MY

home?" Zarathustra realises the danger threatening such a man. "Thy danger

is not small, thou free spirit and wanderer," he says. "Thou hast had a bad

day.  See  that  a  still  worse  evening  doth  not  overtake  thee!"  The  danger

Zarathustra refers to is precisely this, that even a prison may seem a blessing

to  such  a  man.  At  least  the  bars  keep  him  in  a  place  of  rest;  a  place  of

confinement,  at  its  worst,  is  real.  "Beware  lest  in  the  end  a  narrow  faith

capture thee," says Zarathustra, "for now everything that is narrow and fixed

seduceth and tempteth thee."

                                Chapter LXX. Noontide.

  At the noon of life Nietzsche said he entered the world; with him man

came of age. We are now held responsible for our actions; our old guardians,

the  gods  and  demi-gods  of  our  youth,  the  superstitions  and  fears  of  our

childhood,  withdraw;  the  field  lies  open  before  us;  we  lived  through  our

morning with but one master--chance--; let us see to it that we MAKE our

afternoon our own (see Note XLIX., Part III.).

                              Chapter LXXI. The Greeting.

  Here I think I may claim that my contention in regard to the purpose and

aim of the whole of Nietzsche's philosophy (as stated at the beginning of my

Notes on Part IV.) is completely upheld. He fought for "all who do not want

to live, unless they learn again to HOPE--unless THEY learn (from him) the

GREAT hope!" Zarathustra's address to his guests shows clearly enough how

he  wished  to  help  them:  "I  DO  NOT  TREAT  MY  WARRIORS

INDULGENTLY," he says: "how then could ye be fit for MY warfare?" He

rebukes and spurns them, no word of love comes from his lips. Elsewhere he

says a man should be a hard bed to his friend, thus alone can he be of use to

him. Nietzsche would be a hard bed to higher men. He would make them

harder; for, in order to be a law unto himself, man must possess the requisite

hardness.  "I  wait  for  higher  ones,  stronger  ones,  more  triumphant  ones,

merrier ones, for such as are built squarely in body and soul." He says in par.

6 of "Higher Man":--

  "Ye higher men, think ye that I am here to put right what ye have put

wrong?  Or  that  I  wished  henceforth  to  make  snugger  couches  for  you

sufferers? Or show you restless, miswandering, misclimbing ones new andeasier footpaths?"

  "Nay! Nay! Three times nay! Always more, always better ones of your

type shall succumb--for ye shall always have it worse and harder."

                              Chapter LXXII. The Supper.

  In the first seven verses of this discourse, I cannot help seeing a gentle

allusion  to  Schopenhauer's  habits  as  a  bon-vivant.  For  a  pessimist,  be  it

remembered, Schopenhauer led quite an extraordinary life. He ate well, loved

well, played the flute well, and I believe he smoked the best cigars. What

follows is clear enough.

                      Chapter LXXIII. The Higher Man. Par. 1.

  Nietzsche admits, here, that at one time he had thought of appealing to the

people,  to  the  crowd  in  the  market-place,  but  that  he  had  ultimately  to

abandon the task. He bids higher men depart from the market-place.

  Par. 3.

  Here we are told quite plainly what class of men actually owe all their

impulses  and  desires  to  the  instinct  of  self-preservation.  The  struggle  for

existence  is  indeed  the  only  spur  in  the  case  of  such  people.  To  them  it

matters not in what shape or condition man be preserved, provided only he

survive. The transcendental maxim that "Life per se is precious" is the ruling

maxim here.

  Par. 4.

  In the Note on Chapter LVII. (end) I speak of Nietzsche's elevation of the

virtue, Courage, to the highest place among the virtues. Here he tells higher

men the class of courage he expects from them.

  Pars. 5, 6.

  These have already been referred to in the Notes on Chapters LVII. (end)

and LXXI.

  Par. 7.

  I suggest that the last verse in this paragraph strongly confirms the view

that Nietzsche's teaching was always meant by him to be esoteric and for

higher man alone.

  Par. 9.

  In  the  last  verse,  here,  another  shaft  of  light  is  thrown  upon  the

Immaculate Perception or so-called "pure objectivity" of the scientific mind.

"Freedom  from  fever  is  still  far  from  being  knowledge."  Where  a  man's

emotions cease to accompany him in his investigations, he is not necessarily

nearer the truth. Says Spencer, in the Preface to his Autobiography:--"In thegenesis of a system of thought, the emotional nature is a large factor: perhaps

as large a factor as the intellectual nature" (see pages 134, 141 of Vol. I.,

"Thoughts out of Season").

  Pars. 10, 11.

  When we approach Nietzsche's philosophy we must be prepared to be

independent thinkers; in fact, the greatest virtue of his works is perhaps the

subtlety with which they impose the obligation upon one of thinking alone, of

scoring off one's own bat, and of shifting intellectually for oneself.

  Par. 13.

  "I am a railing alongside the torrent; whoever is able to grasp me, may

grasp me! Your crutch, however, I am not." These two paragraphs are an

exhortation to higher men to become independent.

  Par. 15.

  Here  Nietzsche  perhaps  exaggerates  the  importance  of  heredity.  As,

however, the question is by no means one on which we are all agreed, what

he says is not without value.

  A very important principle in Nietzsche's philosophy is enunciated in the

first verse of this paragraph. "The higher its type, always the seldomer doth a

thing succeed" (see page 82 of "Beyond Good and Evil"). Those who, like

some political economists, talk in a business-like way about the terrific waste

of human life and energy, deliberately overlook the fact that the waste most

to be deplored usually occurs among higher individuals. Economy was never

precisely one of nature's leading principles. All this sentimental wailing over

the larger proportion of failures than successes in human life, does not seem

to take into account the fact that it is the rarest thing on earth for a highly

organised being to attain to the fullest development and activity of all its

functions, simply because it is so highly organised. The blind Will to Power

in nature therefore stands in urgent need of direction by man.

  Pars. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

  These  paragraphs  deal  with  Nietzsche's  protest  against  the  democratic

seriousness (Pobelernst) of modern times. "All good things laugh," he says,

and his final command to the higher men is, "LEARN, I pray you--to laugh."

All that is GOOD, in Nietzsche's sense, is cheerful. To be able to crack a joke

about one's deepest feelings is the greatest test of their value. The man who

does not laugh, like the man who does not make faces, is already a buffoon at

heart.

  "What hath hitherto been the greatest sin here on earth? Was it not theword of him who said: 'Woe unto them that laugh now!' Did he himself find

no  cause  for  laughter  on  the  earth?  Then  he  sought  badly.  A  child  even

findeth cause for it."

                      Chapter LXXIV. The Song of Melancholy.

  After his address to the higher men, Zarathustra goes out into the open to

recover himself. Meanwhile the magician (Wagner), seizing the opportunity

in  order  to  draw  them  all  into  his  net  once  more,  sings  the  Song  of

Melancholy.

                                Chapter LXXV. Science.

  The only one to resist the "melancholy voluptuousness" of his art, is the

spiritually conscientious one--the scientific specialist of whom we read in the

discourse entitled "The Leech". He takes the harp from the magician and

cries  for  air,  while  reproving  the  musician  in  the  style  of  "The  Case  of

Wagner".  When  the  magician  retaliates  by  saying  that  the  spiritually

conscientious one could have understood little of his song, the latter replies:

"Thou praisest me in that thou separatest me from thyself." The speech of the

scientific man to his fellow higher men is well worth studying. By means of

it, Nietzsche pays a high tribute to the honesty of the true specialist, while, in

representing him as the only one who can resist the demoniacal influence of

the magician's music, he elevates him at a stroke, above all those present.

Zarathustra and the spiritually conscientious one join issue at the end on the

question of the proper place of "fear" in man's history, and Nietzsche avails

himself  of  the  opportunity  in  order  to  restate  his  views  concerning  the

relation of courage to humanity. It is precisely because courage has played

the most important part in our development that he would not see it vanish

from among our virtues to-day. "...courage seemeth to me the entire primitive

history of man."

                Chapter LXXVI. Among the Daughters of the Desert.

  This tells its own tale.

                          Chapter LXXVII. The Awakening.

  In this discourse, Nietzsche wishes to give his followers a warning. He

thinks he has so far helped them that they have become convalescent, that

new desires are awakened in them and that new hopes are in their arms and

legs. But he mistakes the nature of the change. True, he has helped them, he

has  given  them  back  what  they  most  need,  i.e.,  belief  in  believing--the

confidence in having confidence in something, but how do they use it? This

belief  in  faith,  if  one  can  so  express  it  without  seeming  tautological,  hascertainly been restored to them, and in the first flood of their enthusiasm they

use it by bowing down and worshipping an ass! When writing this passage,

Nietzsche was obviously thinking of the accusations which were levelled at

the early Christians by their pagan contemporaries. It is well known that they

were supposed not only to be eaters of human flesh but also ass-worshippers,

and  among  the  Roman  graffiti,  the  most  famous  is  the  one  found  on  the

Palatino, showing a man worshipping a cross on which is suspended a figure

with  the  head  of  an  ass  (see  Minucius  Felix,  "Octavius"  IX.;  Tacitus,

"Historiae"  v.  3;  Tertullian,  "Apologia",  etc.).  Nietzsche's  obvious  moral,

however, is that great scientists and thinkers, once they have reached the wall

encircling scepticism and have thereby learned to recover their confidence in

the act of believing, as such, usually manifest the change in their outlook by

falling victims to the narrowest and most superstitious of creeds. So much for

the introduction of the ass as an object of worship.

  Now, with regard to the actual service and Ass-Festival, no reader who

happens to be acquainted with the religious history of the Middle Ages will

fail to see the allusion here to the asinaria festa which were by no means

uncommon  in  France,  Germany,  and  elsewhere  in  Europe  during  the

thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries.

                          Chapter LXXVIII. The Ass-Festival.

  At length, in the middle of their feast, Zarathustra bursts in upon them

and rebukes them soundly. But he does not do so long; in the Ass-Festival, it

suddenly occurs to him, that he is concerned with a ceremony that may not be

without its purpose, as something foolish but necessary--a recreation for wise

men. He is therefore highly pleased that the higher men have all blossomed

forth; they therefore require new festivals,--"A little valiant nonsense, some

divine  service  and  ass-festival,  some  old  joyful  Zarathustra  fool,  some

blusterer to blow their souls bright."

  He tells them not to forget that night and the ass-festival, for "such things

only  the  convalescent  devise!  And  should  ye  celebrate  it  again,"  he

concludes, "do it from love to yourselves, do it also from love to me! And in

remembrance of ME!"

                        Chapter LXXIX. The Drunken Song.

  It  were  the  height  of  presumption  to  attempt  to  fix  any  particular

interpretation  of  my  own  to  the  words  of  this  song.  With  what  has  gone

before, the reader, while reading it as poetry, should be able to seek and find

his own meaning in it. The doctrine of the Eternal Recurrence appears for thelast time here, in an art-form. Nietzsche lays stress upon the fact that all

happiness, all delight, longs for repetitions, and just as a child cries "Again!

Again!" to the adult who happens to be amusing him; so the man who sees a

meaning, and a joyful meaning, in existence must also cry "Again!" and yet

"Again!" to all his life.

                                Chapter LXXX. The Sign.

  In this discourse, Nietzsche disassociates himself finally from the higher

men, and by the symbol of the lion, wishes to convey to us that he has won

over and mastered the best and the most terrible in nature. That great power

and tenderness are kin, was already his belief in 1875--eight years before he

wrote this speech, and when the birds and the lion come to him, it is because

he is the embodiment of the two qualities. All that is terrible and great in

nature,  the  higher  men  are  not  yet  prepared  for;  for  they  retreat  horror-

stricken into the cave when the lion springs at them; but Zarathustra makes

not a move towards them. He was tempted to them on the previous day, he

says, but "That hath had its time! My suffering and my fellow suffering,--

what matter about them! Do I then strive after HAPPINESS? I strive after my

work!  Well!  the  lion  hath  come,  my  children  are  nigh.  Zarathustra  hath

grown  ripe.  MY  day  beginneth:  ARISE  NOW,  ARISE,  THOU  GREAT

NOONDAY!"

  ...

  The above I know to be open to much criticism. I shall be grateful to all

those who will be kind enough to show me where and how I have gone

wrong; but I should like to point out that, as they stand, I have not given to

these Notes by any means their final form.

    ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.

    London, February 1909.



                              BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL

                              Translated by Helen Zimmern

                                        PREFACE

    SUPPOSING that Truth is a woman--what then? Is there not ground for

suspecting that all philosophers, in so far as they have been dogmatists, have

failed  to  understand  women--that  the  terrible  seriousness  and  clumsy

importunity with which they have usually paid their addresses to Truth, have

been unskilled and unseemly methods for winning a woman? Certainly shehas never allowed herself to be won; and at present every kind of dogma

stands with sad and discouraged mien--IF, indeed, it stands at all! For there

are scoffers who maintain that it has fallen, that all dogma lies on the ground-

-nay more, that it is at its last gasp. But to speak seriously, there are good

grounds  for  hoping  that  all  dogmatizing  in  philosophy,  whatever  solemn,

whatever conclusive and decided airs it has assumed, may have been only a

noble puerilism and tyronism; and probably the time is at hand when it will

be once and again understood WHAT has actually sufficed for the basis of

such  imposing  and  absolute  philosophical  edifices  as  the  dogmatists  have

hitherto reared: perhaps some popular superstition of immemorial time (such

as the soul-superstition, which, in the form of subject- and ego-superstition,

has  not  yet  ceased  doing  mischief):  perhaps  some  play  upon  words,  a

deception on the part of grammar, or an audacious generalization of very

restricted, very personal, very human--all-too-human facts. The philosophy of

the dogmatists, it is to be hoped, was only a promise for thousands of years

afterwards, as was astrology in still earlier times, in the service of which

probably more labour, gold, acuteness, and patience have been spent than on

any  actual  science  hitherto:  we  owe  to  it,  and  to  its  "super-terrestrial"

pretensions in Asia and Egypt, the grand style of architecture. It seems that in

order  to  inscribe  themselves  upon  the  heart  of  humanity  with  everlasting

claims, all great things have first to wander about the earth as enormous and

awe-inspiring caricatures: dogmatic philosophy has been a caricature of this

kind--for instance, the Vedanta doctrine in Asia, and Platonism in Europe.

Let us not be ungrateful to it, although it must certainly be confessed that the

worst, the most tiresome, and the most dangerous of errors hitherto has been

a dogmatist error--namely, Plato's invention of Pure Spirit and the Good in

Itself.  But  now  when  it  has  been  surmounted,  when  Europe,  rid  of  this

nightmare, can again draw breath freely and at least enjoy a healthier--sleep,

we, WHOSE DUTY IS WAKEFULNESS ITSELF, are the heirs of all the

strength which the struggle against this error has fostered. It amounted to the

very  inversion  of  truth,  and  the  denial  of  the  PERSPECTIVE--the

fundamental condition--of life, to speak of Spirit and the Good as Plato spoke

of them; indeed one might ask, as a physician: "How did such a malady

attack that finest product of antiquity, Plato? Had the wicked Socrates really

corrupted him? Was Socrates after all a corrupter of youths, and deserved his

hemlock?" But the struggle against Plato, or--to speak plainer, and for the

"people"--the struggle against the ecclesiastical oppression of millenniums ofChristianity  (FOR  CHRISTIANITY  IS  PLATONISM  FOR  THE

"PEOPLE"), produced in Europe a magnificent tension of soul, such as had

not existed anywhere previously; with such a tensely strained bow one can

now aim at the furthest goals. As a matter of fact, the European feels this

tension as a state of distress, and twice attempts have been made in grand

style to unbend the bow: once by means of Jesuitism, and the second time by

means  of  democratic  enlightenment--which,  with  the  aid  of  liberty  of  the

press  and  newspaper-reading,  might,  in  fact,  bring  it  about  that  the  spirit

would  not  so  easily  find  itself  in  "distress"!  (The  Germans  invented

gunpowder--all  credit  to  them!  but  they  again  made  things  square--they

invented printing.) But we, who are neither Jesuits, nor democrats, nor even

sufficiently Germans, we GOOD EUROPEANS, and free, VERY free spirits-

-we have it still, all the distress of spirit and all the tension of its bow! And

perhaps also the arrow, the duty, and, who knows? THE GOAL TO AIM

AT....

  Sils Maria Upper Engadine, JUNE, 1885.

                CHAPTER I. PREJUDICES OF PHILOSOPHERS

  1. The Will to Truth, which is to tempt us to many a hazardous enterprise,

the famous Truthfulness of which all philosophers have hitherto spoken with

respect,  what  questions  has  this  Will  to  Truth  not  laid  before  us!  What

strange, perplexing, questionable questions! It is already a long story; yet it

seems as if it were hardly commenced. Is it any wonder if we at last grow

distrustful,  lose  patience,  and  turn  impatiently  away?  That  this  Sphinx

teaches  us  at  last  to  ask  questions  ourselves?  WHO  is  it  really  that  puts

questions to us here? WHAT really is this "Will to Truth" in us? In fact we

made a long halt at the question as to the origin of this Will--until at last we

came to an absolute standstill before a yet more fundamental question. We

inquired  about  the  VALUE  of  this  Will.  Granted  that  we  want  the  truth:

WHY  NOT  RATHER  untruth?  And  uncertainty?  Even  ignorance?  The

problem of the value of truth presented itself before us--or was it we who

presented ourselves before the problem? Which of us is the Oedipus here?

Which the Sphinx? It would seem to be a rendezvous of questions and notes

of interrogation. And could it be believed that it at last seems to us as if the

problem had never been propounded before, as if we were the first to discern

it, get a sight of it, and RISK RAISING it? For there is risk in raising it,

perhaps there is no greater risk.

  2. "HOW COULD anything originate out of its opposite? For example,truth out of error? or the Will to Truth out of the will to deception? or the

generous deed out of selfishness? or the pure sun-bright vision of the wise

man out of covetousness? Such genesis is impossible; whoever dreams of it is

a  fool,  nay,  worse  than  a  fool;  things  of  the  highest  value  must  have  a

different  origin,  an  origin  of  THEIR  own--in  this  transitory,  seductive,

illusory, paltry world, in this turmoil of delusion and cupidity, they cannot

have their source. But rather in the lap of Being, in the intransitory, in the

concealed  God,  in  the  'Thing-in-itself--THERE  must  be  their  source,  and

nowhere else!"--This mode of reasoning discloses the typical prejudice by

which metaphysicians of all times can be recognized, this mode of valuation

is at the back of all their logical procedure; through this "belief" of theirs,

they exert themselves for their "knowledge," for something that is in the end

solemnly christened "the Truth." The fundamental belief of metaphysicians is

THE BELIEF IN ANTITHESES OF VALUES. It never occurred even to the

wariest of them to doubt here on the very threshold (where doubt, however,

was most necessary); though they had made a solemn vow, "DE OMNIBUS

DUBITANDUM." For it may be doubted, firstly, whether antitheses exist at

all;  and  secondly,  whether  the  popular  valuations  and  antitheses  of  value

upon  which  metaphysicians  have  set  their  seal,  are  not  perhaps  merely

superficial estimates, merely provisional perspectives, besides being probably

made from some corner, perhaps from below--"frog perspectives," as it were,

to borrow an expression current among painters. In spite of all the value

which may belong to the true, the positive, and the unselfish, it might be

possible that a higher and more fundamental value for life generally should

be assigned to pretence, to the will to delusion, to selfishness, and cupidity. It

might even be possible that WHAT constitutes the value of those good and

respected things, consists precisely in their being insidiously related, knotted,

and crocheted to these evil and apparently opposed things--perhaps even in

being essentially identical with them. Perhaps! But who wishes to concern

himself with such dangerous "Perhapses"! For that investigation one must

await the advent of a new order of philosophers, such as will have other tastes

and inclinations, the reverse of those hitherto prevalent--philosophers of the

dangerous  "Perhaps"  in  every  sense  of  the  term.  And  to  speak  in  all

seriousness, I see such new philosophers beginning to appear.

  3. Having kept a sharp eye on philosophers, and having read between

their lines long enough, I now say to myself that the greater part of conscious

thinking must be counted among the instinctive functions, and it is so even inthe case of philosophical thinking; one has here to learn anew, as one learned

anew about heredity and "innateness." As little as the act of birth comes into

consideration in the whole process and procedure of heredity, just as little is

"being-conscious"  OPPOSED  to  the  instinctive  in  any  decisive  sense;  the

greater part of the conscious thinking of a philosopher is secretly influenced

by his instincts, and forced into definite channels. And behind all logic and its

seeming sovereignty of movement, there are valuations, or to speak more

plainly, physiological demands, for the maintenance of a definite mode of life

For example, that the certain is worth more than the uncertain, that illusion is

less  valuable  than  "truth"  such  valuations,  in  spite  of  their  regulative

importance  for  US,  might  notwithstanding  be  only  superficial  valuations,

special kinds of niaiserie, such as may be necessary for the maintenance of

beings  such  as  ourselves.  Supposing,  in  effect,  that  man  is  not  just  the

"measure of things."

  4. The falseness of an opinion is not for us any objection to it: it is here,

perhaps, that our new language sounds most strangely. The question is, how

far an opinion is life-furthering, life-preserving, species-preserving, perhaps

species-rearing, and we are fundamentally inclined to maintain that the falsest

opinions (to which the synthetic judgments a priori belong), are the most

indispensable to us, that without a recognition of logical fictions, without a

comparison of reality with the purely IMAGINED world of the absolute and

immutable,  without  a  constant  counterfeiting  of  the  world  by  means  of

numbers, man could not live--that the renunciation of false opinions would be

a renunciation of life, a negation of life. TO RECOGNISE UNTRUTH AS A

CONDITION OF LIFE; that is certainly to impugn the traditional ideas of

value in a dangerous manner, and a philosophy which ventures to do so, has

thereby alone placed itself beyond good and evil.

  5. That which causes philosophers to be regarded half-distrustfully and

half-mockingly, is not the oft-repeated discovery how innocent they are--how

often and easily they make mistakes and lose their way, in short, how childish

and childlike they are,--but that there is not enough honest dealing with them,

whereas  they  all  raise  a  loud  and  virtuous  outcry  when  the  problem  of

truthfulness is even hinted at in the remotest manner. They all pose as though

their real opinions had been discovered and attained through the self-evolving

of  a  cold,  pure,  divinely  indifferent  dialectic  (in  contrast  to  all  sorts  of

mystics, who, fairer and foolisher, talk of "inspiration"), whereas, in fact, a

prejudiced proposition, idea, or "suggestion," which is generally their heart'sdesire abstracted and refined, is defended by them with arguments sought out

after the event. They are all advocates who do not wish to be regarded as

such, generally astute defenders, also, of their prejudices, which they dub

"truths,"--and VERY far from having the conscience which bravely admits

this to itself, very far from having the good taste of the courage which goes

so  far  as  to  let  this  be  understood,  perhaps  to  warn  friend  or  foe,  or  in

cheerful confidence and self-ridicule. The spectacle of the Tartuffery of old

Kant, equally stiff and decent, with which he entices us into the dialectic by-

ways  that  lead  (more  correctly  mislead)  to  his  "categorical  imperative"--

makes us fastidious ones smile, we who find no small amusement in spying

out the subtle tricks of old moralists and ethical preachers. Or, still more so,

the hocus-pocus in mathematical form, by means of which Spinoza has, as it

were,  clad  his  philosophy  in  mail  and  mask--in  fact,  the  "love  of  HIS

wisdom," to translate the term fairly and squarely--in order thereby to strike

terror at once into the heart of the assailant who should dare to cast a glance

on  that  invincible  maiden,  that  Pallas  Athene:--how  much  of  personal

timidity and vulnerability does this masquerade of a sickly recluse betray!

  6. It has gradually become clear to me what every great philosophy up till

now has consisted of--namely, the confession of its originator, and a species

of involuntary and unconscious auto-biography; and moreover that the moral

(or immoral) purpose in every philosophy has constituted the true vital germ

out of which the entire plant has always grown. Indeed, to understand how

the abstrusest metaphysical assertions of a philosopher have been arrived at,

it is always well (and wise) to first ask oneself: "What morality do they (or

does  he)  aim  at?"  Accordingly,  I  do  not  believe  that  an  "impulse  to

knowledge" is the father of philosophy; but that another impulse, here as

elsewhere, has only made use of knowledge (and mistaken knowledge!) as an

instrument. But whoever considers the fundamental impulses of man with a

view to determining how far they may have here acted as INSPIRING GENII

(or as demons and cobolds), will find that they have all practiced philosophy

at one time or another, and that each one of them would have been only too

glad to look upon itself as the ultimate end of existence and the legitimate

LORD over all the other impulses. For every impulse is imperious, and as

SUCH, attempts to philosophize. To be sure, in the case of scholars, in the

case of really scientific men, it may be otherwise--"better," if you will; there

there may really be such a thing as an "impulse to knowledge," some kind of

small, independent clock-work, which, when well wound up, works awayindustriously to that end, WITHOUT the rest of the scholarly impulses taking

any material part therein. The actual "interests" of the scholar, therefore, are

generally  in  quite  another  direction--in  the  family,  perhaps,  or  in  money-

making,  or  in  politics;  it  is,  in  fact,  almost  indifferent  at  what  point  of

research his little machine is placed, and whether the hopeful young worker

becomes a good philologist, a mushroom specialist, or a chemist; he is not

CHARACTERISED  by  becoming  this  or  that.  In  the  philosopher,  on  the

contrary, there is absolutely nothing impersonal; and above all, his morality

furnishes a decided and decisive testimony as to WHO HE IS,--that is to say,

in what order the deepest impulses of his nature stand to each other.

  7. How malicious philosophers can be! I know of nothing more stinging

than the joke Epicurus took the liberty of making on Plato and the Platonists;

he called them Dionysiokolakes. In its original sense, and on the face of it,

the  word  signifies  "Flatterers  of  Dionysius"--consequently,  tyrants'

accessories and lick-spittles; besides this, however, it is as much as to say,

"They  are  all  ACTORS,  there  is  nothing  genuine  about  them"  (for

Dionysiokolax was a popular name for an actor). And the latter is really the

malignant reproach that Epicurus cast upon Plato: he was annoyed by the

grandiose manner, the mise en scene style of which Plato and his scholars

were  masters--of  which  Epicurus  was  not  a  master!  He,  the  old  school-

teacher of Samos, who sat concealed in his little garden at Athens, and wrote

three hundred books, perhaps out of rage and ambitious envy of Plato, who

knows! Greece took a hundred years to find out who the garden-god Epicurus

really was. Did she ever find out?

  8. There is a point in every philosophy at which the "conviction" of the

philosopher appears on the scene; or, to put it in the words of an ancient

mystery:

    Adventavit asinus, Pulcher et fortissimus.

  9. You desire to LIVE "according to Nature"? Oh, you noble Stoics, what

fraud  of  words!  Imagine  to  yourselves  a  being  like  Nature,  boundlessly

extravagant,  boundlessly  indifferent,  without  purpose  or  consideration,

without pity or justice, at once fruitful and barren and uncertain: imagine to

yourselves  INDIFFERENCE  as  a  power--how  COULD  you  live  in

accordance with such indifference? To live--is not that just endeavouring to

be otherwise than this Nature? Is not living valuing, preferring, being unjust,

being  limited,  endeavouring  to  be  different?  And  granted  that  your

imperative, "living according to Nature," means actually the same as "livingaccording  to  life"--how  could  you  do  DIFFERENTLY?  Why  should  you

make a principle out of what you yourselves are, and must be? In reality,

however,  it  is  quite  otherwise  with  you:  while  you  pretend  to  read  with

rapture  the  canon  of  your  law  in  Nature,  you  want  something  quite  the

contrary, you extraordinary stage-players and self-deluders! In your pride you

wish to dictate your morals and ideals to Nature, to Nature herself, and to

incorporate them therein; you insist that it shall be Nature "according to the

Stoa," and would like everything to be made after your own image, as a vast,

eternal glorification and generalism of Stoicism! With all your love for truth,

you have forced yourselves so long, so persistently, and with such hypnotic

rigidity to see Nature FALSELY, that is to say, Stoically, that you are no

longer  able  to  see  it  otherwise--and  to  crown  all,  some  unfathomable

superciliousness gives you the Bedlamite hope that BECAUSE you are able

to tyrannize over yourselves--Stoicism is self-tyranny--Nature will also allow

herself to be tyrannized over: is not the Stoic a PART of Nature?... But this is

an old and everlasting story: what happened in old times with the Stoics still

happens today, as soon as ever a philosophy begins to believe in itself. It

always creates the world in its own image; it cannot do otherwise; philosophy

is this tyrannical impulse itself, the most spiritual Will to Power, the will to

"creation of the world," the will to the causa prima.

  10. The eagerness and subtlety, I should even say craftiness, with which

the problem of "the real and the apparent world" is dealt with at present

throughout  Europe,  furnishes  food  for  thought  and  attention;  and  he  who

hears only a "Will to Truth" in the background, and nothing else, cannot

certainly boast of the sharpest ears. In rare and isolated cases, it may really

have  happened  that  such  a  Will  to  Truth--a  certain  extravagant  and

adventurous  pluck,  a  metaphysician's  ambition  of  the  forlorn  hope--has

participated  therein:  that  which  in  the  end  always  prefers  a  handful  of

"certainty" to a whole cartload of beautiful possibilities; there may even be

puritanical fanatics of conscience, who prefer to put their last trust in a sure

nothing, rather than in an uncertain something. But that is Nihilism, and the

sign of a despairing, mortally wearied soul, notwithstanding the courageous

bearing such a virtue may display. It seems, however, to be otherwise with

stronger and livelier thinkers who are still eager for life. In that they side

AGAINST appearance, and speak superciliously of "perspective," in that they

rank the credibility of their own bodies about as low as the credibility of the

ocular evidence that "the earth stands still," and thus, apparently, allowingwith complacency their securest possession to escape (for what does one at

present believe in more firmly than in one's body?),--who knows if they are

not really trying to win back something which was formerly an even securer

possession, something of the old domain of the faith of former times, perhaps

the "immortal soul," perhaps "the old God," in short, ideas by which they

could live better, that is to say, more vigorously and more joyously, than by

"modern ideas"? There is DISTRUST of these modern ideas in this mode of

looking at things, a disbelief in all that has been constructed yesterday and

today; there is perhaps some slight admixture of satiety and scorn, which can

no longer endure the BRIC-A-BRAC of ideas of the most varied origin, such

as so-called Positivism at present throws on the market; a disgust of the more

refined taste at the village-fair motleyness and patchiness of all these reality-

philosophasters,  in  whom  there  is  nothing  either  new  or  true,  except  this

motleyness. Therein it seems to me that we should agree with those skeptical

anti-realists and knowledge-microscopists of the present day; their instinct,

which  repels  them  from  MODERN  reality,  is  unrefuted...  what  do  their

retrograde by-paths concern us! The main thing about them is NOT that they

wish  to  go  "back,"  but  that  they  wish  to  get  AWAY  therefrom.  A  little

MORE strength, swing, courage, and artistic power, and they would be OFF--

and not back!

  11. It seems to me that there is everywhere an attempt at present to divert

attention  from  the  actual  influence  which  Kant  exercised  on  German

philosophy, and especially to ignore prudently the value which he set upon

himself. Kant was first and foremost proud of his Table of Categories; with it

in  his  hand  he  said:  "This  is  the  most  difficult  thing  that  could  ever  be

undertaken on behalf of metaphysics." Let us only understand this "could

be"!  He  was  proud  of  having  DISCOVERED  a  new  faculty  in  man,  the

faculty of synthetic judgment a priori. Granting that he deceived himself in

this  matter;  the  development  and  rapid  flourishing  of  German  philosophy

depended nevertheless on his pride, and on the eager rivalry of the younger

generation to discover if possible something--at all events "new faculties"--of

which to be still prouder!--But let us reflect for a moment--it is high time to

do  so.  "How  are  synthetic  judgments  a  priori  POSSIBLE?"  Kant  asks

himself--and  what  is  really  his  answer?  "BY  MEANS  OF  A  MEANS

(faculty)"--but  unfortunately  not  in  five  words,  but  so  circumstantially,

imposingly,  and  with  such  display  of  German  profundity  and  verbal

flourishes, that one altogether loses sight of the comical niaiserie allemandeinvolved in such an answer. People were beside themselves with delight over

this new faculty, and the jubilation reached its climax when Kant further

discovered a moral faculty in man--for at that time Germans were still moral,

not yet dabbling in the "Politics of hard fact." Then came the honeymoon of

German philosophy. All the young theologians of the Tubingen institution

went immediately into the groves--all seeking for "faculties." And what did

they not find--in that innocent, rich, and still youthful period of the German

spirit, to which Romanticism, the malicious fairy, piped and sang, when one

could  not  yet  distinguish  between  "finding"  and  "inventing"!  Above  all  a

faculty for the "transcendental"; Schelling christened it, intellectual intuition,

and thereby gratified the most earnest longings of the naturally pious-inclined

Germans. One can do no greater wrong to the whole of this exuberant and

eccentric movement (which was really youthfulness, notwithstanding that it

disguised itself so boldly, in hoary and senile conceptions), than to take it

seriously,  or  even  treat  it  with  moral  indignation.  Enough,  however--the

world grew older, and the dream vanished. A time came when people rubbed

their foreheads, and they still rub them today. People had been dreaming, and

first and foremost--old Kant. "By means of a means (faculty)"--he had said,

or at least meant to say. But, is that--an answer? An explanation? Or is it not

rather merely a repetition of the question? How does opium induce sleep?

"By means of a means (faculty)," namely the virtus dormitiva, replies the

doctor in Moliere,

  Quia est in eo virtus dormitiva, Cujus est natura sensus assoupire.

  But such replies belong to the realm of comedy, and it is high time to

replace  the  Kantian  question,  "How  are  synthetic  judgments  a  PRIORI

possible?"  by  another  question,  "Why  is  belief  in  such  judgments

necessary?"--in effect, it is high time that we should understand that such

judgments must be believed to be true, for the sake of the preservation of

creatures like ourselves; though they still might naturally be false judgments!

Or,  more  plainly  spoken,  and  roughly  and  readily--synthetic  judgments  a

priori should not "be possible" at all; we have no right to them; in our mouths

they are nothing but false judgments. Only, of course, the belief in their truth

is  necessary,  as  plausible  belief  and  ocular  evidence  belonging  to  the

perspective view of life. And finally, to call to mind the enormous influence

which  "German  philosophy"--I  hope  you  understand  its  right  to  inverted

commas (goosefeet)?--has exercised throughout the whole of Europe, there is

no doubt that a certain VIRTUS DORMITIVA had a share in it; thanks toGerman philosophy, it was a delight to the noble idlers, the virtuous, the

mystics,  the  artiste,  the  three-fourths  Christians,  and  the  political

obscurantists  of  all  nations,  to  find  an  antidote  to  the  still  overwhelming

sensualism which overflowed from the last century into this, in short--"sensus

assoupire."...

  12. As regards materialistic atomism, it is one of the best-refuted theories

that have been advanced, and in Europe there is now perhaps no one in the

learned world so unscholarly as to attach serious signification to it, except for

convenient everyday use (as an abbreviation of the means of expression)--

thanks  chiefly  to  the  Pole  Boscovich:  he  and  the  Pole  Copernicus  have

hitherto been the greatest and most successful opponents of ocular evidence.

For while Copernicus has persuaded us to believe, contrary to all the senses,

that the earth does NOT stand fast, Boscovich has taught us to abjure the

belief in the last thing that "stood fast" of the earth--the belief in "substance,"

in  "matter,"  in  the  earth-residuum,  and  particle-atom:  it  is  the  greatest

triumph over the senses that has hitherto been gained on earth. One must,

however, go still further, and also declare war, relentless war to the knife,

against the "atomistic requirements" which still lead a dangerous after-life in

places where no one suspects them, like the more celebrated "metaphysical

requirements": one must also above all give the finishing stroke to that other

and more portentous atomism which Christianity has taught best and longest,

the SOUL-ATOMISM. Let it be permitted to designate by this expression the

belief which regards the soul as something indestructible, eternal, indivisible,

as a monad, as an atomon: this belief ought to be expelled from science!

Between ourselves, it is not at all necessary to get rid of "the soul" thereby,

and  thus  renounce  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  venerated  hypotheses--as

happens frequently to the clumsiness of naturalists, who can hardly touch on

the  soul  without  immediately  losing  it.  But  the  way  is  open  for  new

acceptations and refinements of the soul-hypothesis; and such conceptions as

"mortal  soul,"  and  "soul  of  subjective  multiplicity,"  and  "soul  as  social

structure of the instincts and passions," want henceforth to have legitimate

rights in science. In that the NEW psychologist is about to put an end to the

superstitions which have hitherto flourished with almost tropical luxuriance

around the idea of the soul, he is really, as it were, thrusting himself into a

new desert and a new distrust--it is possible that the older psychologists had a

merrier and more comfortable time of it; eventually, however, he finds that

precisely  thereby  he  is  also  condemned  to  INVENT--and,  who  knows?perhaps to DISCOVER the new.

  13.  Psychologists  should  bethink  themselves  before  putting  down  the

instinct of self-preservation as the cardinal instinct of an organic being. A

living thing seeks above all to DISCHARGE its strength--life itself is WILL

TO POWER; self-preservation is only one of the indirect and most frequent

RESULTS  thereof.  In  short,  here,  as  everywhere  else,  let  us  beware  of

SUPERFLUOUS teleological principles!--one of which is the instinct of self-

preservation (we owe it to Spinoza's inconsistency). It is thus, in effect, that

method ordains, which must be essentially economy of principles.

  14. It is perhaps just dawning on five or six minds that natural philosophy

is only a world-exposition and world-arrangement (according to us, if I may

say so!) and NOT a world-explanation; but in so far as it is based on belief in

the  senses,  it  is  regarded  as  more,  and  for  a  long  time  to  come  must  be

regarded as more--namely, as an explanation. It has eyes and fingers of its

own,  it  has  ocular  evidence  and  palpableness  of  its  own:  this  operates

fascinatingly,  persuasively,  and  CONVINCINGLY  upon  an  age  with

fundamentally plebeian tastes--in fact, it follows instinctively the canon of

truth of eternal popular sensualism. What is clear, what is "explained"? Only

that which can be seen and felt--one must pursue every problem thus far.

Obversely, however, the charm of the Platonic mode of thought, which was

an ARISTOCRATIC mode, consisted precisely in RESISTANCE to obvious

sense-evidence--perhaps among men who enjoyed even stronger and more

fastidious senses than our contemporaries, but who knew how to find a higher

triumph in remaining masters of them: and this by means of pale, cold, grey

conceptional networks which they threw over the motley whirl of the senses--

the mob of the senses, as Plato said. In this overcoming of the world, and

interpreting of the world in the manner of Plato, there was an ENJOYMENT

different from that which the physicists of today offer us--and likewise the

Darwinists and anti-teleologists among the physiological workers, with their

principle of the "smallest possible effort," and the greatest possible blunder.

"Where there is nothing more to see or to grasp, there is also nothing more

for men to do"--that is certainly an imperative different from the Platonic one,

but it may notwithstanding be the right imperative for a hardy, laborious race

of  machinists  and  bridge-builders  of  the  future,  who  have  nothing  but

ROUGH work to perform.

  15. To study physiology with a clear conscience, one must insist on the

fact that the sense-organs are not phenomena in the sense of the idealisticphilosophy; as such they certainly could not be causes! Sensualism, therefore,

at least as regulative hypothesis, if not as heuristic principle. What? And

others say even that the external world is the work of our organs? But then

our body, as a part of this external world, would be the work of our organs!

But then our organs themselves would be the work of our organs! It seems to

me  that  this  is  a  complete  REDUCTIO  ADSURDUM,  if  the  conception

CAUSA SUI is something fundamentally absurd. Consequently, the external

world is NOT the work of our organs--?

  16.  There  are  still  harmless  self-observers  who  believe  that  there  are

"immediate  certainties";  for  instance,  "I  think,"  or  as  the  superstition  of

Schopenhauer puts it, "I will"; as though cognition here got hold of its object

purely and simply as "the thing in itself," without any falsification taking

place  either  on  the  part  of  the  subject  or  the  object.  I  would  repeat  it,

however, a hundred times, that "immediate certainty," as well as "absolute

knowledge"  and  the  "thing  in  itself,"  involve  a  CONTRADICTIO  IN

ADJECTO;  we  really  ought  to  free  ourselves  from  the  misleading

significance of words! The people on their part may think that cognition is

knowing all about things, but the philosopher must say to himself: "When I

analyze the process that is expressed in the sentence, 'I think,' I find a whole

series  of  daring  assertions,  the  argumentative  proof  of  which  would  be

difficult, perhaps impossible: for instance, that it is I who think, that there

must necessarily be something that thinks, that thinking is an activity and

operation on the part of a being who is thought of as a cause, that there is an

'ego,' and finally, that it is already determined what is to be designated by

thinking--that I KNOW what thinking is. For if I had not already decided

within myself what it is, by what standard could I determine whether that

which  is  just  happening  is  not  perhaps  'willing'  or  'feeling'?  In  short,  the

assertion 'I think,' assumes that I COMPARE my state at the present moment

with other states of myself which I know, in order to determine what it is; on

account of this retrospective connection with further 'knowledge,' it has, at

any  rate,  no  immediate  certainty  for  me."--In  place  of  the  "immediate

certainty"  in  which  the  people  may  believe  in  the  special  case,  the

philosopher thus finds a series of metaphysical questions presented to him,

veritable conscience questions of the intellect, to wit: "Whence did I get the

notion of 'thinking'? Why do I believe in cause and effect? What gives me the

right to speak of an 'ego,' and even of an 'ego' as cause, and finally of an 'ego'

as  cause  of  thought?"  He  who  ventures  to  answer  these  metaphysicalquestions at once by an appeal to a sort of INTUITIVE perception, like the

person who says, "I think, and know that this, at least, is true, actual, and

certain"--will  encounter  a  smile  and  two  notes  of  interrogation  in  a

philosopher  nowadays.  "Sir,"  the  philosopher  will  perhaps  give  him  to

understand, "it is improbable that you are not mistaken, but why should it be

the truth?"

  17.  With  regard  to  the  superstitions  of  logicians,  I  shall  never  tire  of

emphasizing a small, terse fact, which is unwillingly recognized by these

credulous minds--namely, that a thought comes when "it" wishes, and not

when "I" wish; so that it is a PERVERSION of the facts of the case to say

that the subject "I" is the condition of the predicate "think." ONE thinks; but

that this "one" is precisely the famous old "ego," is, to put it mildly, only a

supposition, an assertion, and assuredly not an "immediate certainty." After

all, one has even gone too far with this "one thinks"--even the "one" contains

an INTERPRETATION of the process, and does not belong to the process

itself. One infers here according to the usual grammatical formula--"To think

is an activity; every activity requires an agency that is active; consequently"...

It was pretty much on the same lines that the older atomism sought, besides

the  operating  "power,"  the  material  particle  wherein  it  resides  and  out  of

which it operates--the atom. More rigorous minds, however, learnt at last to

get  along  without  this  "earth-residuum,"  and  perhaps  some  day  we  shall

accustom  ourselves,  even  from  the  logician's  point  of  view,  to  get  along

without the little "one" (to which the worthy old "ego" has refined itself).

  18. It is certainly not the least charm of a theory that it is refutable; it is

precisely  thereby  that  it  attracts  the  more  subtle  minds.  It  seems  that  the

hundred-times-refuted theory of the "free will" owes its persistence to this

charm alone; some one is always appearing who feels himself strong enough

to refute it.

  19. Philosophers are accustomed to speak of the will as though it were the

best-known  thing  in  the  world;  indeed,  Schopenhauer  has  given  us  to

understand  that  the  will  alone  is  really  known  to  us,  absolutely  and

completely  known,  without  deduction  or  addition.  But  it  again  and  again

seems to me that in this case Schopenhauer also only did what philosophers

are  in  the  habit  of  doing--he  seems  to  have  adopted  a  POPULAR

PREJUDICE  and  exaggerated  it.  Willing  seems  to  me  to  be  above  all

something COMPLICATED, something that is a unity only in name--and it is

precisely in a name that popular prejudice lurks, which has got the masteryover the inadequate precautions of philosophers in all ages. So let us for once

be more cautious, let us be "unphilosophical": let us say that in all willing

there is firstly a plurality of sensations, namely, the sensation of the condition

"AWAY FROM WHICH we go," the sensation of the condition "TOWARDS

WHICH we go," the sensation of this "FROM" and "TOWARDS" itself, and

then besides, an accompanying muscular sensation, which, even without our

putting in motion "arms and legs," commences its action by force of habit,

directly we "will" anything. Therefore, just as sensations (and indeed many

kinds of sensations) are to be recognized as ingredients of the will, so, in the

second place, thinking is also to be recognized; in every act of the will there

is a ruling thought;--and let us not imagine it possible to sever this thought

from the "willing," as if the will would then remain over! In the third place,

the will is not only a complex of sensation and thinking, but it is above all an

EMOTION, and in fact the emotion of the command. That which is termed

"freedom of the will" is essentially the emotion of supremacy in respect to

him  who  must  obey:  "I  am  free,  'he'  must  obey"--this  consciousness  is

inherent  in  every  will;  and  equally  so  the  straining  of  the  attention,  the

straight look which fixes itself exclusively on one thing, the unconditional

judgment that "this and nothing else is necessary now," the inward certainty

that obedience will be rendered--and whatever else pertains to the position of

the commander. A man who WILLS commands something within himself

which renders obedience, or which he believes renders obedience. But now

let  us  notice  what  is  the  strangest  thing  about  the  will,--this  affair  so

extremely complex, for which the people have only one name. Inasmuch as

in the given circumstances we are at the same time the commanding AND the

obeying  parties,  and  as  the  obeying  party  we  know  the  sensations  of

constraint,  impulsion,  pressure,  resistance,  and  motion,  which  usually

commence immediately after the act of will; inasmuch as, on the other hand,

we are accustomed to disregard this duality, and to deceive ourselves about it

by means of the synthetic term "I": a whole series of erroneous conclusions,

and  consequently  of  false  judgments  about  the  will  itself,  has  become

attached to the act of willing--to such a degree that he who wills believes

firmly that willing SUFFICES for action. Since in the majority of cases there

has only been exercise of will when the effect of the command--consequently

obedience, and therefore action--was to be EXPECTED, the APPEARANCE

has translated itself into the sentiment, as if there were a NECESSITY OF

EFFECT; in a word, he who wills believes with a fair amount of certainty