brought to the point of comparing themselves with others, they are inclined to

a brooding under-estimation of their own worth, so that they have first to be

compelled  by  others  to  form  once  more  a  good  and  just  opinion  of

themselves, and even from this acquired opinion they will always want to

subtract and abate something. We must not, therefore, grudge certain persons

their loneliness or foolishly commiserate them on that account, as is so often

done.

  626.

  Without  Melody.—There  are  persons  to  whom  a  constant  repose  in

themselves and the harmonious ordering of all their capacities is so natural

that every definite activity is repugnant to them. They resemble music which

consists  of  nothing  but  prolonged,  harmonious  accords,  without  even  the

tendency to an organized and animated melody showing itself. All external

movement serves only to restore to the boat its equilibrium on the sea of

harmonious  euphony.  Modern  men  usually  become  excessively  impatient

when they meet such natures, who will never be anything in the world, only it

is not allowable to say of them that they are nothing. But in certain moods the

sight of them raises the unusual question: "Why should there be melody at

all? Why should it not suffice us when life mirrors itself peacefully in a deep

lake?" The Middle Ages were richer in such natures than our times. How

seldom  one  now  meets  with  anyone  who  can  live  on  so  peacefully  and

happily with himself even in the midst of the crowd, saying to himself, like

Goethe, "The best thing of all is the deep calm in which I live and grow in

opposition to the world, and gain what it cannot take away from me with fire

and sword."

  627.

  To Live and Experience.—If we observe how some people can deal with

their  experiences—their  unimportant,  everyday  experiences  so  that  these

become soil which yields fruit thrice a year; whilst others—and how many!—

are  driven  through  the  surf  of  the  most  exciting  adventures,  the  most

diversified movements of times and peoples, and yet always remain light,

always remain on the surface, like cork; we are finally tempted to divide

mankind into a minority (minimality) of those who know how to make much

out of little, and a majority of those who know how to make little out of

much;  indeed,  we  even  meet  with  the  counter-sorcerers  who,  instead  of

making the world out of nothing, make a nothing out of the world.

  628.    Seriousness in Play.—In Genoa one evening, in the twilight, I heard from

a tower a long chiming of bells; it was never like to end, and sounded as if

insatiable above the noise of the streets, out into the evening sky and sea-air,

so thrilling, and at the same time so childish and so sad. I then remembered

the words of Plato, and suddenly felt the force of them in my heart: "Human

matters, one and all, are not worthy of great seriousness; nevertheless. . ."

  629.

    Conviction and Justice.—The requirement that a person must afterwards,

when cool and sober, stand by what he says, promises, and resolves during

passion, is one of the heaviest burdens that weigh upon mankind. To have to

acknowledge for all future time the consequences of anger, of fiery revenge,

of  enthusiastic  devotion,  may  lead  to  a  bitterness  against  these  feelings

proportionate  to  the  idolatry  with  which  they  are  idolized,  especially  by

artists. These cultivate to its full extent the esteem of the passions, and have

always done so; to be sure, they also glorify the terrible satisfaction of the

passions which a person affords himself, the outbreaks of vengeance, with

death, mutilation, or voluntary banishment in their train, and the resignation

of the broken heart In any case they keep alive curiosity about the passions; it

is  as  if  they  said:  "Without  passions  you  have  no  experience  whatever."

Because we have sworn fidelity (perhaps even to a purely fictitious being,

such as a god), because we have surrendered our heart to a prince, a party, a

woman,  a  priestly  order,  an  artist,  or  a  thinker,  in  a  state  of  infatuated

delusion that threw a charm over us and made those beings appear worthy of

all veneration, and every sacrifice—are we, therefore, firmly and inevitably

bound? Or did we not, after all, deceive ourselves then? Was there not a

hypothetical  promise,  under  the  tacit  presupposition  that  those  beings  to

whom we consecrated ourselves were really the beings they seemed to be in

our imagination? Are we under obligation to be faithful to our errors, even

with the knowledge that by this fidelity we shall cause injury to our higher

selves?  No,  there  is  no  law,  no  obligation  of  that  sort;  we  must  become

traitors, we must act unfaithfully and abandon our ideals again and again. We

cannot advance from one period of life into another without causing these

pains of treachery and also suffering from them. Might it be necessary to

guard against the ebullitions of our feelings in order to escape these pains?

Would not the world then become too arid, too ghost-like for us? Rather will

we  ask  ourselves  whether  these  pains  are  necessary  on  a  change  of

convictions,  or  whether  they  do  not  depend  on  a  mistaken  opinion  andestimate. Why do we admire a person who remains true to his convictions

and despise him who changes them? I fear the answer must be, "because

everyone takes for granted that such a change is caused only by motives of

more general utility or of personal trouble." That is to say, we believe at

bottom that nobody alters his opinions as long as they are advantageous to

him,  or  at  least  as  long  as  they  do  not  cause  him  any  harm.  If  it  is  so,

however,  it  furnishes  a  bad  proof  of  the  intellectual  significance  of  all

convictions.  Let  us  once  examine  how  convictions  arise,  and  let  us  see

whether their importance is not greatly over-estimated; it will thereby be seen

that the change of convictions also is in all circumstances judged according to

a false standard, that we have hitherto been accustomed to suffer too much

from this change.

  630.

    Conviction is belief in the possession of absolute truth on any matter of

knowledge. This belief takes it for granted, therefore, that there are absolute

truths; also, that perfect methods have been found for attaining to them; and

finally,  that  everyone  who  has  convictions  makes  use  of  these  perfect

methods. All three notions show at once that the man of convictions is not the

man  of  scientific  thought;  he  seems  to  us  still  in  the  age  of  theoretical

innocence, and is practically a child, however grown-up he may be. Whole

centuries, however, have been lived under the influence of those childlike

presuppositions, and out of them have flowed the mightiest sources of human

strength.  The  countless  numbers  who  sacrificed  themselves  for  their

convictions believed they were doing it for the sake of absolute truth. They

were all wrong, however; probably no one has, ever sacrificed himself for

Truth; at least, the dogmatic expression of the faith of any such person has

been unscientific or only partly scientific. But really, people wanted to carry

their point because they believed that they must be in the right. To allow their

belief  to  be  wrested  from  them  probably  meant  calling  in  question  their

eternal salvation. In an affair of such extreme importance the "will" was too

audibly the prompter of the intellect. The presupposition of every believer of

every shade of belief has been that he could not be confuted; if the counter-

arguments happened to be very strong, it always remained for him to decry

intellect generally, and, perhaps, even to set up the "credo quia absurdum est"

as the standard of extreme fanaticism. It is not the struggle of opinions that

has made history so turbulent; but the struggle of belief in opinions,—that is

to say, of convictions. If all those who thought so highly of their convictions,who made sacrifices of all kinds for them, and spared neither honor, body,

nor life in their service, had only devoted half of their energy to examining

their right to adhere to this or that conviction and by what road they arrived at

it,  how  peaceable  would  the  history  of  mankind  now  appear!  How  much

more knowledge would there be! All the cruel scenes in connection with the

persecution of heretics of all kinds would have been avoided, for two reasons:

firstly, because the inquisitors would above all have inquired of themselves,

and would have recognized the presumption of defending absolute truth; and

secondly,  because  the  heretics  themselves  would,  after  examination,  have

taken no more interest in such badly established doctrines as those of all

religious sectarians and "orthodox" believers.

  631.

  From the ages in which it was customary to believe in the possession of

absolute truth, people have inherited a profound dislike of all skeptical and

relative attitudes with regard to questions of knowledge; they mostly prefer to

acquiesce, for good or evil, in the convictions of those in authority (fathers,

friends, teachers, princes), and they have a kind of remorse of conscience

when they do not do so. This tendency is quite comprehensible, and its results

furnish no ground for condemnation of the course of the development of

human reason. The scientific spirit in man, however, has gradually to bring to

maturity the virtue of cautious forbearance, the wise moderation, which is

better known in practical than in theoretical life, and which, for instance,

Goethe  has  represented  in  "Antonio,"  as  an  object  of  provocation  for  all

Tassos,—that is to say, for unscientific and at the same time inactive natures.

The man of convictions has in himself the right not to comprehend the man

of cautious thought, the theoretical Antonio; the scientific man, on the other

hand, has no right to blame the former on that account, he takes no notice

thereof, and knows, moreover, that in certain cases the former will yet cling

to him, as Tasso finally clung to Antonio.

  632.

  He who has not passed through different phases of conviction, but sticks

to the faith in whose net he was first caught, is, under all circumstances, just

on account of this unchangeableness, a representative of atavistic culture; in

accordance with this lack of culture (which always presupposes plasticity for

culture), he is severe, unintelligent, unteachable, without liberality, an ever

suspicious person, an unscrupulous person who has recourse to all expedients

for enforcing his opinions because he cannot conceive that there must beother opinions; he is, in such respects, perhaps a source of strength, and even

wholesome in cultures that have become too emancipated and languid, but

only  because  he  strongly  incites  to  opposition:  for  thereby  the  delicate

organization  of  the  new  culture,  which  is  forced  to  struggle  with  him,

becomes strong itself.

  633.

  In essential respects we are still the same men as those of the time of the

Reformation; how could it be otherwise? But the fact that we no longer allow

ourselves  certain  means  for  promoting  the  triumph  of  our  opinions

distinguishes us from that age, and proves that we belong to a higher culture.

He who still combats and overthrows opinions with calumnies and outbursts

of rage, after the manner of the Reformation men, obviously betrays the fact

that he would have burnt his adversaries had he lived in other times, and that

he would have resorted to all the methods of the Inquisition if he had been an

opponent of the Reformation. The Inquisition was rational at that time; for it

represented nothing else than the universal application of martial law, which

had to be proclaimed throughout the entire domain of the Church, and which,

like  all  martial  law,  gave  a  right  to  the  extremest  methods,  under  the

presupposition, of course, (which we now no longer share with those people),

that the Church possessed truth and had to preserve it at all costs, and at any

sacrifice,  for  the  salvation  of  mankind.  Now,  however,  one  does  not  so

readily  concede  to  anyone  that  he  possesses  the  truth;  strict  methods  of

investigation  have  diffused  enough  of  distrust  and  precaution,  so  that

everyone who violently advocates opinions in word and deed is looked upon

as an enemy of our modern culture, or, at least, as an atavist. As a matter of

fact the pathos that man possesses truth is now of very little consequence in

comparison with the certainly milder and less noisy pathos of the search for

truth, which is never weary of learning afresh and examining anew.

  634.

    Moreover, the methodical search for truth is itself the outcome of those

ages in which convictions were at war with each other. If the individual had

not cared about his "truth," that is to say, about carrying his point, there

would have been no method of investigation; thus, however, by the eternal

struggle of the claims of different individuals to absolute truth, people went

on step by step to find irrefragable principles according to which the rights of

the claims could be tested and the dispute settled. At first people decided

according  to  authorities;  later  on  they  criticized  one  another's  ways  andmeans of finding the presumed truth; in the interval there was a period when

people deduced the consequences of the adverse theory, and perhaps found

them to be productive of injury and unhappiness; from which it was then to

be  inferred  by  everyone  that  the  conviction  of  the  adversary  involved  an

error. The personal struggle of the thinker at last so sharpened his methods

that  real  truths  could  be  discovered,  and  the  mistakes  of  former  methods

exposed before the eyes of all.

  635.

  On  the  whole,  scientific  methods  are  at  least  as  important  results  of

investigation as any other results, for the scientific spirit is based upon a

knowledge of method, and if the methods were lost, all the results of science

could  not  prevent  the  renewed  prevalence  of  superstition  and  absurdity.

Clever people may learn as much as they like of the results of science, but

one still notices in their conversation, and especially in the hypotheses they

make, that they lack the scientific spirit; they have not the instinctive distrust

of the devious courses of thinking which, in consequence of long training,

has taken root in the soul of every scientific man. It is enough for them to

find any kind of hypothesis on a subject, they are then all on fire for it, and

imagine  the  matter  is  thereby  settled.  To  have  an  opinion  is  with  them

equivalent to immediately becoming fanatical for it, and finally taking it to

heart  as  a  conviction.  In  the  case  of  an  unexplained  matter  they  become

heated for the first idea that comes into their head which has any resemblance

to an explanation—a course from which the worst results constantly follow,

especially  in  the  field  of  politics.  On  that  account  everybody  should

nowadays have become thoroughly acquainted with at least one science, for

then surely he knows what is meant by method, and how necessary is the

extremest carefulness. To women in particular this advice is to be given at

present;  as  to  those  who  are  irretrievably  the  victims  of  all  hypotheses,

especially  when  these  have  the  appearance  of  being  witty,  attractive,

enlivening, and invigorating. Indeed, on close inspection one sees that by far

the greater number of educated people still desire convictions from a thinker

and nothing but convictions, and that only a small minority want certainty.

The former want to be forcibly carried away in order thereby to obtain an

increase of strength; the latter few have the real interest which disregards

personal advantages and the increase of strength also. The former class, who

greatly predominate, are always reckoned upon when the thinker comports

himself and labels himself as a genius, and thus views himself as a higherbeing to whom authority belongs. In so far as genius of this kind upholds the

ardor of convictions, and arouses distrust of the cautious and modest spirit of

science, it is an enemy of truth, however much it may think itself the wooer

thereof.

  636.

  There is, certainly, also an entirely different species of genius, that of

justice; and I cannot make up my mind to estimate it lower than any kind of

philosophical,  political,  or  artistic  genius.  Its  peculiarity  is  to  go,  with

heartfelt  aversion,  out  of  the  way  of  everything  that  blinds  and  confuses

people's judgment of things; it is consequently an adversary of convictions,

for it wants to give their own to all, whether they be living or dead, real or

imaginary—and for that purpose it must know thoroughly; it therefore places

everything in the best light and goes around it with careful eyes. Finally, it

will even give to its adversary the blind or short-sighted "conviction" (as men

call it,—among women it is called "faith"), what is due to conviction—for the

sake of truth.

  637.

  Opinions evolve out of passions; indolence of intellect allows those to

congeal into convictions. He, however, who is conscious of himself as a free,

restless, lively spirit can prevent this congelation by constant change; and if

he is altogether a thinking snowball, he will not have opinions in his head at

all, but only certainties and properly estimated probabilities. But we, who are

of a mixed nature, alternately inspired with ardor and chilled through and

through by the intellect, want to kneel before justice, as the only goddess we

acknowledge. The fire in us generally makes us unjust, and impure in the

eyes of our goddess; in this condition we are not permitted to take her hand,

and the serious smile of her approval never rests upon us. We reverence her

as the veiled Isis of our life; with shame we offer her our pain as penance and

sacrifice when the fire threatens to burn and consume us. It is the intellect

that saves us from being utterly burnt and reduced to ashes; it occasionally

drags us away from the sacrificial altar of justice or enwraps us in a garment

of asbestos. Liberated from the fire, and impelled by the intellect, we then

pass  from  opinion  to  opinion,  through  the  change  of  parties,  as  noble

betrayers of all things that can in any way be betrayed—and nevertheless

without a feeling of guilt.

  638.

  The Wanderer.—He who has attained intellectual emancipation to anyextent cannot, for a long time, regard himself otherwise than as a wanderer on

the face of the earth—and not even as a traveler towards a final goal, for there

is no such thing. But he certainly wants to observe and keep his eyes open to

whatever actually happens in the world; therefore he cannot attach his heart

too  firmly  to  anything  individual;  he  must  have  in  himself  something

wandering that takes pleasure in change and transitoriness. To be sure such a

man will have bad nights, when he is weary and finds the gates of the town

that should offer him rest closed; perhaps he may also find that, as in the

East, the desert reaches to the gates, that wild beasts howl far and near, that a

strong wind arises, and that robbers take away his beasts of burden. Then the

dreadful night closes over him like a second desert upon the desert, and his

heart grows weary of wandering. Then when the morning sun rises upon him,

glowing like a Deity of anger, when the town is opened, he sees perhaps in

the faces of the dwellers therein still more desert, uncleanliness, deceit, and

insecurity than outside the gates—and the day is almost worse than the night.

Thus it may occasionally happen to the wanderer but then there come as

compensation the delightful mornings of other lands and days, when already

in the grey of the dawn he sees the throng of muses dancing by, close to him,

in the mist of the mountain; when afterwards, in the symmetry of his ante-

meridian soul, he strolls silently under the trees, out of whose crests and leafy

hiding-places all manner of good and bright things are flung to him, the gifts

of all the free spirits who are at home in mountains, forests, and solitudes,

and who, like himself, alternately merry and thoughtful, are wanderers and

philosophers. Born of the secrets of the early dawn, they ponder the question

how the day, between the hours of ten and twelve, can have such a pure,

transparent, and gloriously cheerful countenance: they seek the ante-meridian

philosophy.

  AN EPODE. AMONG FRIENDS.

  Nice, when mute we lie a-dreaming,

  Nicer still when we are laughing,

  'Neath the sky heaven's chariot speeding,

  On the moss the book a-reading,

  Sweetly loud with friends all laughing

  Joyous, with white teeth a-gleaming.

  Do I well, we're mute and humble;

  Do I ill—we'll laugh exceeding;

  Make it worse and worse, unheeding,  Worse proceeding, more laughs needing,

  Till into the grave we stumble.

  Friends! Yea! so shall it obtain?

  Amen! Till we meet again.

  II. No excuses need be started!

  Give, ye glad ones, open hearted,

  To this foolish book before you Ear

  and heart and lodging meet;

  Trust me, 'twas not meant to bore you,

  Though of folly I may treat!

  What I find, seek, and am needing,

  Was it e'er in book for reading?

  Honor now fools in my name,

  Learn from out this book by reading

  How "our sense" from reason came.

  Thus, my friends, shall it obtain?

  Amen! Till we meet again.

      HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN FIRST SEQUEL: MIXED OPINIONS

                                  AND MAXIMS

    INTRODUCTION.

  The publication of Human, all-too-Human extends over the period 1878-

1880. Of the two divisions which constitute the Second Part, "Miscellaneous

Maxims  and  Opinions"  appeared  in  1879,  and  "The  Wanderer  and  his

Shadow" in 1880, Nietzsche being then in his thirty-sixth year. The Preface

was added in 1886.

  The whole book forms Nietzsche's first lengthy contribution to literature.

His previous works comprise only the philological treatises, The Birth of

Tragedy, and the essays on Strauss, Schopenhauer, and Wagner in Thoughts

out  of  Season.  With  the  volumes  of  Human,  all-too-Human  Nietzsche

appears  for  the  first  time  in  his  true  colors  as  philosopher.  His  purely

scholarly  publications,  his  essays  in  literary  and  musical  criticism—

especially  the  essay  on  Richard  Wagner  at  Bayreuth—had,  of  course,

foreshadowed his work as a thinker. These efforts, however, had been mere

fragments, from which hardly anyone could observe that a new philosophical

star  had  arisen  on  the  horizon.  But  by  1878  the  period  of  transition  had

definitely  set  in.  Outwardly,  the  new  departure  is  marked  by  Nietzsche's

resignation in that year of his professorship at Bale—a resignation due partlyto ill-health, and partly to his conviction that his was a voice that should

speak  not  merely  to  students  of  philology,  but  to  all  mankind.  Nietzsche

himself characterizes Human, all-too-Human as "the monument of a crisis."

He might as fitly have called it the first-fruits of a new harvest. Now, for the

first time, he practices the form which he was to make so peculiarly his own.

We are told—and we may well believe—that the book came as a surprise

even  to  his  most  intimate  friends.  Wagner  had  already  seen  how  matters

stood  at  the  publication  of  the  first  part,  and  the  gulf  between  the  two

probably widened on the appearance of the Second Part. Several aphorisms

are here, varying in length as in subject, and ranging over the whole human

province—the  emotions  and  aspirations,  the  religions  and  cultures  and

philosophies, the arts and literatures and politics of mankind. Equally varied

is the range of style, the incisive epigram and the passage of pure poetry

jostling each other on the same page. In this curious power of alternating

between cynicism and lyricism, Nietzsche appears as the prose counterpart of

Heine.  One  or  two  of  the  aphorisms  are  of  peculiar  interest  to  English

readers. The essay (as it may almost be called) on Sterne (p. 60, No. 113)

does ample justice, if not more than justice, to that wayward genius. The

allusion to Milton (p. 77, No. 150) will come as somewhat of a shock to

English readers, especially to those who hold that in Milton Art triumphed

over Puritanism. It should be remembered, however, that Nietzsche's view

coincides with Goethe's. The dictum that Shakespeare's gold is to be valued

for its quantity rather than its quality (p. 81, No. 162) also betrays a certain

exclusiveness—a legacy from that eighteenth-century France which appealed

so strongly to Nietzsche on its intellectual side. To Nietzsche, as to Voltaire,

Shakespeare is after all "the great barbarian." The title of the book may be

explained from a phrase in Thus Spake Zarathustra: "Verily, even the greatest

I found—all-too-human." The keynote of these volumes is indeed disillusion

and destruction. Nor is this to be wondered at, for all men must sweep away

the  rubbish  before  they  can  build.  Hence  we  find  here  little  of  the

constructive  philosophy  of  Nietzsche—so  far  as  he  had  a  constructive

philosophy.  The  Superman  appears  but  faintly,  the  doctrine  of  Eternal

Recurrence not at all. For this very reason, Human, all-too-Human is perhaps

the best starting-point for the study of Nietzsche. The difficulties in style and

thought  of  the  later  work—difficulties  that  at  times  become  well-nigh

insuperable in Thus Spake Zarathustra—are here practically absent. The book

may, in fact, almost be described as "popular," bearing the same relation toNietzsche's later productions as Wagner's Tannhäuser and Lohengrin bear to

the Ring. The translator's thanks are due to Mr. Thomas Common for his

careful revision of the manuscript and many valuable suggestions. P. V. C.

    PREFACE.

  1.

  One should only speak where one cannot remain silent, and only speak of

what one has conquered—the rest is all chatter, "literature," bad breeding. My

writings speak only of my conquests, "I" am in them, with all that is hostile to

me,  ego  ipsissimus,  or,  if  a  more  haughty  expression  be  permitted,  ego

ipsissimum. It may be guessed that I have many below me. . . . But first I

always  needed  time,  convalescence,  distance,  separation,  before  I  felt  the

stirrings of a desire to flay, despoil, lay bare, "represent" (or whatever one

likes to call it) for the additional knowledge of the world, something that I

had lived through and outlived, something done or suffered. Hence all my

writings,—with one exception, important, it is true,—must be ante-dated—

they always tell of a "behind-me." Some even, like the first three Thoughts

out  of  Season,  must  be  thrown  back  before  the  period  of  creation  and

experience of a previously published book (The Birth of Tragedy in the case

cited, as anyone with subtle powers of observation and comparison could not

fail to perceive). That wrathful outburst against the Germanism, smugness,

and  raggedness  of  speech  of  old  David  Strauss,  the  contents  of  the  first

Thought out of Season, gave a vent to feelings that had inspired me long

before, as a student, in the midst of German culture and cultured Philistinism

(I claim the paternity of the now much used and misused phrase "cultured

Philistinism"). What I said against the "historical disease" I said as one who

had slowly and laboriously recovered from that disease, and who was not at

all disposed to renounce "history" in the future because he had suffered from

her in the past. When in the third Thought out of Season I gave expression to

my reverence for my first and only teacher, the great Arthur Schopenhauer—I

should now give it a far more personal and emphatic voice—I was for my

part already in the throes of moral skepticism and dissolution, that is, as much

concerned with the criticism as with the study of all pessimism down to the

present day. I already did not believe in "a blessed thing," as the people say,

not even in Schopenhauer. It was at this very period that an unpublished

essay of mine, "On Truth and Falsehood in an Extra-Moral Sense," came into

being. Even my ceremonial oration in honour of Richard Wagner, on the

occasion  of  his  triumphal  celebration  at  Bayreuth  in  1876—Bayreuthsignifies the greatest triumph that an artist has ever won—a work that bears

the  strongest  stamp  of  "individuality,"  was  in  the  background  an  act  of

homage  and  gratitude  to  a  bit  of  the  past  in  me,  to  the  fairest  but  most

perilous calm of my sea-voyage . . . and as a matter of fact a severance and a

farewell. (Was Richard Wagner mistaken on this point? I do not think so. So

long as we still love, we do not paint such pictures, we do not yet "examine,"

we do not place ourselves so far away as is essential for one who "examines."

"Examining needs at least a secret antagonism, that of an opposite point of

view," it is said on page 46 of the above-named work itself, with an insidious,

melancholy application that was perhaps understood by few.) The composure

that gave me the power to speak after many intervening years of solitude and

abstinence, first came with the book, Human, All-too Human, to which this

second preface and apologia [1] is dedicated. As a book for "free spirits" it

shows  some  trace  of  that  almost  cheerful  and  inquisitive  coldness  of  the

psychologist, who has behind him many painful things that he keeps under

him, and moreover establishes them for himself and fixes them firmly as with

a needle-point. Is it to be wondered at that at such sharp, ticklish work blood

flows now and again, that indeed the psychologist has blood on his fingers

and not only on his fingers? [1] "Foreword" and "forword" would be the

literal rendering of the play on words.—Tr.

  2.

  The Miscellaneous Maxims and Opinions were in the first place, like The

Wanderer  and  His  Shadow,  published  separately  as  continuations  and

appendices  to  the  above-mentioned  human,  all-too  human  Book  for  Free

Spirits:  and  at  the  same  time,  as  a  continuation  and  confirmation  of  an

intellectual cure, consisting in a course of anti-romantic self-treatment, such

as my instinct, which had always remained healthy, had itself discovered and

prescribed  against  a  temporary  attack  of  the  most  dangerous  form  of

romantics. After a convalescence of six years I may well be permitted to

collect these same writings and publish them as a second volume of Human,

All-too Human. Perhaps, if surveyed together, they will more clearly and

effectively teach their lesson—a lesson of health that may be recommended

as  a  disciplina  voluntatis  to  the  more  intellectual  natures  of  the  rising

generation. Here speaks a pessimist who has often leaped out of his skin but

has  always  returned  into  it,  thus,  a  pessimist  with  goodwill  towards

pessimism—at all events a romanticist no longer. And has not a pessimist,

who possesses this serpentine knack of changing his skin, the right to read alecture to our pessimists of to-day, who are one and all still in the toils of

romanticism? Or at least to show them how it is—done?

  3.

  It was then, in fact, high time to bid farewell, and I soon received proof.

Richard  Wagner,  who  seemed  all-conquering,  but  was  in  reality  only  a

decayed and despairing romantic, suddenly collapsed, helpless and broken,

before the Christian Cross. . . . Was there not a single German with eyes in

his head and sympathy in his heart for this appalling spectacle? Was I the

only  one  whom  he  caused—suffering?  In  any  case,  the  unexpected  event

illumined for me in one lightning flash the place that I had abandoned; and

also the horror that is felt by everyone who is unconscious of a great danger

until he has passed through it. As I went forward alone, I shuddered, and not

long afterwards I was ill, or rather more than ill—weary: weary from my

ceaseless disappointment about all that remained to make us modern men

enthusiastic, at the thought of the power, work, hope, youth, love, flung to all

the winds: weary from disgust at the effeminacy and undisciplined rhapsody

of this romanticism, at the whole tissue of idealistic lies and softening of

conscience, which here again had won the day over one of the bravest of

men: last, and not least, weary from the bitterness of an inexorable suspicion

—that after this disappointment I was doomed to mistrust more thoroughly,

to despise more thoroughly, to be alone more thoroughly than ever before.

My task—whither had it flown? Did it not look now as if my task were

retreating from me and as if I should for a long future period have no more

right to it? What was I to do to endure this most terrible privation?—I began

by entirely forbidding myself all romantic music, that ambiguous, pompous,

stifling  art,  which  robs  the  mind  of  its  sternness  and  its  joyousness  and

provides a fertile soil for every kind of vague yearning and spongy sensuality.

"Cave musicam" is even to-day my advice to all who are enough of men to

cling  to  purity  in  matters  of  the  intellect.  Such  music  enervates,  softens,

feminizes, its "eternal feminine" draws us—down! [2] My first suspicion, my

most immediate precaution, was directed against romantic music. If I hoped

for anything at all from music, it was in the expectation of the coming of a

musician  bold,  subtle,  malignant,  southern,  healthy  enough  to  take  an

immortal revenge upon that other music. [2] The allusion is to the ending of

the  Second  Part  of  Goethe's  Faust—"das  Ewig  Weibliche  Zieht  uns

hinan!"—"The Eternal Feminine Draweth us on!"—Tr.

  4.  Lonely  now  and  miserably  self-distrustful,  I  took  sides,  not  without

resentment, against myself and for everything that hurt me and was hard to

me. Thus I once more found the way to that courageous pessimism that is the

antithesis of all romantic fraud, and, as it seems to me to-day, the way to

"myself," to my task. That hidden masterful Something, for which we long

have no name until at last it shows itself as our task—that tyrant in us exacts

a terrible price for every attempt that we make to escape him or give him the

slip, for every premature act of self-constraint, for every reconciliation with

those  to  whom  we  do  not  belong,  for  every  activity,  however  reputable,

which turns us aside from our main purpose, yes, even for every virtue that

would fain protect us from the cruelty of our most individual responsibility.

"Disease" is always the answer when we wish to have doubts of our rights to

our own task, when we begin to make it easier for ourselves in any way. How

strange and how terrible! It is our very alleviations for which we have to

make the severest atonement! And if we want to return to health, we have no

choice left—we must load ourselves more heavily than we were ever laden

before.

  5.

  It was then that I learnt the hermitical habit of speech acquired only by

the most silent and suffering. I spoke without witnesses, or rather indifferent

to the presence of witnesses, so as not to suffer from silence, I spoke of

various things that did not concern me in a style that gave the impression that

they did. Then, too, I learnt the art of showing myself cheerful, objective,

inquisitive  in  the  presence  of  all  that  is  healthy  and  evil—is  this,  in  an

invalid, as it seems to me, his "good taste"? Nevertheless, a more subtle eye

and sympathy will not miss what perhaps gives a charm to these writings—

the fact that here speaks one who has suffered and abstained in such a way as

if  he  had  never  suffered  or  abstained.  Here  equipoise,  composure,  even

gratitude  towards  life  shall  be  maintained,  here  rules  a  stern,  proud,  ever

vigilant, ever susceptible will, which has undertaken the task of defending

life against pain and snapping off all conclusions that are wont to grow like

poisonous  fungi  from  pain,  disappointment,  satiety,  isolation  and  other

morasses. Perhaps this gives our pessimists a hint to self-examination? For it

was  then  that  I  hit  upon  the  aphorism,  "a  sufferer  has  as  yet  no  right  to

pessimism," and that I engaged in a tedious, patient campaign against the

unscientific  first  principles  of  all  romantic  pessimism,  which  seeks  to

magnify  and  interpret  individual,  personal  experiences  into  "generaljudgments," universal condemnations—it was then, in short, that I sighted a

new world. Optimism for the sake of restitution, in order at some time to

have  the  right  to  become  a  pessimist—do  you  understand  that?  Just  as  a

physician  transfers  his  patient  to  totally  strange  surroundings,  in  order  to

displace him from his entire "past," his troubles, friends, letters, duties, stupid

mistakes and painful memories, and teaches him to stretch out hands and

senses towards new nourishment, a new sun, a new future: so I, as physician

and invalid in one, forced myself into an utterly different and untried zone of

the  soul,  and  particularly  into  an  absorbing  journey  to  a  strange  land,  a

strange atmosphere, into a curiosity for all that was strange. A long process of

roaming,  seeking,  changing  followed,  a  distaste  for  fixity  of  any  kind—a

dislike for clumsy affirmation and negation: and at the same time a dietary

and discipline which aimed at making it as easy as possible for the soul to fly

high, and above all constantly to fly away. In fact a minimum of life, an

unfettering from all coarser forms of sensuality, an independence in the midst

of all marks of outward disfavor, together with the pride in being able to live

in the midst of all this disfavor: a little cynicism perhaps, a little of the "tub of

Diogenes,"  a  good  deal  of  whimsical  happiness,  whimsical  gaiety,  much

calm, light, subtle folly, hidden enthusiasm—all this produced in the end a

great spiritual strengthening, a growing joy and exuberance of health. Life

itself rewards us for our tenacious will to life, for such a long war as I waged

against the pessimistic weariness of life, even for every observant glance of

our  gratitude,  glances  that  do  not  miss  the  smallest,  most  delicate,  most

fugitive gifts. . . . In the end we receive Life's great gifts, perhaps the greatest

it can bestow—we regain our task.

  6.

  Should my experience—the history of an illness and a convalescence, for

it resulted in a convalescence—be only my personal experience? and merely

just my "Human, All-too-human"? To-day I would "fain believe the reverse,

for I am becoming more and more confident that my books of travel were not

penned for my sole benefit, as appeared for a time to be the case. May I, after

six years of growing assurance, send them once more on a journey for an

experiment?—May I commend them particularly to the ears and hearts of

those who are afflicted with some sort of a "past," and have enough intellect

left  to  suffer  even  intellectually  from  their  past?  But  above  all  would  I

commend them to you whose burden is heaviest, you choice spirits, most

encompassed with perils, most intellectual, most courageous, who must bethe conscience of the modern soul and as such be versed in its science: [3] in

whom is concentrated all of disease, poison or danger that can exist to-day:

whose lot decrees that you must be more sick than any individual because

you are not "mere individuals": whose consolation it is to know and, ah! to

walk the path to a new health, a health of to-morrow and the day after: you

men  of  destiny,  triumphant,  conquerors  of  time,  the  healthiest  and  the

strongest, you good Europeans! [3] It has been attempted to render the play

on "Gewissen" and "Wissen."—Tr.

  7.

  To  express  finally  in  a  single  formula  my  opposition  to  the  romantic

pessimism of the abstinent, the unfortunate, the conquered: there is a will to

the tragic and to pessimism, which is a sign as much of the severity as of the

strength of the intellect (taste, emotion, conscience). With this will in our

hearts  we  do  not  fear,  but  we  investigate  ourselves  the  terrible  and  the

problematical  elements  characteristic  of  all  existence.  Behind  such  a  will

stand courage and pride and the desire for a really great enemy. That was my

pessimistic outlook from the first—a new outlook, methinks, an outlook that

even at this day is new and strange? To this moment I hold to it firmly and (if

it will be believed) not only for myself but occasionally against myself. . . .

You would prefer to have that proved first? Well, what else does all this long

preface—prove? Sils-Maria, Upper Engadine, September,

  1886.

    HUMAN,  ALL-TOO-HUMAN.  MISCELLANEOUS  MAXIMS  AND

OPINIONS.

  1.

  To  the  Disillusioned  in  Philosophy.—If  you  hitherto  believed  in  the

highest  value  of  life  and  now  find  yourselves  disillusioned,  must  you

immediately get rid of life at the lowest possible price?

  2.

    Overnice.—One can even become overnice as regards the clearness of

concepts. How disgusted one is then at having truck with the half-clear, the

hazy, the aspiring, the doubting! How ridiculous and yet not mirth-provoking

is their eternal fluttering and straining without ever being able to fly or to

grasp!

  3.

  The  Wooers  of  Reality.—He  who  realizes  at  last  how  long  and  how

thoroughly  he  has  been  befooled,  embraces  out  of  spite  even  the  ugliestreality. So that in the long run of the world's history the best men have always

been  wooers  of  reality,  for  the  best  have  always  been  longest  and  most

thoroughly deceived.

  4.

  Advance  of  Freethinking.—The  difference  between  past  and  present

freethinking  cannot  better  be  characterized  than  by  that  aphorism  for  the

recognition and expression of which all the fearlessness of the eighteenth

century was needed, and which even then, if measured by our modern view,

sinks into an unconscious naïveté. I mean Voltaire's aphorism, "croyez-moi,

mon ami, l'erreur aussi a son mérite."

  5.

  A  Hereditary  Sin  of  Philosophers.—Philosophers  have  at  all  times

appropriated and corrupted the maxims of censors of men (moralists), by

taking them over without qualification and trying to prove as necessary what

the moralists only meant as a rough indication or as a truth suited to their

fellow-countrymen or fellow-townsmen for a single decade. Moreover, the

philosophers  thought  that  they  were  thereby  raising  themselves  above  the

moralists!  Thus  it  will  be  found  that  the  celebrated  teachings  of

Schopenhauer  as  to  the  supremacy  of  the  will  over  the  intellect,  of  the

immutability of character, the negativity of pleasure—all errors, in the sense

in  which  he  understands  them—rest  upon  principles  of  popular  wisdom

enunciated by the moralists. Take the very word "will," which Schopenhauer

twisted so as to become a common denotation of several human conditions

and with which he filled a gap in the language (to his own great advantage, in

so far as he was a moralist, for he became free to speak of the will as Pascal

had spoken of it). In the hands of its creator, Schopenhauer's "will," through

the philosophic craze for generalization, already turned out to be a bane to

knowledge. For this will was made into a poetic metaphor, when it was held

that all things in nature possess will. Finally, that it might be applied to all

kinds  of  disordered  mysticism,  the  word  was  misused  by  a  fraudulent

convention. So now all our fashionable philosophers repeat it and seem to be

perfectly  certain  that  all  things  have  a  will  and  are  in  fact  One  Will.

According  to  the  description  generally  given  of  this  All-One-Will,  this  is

much as if one should positively try to have the stupid Devil for one's God.

  6.

  Against Visionaries.—The visionary denies the truth to himself, the liar

only to others.  7.

    Enmity to Light.—If we make it clear to anyone that, strictly, he can

never speak of truth, but only of probability and of its degrees, we generally

discover, from the undisguised joy of our pupil, how greatly men prefer the

uncertainty of their intellectual horizon, and how in their heart of hearts they

hate truth because of its definiteness.—Is this due to a secret fear felt by all

that  the  light  of  truth  may  at  some  time  be  turned  too  brightly  upon

themselves? To their wish to be of some consequence, and accordingly their

concealment from the world of what they are? Or is it to be traced to their

horror of the all-too brilliant light, to which their crepuscular, easily dazzled,

bat-like souls are not accustomed, so that hate it they must?

  8.

  Christian Skepticism.—Pilate, with his question, "What is Truth?" is now

gleefully  brought  on  the  scene  as  an  advocate  of  Christ,  in  order  to  cast

suspicion on all that is known or knowable as being mere appearance, and to

erect  the  Cross  on  the  appalling  background  of  the  Impossibility  of

Knowledge.

  9.

  "Natural Law," a Phrase of Superstition.—When you talk so delightedly

of Nature acting according to law, you must either assume that all things in

Nature follow their law from a voluntary obedience imposed by themselves

—in which case you admire the morality of Nature: or you are enchanted

with the idea of a creative mechanician, who has made a most cunning watch

with  human  beings  as  accessory  ornaments.—Necessity,  through  the

expression, "conformity to law," then becomes more human and a coign of

refuge in the last instance for mythological reveries.

  10.

  Fallen Forfeit to History.—All misty philosophers and obscurers of the

world,  in  other  words  all  metaphysicians  of  coarse  or  refined  texture  are

seized with eyeache, earache, and toothache when they begin to suspect that

there is truth in the saying: "All philosophy has from now fallen forfeit to

history." In view of their aches and pains we may pardon them for throwing

stones and filth at him who talks like this, but this teaching may itself thereby

become dirty and disreputable for a time and lose in effect.

  11.

  The Pessimist of the Intellect.—He whose intellect is really free will think

freely about the intellect itself, and will not shut his eyes to certain terribleaspects  of  its  source  and  tendency.  For  this  reason  others  will  perhaps

designate  him  the  bitterest  opponent  of  free  thought  and  give  him  that

dreadful, abusive name of "pessimist of the intellect": accustomed as they are

to typify a man not by his strong point, his pre-eminent virtue, but by the

quality that is most foreign to his nature.

  12.

  The  Metaphysicians'  Knapsack.—To  all  who  talk  so  boastfully  of  the

scientific basis of their metaphysics it is best to make no reply. It is enough to

tug at the bundle that they rather shyly keep hidden behind their backs. If one

succeeds in lifting it, the results of that "scientific basis" come to light, to

their great confusion: a dear little "God," a genteel immortality, perhaps a

little spiritualism, and in any case a complicated mass of poor-sinners'-misery

and pharisee-arrogance.

  13.

    Occasional  Harmfulness  of  Knowledge.—The  utility  involved  in  the

unchecked investigation of knowledge is so constantly proved in a hundred

different ways that one must remember to include in the bargain the subtler

and rarer damage which individuals must suffer on that account. The chemist

cannot avoid occasionally being poisoned or burnt at his experiments. What

applies to the chemist, is true of the whole of our culture. This, it may be

added,  clearly  shows  that  knowledge  should  provide  itself  with  healing

balsam against burns and should always have antidotes ready against poisons.

  14.

  The Craving of the Philistine.—The Philistine thinks that his most urgent

need is a purple patch or turban of metaphysics, nor will he let it slip. Yet he

would look less ridiculous without this adornment.

  15.

    Enthusiasts.—With all that enthusiasts say in favor of their gospel or their

master  they  are  defending  themselves,  however  much  they  comport

themselves as the judges and not the accused; because they are involuntarily

reminded almost at every moment that they are exceptions and have to assert

their legitimacy.

  16.

  The Good Seduces to Life.—All good things, even all good books that

are written against life, are strong means of attraction to life.

  17.

  The  Happiness  of  the  Historian.—"When  we  hear  the  hair-splittingmetaphysicians and prophets of the after-world speak, we others feel indeed

that  we  are  the  'poor  in  spirit,'  but  that  ours  is  the  heavenly  kingdom  of

change, with spring and autumn, summer and winter, and theirs the after-

world, with its grey, everlasting frosts and shadows." Thus soliloquized a

man as he walked in the morning sunshine, a man who in his pursuit of

history has constantly changed not only his mind but his heart. In contrast to

the metaphysicians, he is happy to harbour in himself not an "immortal soul"

but many mortal souls.

  18.

  Three  Varieties  of  Thinkers.—There  are  streaming,  flowing,  trickling

mineral springs, and three corresponding varieties of thinkers. The layman

values them by the volume of the water, the expert by the contents of the

water—in other words, by the elements in them that are not water.

  19.

  The Picture of Life.—The task of painting the picture of life, often as it

has been attempted by poets and philosophers, is nevertheless irrational. Even

in the hands of the greatest artist-thinkers, pictures and miniatures of one life

only—their  own—have  come  into  being,  and  indeed  no  other  result  is

possible. While in the process of developing, a thing that develops, cannot

mirror itself as fixed and permanent, as a definite object.

  20.

  Truth will have no Gods before it.—The belief in truth begins with the

doubt of all truths in which one has previously believed.

  21.

  Where Silence is Required.—If we speak of freethinking as of a highly

dangerous journey over glaciers and frozen seas, we find that those who do

not care to travel on this track are offended, as if they had been reproached

with cowardice and weak knees. The difficult, which we find to be beyond

our powers, must not even be mentioned in our presence.

  22.

  Historia in Nuce.—The most serious parody I ever heard was this: "In the

beginning  was  the  nonsense,  and  the  nonsense  was  with  God,  and  the

nonsense was God." [4] [4] Cf. John i. I.—Tr.

  23.

    Incurable.—The  idealist  is  incorrigible:  if  he  be  thrown  out  of  his

Heaven, he makes himself a suitable ideal out of Hell. Disillusion him, and

lo!  he  will  embrace  disillusionment  with  no  less  ardour  than  he  recentlyembraced  hope.  In  so  far  as  his  impulse  belongs  to  the  great  incurable

impulses  of  human  nature,  he  can  bring  about  tragic  destinies  and  later

become a subject for tragedy himself, for such tragedies as deal with the

incurable, implacable, inevitable in the lot and character of man.

  24.

    Applause Itself as the Continuation of the Play.—Sparkling eyes and an

amiable smile are the tributes of applause paid to all the great comedy of

world and existence—but this applause is a comedy within a comedy, meant

to tempt the other spectators to a plaudite amici.

  25.

  Courage for Tedium.—He who has not the courage to allow himself and

his work to be considered tedious, is certainly no intellect of the first rank,

whether in the arts or in the sciences.—A scoffer, who happened for once in a

way to be a thinker, might add, with a glance at the world and at history:

"God did not possess this courage, for he wanted to make and he made all

things so interesting."

  26.

  From the Most Intimate Experience of the Thinker.—Nothing is harder

for a man than to conceive of an object impersonally, I mean to see in it an

object and not a person. One may even ask whether it is possible for him to

dispense for a single moment with the machinery of his instinct to create and

construct a personality. After all, he associates with his thoughts, however

abstract they may be, as with individuals, against whom he must fight or to

whom he must attach himself, whom he must protect, support and nourish.

Let us watch or listen to ourselves at the moment when we hear or discover a

new idea. Perhaps it displeases us because it is so defiant and so autocratic,

and we unconsciously ask ourselves whether we cannot place a contradiction

of it by its side as an enemy, or fasten on to it a "perhaps" or a "sometimes":

the  mere  little  word  "probably"  gives  us  a  feeling  of  satisfaction,  for  it

shatters the oppressive tyranny of the unconditional. If, on the other hand, the

new idea enters in gentle shape, sweetly patient and humble, and falling at

once  into  the  arms  of  contradiction,  we  put  our  autocracy  to  the  test  in

another way. Can we not come to the aid of this weak creature, stroke it and

feed it, give it strength and fullness, and truth and even unconditionality? Is it

possible for us to show ourselves parental or chivalrous or compassionate

towards  our  idea?—Then  again,  we  see  here  a  judgment  and  there  a

judgment,  sundered  from  each  other,  never  looking  at  or  making  anymovement towards each other. So we are tickled by the thought, whether it be

not here feasible to make a match, to draw a conclusion, with the anticipation

that if a consequence follows this conclusion it is not only the two judgments

united in wedlock but the matchmakers that will gain honour. If, however, we

cannot acquire a hold upon that thought either on the path of defiance and ill-

will or on that of good-will (if we hold it to be true)—then we submit to it

and do homage to it as a leader and a prince, give it a chair of honour, and

speak  not  of  it  without  a  flourish  of  trumpets:  for  we  are  bright  in  its

brightness.  Woe  to  him  who  tries  to  dim  this  brightness!  Perhaps  we

ourselves one day grow suspicious of our idea. Then we, the indefatigable

"king-makers" of the history of the intellect, cast it down from its throne and

immediately exalt its adversary. Surely if this be considered and thought out a

little further, no one will speak of an "absolute impulse to knowledge"! Why,

then,  does  man  prefer  the  true  to  the  untrue,  in  this  secret  combat  with

thought-personalities, in this generally clandestine match-making of thoughts,

constitution-founding  of  thoughts,  child-rearing  of  thoughts,  nursing  and

almsgiving of thoughts? For the same reason that he practices honesty in

intercourse  with  real  persons:  now  from  habit,  heredity,  and  training,

originally because the true, like the fair and the just, is more expedient and

more reputable than the untrue. For in the realm of thought it is difficult to

assume a power and glory that are built on error or on falsehood. The feeling

that such an edifice might at some time collapse is humiliating to the self-

esteem of the architect—he is ashamed of the fragility of the material, and, as

he considers himself more important than the rest of the world, he would fain

construct nothing that is less durable than the rest of the world. In his longing

for truth he embraces the belief in a personal immortality, the most arrogant

and defiant idea that exists, closely allied as it is to the underlying thought,

pereat mundus, dum ego salvus sim! His work has become his "ego," he

transforms himself into the Imperishable with its universal challenge. It is his

immeasurable pride that will only employ the best and hardest stones for the

work—truths, or what he holds for such. Arrogance has always been justly

called the "vice of the sage"; yet without this vice, fruitful in impulses. Truth

and her status on earth would be in a parlous plight. In our propensity to fear

our  thoughts,  concepts  and  words,  and  yet  to  honour  ourselves  in  them,

unconsciously to ascribe to them the power of rewarding, despising, praising,

and  blaming  us,  and  so  to  associate  with  them  as  with  free  intellectual

personalities, as with independent powers, as with our equals—herein lie theroots  of  the  remarkable  phenomenon  which  I  have  called  "intellectual

conscience." Thus something of the highest moral species has bloomed from

a black root.

  27.

  The  Obscurantists.—The  essential  feature  of  the  black  art  of

obscurantism  is  not  its  intention  of  clouding  the  brain,  but  its  attempt  to

darken  the  picture  of  the  world  and  cloud  our  idea  of  existence.  It  often

employs the method of thwarting all illumination of the intellect, but at times

it uses the very opposite means, seeking by the highest refinement of the

intellect  to  induce  a  satiety  of  the  intellect's  fruits.  Hair-splitting

metaphysicians,  who  pave  the  way  for  skepticism  and  by  their  excessive

acumen provoke a distrust of acumen, are excellent instruments of the more

subtle form of obscurantism.—Is it possible that even Kant may be applied to

this purpose? Did he even intend something of the sort, for a time at least, to

judge  from  his  own  notorious  exposition:  "to  clear  the  way  for  belief  by

setting limitations to knowledge"?—Certainly he did not succeed, nor did his

followers, on the wolf and fox tracks of this highly refined and dangerous

form  of  obscurantism—the  most  dangerous  of  all,  for  the  black  art  here

appears in the garb of light.

  28.

  By what Kind of Philosophy Art is Corrupted.—When the mists of a

metaphysical-mystical  philosophy  succeed  in  making  all  aesthetic

phenomena opaque, it follows that these phenomena cannot be comparatively

valued, inasmuch as each becomes individually inexplicable. But when once

they  cannot  be  compared  for  the  sake  of  valuation,  there  arises  an  entire

absence-of-criticism, a blind indulgence. From this source springs a continual

diminution of the enjoyment of art (which is only distinguished from the

crude  satisfaction  of  a  need  by  the  highest  refinement  of  taste  and

appreciation). The more taste diminishes, the more does the desire for art

change and revert to a vulgar hunger, which the artist henceforth seeks to

appease by ever coarser fare.

  29.

  On Gethsemane.—The most painful thing a thinker can say to artists is:

"Could ye not watch with me one hour?"

  30.

  At the Loom.—There are many (artists and women, for instance) who

work against the few that take a pleasure in untying the knot of things andunraveling their wool. The former always want to weave the wool together

again and entangle it and so turn the conceived into the unconceived and if

possible  inconceivable.  Whatever  the  result  may  be,  the  wool  and  knot

always look rather untidy, because too many hands are working and tugging

at them.

  31.

  In the Desert of Science.—As the man of science proceeds on his modest

and toilsome wanderings, which must often enough be journeys in the desert,

he is confronted with those brilliant mirages known as "philosophic systems."

With magic powers of deception they show him that the solution of all riddles

and the most refreshing draught of true water of life are close at hand. His

weary heart rejoices, and he well-nigh touches with his lips the goal of all

scientific endurance and hardship, so that almost unconsciously he presses

forward. Other natures stand still, as if spellbound by the beautiful illusion:

the desert swallows them up, they become lost to science. Other natures,

again, that have often experienced these subjective consolations, become very

disheartened and curse the salty taste which these mirages leave behind in the

mouth and from which springs a raging thirst—without one's having come

one step nearer to any sort of a spring.

  32.

  The  So-called  "Real  Reality."—When  the  poet  depicts  the  various

callings—such as those of the warrior, the silk-weaver, the sailor—he feigns

to know all these things thoroughly, to be an expert. Even in the exposition of

human  actions  and  destinies  he  behaves  as  if  he  had  been  present  at  the

spinning  of  the  whole  web  of  existence.  In  so  far  he  is  an  impostor.  He

practices his frauds on pure ignoramuses, and that is why he succeeds. They

praise him for his deep, genuine knowledge, and lead him finally into the

delusion that he really knows as much as the individual experts and creators,

yes, even as the great world-spinners themselves. In the end, the impostor

becomes honest, and actually believes in his own sincerity. Emotional people

say to his very face that he has the "higher" truth and sincerity—for they are

weary of reality for the time being, and accept the poetic dream as a pleasant

relaxation and a night's rest for head and heart. The visions of the dream now

appear to them of more value, because, as has been said, they find them more

beneficial,  and  mankind  has  always  held  that  what  is  apparently  of  more

value is more true, more real. All that is generally called reality, the poets,

conscious of this power, proceed with intention to disparage and to distortinto the uncertain, the illusory, the spurious, the impure, the sinful, sorrowful,

and deceitful. They make use of all doubts about the limits of knowledge, of

all skeptical excesses, in order to spread over everything the rumpled veil of

uncertainty. For they desire that when this darkening process is complete

their wizardry and soul-magic may be accepted without hesitation as the path

to "true truth" and "real reality."

  33.

  The Wish to be Just and the Wish to be a Judge.—Schopenhauer, whose

profound understanding of what is human and all-too-human and original

sense for facts was not a little impaired by the bright leopard-skin of his

metaphysic (the skin must first be pulled off him if one wants to find the real

moralist genius beneath)—Schopenhauer makes this admirable distinction,

wherein he comes far nearer the mark than he would himself dare to admit:

"Insight into the stern necessity of human actions is the boundary line that

divides philosophic from other brains." He worked against that wonderful

insight of which he was sometimes capable by the prejudice that he had in

common with the moral man (not the moralist), a prejudice that he expresses

quite guilelessly and devoutly as follows: "The ultimate and true explanation

of  the  inner  being  of  the  entirety  of  things  must  of  necessity  be  closely

connected with that about the ethical significance of human actions." This

connection is not "necessary" at all: such a connection must rather be rejected

by  that  principle  of  the  stern  necessity  of  human  actions,  that  is,  the

unconditioned non-freedom and non-responsibility of the will. Philosophic

brains will accordingly be distinguished from others by their disbelief in the

metaphysical  significance  of  morality.  This  must  create  between  the  two

kinds of brain a gulf of a depth and unbridgeableness of which the much-

deplored  gulf  between  "cultured"  and  "uncultured"  scarcely  gives  a

conception. It is true that many back doors, which the "philosophic brains,"

like Schopenhauer's own, have left for themselves, must be recognized as

useless. None leads into the open, into the fresh air of the free will, but every

door through which people had slipped hitherto showed behind it once more

the gleaming brass wall of fate. For we are in a prison, and can only dream of

freedom, not make ourselves free. That the recognition of this fact cannot be

resisted much longer is shown by the despairing and incredible postures and

grimaces of those who still press against it and continue their wrestling-bout

with  it.  Their  attitude  at  present  is  something  like  this:  "So  no  one  is

responsible for his actions? And all is full of guilt and the consciousness ofguilt?  But  someone  must  be  the  sinner.  If  it  is  no  longer  possible  or

permissible to accuse and sentence the individual, the one poor wave in the

inevitable rough-and-tumble of the waves of development—well, then, let

this stormy sea, this development itself, be the sinner. Here is free will: this

totality can be accused and sentenced, can atone and expiate. So let God be

the sinner and man his redeemer. Let the world's history be guilt, expiation,

and  self-murder.  Let  the  evil-doer  be  his  own  judge,  the  judge  his  own

hangman." This Christianity strained to its limits—for what else is it?—is the

last  thrust  in  the  fencing-match  between  the  teaching  of  unconditioned

morality and the teaching of unconditioned non-freedom. It would be quite

horrible if it were anything more than a logical pose, a hideous grimace of the

underlying thought, perhaps the death-convulsion of the heart that seeks a

remedy in its despair, the heart to which delirium whispers: "Behold, thou art

the lamb which taketh away the sin of God." This error lies not only in the

feeling," I am responsible," but just as much in the contradiction, "I am not

responsible,  but  someone  must  be."  That  is  simply  not  true.  Hence  the

philosopher  must  say,  like  Christ,  "Judge  not,"  and  the  final  distinction

between the philosophic brains and the others would be that the former wish

to be just and the latter wish to be judges.

  34.

    Sacrifice.—You hold that sacrifice is the hallmark of moral action?—Just

consider whether in every action that is done with deliberation, in the best as

in the worst, there be not a sacrifice.

  35.

  Against the "Triers of the Reins" of Morality.—One must know the best

and the worst that a man is capable of in theory and in practice before one can

judge how strong his moral nature is and can be. But this is an experiment

that one can never carry out.

  36.

    Serpent's Tooth.—Whether we have a serpent's tooth or not we cannot

know before someone has set his heel upon our necks. A wife or a mother

could say: until someone has put his heel upon the neck of our darling, our

child.—Our  character  is  determined  more  by  the  absence  of  certain

experiences than by the experiences we have undergone.

  37.

  Deception in Love.—We forget and purposely banish from our minds a

good deal of our past. In other words, we wish our picture, that beams at usfrom the past, to belie us, to flatter our vanity—we are constantly engaged in

this self-deception. And you who talk and boast so much of "self-oblivion in

love," of the "absorption of the ego in the other person"—you hold that this is

something different? So you break the mirror, throw yourselves into another

personality that you admire, and enjoy the new portrait of your ego, though

calling it by the other person's name—and this whole proceeding is not to be

thought self-deception, self-seeking, you marvellous beings?—It seems to me

that those who hide something of themselves from themselves, or hide their

whole selves from themselves, are alike committing a theft from the treasury

of knowledge. It is clear, then, against what transgression the maxim "Know

thyself" is a warning.

  38.

  To the Denier of his Vanity.—He who denies his own vanity usually

possesses it in so brutal a form that he instinctively shuts his eyes to avoid the

necessity of despising himself

  39.

  Why the Stupid so often Become Malignant.—To those arguments of our

adversary  against  which  our  head  feels  too  weak  our  heart  replies  by

throwing suspicion on the motives of his arguments.

  40.

  The Art of Moral Exceptions.—An art that points out and glorifies the

exceptional cases of morality—where the good becomes bad and the unjust

just—should  rarely  be  given  a  hearing:  just  as  now  and  again  we  buy

something from gypsies, with the fear that they are diverting to their own

pockets much more than their mere profit from the purchase.

  41.

    Enjoyment and Non-enjoyment of Poisons.—The only decisive argument

that has always deterred men from drinking a poison is not that it is deadly,

but that it has an unpleasant taste.

  42.

  The World without Consciousness of Sin.—If men only committed such

deeds as do not give rise to a bad conscience, the human world would still

look bad and rascally enough, but not so sickly and pitiable as at present.—

Enough wicked men without conscience have existed at all times, and many

good honest folk lack the feeling of pleasure in a good conscience.

  43.

  The  Conscientious.—It  is  more  convenient  to  follow  one's  consciencethan one's intelligence, for at every failure conscience finds an excuse and an

encouragement in itself. That is why there are so many conscientious and so

few intelligent people.

  44.

    Opposite  Means  of  Avoiding  Bitterness.—One  temperament  finds  it

useful to be able to give vent to its disgust in words, being made sweeter by

speech. Another reaches its full bitterness only by speaking out: it is more

advisable for it to have to gulp down something—the restraint that men of

this stamp place upon themselves in the presence of enemies and superiors

improves their character and prevents it from becoming too acrid and sour.

  45.

  Not to be Too Dejected.—To get bed-sores is unpleasant, but no proof

against the merits of the cure that prescribes that you should take to your bed.

Men  who  have  long  lived  outside  themselves,  and  have  at  last  devoted

themselves to the inward philosophic life, know that one can also get sores of

character and intellect. This, again, is on the whole no argument against the

chosen  way  of  life,  but  necessitates  a  few  small  exceptions  and  apparent

relapses.

  46.

  The  Human  "Thing  in  Itself."—The  most  vulnerable  and  yet  most

unconquerable of things is human vanity: nay, through being wounded its

strength increases and can grow to giant proportions.

  47.

  The Farce of Many Industrious Persons.—By an excess of effort they win

leisure for themselves, and then they can do nothing with it but count the

hours until the tale is ended.

  48.

  The Possession of Joy Abounding.—He that has joy abounding must be a

good  man,  but  perhaps  he  is  not  the  cleverest  of  men,  although  he  has

reached the very goal towards which the cleverest man is striving with all his

cleverness.

  49.

  In the Mirror of Nature.—Is not a man fairly well described, when we are

told that he likes to walk between tall fields of golden corn: that he prefers

the forest and flower colors of sere and chilly autumn to all others, because

they point to something more beautiful than Nature has ever attained: that he

feels as much at home under big broad-leaved walnut trees as among hisnearest kinsfolk: that in the mountains his greatest joy is to come across those

tiny distant lakes from which the very eyes of solitude seem to peer at him:

that  he  loves  that  grey  calm  of  the  misty  twilight  that  steals  along  the

windows  on  autumn  and  early  winter  evenings  and  shuts  out  all  soulless

sounds as with velvet curtains: that in unhewn stones he recognizes the last

remaining traces of the primeval age, eager for speech, and honours them

from childhood upwards: that, lastly, the sea with its shifting serpent skin and

wild-beast beauty is, and remains to him, unfamiliar?—Yes, something of the

man is described herewith, but the mirror of Nature does not say that the

same man, with (and not even "in spite of") all his idyllic sensibilities, might

be disagreeable, stingy, and conceited. Horace, who was a good judge of such

matters, in his famous beatus ille qui procul negotiis puts the tenderest feeling

for country life into the mouth of a Roman money-lender.

  50.

  Power without Victory.—The strongest cognition (that of the complete

non-freedom of the human will) is yet the poorest in results, for it has always

had the mightiest of opponents—human vanity.

  51.

  Pleasure and Error.—A beneficial influence on friends is exerted by one

man  unconsciously,  through  his  nature;  by  another  consciously,  through

isolated actions. Although the former nature is held to be the higher, the latter

alone is allied to good conscience and pleasure—the pleasure in justification

by good works, which rests upon a belief in the volitional character of our

good and evil doing—that is to say, upon a mistake.

  52.

  The  Folly  of  Committing  Injustice.—The  injustice  we  have  inflicted

ourselves is far harder to bear than the injustice inflicted upon us by others

(not always from moral grounds, be it observed). After all, the doer is always

the sufferer—that is, if he be capable of feeling the sting of conscience or of

perceiving that by his action he has armed society against himself and cut

himself off. For this reason we should beware still more of doing than of

suffering injustice, for the sake of our own inward happiness so as not to lose

our feeling of well-being—quite apart from any consideration of the precepts

of religion and morality. For in suffering injustice we have the consolation of

a good conscience, of hope and of revenge, together with the sympathy and

applause of the just, nay of the whole of society, which is afraid of the evil-

doer. Not a few are skilled in the impure self-deception that enables them totransform every injustice of their own into an injustice inflicted upon them

from without, and to reserve for their own acts the exceptional right to the

plea of self-defence. Their object, of course, is to make their own burden

lighter.

  53.

  Envy with or without a Mouthpiece.—Ordinary envy is wont to cackle

when the envied hen has laid an egg, thereby relieving itself and becoming

milder. But there is a yet deeper envy that in such a case becomes dead silent,

desiring that every mouth should be sealed and always more and more angry

because this desire is not gratified. Silent envy grows in silence.

  54.

  Anger as a Spy.—Anger exhausts the soul and brings its very dregs to

light.  Hence,  if  we  know  no  other  means  of  gaining  certainty,  we  must

understand how to arouse anger in our dependents and adversaries, in order to

learn what is really done and thought to our detriment.

  55.

  Defence Morally more Difficult than Attack.—The true heroic deed and

masterpiece  of  the  good  man  does  not  lie  in  attacking  opinions  and

continuing to love their propounders, but in the far harder task of defending

his own position without causing or intending to cause bitter heartburns to his

opponent. The sword of attack is honest and broad, the sword of defence

usually runs out to a needle point.

  56.

  Honest towards Honesty.—One who is openly honest towards himself

ends by being rather conceited about this honesty. He knows only too well

why he is honest—for the same reason that another man prefers outward

show and hypocrisy.

  57.

  Coals of Fire.—The heaping of coals of fire on another's head is generally

misunderstood and falls flat, because the other knows himself to be just as

much in the right, and on his side too has thought of collecting coals.

  58.

  Dangerous Books.—A man says: "Judging from my own case, I find that

this book is harmful." Let him but wait, and perhaps one day he will confess

that the book did him a great service by thrusting forward and bringing to

light the hidden disease of his soul.—Altered opinions alter not at all (or very

little) the character of a man: but they illuminate individual facets of hispersonality,  which  hitherto,  in  another  constellation  of  opinions,  had

remained dark and unrecognizable.

  59.

    Simulated  Pity.—We  simulate  pity  when  we  wish  to  show  ourselves

superior to the feeling of animosity, but generally in vain. This point is not

noticed without a considerable enhancement of that feeling of animosity.

  60.

  Open  Contradiction  often  Conciliatory.—At  the  moment  when  a  man

openly  makes  known  his  difference  of  opinion  from  a  well-known  party

leader,  the  whole  world  thinks  that  he  must  be  angry  with  the  latter.

Sometimes, however, he is just on the point of ceasing to be angry with him.

He ventures to put himself on the same plane as his opponent, and is free

from the tortures of suppressed envy.

  61.

  Seeing our Light Shining.—In the darkest hour of depression, sickness,

and guilt, we are still glad to see others taking a light from us and making use

of us as of the disk of the moon. By this roundabout route we derive some

light from our own illuminating faculty.

  62.

    Fellowship in Joy. [5]—The snake that stings us means to hurt us and

rejoices in so doing: the lowest animal can picture to itself the pain of others.

But to picture to oneself the joy of others and to rejoice thereat is the highest

privilege of the highest animals, and again, amongst them, is the property

only of the most select specimens—accordingly a rare "human thing." Hence

there have been philosophers who denied fellowship in joy. [5] The German

word Mitfreude, coined by Nietzsche in opposition to Mitleid (sympathy), is

untranslatable.—Tr.

  63.

    Supplementary Pregnancy.—Those who have arrived at works and deeds

are in an obscure way, they know not how, all the more pregnant with them,

as if to prove supplementarily that these are their children and not those of

chance.

  64.

    Hard-hearted  from  Vanity.—Just  as  justice  is  so  often  a  cloak  for

weakness, so men who are fairly intelligent, but weak, sometimes attempt

dissimulation from ambitious motives and purposely show themselves unjust

and hard, in order to leave behind them the impression of strength.  65.

    Humiliation.—If  in  a  large  sack  of  profit  we  find  a  single  grain  of

humiliation we still make a wry face even at our good luck.

  66.

  Extreme Herostratism. [6]—There might be Herostratuses who set fire to

their own temple, in which their images are honoured. [6] Herostratus of

Ephesus (in

  356 B.C.) set fire to the temple of Diana in order (as he confessed on the

rack) to gain notoriety.—Tr.

  67.

  A World of Diminutives.—The fact that all that is weak and in need of

help appeals to the heart induces in us the habit of designating by diminutive

and softening terms all that appeals to our hearts—and accordingly making

such things weak and clinging to our imaginations.

  68.

  The  Bad  Characteristic  of  Sympathy.—Sympathy  has  a  peculiar

impudence for its companion. For, wishing to help at all costs, sympathy is in

no perplexity either as to the means of assistance or as to the nature and cause

of  the  disease,  and  goes  on  courageously  administering  all  its  quack

medicines to restore the health and reputation of the patient.

  69.

    Importunacy.—There is even an importunacy in relation to works, and

the act of associating oneself from early youth on an intimate footing with the

illustrious works of all times evinces an entire absence of shame.—Others are

only importunate from ignorance, not knowing with whom they have to do—

for instance classical scholars young and old in relation to the works of the

Greeks.

  70.

  The  Will  is  Ashamed  of  the  Intellect.—In  all  coolness  we  make

reasonable plans against our passions. But we make the most serious mistake

in this connection in being often ashamed, when the design has to be carried

out, of the coolness and calculation with which we conceived it. So we do

just the unreasonable thing, from that sort of defiant magnanimity that every

passion involves.

  71.

  Why the Skeptics Offend Morality.—He who takes his morality solemnly

and seriously is enraged against the skeptics in the domain of morals. Forwhere  he  lavishes  all  his  force,  he  wishes  others  to  marvel  but  not  to

investigate and doubt. Then there are natures whose last shred of morality is

just the belief in morals. They behave in the same way towards skeptics, if

possible still more passionately.

  72.

    Shyness.—All moralists are shy, because they know they are confounded

with spies and traitors, so soon as their penchant is noticed. Besides, they are

generally conscious of being impotent in action, for in the midst of work the

motives of their activity almost withdraw their attention from the work.

  73.

  A Danger to Universal Morality.—People who are at the same time noble

and honest come to deify every devilry that brings out their honesty, and to

suspend for a time the balance of their moral judgment.

  74.

  The Saddest Error.—It is an unpardonable offence when one discovers

that  where  one  was  convinced  of  being  loved,  one  is  only  regarded  as  a

household utensil and decoration, whereby the master of the house can find

an outlet for his vanity before his guests.

  75.

  Love and Duality.—What else is love but understanding and rejoicing

that  another  lives,  works,  and  feels  in  a  different  and  opposite  way  to

ourselves? That love may be able to bridge over the contrasts by joys, we

must  not  remove  or  deny  those  contrasts.  Even  self-love  presupposes  an

irreconcilable duality (or plurality) in one person.

  76.

  Signs  from  Dreams.—What  one  sometimes  does  not  know  and  feel

accurately in waking hours—whether one has a good or a bad conscience as

regards some person—is revealed completely and unambiguously by dreams.

  77.

    Debauchery.—Not joy but joylessness is the mother of debauchery.

  78.

  Reward and Punishment.—No one accuses without an underlying notion

of punishment and revenge, even when he accuses his fate or himself. All

complaint is accusation, all self-congratulation is praise. Whether we do one

or the other, we always make someone responsible.

  79.

  Doubly  Unjust.—We  sometimes  advance  truth  by  a  twofold  injustice:when we see and represent consecutively the two sides of a case which we

are not in a position to see together, but in such a way that every time we

mistake or deny the other side, fancying that what we see is the whole truth.

  80.

    Mistrust.—Self-mistrust does not always proceed uncertainly and shyly,

but sometimes in a furious rage, having worked itself into a frenzy in order

not to tremble.

  81.

  Philosophy of Parvenus.—If you want to be a personality you must even

hold your shadow in honour.

  82.

    Knowing how to Wash Oneself Clean.—We must know how to emerge

cleaner from unclean conditions, and, if necessary, how to wash ourselves

even with dirty water.

  83.

  Letting Yourself Go.—The more you let yourself go, the less others let

you go.

  84.

  The Innocent Rogue.—There is a slow, gradual path to vice and rascality

of every description. In the end, the traveller is quite abandoned by the insect-

swarms of a bad conscience, and although a thorough scoundrel he walks in

innocence.

  85.

  Making  Plans.—Making  plans  and  conceiving  projects  involves  many

agreeable sentiments. He that had the strength to be nothing but a contriver of

plans all his life would be a happy man. But one must occasionally have a

rest  from  this  activity  by  carrying  a  plan  into  execution,  and  then  comes

anger and sobriety.

  86.

    Wherewith We See the Ideal.—Every efficient man is blocked by his

efficiency  and  cannot  look  out  freely  from  its  prison.  Had  he  not  also  a

goodly share of imperfection, he could, by reason of his virtue, never arrive

at  an  intellectual  or  moral  freedom.  Our  shortcomings  are  the  eyes  with

which we see the ideal.

  87.

    Dishonest  Praise.—Dishonest  praise  causes  many  more  twinges  of

conscience than dishonest blame, probably only because we have exposedour capacity for judgment far more completely through excessive praise than

through excessive and unjust blame.

  88.

  How One Dies is Indifferent.—The whole way in which a man thinks of

death  during  the  prime  of  his  life  and  strength  is  very  expressive  and

significant for what we call his character. But the hour of death itself, his

behaviour on the death-bed, is almost indifferent. The exhaustion of waning

life, especially when old people die, the irregular or insufficient nourishment

of the brain during this last period, the occasionally violent pain, the novel

and untried nature of the whole position, and only too often the ebb and flow

of superstitious impressions and fears, as if dying were of much consequence

and meant the crossing of bridges of the most terrible kind—all this forbids

our using death as a testimony concerning the living. Nor is it true that the

dying man is generally more honest than the living. On the contrary, through

the solemn attitude of the bystanders, the repressed or flowing streams of

tears  and  emotions,  everyone  is  inveigled  into  a  comedy  of  vanity,  now

conscious, now unconscious. The serious way in which every dying man is

treated must have been to many a poor despised devil the highest joy of his

whole life and a sort of compensation and repayment for many privations.

  89.

  Morality and its Sacrifice.—The origin of morality may be traced to two

ideas:  "The  community  is  of  more  value  than  the  individual,"  and  "The

permanent interest is to be preferred to the temporary." The conclusion drawn

is that the permanent interest of the community is unconditionally to be set

above  the  temporary  interest  of  the  individual,  especially  his  momentary

well-being, but also his permanent interest and even the prolongation of his

existence.  Even  if  the  individual  suffers  by  an  arrangement  that  suits  the

mass, even if he is depressed and ruined by it, morality must be maintained

and  the  victim  brought  to  the  sacrifice.  Such  a  trend  of  thought  arises,

however, only in those who are not the victims—for in the victim's case it

enforces the claim that the individual might be worth more than the many,

and that the present enjoyment, the "moment in paradise," [7] should perhaps

be  rated  higher  than  a  tame  succession  of  untroubled  or  comfortable

circumstances. But the philosophy of the sacrificial victim always finds voice

too late, and so victory remains with morals and morality: which are really

nothing more than the sentiment for the whole concept of morals under which

one  lives  and  has  been  reared—and  reared  not  as  an  individual  but  as  amember of the whole, as a cipher in a majority. Hence it constantly happens

that the individual makes himself into a majority by means of his morality.

[7] Quotation from Schiller, Don Carlos, i.

  5.

  —Tr.

  90.

  The Good and the Good Conscience.—You hold that all good things have

at all times had a good conscience? Science, which is certainly a very good

thing, has come into the world without such a conscience and quite free from

all pathos, rather clandestinely, by roundabout ways, walking with shrouded

or masked face like a sinner, and always with the feeling at least of being a

smuggler. Good conscience has bad conscience for its stepping-stone, not for

its opposite. For all that is good has at one time been new and consequently

strange, against morals, immoral, and has gnawed like a worm at the heart of

the fortunate discoverer.

  91.

  Success Sanctifies the Intentions.—We should not shrink from treading

the road to a virtue, even when we see clearly that nothing but egotism, and

accordingly  utility,  personal  comfort,  fear,  considerations  of  health,

reputation,  or  glory,  are  the  impelling  motives.  These  motives  are  styled

ignoble and selfish. Very well, but if they stimulate us to some virtue—for

example, self-denial, dutifulness, order, thrift, measure, and moderation—let

us listen to them, whatever their epithets may be! For if we reach the goal to

which they summon us, then the virtue we have attained, by means of the

pure air it makes us breathe and the spiritual well-being it communicates,

ennobles the remoter impulses of our action, and afterwards we no longer

perform those actions from the same coarse motives that inspired us before.

—Education should therefore force the virtues on the pupil, as far as possible,

according  to  his  disposition.  Then  virtue,  the  sunshine  and  summer

atmosphere  of  the  soul,  can  contribute  her  own  share  of  work  and  add

mellowness and sweetness.

  92.

    Dabblers in Christianity, not Christians.—So that is your Christianity!—

To annoy humanity you praise "God and His Saints," and again when you

want  to  praise  humanity  you  go  so  far  that  God  and  His  Saints  must  be

annoyed.—I wish you would at least learn Christian manners, as you are so

deficient in the civility of the Christian heart.  93.

  The  Religious  and  Irreligious  Impression  of  Nature.—A  true  believer

must be to us an object of veneration, but the same holds good of a true,

sincere, convinced unbeliever. With men of the latter stamp we are near to

the high mountains where mighty rivers have their source, and with believers

we are under vigorous, shady, restful trees.

  94.

  Judicial Murder.—The two greatest judicial murders [8] in the world's

history  are,  to  speak  without  exaggeration,  concealed  and  well-concealed

suicide. In both cases a man willed to die, and in both cases he let his breast

be pierced by the sword in the hand of human injustice. [8] This, of course,

refers to Jesus and Socrates.—Tr.

  95.

    "Love."—The  finest  artistic  conception  wherein  Christianity  had  the

advantage  over  other  religious  systems  lay  in  one  word—Love.  Hence  it

became  the  lyric  religion  (whereas  in  its  two  other  creations  Semitism

bestowed heroico-epical religions upon the world). In the word "love" there is

so much meaning, so much that stimulates and appeals to memory and hope,

that even the meanest intelligence and the coldest heart feel some glimmering

of  its  sense.  The  cleverest  woman  and  the  lowest  man  think  of  the

comparatively unselfish moments of their whole life, even if with them Eros

never soared high: and the vast number of beings who miss love from their

parents or children or sweethearts, especially those whose sexual instincts

have been refined away, have found their heart's desire in Christianity.

  96.

  The  Fulfillment  of  Christianity.—In  Christianity  there  is  also  an

Epicurean trend of thought, starting from the idea that God can only demand

of man, his creation and his image, what it is possible for man to fulfil, and

accordingly  that  Christian  virtue  and  perfection  are  attainable  and  often

attained. Now, for instance, the belief in loving one's enemies—even if it is

only a belief or fancy, and by no means a psychological reality (a real love)—

gives unalloyed happiness, so long as it is genuinely believed. (As to the

reason of this, psychologist and Christian might well differ.) Hence earthly

life,  through  the  belief,  I  mean  the  fancy,  that  it  satisfies  not  only  the

injunction to love our enemies, but all the other injunctions of Christianity,

and that it has really assimilated and embodied in itself the Divine perfection

according to the command, "Be perfect as your Father in heaven is perfect,"might  actually  become  a  holy  life.  Thus  error  can  make  Christ's  promise

come true.

  97.

  Of the Future of Christianity.—We may be allowed to form a conjecture

as to the disappearance of Christianity and as to the places where it will be

the  slowest  to  retreat,  if  we  consider  where  and  for  what  reasons

Protestantism  spread  with  such  startling  rapidity.  As  is  well  known,

Protestantism promised to do far more cheaply all that the old Church did,

without costly masses, pilgrimages, and priestly pomp and circumstance. It

spread particularly among the Northern nations, which were not so deeply

rooted as those of the South in the old Church's symbolism and love of ritual.

In  the  South  the  more  powerful  pagan  religion  survived  in  Christianity,

whereas in the North Christianity meant an opposition to and a break with the

old-time  creed,  and  hence  was  from  the  first  more  thoughtful  and  less

sensual, but for that very reason, in times of peril, more fanatical and more

obstinate.  If  from  the  standpoint  of  thought  we  succeed  in  uprooting

Christianity, we can at once know the point where it will begin to disappear

—the very point at which it will be most stubborn in defence. In other places

it will bend but not break, lose its leaves but burst into leaf afresh, because

the senses, and not thought, have gone over to its side. But it is the senses that

maintain  the  belief  that  with  all  its  expensive  outlay  the  Church  is  more

cheaply and conveniently managed than under the stern conditions of work

and wages. Yet what does one hold leisure (or semi-idleness) to be worth,

when once one has become accustomed to it? The senses plead against a

dechristianized world, saying that there would be too much work to do in it

and an insufficient supply of leisure. They take the part of magic—that is,

they let God work himself (oremus nos, Deus laboret).

  98.

    Theatricality  and  Honesty  of  Unbelievers.—There  is  no  book  that

contains  in  such  abundance  or  expresses  so  faithfully  all  that  man

occasionally finds salutary—ecstatic inward happiness, ready for sacrifice or

death in the belief in and contemplation of his truth—as the book that tells of

Christ. From that book a clever man may learn all the means whereby a book

can be made into a world-book, a vade-mecum for all, and especially that

master-means of representing everything as discovered, nothing as future and

uncertain. All influential books try to leave the same impression, as if the

widest intellectual horizon were circumscribed here and as if about the sunthat shines here every constellation visible at present or in the future must

revolve.—Must not then all purely scientific books be poor in influence on

the same grounds as such books are rich in influence? Is not the book fated to

live humble and among humble folk, in order to be crucified in the end and

never  resurrected?  In  relation  to  what  the  religious  inform  us  of  their

"knowledge" and their "holy spirit," are not all upright men of science "poor

in spirit"? Can any religion demand more self-denial and draw the selfish out

of themselves more inexorably than science?—This and similar things we

may say, in any case with a certain theatricality, when we have to defend

ourselves against believers, for it is impossible to conduct a defence without a

certain amount of theatricality. But between ourselves our language must be

more honest, and we employ a freedom that those believers are not even

allowed, in their own interests, to understand. Away, then, with the monastic

cowl of self-denial, with the appearance of humility! Much more and much

better—so rings our truth! If science were not linked with the pleasure of

knowledge, the utility of the thing known, what should we care for science?

If a little faith, love, and hope did not lead our souls to knowledge, what

would attract us to science? And if in science the ego means nothing, still the

inventive, happy ego, every upright and industrious ego, means a great deal

in the republic of the men of science. The homage of those who pay homage,

the joy of those whom we wish well or honour, in some cases glory and a fair

share  of  immortality,  is  the  personal  reward  for  every  suppression  of

personality: to say nothing here of meaner views and rewards, although it is

just on this account that the majority have sworn and always continue to

swear  fidelity  to  the  laws  of  the  republic  and  of  science.  If  we  had  not

remained  in  some  degree  unscientific,  what  would  science  matter  to  us?

Taking  everything  together  and  speaking  in  plain  language:  "To  a  purely

knowing being knowledge would be indifferent."—Not the quality but the

quantity  of  faith  and  devoutness  distinguishes  us  from  the  pious,  the

believers. We are content with less. But should one of them cry out to us: "Be

content  and  show  yourselves  contented!"  we  could  easily  answer:  "As  a

matter of fact, we do not belong to the most discontented class. But you, if

your faith makes you happy, show yourselves to be happy. Your faces have

always done more harm to your faith than our reasons! If that glad message

of your Bible were written in your faces, you would not need to demand

belief in the authority of that book in such stiff-necked fashion. Your words,

your actions should continually make the Bible superfluous—in fact, throughyou a new Bible should continually come into being. As it is, your apologia

for Christianity is rooted in your unchristianity, and with your defence you

write your own condemnation. If you, however, should wish to emerge from

your dissatisfaction with Christianity, you should ponder over the experience

of two thousand years, which, clothed in the modest form of a question, may

be voiced as follows: "If Christ really intended to redeem the world, may he

not be said to have failed?"

  99.

  The Poet as Guide to the Future.—All the surplus poetical force that still

exists  in  modern  humanity,  but  is  not  used  under  our  conditions  of  life,

should  (without  any  deduction)  be  devoted  to  a  definite  goal—not  to

depicting  the  present  nor  to  reviving  and  summarizing  the  past,  but  to

pointing the way to the future. Nor should this be so done as if the poet, like

an  imaginative  political  economist,  had  to  anticipate  a  more  favorable

national and social state of things and picture their realisation. Rather will he,

just as the earlier poets portrayed the images of the Gods, portray the fair

images of men. He will divine those cases where, in the midst of our modern

world and reality (which will not be shirked or repudiated in the usual poetic

fashion), a great, noble soul is still possible, where it may be embodied in

harmonious, equable conditions, where it may become permanent, visible,

and representative of a type, and so, by the stimulus to imitation and envy,

help to create the future. The poems of such a poet would be distinguished by

appearing secluded and protected from the heated atmosphere of the passions.

The  irremediable  failure,  the  shattering  of  all  the  strings  of  the  human

instrument, the scornful laughter and gnashing of teeth, and all tragedy and

comedy in the usual old sense, would appear by the side of this new art as

mere archaic lumber, a blurring of the outlines of the world-picture. Strength,

kindness,  gentleness,  purity,  and  an  unsought,  innate  moderation  in  the

personalities and their action: a levelled soil, giving rest and pleasure to the

foot: a shining heaven mirrored in faces and events: science and art welded

into  a  new  unity:  the  mind  living  together  with  her  sister,  the  soul,

withoutarrogance  or  jealousy,  and  enticing  from  contrasts  the  grace  of

seriousness,  not  the  impatience  of  discord—all  this  would  be  the  general

environment,  the  background  on  which  the  delicate  differences  of  the

embodied ideals would make the real picture, that of ever-growing human

majesty. Many roads to this poetry of the future start from Goethe, but the

quest  needs  good  pathfinders  and  above  all  a  far  greater  strength  than  ispossessed by modern poets, who unscrupulously represent the half-animal

and the immaturity and intemperance that are mistaken by them for power

and naturalness.

  100.

  The Muse as Penthesilea. [9]—"Better to rot than to be a woman without

charm." When once the Muse thinks thus, the end of her art is again at hand.

But it can be a tragic and also a comic finale. [9] Queen of the Amazons,

slain by Achilles in the Trojan War.—Tr.

  101.

  The Circuitous Path to the Beautiful.—If the beautiful is to be identified

with that which gives pleasure—and thus sang the Muses once—the useful is

often the necessary circuitous path to the beautiful, and has a perfect right to

spurn the short-sighted censure of men who live for the moment, who will

not wait, and who think that they can reach all good things without ever

taking a circuitous path.

  102.

  An Excuse for many a Transgression.—The ceaseless desire to create, the

eternal looking outward of the artist, hinders him from becoming better and

more beautiful as a personality: unless his craving for glory be great enough

to  compel  him  to  exhibit  in  his  relations  with  other  men  a  growth

corresponding to the growing beauty and greatness of his works. In any case

he has but a limited measure of strength, and how could the proportion of

strength that he spends on himself be of any benefit to his work—or vice

versa?

  103.

    Satisfying the Best People.—If we have satisfied the best people of our

time with our art, it is a sign that we shall not satisfy the best people of the

succeeding period. We have indeed "lived for all time," and the applause of

the  best  people  ensures  our  fame.  [10]  [10]  From  Schiller,  Wallenstein's

Lager: "Wer den Besten seiner Zeit genug gethan, der hat gelebt für alle

Zeiten" ("He that has satisfied the best men of his time has lived for all

time").

  104.

  Of One Substance.—If we are of one substance with a book or a work of

art, we think in our heart of hearts that it must be excellent, and are offended

if others find it ugly, over-spiced, or pretentious.

  105.  Speech and Emotion.—That speech is not given to us to communicate our

emotions may be seen from the fact that all simple men are ashamed to seek

for words to express their deeper feelings. These feelings are expressed only

in  actions,  and  even  here  such  men  blush  if  others  seem  to  divine  their

motives. After all, among poets, to whom God generally denies this shame,

the more noble are more monosyllabic in the language of emotion, and evince

a certain constraint: whereas the real poets of emotion are for the most part

shameless in practical life.

  106.

  A  Mistake  about  a  Privation.—He  that  has  not  for  a  long  time  been

completely weaned from an art, and is still always at home in it, has no idea

how small a privation it is to live without that art.

  107.

    Three-quarter Strength.—A work that is meant to give an impression of

health should be produced with three-quarters, at the most, of the strength of

its creator. If he has gone to his farthest limit, the work excites the observer

and  disconcerts  him  by  its  tension.  All  good  things  have  something  lazy

about them and lie like cows in the meadow.

  108.

    Refusing to have Hunger as a Guest.—As refined fare serves a hungry

man as well as and no better than coarser food, the more pretentious artist

will not dream of inviting the hungry man to his meal.

  109.

  Living without Art and Wine.—It is with works of art as with wine—it is

better if one can do without both and keep to water, and if from the inner fire

and inner sweetness of the soul the water spontaneously changes again into

wine.

  110.

  The Pirate-Genius.—The pirate-genius in art, who even knows how to

deceive subtle minds, arises when someone unscrupulously and from youth

upwards regards all good things, that are not protected by law, as the property

of a particular person, as his legitimate spoil. Now all the good things of past

ages  and  masters  lie  free  around  us,  hedged  about  and  protected  by  the

reverential awe of the few who know them. To these few our robber-genius,

by the force of his impudence, bids defiance and accumulates for himself a

wealth that once more calls forth homage and awe.

  111.  To the Poets of Great Towns.—In the gardens of modern poetry it will

clearly be observed that the sewers of great towns are too near. With the

fragrance  of  flowers  is  mingled  something  that  betrays  abomination  and

putrescence. With pain I ask: "Must you poets always request wit and dirt to

stand  godfather,  when  an  innocent  and  beautiful  sensation  has  to  be

christened by you? Are you obliged to dress your noble goddess in a hood of

devilry  and  caricature?  But  whence  this  necessity,  this  obligation?"  The

reason is—because you live too near the sewers.

  112.

  Of  the  Salt  of  Speech.—No  one  has  ever  explained  why  the  Greek

writers,  having  at  command  such  an  unparalleled  wealth  and  power  of

language, made so sparing a use of their resources that every post-classical

Greek book appears by comparison crude, over-colored, and extravagant. It is

said  that  towards  the  North  Polar  ice  and  in  the  hottest  countries  salt  is

becoming less and less used, whereas on the other hand the dwellers on the

plains  and  by  the  coast  in  the  more  temperate  zones  use  salt  in  great

abundance. Is it possible that the Greeks from a twofold reason—because

their intellect was colder and clearer but their fundamental passionate nature

far more tropical than ours—did not need salt and spice to the same extent

that we do?

  113.

  The Freest Writer.—In a book for free spirits one cannot avoid mention

of Laurence Sterne, the man whom Goethe honoured as the freest spirit of his

century. May he be satisfied with the honour of being called the freest writer

of all times, in comparison with whom all others appear stiff, square-toed,

intolerant, and downright boorish! In his case we should not speak of the

clear and rounded but of "the endless melody"—if by this phrase we arrive at

a name for an artistic style in which the definite form is continually broken,

thrust aside and transferred to the realm of the indefinite, so that it signifies

one  and  the  other  at  the  same  time.  Sterne  is  the  great  master  of  double

entendre,  this  phrase  being  naturally  used  in  a  far  wider  sense  than  is

commonly done when one applies it to sexual relations. We may give up for

lost the reader who always wants to know exactly what Sterne thinks about a

matter, and whether he be making a serious or a smiling face (for he can do

both with one wrinkling of his features; he can be and even wishes to be right

and wrong at the same moment, to interweave profundity and farce). His

digressions are at once continuations and further developments of the story,his  maxims  contain  a  satire  on  all  that  is  sententious,  his  dislike  of

seriousness is bound up with a disposition to take no matter merely externally

and on the surface. So in the proper reader he arouses a feeling of uncertainty

whether he be walking, lying, or standing, a feeling most closely akin to that

of  floating  in  the  air.  He,  the  most  versatile  of  writers,  communicates

something of this versatility to his reader. Yes, Sterne unexpectedly changes

the parts, and is often as much reader as author, his book being like a play

within a play, a theatre audience before another theatre audience. We must

surrender at discretion to the mood of Sterne, although we can always expect

it to be gracious. It is strangely instructive to see how so great a writer as

Diderot  has  affected  this  double  entendre  of  Sterne's—to  be  equally

ambiguous throughout is just the Sternian super-humor. Did Diderot imitate,

admire, ridicule, or parody Sterne in his Jacques le Fataliste? One cannot be

exactly certain, and this uncertainty was perhaps intended by the author. This

very doubt makes the French unjust to the work of one of their first masters,

one who need not be ashamed of comparison with any of the ancients or

moderns.  For  humor  (and  especially  for  this  humorous  attitude  towards

humor itself) the French are too serious. Is it necessary to add that of all great

authors Sterne is the worst model, in fact the inimitable author, and that even

Diderot had to pay for his daring? What the worthy Frenchmen and before

them some Greeks and Romans aimed at and attained in prose is the very

opposite of what Sterne aims at and attains. He raises himself as a masterly

exception above all that artists in writing demand of themselves—propriety,

reserve, character, steadfastness of purpose, comprehensiveness, perspicuity,

good deportment in gait and feature. Unfortunately Sterne the man seems to

have  been  only  too  closely  related  to  Sterne  the  writer.  His  squirrel-soul

sprang  with  insatiable  unrest  from  branch  to  branch;  he  knew  what  lies

between  sublimity  and  rascality;  he  had  sat  on  every  seat,  always  with

unabashed watery eyes and mobile play of feature. He was—if language does

not revolt from such a combination—of a hard-hearted kindness, and in the

midst of the joys of a grotesque and even corrupt imagination he showed the

bashful  grace  of  innocence.  Such  a  carnal  and  spiritual  hermaphroditism,

such untrammeled wit penetrating into every vein and muscle, was perhaps

never possessed by any other man.

  114.

  A Choice Reality.—Just as the good prose writer only takes words that

belong to the language of daily intercourse, though not by a long way all itswords—whence arises a choice style—so the good poet of the future will

only represent the real and turn his eyes away from all fantastic, superstitious,

half-voiced, forgotten stories, to which earlier poets devoted their powers.

Only reality, though by a long way not every reality—but a choice reality.

  115.

    Degenerate Species of Art.—Side by side with the genuine species of art,

those of great repose and great movement, there are degenerate species—

weary, blasé art and excited art. Both would have their weakness taken for

strength and wish to be confounded with the genuine species.

  116.

  A Hero Impossible from Lack of Color.—The typical poets and artists of

our age like to compose their pictures upon a background of shimmering red,

green, grey, and gold, on the background of nervous sensuality—a condition

well understood by the children of this century. The drawback comes when

we do not look at these pictures with the eyes of our century. Then we see

that  the  great  figures  painted  by  these  artists  have  something  flickering,

tremulous, and dizzy about them, and accordingly we do not ascribe to them

heroic deeds, but at best mock-heroic, swaggering misdeeds.

  117.

  Overladen  Style.—The  overladen  style  is  a  consequence  of  the

impoverishment  of  the  organizing  force  together  with  a  lavish  stock  of

expedients  and  intentions.  At  the  beginnings  of  art  the  very  reverse

conditions sometimes appear.

  118.

    Pulchrum est Paucorum Hominum.—History and experience tell us that

the significant grotesqueness that mysteriously excites the imagination and

carries one beyond everyday reality, is older and grows more luxuriantly than

the  beautiful  and  reverence  for  the  beautiful  in  art:  and  that  it  begins  to

flourish exceedingly when the sense for beauty is on the wane. For the vast

majority  of  mankind  this  grotesque  seems  to  be  a  higher  need  than  the

beautiful, presumably because it contains a coarser narcotic.

  119.

  Origins of Taste in Works of Art.—If we consider the primary germs of

the  artistic  sense,  and  ask  ourselves  what  are  the  various  kinds  of  joy

produced by the firstlings of art—as, for example, among savage tribes—we

find first of all the joy of understanding what another means. Art in this case

is a sort of conundrum, which causes its solver pleasure in his own quick andkeen perceptions.—Then the roughest works of art remind us of the pleasant

things we have actually experienced, and so give joy—as, for example, when

the artist alludes to a chase, a victory, a wedding.—Again, the representation

may  cause  us  to  feel  excited,  touched,  inflamed,  as  for  instance  in  the

glorification  of  revenge  and  danger.  Here  the  enjoyment  lies  in  the

excitement  itself,  in  the  victory  over  tedium.—The  memory,  too,  of

unpleasant things, so far as they have been overcome or make us appear

interesting to the listener as subjects for art (as when the singer describes the

mishaps of a daring seaman), can inspire great joy, the credit for which is

given to art.—A more subtle variety is the joy that arises at the sight of all

that is regular and symmetrical in lines, points, and rhythms. For by a certain

analogy is awakened the feeling for all that is orderly and regular in life,

which one has to thank alone for all well-being. So in the cult of symmetry

we unconsciously do homage to rule and proportion as the source of our

previous  happiness,  and  the  joy  in  this  case  is  a  kind  of  hymn  of

thanksgiving. Only when a certain satiety of the last-mentioned joy arises

does  a  more  subtle  feeling  step  in,  that  enjoyment  might  even  lie  in  a

violation of the symmetrical and regular. This feeling, for example, impels us

to seek reason in apparent unreason, and the sort of aesthetic riddle-guessing

that results is in a way the higher species of the first-named artistic joy.—He

who pursues this speculation still further will know what kind of hypotheses

for  the  explanation  of  aesthetic  phenomena  are  hereby  fundamentally

rejected.

  120.

  Not too Near.—It is a disadvantage for good thoughts when they follow

too closely on one another, for they hide the view from each other. That is

why great artists and writers have made an abundant use of the mediocre.

  121.

    Roughness  and  Weakness.—Artists  of  all  periods  have  made  the

discovery that in roughness lies a certain strength, and that not everyone can

be  rough  who  wants  to  be:  also  that  many  varieties  of  weakness  have  a

powerful effect on the emotions. From this source are derived many artistic

substitutes, which not even the greatest and most conscientious artists can

abstain from using.

  122.

  Good  Memory.—Many  a  man  fails  to  become  a  thinker  for  the  sole

reason that his memory is too good.  123.

    Arousing  instead  of  Appeasing  Hunger.—Great  artists  fancy  that  they

have taken full possession of a soul. In reality, and often to their painful

disappointment, that soul has only been made more capacious and insatiable,

so that a dozen greater artists could plunge into its depths without filling it

up.

  124.

  Artists'  Anxiety.—The  anxiety  lest  people  may  not  believe  that  their

figures are alive can mislead many artists of declining taste to portray these

figures so that they appear as if mad. From the same anxiety, on the other

hand, Greek artists of the earliest ages gave even dead and sorely wounded

men that smile which they knew as the most vivid sign of life—careless of

the actual forms bestowed by nature on life at its last gasp.

  125.

  The Circle must be Completed.—He who follows a philosophy or a genre

of art to the end of its career and beyond, understands from inner experience

why the masters and disciples who come after have so often turned, with a

depreciatory gesture, into a new groove. The circle must be described—but

the individual, even the greatest, sits firm on his point of the circumference,

with  an  inexorable  look  of  obstinacy,  as  if  the  circle  ought  never  to  be

completed.

  126.

  The Older Art and the Soul of the Present.—Since every art becomes

more  and  more  adapted  to  the  expression  of  spiritual  states,  of  the  more

lively, delicate, energetic, and passionate states, the later masters, spoilt by

these means of expression, do not feel at their ease in the presence of the old-

time works of art. They feel as if the ancients had merely been lacking in the

means of making their souls speak clearly, also perhaps in some necessary

technical preliminaries. They think that they must render some assistance in

this quarter, for they believe in the similarity or even unity of all souls. In

truth, however, measure, symmetry, a contempt for graciousness and charm,

an unconscious severity and morning chilliness, an evasion of passion, as if

passion meant the death of art—such are the constituents of sentiment and

morality  in  all  old  masters,  who  selected  and  arranged  their  means  of

expression not at random but in a necessary connection with their morality.

Knowing this, are we to deny those that come after the right to animate the

older works with their soul? No, for these works can only survive through ourgiving them our soul, and our blood alone enables them to speak to us. The

real "historic" discourse would talk ghostly speech to ghosts. We honour the

great artists less by that barren timidity that allows every word, every note to

remain intact than by energetic endeavours to aid them continually to a new

life.—True, if Beethoven were suddenly to come to life and hear one of his

works performed with that modern animation and nervous refinement that

bring glory to our masters of execution, he would probably be silent for a

long while, uncertain whether he should raise his hand to curse or to bless,

but perhaps say at last: "Well, well! That is neither I nor not-I, but a third

thing—it seems to me, too, something right, if not just the right thing. But

you must know yourselves what to do, as in any case it is you who have to

listen. As our Schiller says, 'the living man is right.' So have it your own way,

and let me go down again."

  127.

  Against the Disparagers of Brevity.—A brief dictum may be the fruit and

harvest of long reflection. The reader, however, who is a novice in this field

and has never considered the case in point, sees something embryonic in all

brief dicta, not without a reproachful hint to the author, requesting him not to

serve up such raw and ill-prepared food.

  128.

  Against the Short-Sighted.—Do you think it is piece-work because it is

(and must be) offered you in pieces?

  129.

  Readers of Aphorisms.—The worst readers of aphorisms are the friends

of the author, if they make a point of referring the general to the particular

instance to which the aphorism owes its origin. This namby-pamby attitude

brings all the author's trouble to naught, and instead of a philosophic lesson

and  a  philosophic  frame  of  mind,  they  deservedly  gain  nothing  but  the

satisfaction of a vulgar curiosity.

  130.

  Readers'  Insults.—The  reader  offers  a  twofold  insult  to  the  author  by

praising his second book at the expense of his first (or vice versa) and by

expecting the author to be grateful to him on that account.

  131.

  The  Exciting  Element  in  the  History  of  Art.—We  fall  into  a  state  of

terrible tension when we follow the history of an art—as, for example, that of

Greek oratory—and, passing from master to master, observe their increasingprecautions  to  obey  the  old  and  the  new  laws  and  all  these  self-imposed

limitations. We see that the bow must snap, and that the so-called "loose"

composition,  with  the  wonderful  means  of  expression  smothered  and

concealed  (in  this  particular  case  the  florid  style  of  Asianism),  was  once

necessary and almost beneficial.

  132.

  To the Great in Art.—That enthusiasm for some object which you, O

great man, introduce into this world causes the intelligence of the many to be

stunted.  The  knowledge  of  this  fact  spells  humiliation.  But  the  enthusiast

wears his hump with pride and pleasure, and you have the consolation of

feeling that you have increased the world's happiness.

  133.

    Conscienceless  Æsthetes.—The  real  fanatics  of  an  artistic  school  are

perhaps  those  utterly  inartistic  natures  that  are  not  even  grounded  in  the

elements of artistic study and creation, but are impressed with the strongest of

all  the  elementary  influences  of  an  art.  For  them  there  is  no  æsthetic

conscience—hence nothing to hold them back from fanaticism.

  134.

  How the Soul should be Moved by the New Music.—The artistic purpose

followed by the new music, in what is now forcibly but none too lucidly

termed "endless melody," can be understood by going into the sea, gradually

losing  one's  firm  tread  on  the  bottom,  and  finally  surrendering

unconditionally to the fluid element. One has to swim. In the previous, older

music one was forced, with delicate or stately or impassioned movement, to

dance.  The  measure  necessary  for  dancing,  the  observance  of  a  distinct

balance of time and force in the soul of the hearer, imposed a continual self-

control. Through the counteraction of the cooler draught of air which came

from this caution and the warmer breath of musical enthusiasm, that music

exercised its spell.—Richard Wagner aimed at a different excitation of the

soul, allied, as above said, to swimming and floating. This is perhaps the

most essential of his innovations. His famous method, originating from this

aim and adapted to it—the "endless melody"—strives to break and sometimes

even to despise all mathematical equilibrium of time and force. He is only too

rich  in  the  invention  of  such  effects,  which  sound  to  the  old  school  like

rhythmic paradoxes and blasphemies. He dreads petrifaction, crystallization,

the development of music into the architectural. He accordingly sets up a

three-time  rhythm  in  opposition  to  the  double-time,  not  infrequentlyintroduces five-time and seven-time, immediately repeats a phrase, but with a

prolation, so that its time is again doubled and trebled. From an easy-going

imitation of such art may arise a great danger to music, for by the side of the

super-abundance of rhythmic emotion demoralization and decadence lurk in

ambush. The danger will become very great if such music comes to associate

itself  more  and  more  closely  with  a  quite  naturalistic  art  of  acting  and

pantomime, trained and dominated by no higher plastic models; an art that

knows  no  measure  in  itself  and  can  impart  no  measure  to  the  kindred

element, the all-too-womanish nature of music.

  135.

  Poet and Reality.—The Muse of the poet who is not in love with reality

will not be reality, and will bear him children with hollow eyes and all too

tender bones.

  136.

  Means and End.—In art the end does not justify the means, but holy

means can justify the end.

  137.

  The Worst Readers.—The worst readers are those who act like plundering

soldiers. They take out some things that they might use, cover the rest with

filth and confusion, and blaspheme about the whole.

  138.

  Signs of a Good Writer.—Good writers have two things in common: they

prefer  being  understood  to  being  admired,  and  they  do  not  write  for  the

critical and over-shrewd reader.

  139.

  The  Mixed  Species.—The  mixed  species  in  art  bear  witness  to  their

authors' distrust of their own strength. They seek auxiliary powers, advocates,

hiding-places—such is the case with the poet who calls in philosophy, the

musician who calls in the drama, and the thinker who calls in rhetoric to his

aid.

  140.

  Shutting One's Mouth.—When his book opens its mouth, the author must

shut his.

  141.

    Badges of Rank.—All poets and men of letters who are in love with the

superlative want to do more than they can.

  142.  Cold Books.—The deep thinker reckons on readers who feel with him the

happiness that lies in deep thinking. Hence a book that looks cold and sober,

if  seen  in  the  right  light,  may  seem  bathed  in  the  sunshine  of  spiritual

cheerfulness and become a genuine soul-comforter.

  143.

  A Knack of the Slow-Witted.—The slow-witted thinker generally allies

himself with loquacity and ceremoniousness. By the former he thinks he is

gaining  mobility  and  fluency,  by  the  latter  he  gives  his  peculiarity  the

appearance of being a result of free will and artistic purpose, with a view to

dignity, which needs slow movement.

  144.

  Le Style Baroque. [11]—He who as thinker and writer is not born or

trained  to  dialectic  and  the  consecutive  arrangement  of  ideas,  will

unconsciously  turn  to  the  rhetoric  and  dramatic  forms.  For,  after  all,  his

object is to make himself understood and to carry the day by force, and he is

indifferent whether, as shepherd, he honestly guides to himself the hearts of

his fellow-men, or, as robber, he captures them by surprise. This is true of the

plastic  arts  as  of  music:  where  the  feeling  of  insufficient  dialectic  or  a

deficiency in expression or narration, together with an urgent, over-powerful

impulse to form, gives birth to that species of style known as "baroque." Only

the ill-educated and the arrogant will at once find a depreciatory force in this

word. The baroque style always arises at the time of decay of a great art,

when the demands of art in classical expression have become too great. It is a

natural phenomenon which will be observed with melancholy—for it is a

forerunner of the night—but at the same time with admiration for its peculiar

compensatory arts of expression and narration. To this style belongs already a

choice of material and subjects of the highest dramatic tension, at which the

heart trembles even when there is no art, because heaven and hell are all too

near the emotions: then, the oratory of strong passion and gestures, of ugly

sublimity, of great masses, in fact of absolute quantity per se (as is shown in

Michael Angelo, the father or grandfather of the Italian baroque stylists): the

lights of dusk, illumination and conflagration playing upon those strongly

molded forms: ever-new ventures in means and aims, strongly underscored

by artists for artists, while the layman must fancy he sees an unconscious

overflowing  of  all  the  horns  of  plenty  of  an  original  nature-art:  all  these

characteristics that constitute the greatness of that style are neither possible

nor permitted in the earlier ante-classical and classical periods of a branch ofart. Such luxuries hang long on the tree like forbidden fruit. Just now, when

music is passing into this last phase, we may learn to know the phenomenon

of the baroque style in peculiar splendor, and, by comparison, find much that

is instructive for earlier ages. For from Greek times onward there has often

been a baroque style, in poetry, oratory, prose writing, sculpture, and, as is

well  known,  in  architecture.  This  style,  though  wanting  in  the  highest

nobility,—the nobility of an innocent, unconscious, triumphant perfection,—

has nevertheless given pleasure to many of the best and most serious minds

of their time. Hence, as aforesaid, it is presumptuous to depreciate it without

reserve, however happy we may feel because our taste for it has not made us

insensible to the purer and greater style. [11] In German Barockstil, i.e. the

degenerate post-Renaissance style in art and literature, which spread from

Italy in the seventeenth century.—Tr.

  145.

  The Value of Honest Books.—Honest books make the reader honest, at

least by exciting his hatred and aversion, which otherwise cunning cleverness

knows so well how to conceal. Against a book, however, we let ourselves go,

however restrained we may be in our relations with men.

  146.

  How Art makes Partisans.—Individual fine passages, an exciting general

tenor, a moving and absorbing finale—so much of a work of art is accessible

even to most laymen. In an art period when it is desired to win over the great

majority of the laymen to the side of the artists and to make a party perhaps

for the very preservation of art, the creative artist will do well to offer nothing

more than the above. Then he will not be a squanderer of his strength, in

spheres  where  no  one  is  grateful  to  him.  For  to  perform  the  remaining

functions, the imitation of Nature in her organic development and growth,

would in that case be like sowing seeds in water.

  147.

  Becoming Great to the Detriment of History.—Every later master who

leads the taste of art-lovers into his channel unconsciously gives rise to a

selection and revaluation of the older masters and their works. Whatever in

them is conformable and akin to him, and anticipates and foreshadows him,

appears henceforth as the only important element in them and their works—a

fruit in which a great error usually lies hidden like a worm.

  148.

  How an Epoch becomes Lured to Art.—If we teach people by all theenchantments of artists and thinkers to feel reverence for their defects, their

intellectual  poverty,  their  absurd  infatuations  and  passions  (as  it  is  quite

possible to do); if we show them only the lofty side of crime and folly, only

the touching and appealing element in weakness and flabbiness and blind

devotion  (that  too  has  often  enough  been  done):—we  have  employed  the

means  for  inspiring  even  an  unphilosophical  and  inartistic  age  with  an

ecstatic  love  of  philosophy  and  art  (especially  of  thinkers  and  artists  as

personalities)  and,  in  theworst  case,  perhaps  with  the  only  means  of

defending the existence of such tender and fragile beings.

  149.

    Criticism and Joy.—Criticism, one-sided and unjust as well as intelligent

criticism, gives so much pleasure to him who exercises it that the world is

indebted to every work and every action that inspires much criticism and

many critics. For criticism draws after it a glittering train of joyousness, wit,

self-admiration, pride, instruction, designs of improvement.—The God of joy

created the bad and the mediocre for the same reason that he created the

good.

  150.

  Beyond his Limits.—When an artist wants to be more than an artist—for

example, the moral awakener of his people—he at last falls in love, as a

punishment,  with  a  monster  of  moral  substance.  The  Muse  laughs,  for,

though a kind-hearted Goddess, she can also be malignant from jealousy.

Milton and Klopstock are cases in point.

  151.

  A  Glass  Eye.—The  tendency  of  a  talent  towards  moral  subjects,

characters, motives, towards the "beautiful soul" of the work of art, is often

only a glass eye put on by the artist who lacks a beautiful soul. It may result,

though  rarely,  that  his  eye  finally  becomes  living  Nature,  if  indeed  it  be

Nature with a somewhat troubled look. But the ordinary result is that the

whole world thinks it sees Nature where there is only cold glass.

  152.

  Writing  and  Desire  for  Victory.—Writing  should  always  indicate  a

victory, indeed a conquest of oneself which must be communicated to others

for their behoof. There are, however, dyspeptic authors who only write when

they cannot digest something, or when something has remained stuck in their

teeth. Through their anger they try unconsciously to disgust the reader too,

and to exercise violence upon him—that is, they desire victory, but victoryover others.

  153.

  A Good Book Needs Time.—Every good book tastes bitter when it first

comes out, for it has the defect of newness. Moreover, it suffers damage from

its living author, if he is well known and much talked about. For all the world

is accustomed to confuse the author with his work. Whatever of profundity,

sweetness, and brilliance the work may contain must be developed as the

years  go  by,  under  the  care  of  growing,  then  old,  and  lastly  traditional

reverence. Many hours must pass, many a spider must have woven its web

about the book. A book is made better by good readers and clearer by good

opponents.

  154.

    Extravagance as an Artistic Means.—Artists well understand the idea of

using extravagance as an artistic means in order to convey an impression of

wealth. This is one of those innocent wiles of soul-seduction that the artist

must know, for in his world, which has only appearance in view, the means to

appearance need not necessarily be genuine.

  155.

  The Hidden Barrel-Organ.—Genius, by virtue of its more ample drapery,

knows better than talent how to hide its barrel-organ. Yet after all it too can

only play its seven old pieces over and over again.

  156.

  The Name on the Title-Page.—It is now a matter of custom and almost of

duty for the author's name to appear on the book, and this is a main cause of

the fact that books have so little influence. If they are good, they are worth

more  than  the  personalities  of  their  authors,  of  which  they  are  the

quintessences. But as soon as the author makes himself known on the title-

page, the quintessence, from the reader's point of view, becomes diluted with

the personal, the most personal element, and the aim of the book is frustrated.

It is the ambition of the intellect no longer to appear individual.

  157.

  The Most Cutting Criticism.—We make the most cutting criticism of a

man or a book when we indicate his or its ideal.

  158.

  Little or no Love.—Every good book is written for a particular reader and

men of his stamp, and for that very reason is looked upon unfavorably by all

other  readers,  by  the  vast  majority.  Its  reputation  accordingly  rests  on  anarrow basis and must be built up by degrees.—The mediocre and bad book

is  mediocre  and  bad  because  it  seeks  to  please,  and  does  please,  a  great

number.

  159.

  Music and Disease.—The danger of the new music lies in the fact that it

puts the cup of rapture and exaltation to the lips so invitingly, and with such a

show of moral ecstasy, that even the noble and temperate man always drinks

a drop too much. This minimum of intemperance, constantly repeated, can in

the end bring about a deeper convulsion and destruction of mental health than

any coarse excess could do. Hence nothing remains but some day to fly from

the grotto of the nymph, and through perils and billowy seas to forge one's

way to the smoke of Ithaca and the embraces of a simpler and more human

spouse.

  160.

  Advantage  for  Opponents.—A  book  full  of  intellect  communicates

something thereof even to its opponents.

  161.

  Youth and Criticism.—To criticize a book means, for the young, not to let

oneself be touched by a single productive thought therefrom, and to protect

one's  skin  with  hands  and  feet.  The  youngster  lives  in  opposition  to  all

novelty that he cannot love in the lump, in a position of self-defence, and in

this connection he commits, as often as he can, a superfluous sin.

  162.

  Effect of Quantity.—The greatest paradox in the history of poetic art lies

in this: that in all that constitutes the greatness of the old poets a man may be

a barbarian, faulty and deformed from top to toe, and still remain the greatest

of  poets.  This  is  the  case  with  Shakespeare,  who,  as  compared  with

Sophocles, is like a mine of immeasurable wealth in gold, lead, and rubble,

whereas Sophocles is not merely gold, but gold in its noblest form, one that

almost makes us forget the money-value of the metal. But quantity in its

highest  intensity  has  the  same  effect  as  quality.  That  is  a  good  thing  for

Shakespeare.

  163.

  All  Beginning  is  Dangerous.—The  Poet  can  choose  whether  to  raise

emotion from one grade to another, and so finally to exalt it to a great height

—or to try a surprise attack, and from the start to pull the bell-rope with

might  and  main.  Both  processes  have  their  danger—in  the  first  case  hishearer  may  run  away  from  him  through  boredom,  in  the  second  through

terror.

  164.

  In Favor of Critics.—Insects sting, not from malice, but because they too

want to live. It is the same with our critics—they desire our blood, not our

pain.

  165.

  Success of Aphorisms.—The inexperienced, when an aphorism at once

illuminates their minds with its naked truth, always think that it is old and

well known. They look askance at the author, as if he had wanted to steal the

common property of all, whereas they enjoy highly spiced half-truths, and

give the author to understand as much. He knows how to appreciate the hint,

and easily guesses thereby where he has succeeded and failed.

  166.

  The Desire for Victory.—An artist who exceeds the limit of his strength

in all that he undertakes will end by carrying the multitude along with him

through  the  spectacle  of  violent  wrestling  that  he  affords.  Success  is  not

always the accompaniment only of victory, but also of the desire for victory.

  167.

  Sibi Scribere.—The sensible author writes for no other posterity than his

own—that is, for his age—so as to be able even then to take pleasure in

himself.

  168.

  Praise of the Aphorism.—A good aphorism is too hard for the tooth of

time, and is not worn away by all the centuries, although it serves as food for

every epoch. Hence it is the greatest paradox in literature, the imperishable in

the midst of change, the nourishment which always remains highly valued, as

salt does, and never becomes stupid like salt.

  169.

  The Art-Need of the Second Order.—The people may have something of

what can be called art-need, but it is small, and can be cheaply satisfied. On

the whole, the remnant of art (it must be honestly confessed) suffices for this

need. Let us consider, for example, the kind of melodies and songs in which

the most vigorous, unspoiled, and true-hearted classes of the population find

genuine delight; let us live among shepherds, cowherds, peasants, huntsmen,

soldiers, and sailors, and give ourselves the answer. And in the country town,

just in the houses that are the homes of inherited civic virtue, is it not theworst music at present produced that is loved and, one might say cherished?

He who speaks of deeper needs and unsatisfied yearnings for art among the

people, as it is, is a crank or an impostor. Be honest! Only in exceptional men

is there now an art-need in the highest sense—because art is once more on

the down-grade, and human powers and hopes are for the time being directed

to other matters.—Apart from this, outside the populace, there exists indeed,

in the higher and highest strata of society, a broader and more comprehensive

art need, but of the second order. Here there is a sort of artistic commune,

which possibly means to be sincere. But let us look at the elements! They are

in general the more refined malcontents, who attain no genuine pleasure in

themselves; the cultured, who have not become free enough to dispense with

the  consolations  of  religion,  and  yet  do  not  find  its  incense  sufficiently

fragrant;  the  half-aristocratic,  who  are  too  weak  to  combat  by  a  heroic

conversion or renunciation the one fundamental error of their lives or the

pernicious bent of their characters; the highly gifted, who think themselves

too dignified to be of service by modest activity, and are too lazy for real,

self-sacrificing work; girls who cannot create for themselves a satisfactory

sphere  of  duties;  women  who  have  tied  themselves  by  a  light-hearted  or

nefarious  marriage,  and  know  that  they  are  not  tied  securely  enough;

scholars, physicians, merchants, officials who specialized too early and never

gave their lives a free enough scope—who do their work efficiently, it is true,

but with a worm gnawing at their hearts; finally, all imperfect artists—these

are nowadays the true needers of art! What do they really desire from art? Art

is  to  drive  away  hours  and  moments  of  discomfort,  boredom,  half-bad

conscience, and, if possible, transform the faults of their lives and characters

into faults of world-destiny. Very different were the Greeks, who realized in

their  art  the  outflow  and  overflow  of  their  own  sense  of  well-being  and

health, and loved to see their perfection once more from a standpoint outside

themselves.  They  were  led  to  art  by  delight  in  themselves;  our

contemporaries—by disgust of themselves.

  170.

  The Germans in the Theatre.—The real theatrical talent of the Germans

was  Kotzebue.  He  and  his  Germans,  those  of  higher  as  well  as  those  of

middle-class  society,  were  necessarily  associated,  and  his  contemporaries

should have said of him in all seriousness, "in him we live and move and

have  our  being."  Here  was  nothing—no  constraint,  pretence,  or  half-

enjoyment: what he could and would do was understood. Yes, until now thehonest theatrical success on the German stage has been in the hands of the

shamefaced or unashamed heirs of Kotzebue's methods and influence—that

is, as far as comedy still flourishes at all. The result is that much of the

Germanism of that age, sometimes far off from the great towns, still survives.

Good-natured; incontinent in small pleasures; always ready for tears; with the

desire, in the theatre at any rate, to be able to get rid of their innate sobriety

and  strict  attention  to  duty  and  exercise;  a  smiling,  nay,  a  laughing

indulgence; confusing goodness and sympathy and welding them into one, as

is the essential characteristic of German sentimentality; exceedingly happy at

a  noble,  magnanimous  action;  for  the  rest,  submissive  towards  superiors,

envious of each other, and yet in their heart of hearts thoroughly self-satisfied

—such  were  they  and  such  was  he.—The  second  dramatic  talent  was

Schiller.  He  discovered  a  class  of  hearers  which  had  hitherto  never  been

taken into consideration: among the callow German youth of both sexes. His

poetry  responded  to  their  higher,  nobler,  more  violent  if  more  confused

emotions, their delight in the jingle of moral words (a delight that begins to

disappear when we reach the thirties). Thus he won for himself, by virtue of

the passionateness and partisanship of the young, a success which gradually

reacted  with  advantage  upon  those  of  riper  years.  Generally  speaking,

Schiller rejuvenated the Germans. Goethe stood and still stands above the

Germans in every respect. To them he will never belong. How could a nation

in  well-being  and  well-wishing  come  up  to  the  intellectuality  of  Goethe?

Beethoven composed and Schopenhauer philosophized above the heads of

the Germans, and it was above their heads, in the same way, that Goethe

wrote  his  Tasso,  his  Iphigenie.  He  was  followed  by  a  small  company  of

highly cultured persons, who were educated by antiquity, life, and travel, and

had grown out of German ways of thought. He himself did not wish it to be

otherwise.—When the Romantics set up their well-conceived Goethe cult;

when their amazing skill in appreciation was passed on to the disciples of

Hegel, the real educators of the Germans of this century; when the awakening

national ambition turned out advantageous to the fame of the German poets;

when the real standard of the nation, as to whether it could honestly find

enjoyment in anything, became inexorably subordinated to the judgment of

individuals  and  to  that  national  ambition,—that  is,  when  people  began  to

enjoy by compulsion,—then arose that false, spurious German culture which

was ashamed of Kotzebue; which brought Sophocles, Calderon, and even the

Second Part of Goethe's Faust on the stage; and which, on account of its foultongue and congested stomach, no longer knows now what it likes and what

it finds tedious.—Happy are those who have taste, even if it be a bad taste!

Only  by  this  characteristic  can  one  be  wise  as  well  as  happy.  Hence  the

Greeks, who were very refined in such matters, designated the sage by a word

that means "man of taste," and called wisdom, artistic as well as scientific,

"taste" (sophia).

  171.

  Music as a Late-Comer in every Culture.—Among all the arts that are

accustomed to grow on a definite culture-soil and under definite social and

political conditions, music is the last plant to come up, arising in the autumn

and fading-season of the culture to which it belongs. At the same time, the

first signs and harbingers of a new spring are usually already noticeable, and

sometimes music, like the language of a forgotten age, rings out into a new,

astonished world, and comes too late. In the art of the Dutch and Flemish

musicians the soul of the Christian middle ages at last found its fullest tone:

their sound-architecture is the posthumous but legitimate and equal sister of

Gothic. Not until Handel's music was heard the note of the best in the soul of

Luther and his kin, the great Judæo-heroical impulse that created the whole

Reformation movement. Mozart first expressed in golden melody the age of

Louis xiv. and the art of Racine and Claude Lorrain. The eighteenth century

—that century of rhapsody, of broken ideals and transitory happiness—only

sang itself out in the music of Beethoven and Rossini. A lover of sentimental

similes might say that all really important music was a swan-song.—Music

is, in fact, not a universal language for all time, as is so often said in its

praise, but responds exactly to a particular period and warmth of emotion

which involves a quite definite, individual culture, determined by time and

place, as its inner law. The music of Palestrina would be quite unintelligible

to a Greek; and again, what would the music of Rossini convey to Palestrina?

—It may be that our most modern German music, with all its preeminence

and desire of preeminence, will soon be no longer understood. For this music

sprang from a culture that is undergoing a rapid decay, from the soil of that

epoch of reaction and restoration in which a certain Catholicism of feeling, as

well as a delight in all indigenous, national, primitive manners, burst into

bloom and scattered a blended perfume over Europe. These two emotional

tendencies,  adopted  in  their  greatest  strength  and  carried  to  their  farthest

limits, found final expression in the music of Wagner. Wagner's predilection

for the old native sagas, his free idealization of their unfamiliar gods andheroes,—who  are  really  sovereign  beasts  of  prey  with  occasional  fits  of

thoughtfulness,  magnanimity,  and  boredom,—his  re-animation  of  those

figures, to which he gave in addition the mediæval Christian thirst for ecstatic

sensuality and spiritualization—all this Wagnerian give-and-take with regard

to materials, souls, figures, and words—would clearly express the spirit of his

music, if it could not, like all music, speak quite unambiguously of itself.

This  spirit  wages  the  last  campaign  of  reaction  against  the  spirit  of

illumination which passed into this century from the last, and also against the

super-national ideas of French revolutionary romanticism and of English and

American insipidity in the reconstruction of state and society.—But is it not

evident that the spheres of thought and emotion apparently suppressed by

Wagner and his school have long since acquired fresh strength, and that his

late musical protest against them generally rings into ears that prefer to hear

different and opposite notes; so that one day that high and wonderful art will

suddenly become unintelligible and will be covered by the spider's web of

oblivion?—In considering this state of affairs we must not let ourselves be

led astray by those transitory fluctuations which arise like a reaction within a

reaction, as a temporary sinking of the mountainous wave in the midst of the

general  upheaval.  Thus,  this  decade  of  national  war,  ultramontane

martyrdom, and socialistic unrest may, in its remoter after-effect, even aid the

Wagnerian art to acquire a sudden halo, without guaranteeing that it "has a

future" or that it has the future. It is in the very nature of music that the fruits

of its great culture-vintage should lose their taste and wither earlier than the

fruits of the plastic arts or those that grow on the tree of knowledge. Among

all  the  products  of  the  human  artistic  sense  ideas  are  the  most  solid  and

lasting.

  172.

  The Poet no longer a Teacher.—Strange as it may sound to our time,

there were once poets and artists whose soul was above the passions with

their delights and convulsions, and who therefore took their pleasure in purer

materials, worthier men, more delicate complications and dénouements. If the

artists of our day for the most part unfetter the will, and so are under certain

circumstances for that very reason emancipators of life, those were tamers of

the will, enchanters of animals, creators of men. In fact, they molded, re-

molded, and new-molded life, whereas the fame of poets of our day lies in

unharnessing, unchaining, and shattering.—The ancient Greeks demanded of

the poet that he should be the teacher of grown men. How ashamed the poetwould be now if this demand were made of him! He is not even a good

student of himself, and so never himself becomes a good poem or a fine

picture.  Under  the  most  favorable  circumstances  he  remains  the  shy,

attractive  ruin  of  a  temple,  but  at  the  same  time  a  cavern  of  cravings,

overgrown like a ruin with flowers, nettles, and poisonous weeds, inhabited

and haunted by snakes, worms, spiders, and birds; an object for sad reflection

as to why the noblest and most precious must grow up at once like a ruin,

without the past and future of perfection.

  173.

  Looking Forward and Backward.—An art like that which streams out of

Homer,  Sophocles,  Theocritus,  Calderon,  Racine,  Goethe,  as  the  super-

abundance of a wise and harmonious conduct of life—that is the true art, at

which  we  grasp  when  we  have  ourselves  become  wiser  and  more

harmonious. It is not that barbaric, if ever so delightful, outpouring of hot and

highly colored things from an undisciplined, chaotic soul, which is what we

understood by "art" in our youth. It is obvious from the nature of the case that

for certain periods of life an art of overstrain, excitement, antipathy to the

orderly, monotonous, simple, logical, is an inevitable need, to which artists

must respond, lest the soul of such periods should unburden itself in other

ways, through all kinds of disorder and impropriety. Hence youths as they

generally are, full, fermenting, tortured above all things by boredom, and

women  who  lack  work  that  fully  occupies  their  soul,  require  that  art  of

delightful disorder. All the more violently on that account are they inflamed

with a desire for satisfaction without change, happiness without stupor and

intoxication.

  174.

  Against the Art of Works of Art.—Art is above all and first of all meant

to embellish life, to make us ourselves endurable and if possible agreeable in

the eyes of others. With this task in view, art moderates us and holds us in

restraint, creates forms of intercourse, binds over the uneducated to laws of

decency,  cleanliness,  politeness,  well-timed  speech  and  silence.  Hence  art

must conceal or transfigure everything that is ugly—the painful, terrible, and

disgusting  elements  which  in  spite  of  every  effort  will  always  break  out

afresh in accordance with the very origin of human nature. Art has to perform

this  duty  especially  in  regard  to  the  passions  and  spiritual  agonies  and

anxieties, and to cause the significant factor to shine through unavoidable or

unconquerable  ugliness.  To  this  great,  super-great  task  the  so-called  artproper, that of works of art, is a mere accessory. A man who feels within

himself  a  surplus  of  such  powers  of  embellishment,  concealment,  and

transfiguration will finally seek to unburden himself of this surplus in works

of art. The same holds good, under special circumstances, of a whole nation.

—But as a rule we nowadays begin art at the end, hang on to its tail, and

think that works of art constitute art proper, and that life should be improved

and transformed by this means—fools that we are! If we begin a dinner with

dessert, and try sweet after sweet, small wonder that we ruin our digestions

and even our appetites for the good, hearty, nourishing meal to which art

invites us!

  175.

    Continued Existence of Art.—Why, really, does a creative art nowadays

continue to exist? Because the majority who have hours of leisure (and such

an art is for them only) think that they cannot fill up their time without music,

theatres and picture-galleries, novels and poetry. Granted that one could keep

them from this indulgence, either they would strive less eagerly for leisure,

and the invidious sight of the rich would be less common (a great gain for the

stability of society), or they would have leisure, but would learn to reflect on

what  can  be  learnt  and  unlearnt:  on  their  work,  for  instance,  their

associations,  the  pleasure  they  could  bestow.  All  the  world,  with  the

exception of the artist, would in both cases reap the advantage.—Certainly,

there are many vigorous, sensible readers who could take objection to this.

Still, it must be said on behalf of the coarse and malignant that the author

himself is concerned with this protest, and that there is in his book much to

be read that is not actually written down therein.

  176.

  The Mouthpiece of the Gods.—The poet expresses the universal higher

opinions of the nation, he is its mouthpiece and flute; but by virtue of metre

and all other artistic means he so expresses them that the nation regards them

as something quite new and wonderful, and believes in all seriousness that he

is the mouthpiece of the Gods. Yes, under the clouds of creation the poet

himself forgets whence he derives all his intellectual wisdom—from father

and  mother,  from  teachers  and  books  of  all  kinds,  from  the  street  and

particularly  from  the  priest.  He  is  deceived  by  his  own  art,  and  really

believes, in a naïve period, that a God is speaking through him, that he is

creating in a state of religious inspiration. As a matter of fact, he is only

saying  what  he  has  learnt,  a  medley  of  popular  wisdom  and  popularfoolishness. Hence, so far as a poet is really vox populi he is held to be vox

dei.

  177.

  What all Art wants to Do and Cannot.—The last and hardest task of the

artist is the presentment of what remains the same, reposes in itself, is lofty

and  simple  and  free  from  the  bizarre.  Hence  the  noblest  forms  of  moral

perfection are rejected as inartistic by weaker artists, because the sight of

these fruits is too painful for their ambition. The fruit gleams at them from

the topmost branches of art, but they lack the ladder, the courage, the grip to

venture  so  high.  In  himself  a  Phidias  is  quite  possible  as  a  poet,  but,  if

modern strength be taken into consideration, almost solely in the sense that to

God nothing is impossible. The desire for a poetical Claude Lorrain is already

an immodesty at present, however earnestly one man's heart may yearn for

such a consummation.—The presentment of the highest man, the most simple

and at the same time the most complete, has hitherto been beyond the scope

of  all  artists.  Perhaps,  however,  the  Greeks,  in  the  ideal  of  Athene,  saw

farther than any men did before or after their time.

  178.

  Art and Restoration.—The retrograde movements in history, the so-called

periods of restoration, which try to revive intellectual and social conditions

that existed before those immediately preceding,—and seem really to succeed

in  giving  them  a  brief  resurrection,—have  the  charm  of  sentimental

recollection, ardent longing for what is almost lost, hasty embracing of a

transitory happiness. It is on account of this strange trend towards seriousness

that in such transient and almost dreamy periods art and poetry find a natural

soil, just as the tenderest and rarest plants grow on mountain-slopes of steep

declivity.—Thus many a good artist is unwittingly impelled to a "restoration"

way of thinking in politics and society, for which, on his own account, he

prepares a quiet little corner and garden. Here he collects about himself the

human remains of the historical epoch that appeals to him, and plays his lyre

to  many  who  are  dead,  half-dead,  and  weary  to  death,  perhaps  with  the

above-mentioned result of a brief resurrection.

  179.

  Happiness of the Age.—In two respects our age is to be accounted happy.

With respect to the past, we enjoy all cultures and their productions, and

nurture ourselves on the noblest blood of all periods. We stand sufficiently

near to the magic of the forces from whose womb these periods are born to beable in passing to submit to their spell with pleasure and terror; whereas

earlier  cultures  could  only  enjoy  themselves,  and  never  looked  beyond

themselves,  but  were  rather  overarched  by  a  bell  of  broader  or  narrower

dome, through which indeed light streamed down to them, but which their

gaze could not pierce. With respect to the future, there opens out to us for the

first time a mighty, comprehensive vista of human and economic purposes

engirdling the whole inhabited globe. At the same time, we feel conscious of

a power ourselves to take this new task in hand without presumption, without

requiring  supernatural  aids.  Yes,  whatever  the  result  of  our  enterprise,

however much we may have overestimated our strength, at any rate we need

render account to no one but ourselves, and mankind can henceforth begin to

do with itself what it will.—There are, it is true, peculiar human bees, who

only know how to suck the bitterest and worst elements from the chalice of

every flower. It is true that all flowers contain something that is not honey,

but these bees may be allowed to feel in their own way about the happiness of

our time, and continue to build up their hive of discomfort.

  180.

  A Vision.—Hours of instruction and meditation for adults, even the most

mature, and such institutions visited without compulsion but in accordance

with  the  moral  injunction  of  the  whole  community;  the  churches  as  the

meeting-places most worthy and rich in memories for the purpose; at the

same  time  daily  festivals  in  honour  of  the  reason  that  is  attained  and

attainable by man; a newer and fuller budding and blooming of the ideal of

the teacher, in which the clergyman, the artist and the physician, the man of

science and the sage are blended, and their individual virtues should come to

the fore as a collective virtue in their teaching itself, in their discourses, in

their method—this is my ever-recurring vision, of which I firmly believe that

it has raised a corner of the veil of the future.

  181.

    Education A Distortion.—The extraordinary haphazardness of the whole

system of education, which leads every adult to say nowadays that his sole

educator was chance, and the weathercock-nature of educational methods and

aims, may be explained as follows. The oldest and the newest culture-powers,

as in a turbulent mass-meeting, would rather be heard than understood, and

wish to prove at all costs by their outcries and clamorings that they still exist

or  already  exist.  The  poor  teachers  and  educators  are  first  dazed  by  this

senseless noise, then become silent and finally apathetic, allowing anythingto be done to them just as they in their turn allow anything to be done to their

pupils. They are not trained themselves, so how are they to train others? They

are themselves no straight-growing, vigorous, succulent trees, and he who

wishes to attach himself to them must wind and bend himself and finally

become distorted and deformed as they.

  182.

    Philosophers and Artists of the Age.—Rhapsody and frigidity, burning

desires and waning of the heart's glow—this wretched medley is to be found

in the picture of the highest European society of the present day. There the

artist thinks that he is achieving a great deal when through his art he lights the

torch of the heart as well as the torch of desire. The philosopher has the same

notion, when in the chilliness of his heart, which he has in common with his

age, he cools hot desires in himself and his following by his world-denying

judgments.

  183.

  Not to be a Soldier of Culture without Necessity.—At last people are

learning what it costs us so dear not to know in our youth—that we must first

do  superior  actions  and  secondly  seek  the  superior  wherever  and  under

whatever names it is to be found; that we must at once go out of the way of

all badness and mediocrity without fighting it; and that even doubt as to the

excellence of a thing (such as quickly arises in one of practiced taste) should

rank as an argument against it and a reason for completely avoiding it. We

must  not  shrink  from  the  danger  of  occasionally  making  a  mistake  and

confounding the less accessible good with the bad and imperfect. Only he

who can do nothing better should attack the world's evils as the soldier of

culture. But those who should support culture and spread its teachings ruin

themselves if they go about armed, and by precautions, night-watches, and

bad  dreams  turn  the  peace  of  their  domestic  and  artistic  life  into  sinister

unrest.

  184.

  How Natural History should be Expounded.—Natural history, like the

history  of  the  war  and  victory  of  moral  and  intellectual  forces  in  the

campaign against anxiety, self-delusion, laziness, superstition, folly, should

be so expounded that every reader or listener may be continually aroused to

strive after mental and physical health and soundness, after the feeling of joy,

and be awakened to the desire to be the heir and continuator of mankind, to

an ever nobler adventurous impulse. Hitherto natural history has not found itstrue language, because the inventive and eloquent artists—who are needed

for this purpose—never rid themselves of a secret mistrust of it, and above all

never  wish  to  learn  from  it  a  thorough  lesson.  Nevertheless  it  must  be

conceded to the English that their scientific manuals for the lower strata of

the people have made admirable strides towards that ideal. But then such

books  are  written  by  their  foremost  men  of  learning,  full,  complete,  and

inspiring natures, and not, as among us, by mediocre investigators.

  185.

  Genius  in  Humanity.—If  genius,  according  to  Schopenhauer's

observation, lies in the coherent and vivid recollection of our own experience,

a striving towards genius in humanity collectively might be deduced from the

striving towards knowledge of the whole historic past—which is beginning to

mark off the modern age more and more as compared with earlier ages and

has for the first time broken down the barriers between nature and spirit, men

and animals, morality and physics. A perfectly conceived history would be

cosmic self-consciousness.

  186.

  The Cult of Culture.—On great minds is bestowed the terrifying all-too-

human of their natures, their blindnesses, deformities, and extravagances, so

that  their  more  powerful,  easily  all-too-powerful  influence  may  be

continually held within bounds through the distrust aroused by such qualities.

For the sum-total of all that humanity needs for its continued existence is so

comprehensive, and demands powers so diverse and so numerous, that for

every  one-sided  predilection,  whether  in  science  or  politics  or  art  or

commerce, to which such natures would persuade us, mankind as a whole has

to pay a heavy price. It has always been a great disaster to culture when

human beings are worshipped. In this sense we may understand the precept of

Mosaic law which forbids us to have any other gods but God.—Side by side

with the cult of genius and violence we must always place, as its complement

and remedy, the cult of culture. This cult can find an intelligent appreciation

even for the material, the inferior, the mean, the misunderstood, the weak, the

imperfect, the one-sided, the incomplete, the untrue, the apparent, even the

wicked  and  horrible,  and  can  grant  them  the  concession  that  all  this  is

necessary.  For  the  continued  harmony  of  all  things  human,  attained  by

amazing toil and strokes of luck, and just as much the work of Cyclopes and

ants as of geniuses, shall never be lost. How, indeed, could we dispense with

that deep, universal, and often uncanny bass, without which, after all, melodycannot be melody?

  187.

  The  Antique  World  and  Pleasure.—The  man  of  the  antique  world

understood better how to rejoice, we understand better how to grieve less.

They  continually  found  new  motives  for  feeling  happy,  for  celebrating

festivals, being inventive with all their wealth of shrewdness and reflection.

We,  on  the  other  hand,  concentrate  our  intellect  rather  on  the  solving  of

problems which have in view painlessness and the removal of sources of

discomfort. With regard to suffering existence, the ancients sought to forget

or in some way to convert the sensation into a pleasant one, thus trying to

supply palliatives. We attack the causes of suffering, and on the whole prefer

to  use  prophylactics.—Perhaps  we  are  only  building  upon  a  foundation

whereon a later age will once more set up the temple of joy.

  188.

  The Muses as Liars.—"We know how to tell many lies," so sang the

Muses once, when they revealed themselves to Hesiod.—The conception of

the artist as deceiver, once grasped, leads to important discoveries.

  189.

  How Paradoxical Homer can be.—Is there anything more desperate, more

horrible, more incredible, shining over human destiny like a winter sun, than

that idea of Homer's: "So the decree of the Gods willed it, and doomed man

to perish, that it might be a matter for song even to distant generations"? In

other words, we suffer and perish so that poets may not lack material, and

this  is  the  dispensation  of  those  very  Gods  of  Homer  who  seem  much

concerned about the joyousness of generations to come, but very little about

us men of the present. To think that such ideas should ever have entered the

head of a Greek!

  190.

    Supplementary Justification of Existence.—Many ideas have come into

the world as errors and fancies but have turned out truths, because men have

afterwards given them a genuine basis to rest upon.

  191.

  Pro and Con Necessary.—He who has not realized that every great man

must not only be encouraged but also, for the sake of the common welfare,

opposed, is certainly still a great child—or himself a great man.

  192.

  Injustice of Genius.—Genius is most unjust towards geniuses, if they becontemporary. Either it thinks it has no need of them and considers them

superfluous (for it can do without them), or their influence crosses the path of

its electric current, in which case it even calls them pernicious.

  193.

  The  Saddest  Destiny  of  a  Prophet.—He  has  worked  twenty  years  to

convince his contemporaries, and succeeds at last, but in the meantime his

adversaries have also succeeded—he is no longer convinced of himself.

  194.

  Three  Thinkers  like  one  Spider.—In  every  philosophical  school  three

thinkers follow one another in this relation: the first produces from himself

sap and seed, the second draws it out in threads and spins a cunning web, the

third waits in this web for the victims who are caught in it—and tries to live

upon this philosophy.

  195.

  From Association with Authors.—It is as bad a habit to go about with an

author grasping him by the nose as grasping him by the horn (and every

author has his horn).

  196.

  A Team of Two.—Vagueness of thought and outbursts of sentimentality

are as often wedded to the reckless desire to have one's own way by hook or

by crook, to make oneself alone of any consequence, as a genuinely helpful,

gracious, and kindly spirit is wedded to the impulse towards clearness and

purity of thought and towards emotional moderation and self-restraint.

  197.

  Binding and Separating Forces.—Surely it is in the heads of men that

there arises the force that binds them—an understanding of their common

interest or the reverse; and in their hearts the force that separates them—a

blind choosing and groping in love and hate, a devotion to one at the expense

of all, and a consequent contempt for the common utility.

  198.

    Marksmen and Thinkers.—There are curious marksmen who miss their

mark, but leave the shooting-gallery with secret pride in the fact that their

bullet at any rate flew very far (beyond the mark, it is true), or that it did not

hit the mark but hit something else. There are thinkers of the same stamp.

  199.

  Attack  from  Two  Sides.—We  act  as  enemies  towards  an  intellectual

tendency or movement when we are superior to it and disapprove of its aim,or when its aim is too high and unrecognizable to our eye—in other words,

when it is superior to us. So the same party may be attacked from two sides,

from above and from below. Not infrequently the assailants, from common

hatred, form an alliance which is more repulsive than all that they hate.

  200.

    Original.—Original minds are distinguished not by being the first to see a

new  thing,  but  by  seeing  the  old,  well-known  thing,  which  is  seen  and

overlooked by everyone, as something new. The first discoverer is usually

that quite ordinary and unintellectual visionary—chance.

  201.

  Error of Philosophers.—The philosopher believes that the value of his

philosophy lies in the whole, in the structure. Posterity finds it in the stone

with which he built and with which, from that time forth, men will build

oftener  and  better—in  other  words,  in  the  fact  that  the  structure  may  be

destroyed and yet have value as material.

  202.

    Wit.—Wit is the epitaph of an emotion.

  203.

  The Moment before Solution.—In science it occurs every day and every

hour  that  a  man,  immediately  before  the  solution,  remains  stuck,  being

convinced  that  his  efforts  have  been  entirely  in  vain—like  one  who,  in

untying a noose, hesitates at the moment when it is nearest to coming loose,

because at that very moment it looks most like a knot.

  204.

  Among the Visionaries.—The thoughtful man, and he who is sure of his

intelligence,  may  profitably  consort  with  visionaries  for  a  decade  and

abandon himself in their torrid zone to a moderate insanity. He will thus have

travelled a good part of the road towards that cosmopolitanism of the intellect

which can say without presumption, "Nothing intellectual is alien to me."

  205.

  Keen  Air.—The  best  and  healthiest  element  in  science  as  amid  the

mountains  is  the  keen  air  that  plays  about  it.—Intellectual  molly-coddles

(such as artists) dread and abuse science on account of this atmosphere.

  206.

  Why Savants are Nobler than Artists.—Science requires nobler natures

than  does  poetry;  natures  that  are  more  simple,  less  ambitious,  more

restrained,  calmer,  that  think  less  of  posthumous  fame  and  can  burythemselves in studies which, in the eye of the many, scarcely seem worthy of

such  a  sacrifice  of  personality.  There  is  another  loss  of  which  they  are

conscious.  The  nature  of  their  occupation,  its  continual  exaction  of  the

greatest sobriety, weakens their will; the fire is not kept up so vigorously as

on the hearths of poetic minds. As such, they often lose their strength and

prime earlier than artists do—and, as has been said, they are aware of their

danger. Under all circumstances they seem less gifted because they shine

less, and thus they will always be rated below their value.

  207.

  How Far Piety Obscures.—In later centuries the great man is credited

with all the great qualities and virtues of his century. Thus all that is best is

continually obscured by piety, which treats the picture as a sacred one, to be

surrounded  with  all  manner  of  votive  offerings.  In  the  end  the  picture  is

completely veiled and covered by the offerings, and thenceforth is more an

object of faith than of contemplation.

  208.

  Standing  on  One's  Head.—If  we  make  truth  stand  on  its  head,  we

generally fail to notice that our own head, too, is not in its right position.

  209.

  Origin and Utility of Fashion.—The obvious satisfaction of the individual

with his own form excites imitation and gradually creates the form of the

many—that  is,  fashion.  The  many  desire,  and  indeed  attain,  that  same

comforting  satisfaction  with  their  own  form.  Consider  how  many  reasons

every  man  has  for  anxiety  and  shy  self-concealment,  and  how,  on  this

account,  three-fourths  of  his  energy  and  goodwill  is  crippled  and  may

become unproductive! So we must be very grateful to fashion for unfettering

that  three-fourths  and  communicating  self-confidence  and  the  power  of

cheerful compromise to those who feel themselves bound to each other by its

law. Even foolish laws give freedom and calm of the spirit, so long as many

persons have submitted to their sway.

  210.

  Looseners of Tongues.—The value of many men and books rests solely

on their faculty for compelling all to speak out the most hidden and intimate

things. They are looseners of tongues and crowbars to open the most stubborn

teeth. Many events and misdeeds which are apparently only sent as a curse to

mankind possess this value and utility.

  211.    Intellectual Freedom of Domicile. [12]—Who of us could dare to call

himself a "free spirit" if he could not render homage after his fashion, by

taking on his own shoulders a portion of that burden of public dislike and

abuse, to men to whom this name is attached as a reproach? We might as well

call ourselves in all seriousness "spirits free of domicile" (Freiziigig) (and

without that arrogant or high-spirited defiance) because we feel the impulse

to freedom (Zug zur Freiheit) as the strongest instinct of our minds and, in

contrast to fixed and limited minds, practically see our ideal in an intellectual

nomadism—-to use a modest and almost depreciatory expression. [12] The

original word, Freiziigig, means, in the modem German Empire, possessing

the free right of migration, without pecuniary burdens or other restrictions,

from one German state to another. The play on words in Zug zur Freiheit

("impulse to freedom") is untranslatable.—Tr.

  212.

  Yes, the Favor of the Muses!—What Homer says on this point goes right

to our heart, so true, so terrible is it: "The Muse loved him with all her heart

and gave him good and evil, for she took away his eyes and vouchsafed him

sweet song." This is an endless text for thinking men: she gives good and

evil, that is her manner of loving with all her heart and soul! And each man

will interpret specially for himself why we poets and thinkers have to give up

our eyes in her service. [13] [13] Nietzsche seems to allude to his own case,

for he ultimately contracted a myopia which bordered on blindness.—Tr.

  213.

  Against the Cultivation of Music.—The artistic training of the eye from

childhood  upwards  by  means  of  drawing,  painting,  landscape-sketching,

figures, scenes, involves an estimable gain in life, making the eyesight keen,

calm, and enduring in the observation of men and circumstances. No similar

secondary advantage arises from the artistic cultivation of the ear, whence

public schools will generally do well to give the art of the eye a preference

over that of the ear.

  214.

  The Discoverers of Trivialities.—Subtle minds, from which nothing is

farther than trivialities, often discover a triviality after taking all manner of

circuitous routes and mountain paths, and, to the astonishment of the non-

subtle, rejoice exceedingly.

  215.

  Morals of Savants.—A regular and rapid advance in the sciences is onlypossible when the individual is compelled to be not so distrustful as to test

every calculation and assertion of others, in fields which are remote from his

own.  A  necessary  condition,  however,  is  that  every  man  should  have

competitors in his own sphere, who are extremely distrustful and keep a sharp

eye upon him. From this juxtaposition of "not too distrustful" and "extremely

distrustful" arises sincerity in the republic of learning.

  216.

  Reasons for Sterility.—There are highly gifted minds which are always

sterile only because, from temperamental weakness, they are too impatient to

wait for their pregnancy.

  217.

  The  Perverted  World  of  Tears.—The  manifold  discomforts  which  the

demands of higher culture cause to man finally pervert his nature to such an

extent that he usually keeps himself stoical and unbending. Thus he has tears

in reserve only for rare occasions of happiness, so that many must weep even

at the enjoyment of painlessness—only when happy does his heart still beat.

  218.

  The  Greeks  as  Interpreters.—When  we  speak  of  the  Greeks  we

unwittingly speak of to-day and yesterday; their universally known history is

a blank mirror, always reflecting something that is not in the mirror itself. We

enjoy the freedom of speaking about them in order to have the right of being

silent about others—so that these Greeks themselves may whisper something

in the ear of the reflective reader. Thus the Greeks facilitate to modern men

the communication of much that is debatable and hard to communicate.

  219.

  Of the Acquired Character of the Greeks.—We are easily led astray by

the renowned Greek clearness, transparency, simplicity, and order, by their

crystal-like naturalness and crystal-like art, into believing that all these gifts

were bestowed on the Greeks—for instance, that they could not but write

well, as Lichtenberg expressed it on one occasion. Yet no statement could be

more  hasty  and  more  untenable.  The  history  of  prose  from  Gorgias  to

Demosthenes shows a course of toiling and wrestling towards light from the

obscure, overloaded, and tasteless, reminding one of the labour of heroes who

had  to  construct  the  first  roads  through  forest  and  bog.  The  dialogue  of

tragedy was the real achievement of the dramatist, owing to its uncommon

clearness  and  precision,  whereas  the  national  tendency  was  to  riot  in

symbolism and innuendo, a tendency expressly fostered by the great chorallyric. Similarly it was the achievement of Homer to liberate the Greeks from

Asiatic pomp and gloom, and to have attained the clearness of architecture in

details great and small. Nor was it by any means thought easy to say anything

in a pure and illuminating style. How else should we account for the great

admiration for the epigram of Simonides, which shows itself so simple, with

no gilded points or arabesques of wit, but says all that it has to say plainly

and  with  the  calm  of  the  sun,  not  with  the  straining  after  effect  of  the

lightning. Since the struggle towards light from an almost native twilight is

Greek, a thrill of jubilation runs through the people when they hear a laconic

sentence, the language of elegy or the maxims of the Seven Wise Men. Hence

they  were  so  fond  of  giving  precepts  in  verse,  a  practice  that  we  find

objectionable. This was the true Apolline task of the Hellenic spirit, with the

aim  of  rising  superior  to  the  perils  of  metre  and  the  obscurity  which  is

otherwise characteristic of poetry. Simplicity, flexibility, and sobriety were

wrestled for and not given by nature to this people. The danger of a relapse

into Asianism constantly hovered over the Greeks, and really overtook them

from  time  to  time  like  a  murky,  overflowing  tide  of  mystical  impulses,

primitive savagery and darkness. We see them plunge in; we see Europe, as it

were,  flooded,  washed  away—for  Europe  was  very  small  then;  but  they

always emerge once more to the light, good swimmers and divers that they

are, those fellow-countrymen of Odysseus.

  220.

  The Pagan Characteristic.—Perhaps there is nothing more astonishing to

the observer of the Greek world than to discover that the Greeks from time to

time held festivals, as it were, for all their passions and evil tendencies alike,

and in fact even established a kind of series of festivals, by order of the State,

for  their  "all-too-human."  This  is  the  pagan  characteristic  of  their  world,

which Christianity has never understood and never can understand, and has

always  combated  and  despised.—They  accepted  this  all-too-human  as

unavoidable,  and  preferred,  instead  of  railing  at  it,  to  give  it  a  kind  of

secondary right by grafting it on to the usages of society and religion. All in

man that has power they called divine, and wrote it on the walls of their

heaven. They do not deny this natural instinct that expresses itself in evil

characteristics, but regulate and limit it to definite cults and days, so as to turn

those turbulent streams into as harmless a course as possible, after devising

sufficient precautionary measures. That is the root of all the moral broad-

mindedness  of  antiquity.  To  the  wicked,  the  dubious,  the  backward,  theanimal element, as to the barbaric, pre-Hellenic and Asiatic, which still lived

in the depths of Greek nature, they allowed a moderate outflow, and did not

strive to destroy it utterly. The whole system was under the domain of the

State, which was built up not on individuals or castes, but on common human

qualities. In the structure of the State the Greeks show that wonderful sense

for  typical  facts  which  later  on  enabled  them  to  become  investigators  of

Nature, historians, geographers, and philosophers. It was not a limited moral

law of priests or castes, which had to decide about the constitution of the

State and State worship, but the most comprehensive view of the reality of all

that  is  human.  Whence  do  the  Greeks  derive  this  freedom,  this  sense  of

reality? Perhaps from Homer and the poets who preceded him. For just those

poets  whose  nature  is  generally  not  the  most  wise  or  just  possess,  in

compensation, that delight in reality and activity of every kind, and prefer not

to deny even evil. It suffices for them if evil moderates itself, does not kill or

inwardly poison everything—in other words, they have similar ideas to those

of  the  founders  of  Greek  constitutions,  and  were  their  teachers  and

forerunners.

  221.

    Exceptional Greeks.—In Greece, deep, thorough, serious minds were the

exception.  The  national  instinct  tended  rather  to  regard  the  serious  and

thorough as a kind of grimace. To borrow forms from a foreign source, not to

create but to transform into the fairest shapes—that is Greek. To imitate, not

for utility but for artistic illusion, ever and anon to gain the mastery over

forced seriousness, to arrange, beautify, simplify—that is the continual task

from Homer to the Sophists of the third and fourth centuries of our era, who

are all outward show, pompous speech, declamatory gestures, and address

themselves to shallow souls that care only for appearance, sound, and effect.

And  now  let  us  estimate  the  greatness  of  those  exceptional  Greeks,  who

created science! Whoever tells of them, tells the most heroic story of the

human mind!

  222.

    Simplicity not the First nor the Last Thing in Point of Time.—In the

history of religious ideas many errors about development and false gradations

are  made  in  matters  which  in  reality  are  not  consecutive  outgrowths  but

contemporary yet separate phenomena. In particular, simplicity has still far

too much the reputation of being the oldest, the initial thing. Much that is

human  arises  by  subtraction  and  division,  and  not  merely  by  doubling,addition,  and  unification.—For  instance,  men  still  believe  in  a  gradual

development of the idea of God from those unwieldy stones and blocks of

wood up to the highest forms of anthropomorphism. Yet the fact is that so

long as divinity was attributed to and felt in trees, logs of wood, stones, and

beasts,  people  shrank  from  humanizing  their  forms  as  from  an  act  of

godlessness. First of all, poets, apart from all considerations of cult and the

ban  of  religious  shame,  have  had  to  make  the  inner  imagination  of  man

accustomed and compliant to this notion. Wherever more pious periods and

phases of thought gained the upper hand, this liberating influence of poets fell

into the background, and sanctity remained, after as before, on the side of the

monstrous, uncanny, quite peculiarly inhuman. And then, much of what the

inner imagination ventures to picture to itself would exert a painful influence

if externally and corporeally represented. The inner eye is far bolder and

more shameless than the outer (whence the well-known difficulty and, to

some extent, impossibility, of working epic material into dramatic form). The

religious imagination for a long time entirely refuses to believe in the identity

of God with an image: the image is meant to fix the numen of the Deity,

actually  and  specifically,  although  in  a  mysterious  and  not  altogether

intelligible way. The oldest image of the Gods is meant to shelter and at the

same time to hide [14] the God—to indicate him but not to expose him to

view. No Greek really looked upon his Apollo as a pointed pillar of wood, his

Eros as a lump of stone. These were symbols, which were intended to inspire

dread of the manifestation of the God. It was the same with those blocks of

wood out of which individual limbs, generally in excessive number, were

fashioned with the scantiest of carving—as, for instance, a Laconian Apollo

with four hands and four ears. In the incomplete, symbolical, or excessive lies

a terrible sanctity, which is meant to prevent us from thinking of anything

human or similar to humanity. It is not an embryonic stage of art in which

such things are made—as if they were not able to speak more plainly and

portray more sensibly in the age when such images were honored! Rather,

men are afraid of just one thing—direct speaking out. Just as the cella hides

and conceals in a mysterious twilight, yet not completely, the holy of holies,

the real numen of the Deity; just as, again, the peripteric temple hides the

cella, protecting it from indiscreet eyes as with a screen and a veil, yet not

completely—so it is with the image of the Deity, and at the same time the

concealment of the Deity.—Only when outside the cult, in the profane world

of athletic contest, the joy in the victor had risen so high that the ripples thusstarted reacted upon the lake of religious emotion, was the statue of the victor

set up before the temple. Then the pious pilgrim had to accustom his eye and

his soul, whether he would or no, to the inevitable sight of human beauty and

super-strength, so that the worship of men and Gods melted into each other

from physical and spiritual contact. Then too for the first time the fear of

really humanizing the figures of the Gods is lost, and the mighty arena for

great plastic art is opened—even now with the limitation that wherever there

is to be adoration the primitive form and ugliness are carefully preserved and

copied. But the Hellene, as he dedicates and makes offerings, may now with

religious sanction indulge in his delight in making God become a man. [14]

The play on bergen (shelter) and verbergen (hide) is untranslateable.—Tr.

  223.

  Whither We must Travel.—Immediate self-observation is not enough, by

a long way, to enable us to learn to know ourselves. We need history, for the

past continues to flow through us in a hundred channels. We ourselves are,

after all, nothing but our own sensation at every moment of this continued

flow.  Even  here,  when  we  wish  to  step  down  into  the  stream  of  our

apparently  most  peculiar  and  personal  development,  Heraclitus'  aphorism,

"You cannot step twice into the same river," holds good.—This is a piece of

wisdom  which  has,  indeed,  gradually  become  trite,  but  nevertheless  has

remained as strong and true as it ever was. It is the same with the saying that,

in  order  to  understand  history,  we  must  scrutinize  the  living  remains  of

historical periods; that we must travel, as old Herodotus travelled, to other

nations, especially to those so-called savage or half-savage races in regions

where man has doffed or not yet donned European garb. For they are ancient

and  firmly  established  steps  of  culture  on  which  we  can  stand.  There  is,

however, a more subtle art and aim in travelling, which does not always

necessitate our passing from place to place and going thousands of miles

away.  Very  probably  the  last  three  centuries,  in  all  their  colorings  and

refractions  of  culture,  survive  even  in  our  vicinity,  only  they  have  to  be

discovered.  In  some  families,  or  even  in  individuals,  the  strata  are  still

superimposed on each other, beautifully and perceptibly; in other places there

are  dispersions  and  displacements  of  the  structure  which  are  harder  to

understand. Certainly in remote districts, in less known mountain valleys,

circumscribed  communities  have  been  able  more  easily  to  maintain  an

admirable  pattern  of  a  far  older  sentiment,  a  pattern  that  must  here  be

investigated. On the other hand, it is improbable that such discoveries will bemade in Berlin, where man comes into the world washed-out and sapless. He

who after long practice of this art of travel has become a hundred-eyed Argus

will  accompany  his  Io—I  mean  his  ego—everywhere,  and  in  Egypt  and

Greece, Byzantium and Rome, France and Germany, in the age of wandering

or settled races, in Renaissance or Reformation, at home and abroad, in sea,

forest, plant, and mountain, will again light upon the travel-adventure of this

ever-growing,  ever-altered  ego.—Thus  self-knowledge  becomes  universal

knowledge as regards the entire past, and, by another chain of observation,

which can only be indicated here, self-direction and self-training in the freest

and most far-seeing spirits might become universal direction as regards all

future humanity.

  224.

  Balm  and  Poison.—We  cannot  ponder  too  deeply  on  this  fact:

Christianity is the religion of antiquity grown old; it presupposes degenerate

old culture-stocks, and on them it had, and still has, power to work like balm.

There are periods when ears and eyes are full of slime, so that they can no

longer hear the voice of reason and philosophy or see the wisdom that walks

in bodily shape, whether it bears the name of Epictetus or of Epicurus. Then,

perhaps,  the  erection  of  the  martyr's  cross  and  the  "trumpet  of  the  last

judgment" may have the effect of still inspiring such races to end their lives

decently. If we think of Juvenal's Rome, of that poisonous toad with the eyes

of Venus, we understand what it means to make the sign of the Cross before

the world, we honour the silent Christian community and are grateful for its

having stifled the Greco-Roman Empire. If, indeed, most men were then born

in spiritual slavery, with the sensuality of old men, what a pleasure to meet

beings who were more soul than body, and who seemed to realize the Greek

idea  of  the  shades  of  the  under-world—shy,  scurrying,  chirping,  kindly

creatures, with a reversion on the "better life," and therefore so unassuming,

so secretly scornful, so proudly patient!—This Christianity, as the evening

chime of the good antiquity, with cracked, weary and yet melodious bell, is

balm  in  the  ears  even  to  one  who  only  now  traverses  those  centuries

historically. What must it have been to those men themselves!—To young

and fresh barbarian nations, on the other hand, Christianity is a poison. For to

implant the teaching of sinfulness and damnation in the heroic, childlike, and

animal  soul  of  the  old  Germans  is  nothing  but  poisoning.  An  enormous

chemical  fermentation  and  decomposition,  a  medley  of  sentiments  and

judgments, a rank growth of adventurous legend, and hence in the long run afundamental weakening of such barbarian peoples, was the inevitable result.

True, without this weakening what should we have left of Greek culture, of

the whole cultured past of the human race? For the barbarians untouched by

Christianity knew very well how to make a clean sweep of old cultures, as

was only too clearly shown by the heathen conquerors of Romanized Britain.

Thus  Christianity,  against  its  will,  was  compelled  to  aid  in  making  "the

antique world" immortal.—There remains, however, a counter-question and

the possibility of a counter-reckoning. Without this weakening through the

poisoning referred to, would any of those fresh stocks—the Germans, for

instance—have been in a position gradually to find by themselves a higher, a

peculiar, a new culture, of which the most distant conception would therefore

have been lost to humanity?—In this, as in every case, we do not know,

Christianly speaking, whether God owes the devil or the devil God more

thanks for everything having turned out as it has.

  225.

  Faith  makes  Holy  and  Condemns.—A  Christian  who  happened  upon

forbidden paths of thought might well ask himself on some occasion whether

it  is  really  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  God,  side  by  side  with  a

representative  Lamb,  if  faith  in  the  existence  of  these  beings  suffices  to

produce  the  same  influences?  If  they  do  exist  after  all,  are  they  not

superfluous  beings?  For  all  that  is  given  by  the  Christian  religion  to  the

human soul, all that is beneficent, consoling, and edifying, just as much as all

that depresses and crushes, emanates from that faith and not from the objects

of that faith. It is here as in another well-known case—there were indeed no

witches, but the terrible effects of the belief in witches were the same as if

they  really  had  existed.  For  all  occasions  where  the  Christian  awaits  the

immediate intervention of a God, though in vain (for there is no God), his

religion is inventive enough to find subterfuges and reasons for tranquility. In

so  far  Christianity  is  an  ingenious  religion.—Faith,  indeed,  has  up  to  the

present not been able to move real mountains, although I do not know who

assumed that it could. But it can put mountains where there are none.

  226.

  The Tragi-Comedy of Regensburg.—Here and there we see with terrible

clearness the harlequinade of Fortune, how she fastens the rope, on which she

wills that succeeding centuries should dance, on to a few days, one place, the

condition andopinions of one brain. Thus the fate of modern German history

lies in the days of that disputation at Regensburg: the peaceful settlement ofecclesiastical  and  moral  affairs,  without  religious  wars  or  a  counter-

reformation, and also the unity of the German nation, seemed assured: the

deep, gentle spirit of Contarini hovered for one moment over the theological

squabble, victorious, as representative of the riper Italian piety, reflecting the

morning  glory  of  intellectual  freedom.  But  Luther's  hard  head,  full  of

suspicions and strange misgivings, showed resistance. Because justification

by grace appeared to him his greatest motto and discovery, he did not believe

the  phrase  in  the  mouth  of  Italians;  whereas,  in  point  of  fact,  as  is  well

known, they had invented it much earlier and spread it throughout Italy in

deep silence. In this apparent agreement Luther saw the tricks of the devil,

and hindered the work of peace as well as he could, thereby advancing to a

great extent the aims of the Empire's foes.—And now, in order to have a still

stronger idea of the dreadful farcicality of it all, let us add that none of the

principles  about  which  men  then  disputed  in  Regensburg—neither  that  of

original sin, nor that of redemption by proxy, nor that of justification by faith

—is in any way true or even has any connection with truth: that they are now

all recognized as incapable of being discussed. Yet on this account the world

was set on fire—that is to say, by opinions which correspond to no things or

realities; whereas as regards purely philological questions—as, for instance,

that  of  the  sacramental  words  in  the  Eucharist—discussion  at  any  rate  is

permitted, because in this case the truth can be said. But "where nothing is,

even truth has lost her right." [15]—Lastly, it only remains to be said that it is

true these principles give rise to sources of power so mighty that without

them all the mills of the modern world could not be driven with such force.

And it is primarily a matter of force, only secondarily of truth (and perhaps

not even secondarily)—is it not so, my dear up-to-date friends? [15] Allusion

to  German  proverb:  "Where  there  is  nothing,  the  Emperor  has  lost  his

rights."—Tr.

  227.

    Goethe's Errors.—Goethe is a signal exception among great artists in that

he did not live within the limited confines of his real capacity, as if that must

be the essential, the distinctive, the unconditional, and the last thing in him

and for all the world. Twice he intended to possess something higher than he

really possessed—and went astray in the second half of his life, where he

seems quite convinced that he is one of the great scientific discoverers and

illuminators.  So  too  in  the  first  half  of  his  life  he  demanded  of  himself

something higher than the poetic art seemed to him—and here already hemade a mistake. That nature wished to make him a plastic artist,—this was

his inwardly glowing and scorching secret, which finally drove him to Italy,

that he might give vent to his mania in this direction and make to it every

possible  sacrifice.  At  last,  shrewd  as  he  was,  and  honestly  averse  to  any

mental perversion in himself, he discovered that a tricksy elf of desire had

attracted him to the belief in this calling, and that he must free himself of the

greatest  passion  of  his  heart  and  bid  it  farewell.  The  painful  conviction,

tearing and gnawing at his vitals, that it was necessary to bid farewell, finds

full  expression  in  the  character  of  Tasso.  Over  Tasso,  that  Werther

intensified, hovers the premonition of something worse than death, as when

one says: "Now it is over, after this farewell: how shall I go on living without

going mad?" These two fundamental errors of his life gave Goethe, in face of

a purely literary attitude towards poetry (the only attitude then known to the

world), such an unembarrassed and apparently almost arbitrary position. Not

to speak of the period when Schiller (poor Schiller, who had no time himself

and left no time to others) drove away his shy dread of poetry, his fear of all

literary life and craftsmanship, Goethe appears like a Greek who now and

then visits his beloved, doubting whether she be not a Goddess to whom he

can  give  no  proper  name.  In  all  his  poetry  one  notices  the  inspiring

neighbourhood of plastic art and Nature. The features of these figures that

floated before him—and perhaps he always thought he was on the track of

the metamorphoses of one Goddess—became, without his will or knowledge,

the features of all the children of his art. Without the extravagances of error

he would not have been Goethe—that is, the only German artist in writing

who has not yet become out of date—just because he desired as little to be a

writer as a German by vocation.

  228.

    Travellers and their Grades.—Among travellers we may distinguish five

grades. The first and lowest grade is of those who travel and are seen—they

become really travelled and are, as it were, blind. Next come those who really

see  the  world.  The  third  class  experience  the  results  of  their  seeing.  The

fourth  weave  their  experience  into  their  life  and  carry  it  with  them

henceforth. Lastly, there are some men of the highest strength who, as soon

as they have returned home, must finally and necessarily work out in their

lives  and  productions  all  the  things  seen  that  they  have  experienced  and

incorporated  in  themselves.—Like  these  five  species  of  travellers,  all

mankind  goes  through  the  whole  pilgrimage  of  life,  the  lowest  as  purelypassive, the highest as those who act and live out their lives without keeping

back any residue of inner experiences.

  229.

  In  Climbing  Higher.—So  soon  as  we  climb  higher  than  those  who

hitherto  admired  us,  we  appear  to  them  as  sunken  and  fallen.  For  they

imagined  that  under  all  circumstances  they  were  on  the  heights  in  our

company (maybe also through our agency).

  230.

  Measure  and  Moderation.—Of  two  quite  lofty  things,  measure  and

moderation,  it  is  best  never  to  speak.  A  few  know  their  force  and

significance, from the mysterious paths of inner experiences and conversions:

they honour in them something quite godlike, and are afraid to speak aloud.

All the rest hardly listen when they are spoken about, and think the subjects

under discussion are tedium and mediocrity. We must perhaps except those

who have once heard a warning note from that realm but have stopped their

ears  against  the  sound.  The  recollection  of  it  makes  them  angry  and

exasperated.

  231.

    Humanity of Friendship and Comradeship.—"If thou wilt take the left

hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the  right,"  [16]  that  feeling  is  the  hall-mark  of

humanity in intimate intercourse, and without that feeling every friendship,

every band of apostles or disciples, sooner or later becomes a fraud. [16]

Genesis xiii.

  9.

  —Tr.

  232.

  The  Profound.—Men  of  profound  thought  appear  to  themselves  in

intercourse with others like comedians, for in order to be understood they

must always simulate superficiality.

  233.

  For the Scorners of "Herd-Humanity."—He who regards human beings as

a herd, and flies from them as fast as he can, will certainly be caught up by

them and gored upon their horns.

  234.

  The  Main  Transgression  against  the  Vain.—In  society,  he  who  gives

another an opportunity of favorably setting forth his knowledge, sentiments,

and experience sets himself above him. Unless he is felt by the other to be asuperior being without limitation, he is guilty of an attack upon his vanity,

while what he aimed at was the gratification of the other man's vanity.

  235.

      Disappointment.—When a long life of action distinguished by speeches

and writings gives publicity to a man's personality, personal intercourse with

him is generally disappointing on two grounds. Firstly, one expects too much

from a brief period of intercourse (namely, all that the thousand and one

opportunities of life can alone bring out). Secondly, no recognized person

gives himself the trouble to woo recognition in individual cases. He is too

careless, and we are at too high a tension.

  236.

  Two Sources of Kindness.—To treat all men with equal good-humor, and

to be kind without distinction of persons, may arise as much from a profound

contempt for mankind as from an ingrained love of humanity.

  237.

  The Wanderer in the Mountains to Himself.—There are certain signs that

you have gone farther and higher. There is a freer, wider prospect before you,

the air blows cooler yet milder in your face (you have unlearned the folly of

confounding mildness with warmth), your gait is more firm and vigorous,

courage  and  discretion  have  waxed  together.  On  all  these  grounds  your

journey  may  now  be  more  lonely  and  in  any  case  more  perilous  than

heretofore, if indeed not to the extent believed by those who from the misty

valley see you, the roamer, striding on the mountains.

  238.

  With  the  Exception  of  Our  Neighbour.—I  admit  that  my  head  is  set

wrong on my neck only, for every other man, as is well known, knows better

than I what I should do or leave alone. The only one who cannot help me is

myself, poor beggar! Are we not all like statues on which false heads have

been placed? Eh, dear neighbour?—Ah no; you, just you, are the exception!

  239.

    Caution.—We must either not go about at all with people who are lacking

in the reverence for personalities, or inexorably fetter them beforehand with

the manacles of convention.

  240.

  The  Wish  to  Appear  Vain.—In  conversation  with  strangers  or  little-

known acquaintances, to express only selected thoughts, to speak of one's

famous acquaintances, and important experiences and travels, is a sign thatone is not proud, or at least would not like to appear proud. Vanity is the

polite mask of pride.

  241.

  Good Friendship.—A good friendship arises when the one man deeply

respects the other, more even than himself; loves him also, though not so

much as himself; and finally, to facilitate intercourse, knows how to add the

delicate bloom and veneer of intimacy, but at the same time wisely refrains

from a true, real intimacy, from the confounding of meum and tuum.

  242.

  Friends as Ghosts.—If we change ourselves vitally, our friends, who have

not changed, become ghosts of our own past: their voice sounds shadowy and

dreadful to us, as if we heard our own voice speaking, but younger, harder,

less mellow.

  243.

  One  Eye  and  Two  Glances.—The  same  people  whose  eyes  naturally

plead  for  favors  and  indulgences  are  accustomed,  from  their  frequent

humiliations and cravings for revenge, to assume a shameless glance as well.

  244.

  The  Haze  of  Distance.—A  child  throughout  life—that  sounds  very

touching, but is only the verdict from the distance. Seen and known close at

hand, he is always called "puerile throughout life."

  245.

  Advantage and Disadvantage in the Same Misunderstanding.—The mute

perplexity of the subtle brain is usually understood by the non-subtle as a

silent superiority, and is much dreaded whereas the perception of perplexity

would produce good will.

  246.

  The Sage giving Himself out to be a Fool.—The philanthropy of the sage

sometimes makes him decide to pretend to be excited, enraged, or delighted,

so that he may not hurt his surroundings by the coldness and rationality of his

true nature.

  247.

  Forcing  Oneself  to  Attention.—So  soon  as  we  note  that  any  one  in

intercourse and conversation with us has to force himself to attention, we

have adequate evidence that he loves us not, or loves us no longer.

  248.

  The Way to a Christian Virtue.—Learning from one's enemies is the bestway to love them, for it inspires us with a grateful mood towards them.

  249.

    Stratagem of the Importunate.—The importunate man gives us gold coins

as change for our convention coins, and thereby tries to force us afterwards to

treat our convention as an oversight and him as an exception.

  250.

    Reason for Dislike.—We become hostile to many an artist or writer, not

because we notice in the end that he has duped us, but because he did not find

more subtle means necessary to entrap us.

  251.

  In Parting.—Not by the way one soul approaches another, but by the way

it separates, do I recognize its relationship and homogeneity with the other.

  252.

    Silentium.—We must not speak about our friends, or we renounce the

sentiment of friendship.

  253.

      Impoliteness.—Impoliteness is often the sign of a clumsy modesty, which

when taken by surprise loses its head and would fain hide the fact by means

of rudeness.

  254.

    Honesty's Miscalculation.—Our newest acquaintances are sometimes the

first to learn what we have hitherto kept dark. We have the foolish notion that

our proof of confidence is the strongest fetter wherewith to hold them fast.

But  they  do  not  know  enough  about  us  to  feel  so  strongly  the  sacrifice

involved in our speaking out, and betray our secrets to others without any

idea of betrayal. Hereby we possibly lose our old friends.

  255.

  In the Ante-Chamber of Favor.—All men whom we let stand long in the

ante-chamber of our favor get into a state of fermentation or become bitter.

  256.

    Warning  to  the  Despised.—When  we  have  sunk  unmistakably  in  the

estimation  of  mankind  we  should  cling  tooth  and  nail  to  modesty  in

intercourse,  or  we  shall  betray  to  others  that  we  have  sunk  in  our  own

estimation as well. Cynicism in intercourse is a sign that a man, when alone,

treats himself too as a dog.

  257.

  Ignorance often Ennobles.—With regard to the respect of those who payrespect,  it  is  an  advantage  ostensibly  not  to  understand  certain  things.

Ignorance, too, confers privileges.

  258.

  The Opponent of Grace.—The impatient and arrogant man does not care

for grace, feeling it to be a corporeal, visible reproach against himself. For

grace is heartfelt toleration in movement and gesture.

  259.

  On Seeing Again.—When old friends see each other again after a long

separation, it often happens that they affect an interest in matters to which

they have long since become indifferent. Sometimes both remark this, but

dare not raise the veil—from a mournful doubt. Hence arise conversations as

in the realm of the dead.

  260.

  Making  Friends  only  with  the  Industrious.—The  man  of  leisure  is

dangerous  to  his  friends,  for,  having  nothing  to  do,  he  talks  of  what  his

friends  are  doing  or  not  doing,  interferes,  and  finally  makes  himself  a

nuisance. The clever man will only make friends with the industrious.

  261.

  One Weapon twice as much as Two.—It is an unequal combat when one

man defends his cause with head and heart, the other with head alone. The

first has sun and wind against him, as it were, and his two weapons interfere

with each other: he loses the prize—in the eyes of truth. True, the victory of

the second, with his one weapon, is seldom a victory after the hearts of all the

other spectators, and makes him unpopular.

  262.

  Depth  and  Troubled  Waters.—The  public  easily  confounds  him  who

fishes in troubled waters with him who pumps up from the depths.

  263.

    Demonstrating  One's  Vanity  to  Friend  and  Foe.—Many  a  man,  from

vanity, maltreats even his friends, when in the presence of witnesses to whom

he wishes to make his own preponderance clear. Others exaggerate the merits

of their enemies, in order to point proudly to the fact that they are worthy of

such foes.

  264.

  Cooling  Off.—The  over-heating  of  the  heart  is  generally  allied  with

illness of the head and judgment. He who is concerned for a time with the

health of his head must know what he has to cool, careless of the future of hisheart. For if we are capable at all of giving warmth, we are sure to become

warm again and then have our summer.

  265.

  Mingled  Feelings.—Towards  science  women  and  self-seeking  artists

entertain a feeling that is composed of envy and sentimentality.

  266.

  Where Danger is Greatest.—We seldom break our leg so long as life

continues a toilsome upward climb. The danger comes when we begin to take

things easily and choose the convenient paths.

  267.

  Not too Early.—We must beware of becoming sharp too early, or we

shall also become thin too early.

  268.

  Joy in Refractoriness.—The good teacher knows cases where he is proud

that his pupil remains true to himself in opposition to him—at times when the

youth must not understand the man or would be harmed by understanding

him.

  269.

  The Experiment of Honesty.—Young men, who wish to be more honest

than they have been, seek as victim someone acknowledged to be honest,

attacking him first with an attempt to reach his height by abuse—with the

underlying notion that this first experiment at any rate is void of danger. For

just such a one has no right to chastise the impudence of the honest man.

  270.

  The Eternal Child.—We think, short-sighted that we are, that fairy-tales

and  games  belong  to  childhood.  As  if  at  any  age  we  should  care  to  live

without  fairy-tales  and  games!  Our  words  and  sentiments  are  indeed

different, but the essential fact remains the same, as is proved by the child

himself  looking  on  games  as  his  work  and  fairy-tales  as  his  truth.  The

shortness of life ought to preserve us from a pedantic distinction between the

different ages—as if every age brought something new—and a poet ought

one day to portray a man of two hundred, who really lives without fairy-tales

and games.

  271.

  Every Philosophy is the Philosophy of a Period of Life.—The period of

life in which a philosopher finds his teaching is manifested by his teaching;

he cannot avoid that, however elevated above time and hour he may feelhimself. Thus, Schopenhauer's philosophy remains a mirror of his hot and

melancholy  youth—it  is  no  mode  of  thought  for  older  men.  Plato's

philosophy  reminds  one  of  the  middle  thirties,  when  a  warm  and  a  cold

current generally rush together, so that spray and delicate clouds and, under

favorable  circumstances  and  glimpses  of  sunshine,  enchanting  rainbow-

pictures result.

  272.

  Of the Intellect of Women.—The intellectual strength of a woman is best

proved by the fact that she offers her own intellect as a sacrifice out of love

for a man and his intellect, and that nevertheless in the new domain, which

was previously foreign to her nature, a second intellect at once arises as an

aftergrowth, to which the man's mind impels her.

  273.

  Raising and Lowering in the Sexual Domain.—The storm of desire will

sometimes carry a man up to a height where all desire is silenced, where he

really loves and lives in a better state of being rather than in a better state of

choice. On the other hand, a good woman, from true love, often climbs down

to desire, and lowers herself in her own eyes. The latter action in particular is

one of the most pathetic sensations which the idea of a good marriage can

involve.

  274.

  Man Promises, Woman Fulfils.—By woman Nature shows how far she

has hitherto achieved her task of fashioning humanity, by man she shows

what she has had to overcome and what she still proposes to do for humanity.

—The most perfect woman of every age is the holiday-task of the Creator on

every seventh day of culture, the recreation of the artist from his work.

  275.

    Transplanting.—If we have spent our intellect in order to gain mastery

over the intemperance of the passions, the sad result often follows that we

transfer  the  intemperance  to  the  intellect,  and  from  that  time  forth  are

extravagant in thought and desire of knowledge.

  276.

    Laughter as Treachery.—How and when a woman laughs is a sign of her

culture, but in the ring of laughter her nature reveals itself, and in highly

cultured women perhaps even the last insoluble residue of their nature. Hence

the psychologist will say with Horace, though from different reasons: "Ridete

puellae."  277.

  From  the  Youthful  Soul.—Youths  varyingly  show  devotion  and

impudence towards the same person, because at bottom they only despise or

admire themselves in that other person, and between the two feelings but

stagger to and fro in themselves, so long as they have not found in experience

the measure of their will and ability.

  278.

  For the Amelioration of the World.—If we forbade the discontented, the

sullen, and the atrabilious to propagate, we might transform the world into a

garden of happiness.—This aphorism belongs to a practical philosophy for

the female sex.

  279.

  Not to Distrust your Emotions.—The feminine phrase "Do not distrust

your emotions" does not mean much more than "Eat what tastes good to

you." This may also, especially for moderate natures, be a good everyday

rule. But other natures must live according to another maxim: "You must eat

not  only  with  your  mouth  but  also  with  your  brain,  in  order  that  the

greediness of your mouth may not prove your undoing."

  280.

  A Cruel Fancy of Love.—Every great love involves the cruel thought of

killing the object of love, so that it may be removed once for all from the

mischievous  play  of  change.  For  love  is  more  afraid  of  change  than  of

destruction.

  281.

  Doors.—In everything that is learnt or experienced, the child, just like the

man, sees doors; but for the former they are places to go to, for the latter to

go through.

  282.

    Sympathetic  Women.—The  sympathy  of  women,  which  is  talkative,

takes the sick-bed to market.

  283.

  Early  Merit.—He  who  acquires  merit  early  in  life  tends  to  forget  all

reverence  for  age  and  old  people,  and  accordingly,  greatly  to  his

disadvantage, excludes himself from the society of the mature, those who

confer  maturity.  Thus  in  spite  of  his  early  merit  he  remains  green,

importunate, and boyish longer than others.

  284.  Souls All of a Piece.—Women and artists think that where we do not

contradict them we cannot. Reverence on ten counts and silent disapproval on

ten others appears to them an impossible combination, because their souls are

all of a piece.

  285.

  Young Talents.—With respect to young talents we must strictly follow

Goethe's maxim, that we should often avoid harming error in order to avoid

harming truth. Their condition is like the diseases of pregnancy, and involves

strange appetites. These appetites should be satisfied and humored as far as

possible, for the sake of the fruit they may be expected to produce. It is true

that, as nurse of these remarkable invalids, one must learn the difficult art of

voluntary self-abasement.

  286.

  Disgust with Truth.—Women are so constituted that all truth (in relation

to men, love, children, society, aim of life) disgusts them—and that they try

to be revenged on every one who opens their eyes.

  287.

  The Source of Great Love.—Whence arises the sudden passion of a man

for a woman, a passion so deep, so vital? Least of all from sensuality only:

but when a man finds weakness, need of help, and high spirits united in the

same creature, he suffers a sort of overflowing of soul, and is touched and

offended at the same moment. At this point arises the source of great love.

  288.

    Cleanliness.—In the child, the sense for cleanliness should be fanned into

a passion, and then later on he will raise himself, in ever new phases, to

almost every virtue, and will finally appear, in compensation for all talent, as

a shining cloud of purity, temperance, gentleness, and character, happy in

himself and spreading happiness around.

  289.

  Of Vain Old Men.—Profundity of thought belongs to youth, clarity of

thought to old age. When, in spite of this, old men sometimes speak and write

in the manner of the profound, they do so from vanity, imagining that they

thereby  assume  the  charm  of  juvenility,  enthusiasm,  growth,

apprehensiveness, hopefulness.

  290.

    Enjoyment of Novelty.—Men use a new lesson or experience later on as a

ploughshare or perhaps also as a weapon, women at once make it into anornament.

  291.

  How both Sexes behave when in the Right.—If it is conceded to a woman

that she is right, she cannot deny herself the triumph of setting her heel on the

neck of the vanquished; she must taste her victory to the full. On the other

hand, man towards man in such a case is ashamed of being right. But then

man is accustomed to victory; with woman it is an exception.

  292.

    Abnegation  in  the  Will  to  Beauty.—In  order  to  become  beautiful,  a

woman must not desire to be considered pretty. That is to say, in ninety-nine

out of a hundred cases where she could please she must scorn and put aside

all thoughts of pleasing. Only then can she ever reap the delight of him whose

soul's portal is wide enough to admit the great.

  293.

    Unintelligible,  Unendurable.—A  youth  cannot  understand  that  an  old

man  has  also  had  his  delights,  his  dawns  of  feeling,  his  changings  and

soarings of thought. It offends him to think that such things have existed

before. But it makes him very bitter to hear that, to become fruitful, he must

lose those buds and dispense with their fragrance.

  294.

  The Party with the Air of Martyrdom.—Every party that can assume an

air of martyrdom wins good-natured souls over to its side and thereby itself

acquires an air of good nature—greatly to its advantage.

  295.

    Assertions surer than Arguments.—An assertion has, with the majority of

men  at  any  rate,  more  effect  than  an  argument,  for  arguments  provoke

mistrust. Hence demagogues seek to strengthen the arguments of their party

by assertions.

  296.

  The  Best  Concealers.—All  regularly  successful  men  are  profoundly

cunning in making their faults and weaknesses look like manifestations of

strength. This proves that they must know their defects uncommonly well.

  297.

  From Time to Time.—He sat in the city gateway and said to one who

passed through that this was the city gate. The latter replied that this was true,

but that one must not be too much in the right if one expected to be thanked

for it. "Oh," answered the other, "I don't want thanks, but from time to time itis very pleasant not merely to be in the right but to remain in the right."

  298.

  Virtue  WAS  not  Invented  by  the  Germans.—Goethe's  nobleness  and

freedom  from  envy,  Beethoven's  fine  hermitical  resignation,  Mozart's

cheerfulness and grace of heart, Handel's unbending manliness and freedom

under the law, Bach's confident and luminous inner life, such as does not

even need to renounce glamour and success—are these qualities peculiarly

German?—If they are not, they at least prove to what goal Germans should

strive and to what they can attain.

  299.

  Pia Fraus or Something Else.—I hope I am mistaken, but I think that in

Germany of to-day a twofold sort of hypocrisy is set up as the duty of the

moment  for  everyone.  From  imperial-political  misgivings  Germanism  is

demanded,  and  from  social  apprehensions  Christianity—but  both  only  in

words and gestures, and particularly in ability to keep silent. It is the veneer

that nowadays costs so much and is paid for so highly; and for the benefit of

the spectators the face of the nation assumes German and Christian wrinkles.

  300.

  How Far Even in the Good the Half May be More than the Whole.—In all

things that are constructed to last and demand the service of many hands,

much that is less good must be made a rule, although the organizer knows

what is better and harder very well. He will calculate that there will never be

a lack of persons who can correspond to the rule, and he knows that the

middling  good  is  the  rule.—The  youth  seldom  sees  this  point,  and  as  an

innovator thinks how marvelously he is in the right and how strange is the

blindness of others.

  301.

  The  Partisan.—The  true  partisan  learns  nothing  more,  he  only

experiences and judges. It is significant that Solon, who was never a partisan

but pursued his aims above and apart from parties or even against them, was

the  father  of  that  simple  phrase  wherein  lies  the  secret  of  the  health  and

vitality of Athens: "I grow old, but I am always learning."

  302.

  What is German according to Goethe.—They are really intolerable people

of whom one cannot even accept the good, who have freedom of disposition

but do not remark that they are lacking in freedom of taste and spirit. Yet just

this, according to Goethe's well-weighed judgment, is German.—His voiceand his example indicate that the German should be more than a German if

he  wishes  to  be  useful  or  even  endurable  to  other  nations—and  which

direction his striving should take, in order that he may rise above and beyond

himself.

  303.

  When it is Necessary to Remain Stationary.—When the masses begin to

rage, and reason is under a cloud, it is a good thing, if the health of one's soul

is not quite assured, to go under a doorway and look out to see what the

weather is like.

  304.

  The  Revolution-Spirit  and  the  Possession-Spirit.—The  only  remedy

against Socialism that still lies in your power is to avoid provoking Socialism

—in other words, to live in moderation and contentment, to prevent as far as

possible all lavish display, and to aid the State as far as possible in its taxing

of all superfluities and luxuries. You do not like this remedy? Then, you rich

bourgeois  who  call  yourselves  "Liberals,"  confess  that  it  is  your  own

inclination that you find so terrible and menacing in Socialists, but allow to

prevail  in  yourselves  as  unavoidable,  as  if  with  you  it  were  something

different. As you are constituted, if you had not your fortune and the cares of

maintaining it, this bent of yours would make Socialists of you. Possession

alone differentiates you from them. If you wish to conquer the assailants of

your prosperity, you must first conquer yourselves.—And if that prosperity

only meant well-being, it would not be so external and provocative of envy; it

would  be  more  generous,  more  benevolent,  more  compensatory,  more

helpful. But the spurious, histrionic element in your pleasures, which lie more

in the feeling of contrast (because others have them not, and feel envious)

than  in  feelings  of  realized  and  heightened  power—your  houses,  dresses,

carriages, shops, the demands of your palates and your tables, your noisy

operatic and musical enthusiasm; lastly your women, formed and fashioned

but of base metal, gilded but without the ring of gold, chosen by you for show

and considering themselves meant for show—these are the things that spread

the poison of that national disease, which seizes the masses ever more and

more as a Socialistic heart-itch, but has its origin and breeding-place in you.

Who shall now arrest this epidemic?

  305.

  Party  Tactics.—When  a  party  observes  that  a  previous  member  has

changed from an unqualified to a qualified adherent, it endures it so ill that itirritates and mortifies him in every possible way with the object of forcing

him to a decisive break and making him an opponent. For the party suspects

that the intention of finding a relative value in its faith, a value which admits

of  pro  and  con,  of  weighing  and  discarding,  is  more  dangerous  than

downright opposition.

  306.

  For the Strengthening of Parties.—Whoever wishes to strengthen a party

internally should give it an opportunity of being forcibly treated with obvious

injustice. The party thus acquires a capital of good conscience, which hitherto

it perhaps lacked.

  307.

  To  Provide  for  One's  Past.—As  men  after  all  only  respect  the  old-

established and slowly developed, he who would survive after his death must

not only provide for posterity but still more for the past. Hence tyrants of

every sort (including tyrannical artists and politicians) like to do violence to

history, so that history may seem a preparation and a ladder up to them.

  308.

  Party Writers.—The beating of drums, which delights young writers who

serve a party, sounds to him who does not belong to the party like a rattling

of chains, and excites sympathy rather than admiration.

  309.

  Taking  Sides  against  Ourselves.—Our  followers  never  forgive  us  for

taking  sides  against  ourselves,  for  we  seem  in  their  eyes  not  only  to  be

spurning  their  love  but  to  be  exposing  them  to  the  charge  of  lack  of

intelligence.

  310.

    Danger  in  Wealth.—Only  a  man  of  intellect  should  hold  property:

otherwise  property  is  dangerous  to  the  community.  For  the  owner,  not

knowing how to make use of the leisure which his possessions might secure

to him, will continue to strive after more property. This strife will be his

occupation, his strategy in the war with ennui. So in the end real wealth is

produced from the moderate property that would be enough for an intellectual

man. Such wealth, then, is the glittering outcrop of intellectual dependence

and poverty, but it looks quite different from what its humble origin might

lead one to expect, because it can mask itself with culture and art—it can, in

fact, purchase the mask. Hence it excites envy in the poor and uncultured—

who  at  bottom  always  envy  culture  and  see  no  mask  in  the  mask—andgradually paves the way for a social revolution. For a gilded coarseness and a

histrionic blowing of trumpets in the pretended enjoyment of culture inspires

that class with the thought, "It is only a matter of money," whereas it is

indeed to some extent a matter of money, but far more of intellect.

  311.

  Joy in Commanding and Obeying.—Commanding is a joy, like obeying;

the former when it has not yet become a habit, the latter just when it has

become a habit. Old servants under new masters advance each other mutually

in giving pleasure.

  312.

  Ambition for a Forlorn Hope.—There is an ambition for a forlorn hope

which forces a party to place itself at the post of extreme danger.

  313.

  When  Asses  are  Needed.—We  shall  not  move  the  crowd  to  cry

"Hosanna!" until we have ridden into the city upon an ass.

  314.

  Party Usage.—Every party attempts to represent the important elements

that have sprung up outside it as unimportant, and if it does not succeed, it

attacks those elements the more bitterly, the more excellent they are.

  315.

  Becoming  Empty.—Of  him  who  abandons  himself  to  the  course  of

events, a smaller and smaller residue is continually left, Great politicians may

therefore become quite empty men, although they were once full and rich.

  316.

  Welcome Enemies.—The Socialistic movements are nowadays becoming

more and more agreeable rather than terrifying to the dynastic governments,

because by these movements they are provided with a right and a weapon for

making exceptional rules, and can thus attack their real bogies, democrats and

anti-dynasts.—Towards  all  that  such  governments  professedly  detest  they

feel a secret cordiality and inclination. But they are compelled to draw the

veil over their soul.

  317.

  Possession Possesses.—Only up to a certain point does possession make

men  feel  freer  and  more  independent;  one  step  farther,  and  possession

becomes lord, the possessor a slave. The latter must sacrifice his time, his

thoughts to the former, and feels himself compelled to an intercourse, nailed

to a spot, incorporated with the State—perhaps quite in conflict with his realand essential needs.

  318.

  Of the Mastery of Them that Know.—It is easy, ridiculously easy, to set

up a model for the choice of a legislative body. First of all the honest and

reliable men of the nation, who at the same time are masters and experts in

some  one  branch,  have  to  become  prominent  by  mutual  scenting-out  and

recognition. From these, by a narrower process of selection, the learned and

expert of the first rank in each individual branch must again be chosen, also

by mutual recognition and guarantee. If the legislative body be composed of

these, it will finally be necessary, in each individual case, that only the voices

and judgments of the most specialized experts should decide; the honesty of

all the rest should have become so great that it is simply a matter of decency

to leave the voting also in the hands of these men. The result would be that

the law, in the strictest sense, would emanate from the intelligence of the

most intelligent.—As things now are, voting is done by parties, and at every

division there must be hundreds of uneasy consciences among the ill-taught,

the incapable of judgment, among those who merely repeat, imitate, and go

with  the  tide.  Nothing  lowers  the  dignity  of  a  new  law  so  much  as  this

inherent shamefaced feeling of insincerity that necessarily results at every

party division. But, as has been said, it is easy, ridiculously easy, to set up

such a model: no power on earth is at present strong enough to realize such

an ideal—unless the belief in the highest utility of knowledge, and of those

that know, at last dawns even upon the most hostile minds and is preferred to

the  prevalent  belief  in  majorities.  In  the  sense  of  such  a  future  may  our

watchword  be:  "More  reverence  for  them  that  know,  and  down  with  all

parties!"

  319.

  Of  the  "Nation  of  Thinkers"  (or  of  Bad  Thinking).—The  vague,

vacillating, premonitory, elementary, intuitive elements—to choose obscure

names for obscure things—that are attributed to the German nature would be,

if they really still existed, a proof that our culture has remained several stages

behind and is still surrounded by the spell and atmosphere of the Middle

Ages.—It is true that in this backwardness there are certain advantages: by

these qualities the Germans (if, as has been said before, they still possess

them) would possess the capacity, which other nations have now lost, for

doing certain things and particularly for understanding certain things. Much

undoubtedly is lost if the lack of sense—which is just the common factor inall those qualities—is lost. Here too, however, there are no losses without the

highest compensatory gains, so that no reason is left for lamenting, granting

that we do not, like children, and gourmands, wish to enjoy at once the fruits

of all seasons of the year.

  320.

  Carrying Coals to Newcastle.—The governments of the great States have

two instruments for keeping the people dependent in fear and obedience: a

coarser, the army, and a more refined, the school. With the aid of the former

they win over to their side the ambition of the higher strata and the strength

of the lower, so far as both are characteristic of active and energetic men of

moderate or inferior gifts. With the aid of the latter they win over gifted

poverty, especially the intellectually pretentious semi-poverty of the middle

classes. Above all, they make teachers of all grades into an intellectual court

looking  unconsciously  "towards  the  heights."  By  putting  obstacle  after

obstacle in the way of private schools and the wholly distasteful individual

tuition  they  secure  the  disposal  of  a  considerable  number  of  educational

posts, towards which numerous hungry and submissive eyes are turned to an

extent five times as great as can ever be satisfied. These posts, however, must

support the holder but meagerly, so that he maintains a feverish thirst for

promotion  and  becomes  still  more  closely  attached  to  the  views  of  the

government.  For  it  is  always  more  advantageous  to  foster  moderate

discontent than contentment, the mother of courage, the grandmother of free

thought and exuberance. By means of this physically and mentally bridled

body of teachers, the youth of the country is as far as possible raised to a

certain level of culture that is useful to the State and arranged on a suitable

sliding-scale. Above all, the immature and ambitious minds of all classes are

almost  imperceptibly  imbued  with  the  idea  that  only  a  career  which  is

recognized  and  hall-marked  by  the  State  can  lead  immediately  to  social

distinction. The effect of this belief in government examinations and titles

goes so far that even men who have remained independent and have risen by

trade or handicraft still feel a pang of discontent in their hearts until their

position too is marked and acknowledged by a gracious bestowal of rank and

orders  from  above—until  one  becomes  a  "somebody."  Finally  the  State

connects  all  these  hundreds  of  offices  and  posts  in  its  hands  with  the

obligation of being trained and hall-marked in these State schools if one ever

wishes  to  enter  this  charmed  circle.  Honour  in  society,  daily  bread,  the

possibility of a family, protection from above, the feeling of community in acommon culture—all this forms a network of hopes into which every young

man walks: how should he feel the slightest breath of mistrust? In the end,

perhaps, the obligation of being a soldier for one year has become with every

one, after the lapse of a few generations, an unreflecting habit, an understood

thing, with an eye to which we construct the plan of our lives quite early.

Then the State can venture on the master-stroke of weaving together school

and army, talent, ambition and strength by means of common advantages—

that is, by attracting the more highly gifted on favorable terms to the army

and inspiring them with the military spirit of joyful obedience; so that finally,

perhaps, they become attached permanently to the flag and endow it by their

talents  with  an  ever  new  and  more  brilliant  luster.  Then  nothing  more  is

wanted  but  an  opportunity  for  great  wars.  These  are  provided  from

professional  reasons  (and  so  in  all  innocence)  by  diplomats,  aided  by

newspapers and Stock Exchanges. For "the nation," as a nation of soldiers,

need never be supplied with a good conscience in war—it has one already.

  321.

  The  Press.—If  we  consider  how  even  to-day  all  great  political

transactions glide upon the stage secretly and stealthily; how they are hidden

by unimportant events, and seem small when close at hand; how they only

show their far-reaching effect, and leave the soil still quaking, long after they

have taken place;—what significance can we attach to the Press in its present

position, with its daily expenditure of lung-power in order to bawl, to deafen,

to excite, to terrify? Is it anything more than an everlasting false alarm, which

tries to lead our ears and our wits into a false direction?

  322.

  After a Great Event.—A nation and a man whose soul has come to light

through some great event generally feel the immediate need of some act of

childishness or coarseness, as much from shame as for purposes of recreation.

  323.

  To  be  A  Good  German  means  to  de-Germanize  Oneself.—National

differences consist, far more than has hitherto been observed, only in the

differences of various grades of culture, and are only to a very small extent

permanent (nor even that in a strict sense). For this reason all arguments

based  on  national  character  are  so  little  binding  on  one  who  aims  at  the

alteration  of  convictions—in  other  words,  at  culture.  If,  for  instance,  we

consider  all  that  has  already  been  German,  we  shall  improve  upon  the

hypothetical question, "What is German?" by the counter-question, "What isnow  German?"  and  every  good  German  will  answer  it  practically,  by

overcoming  his  German  characteristics.  For  when  a  nation  advances  and

grows, it bursts the girdle previously given to it by its national outlook. When

it remains stationary or declines, its soul is surrounded by a fresh girdle, and

the crust, as it becomes harder and harder, builds a prison around, with walls

growing ever higher. Hence if a nation has much that is firmly established,

this is a sign that it wishes to petrify and would like to become nothing but a

monument. This happened, from a definite date, in the case of Egypt. So he

who is well-disposed towards the Germans may for his part consider how he

may more and more grow out of what is German. The tendency to be un-

German has therefore always been a mark of efficient members of our nation.

  324.

    Foreignisms.—A foreigner who travelled in Germany found favor or the

reverse by certain assertions of his, according to the districts in which he

stayed. All intelligent Suabians, he used to say, are coquettish.—The other

Suabians still believed that Uhland was a poet and Goethe immoral.—The

best about German novels now in vogue was that one need not read them, for

one knew already what they contained.—The native of Berlin seemed more

good-humored than the South German, for he was all too fond of mocking,

and so could endure mockery himself, which the South German could not.—

The  intellect  of  the  Germans  was  kept  down  by  their  beer  and  their

newspapers: he recommended them tea and pamphlets, of course as a cure.—

He advised us to contemplate the different nations of worn-out Europe and

see how well each displayed some particular quality of old age, to the delight

of  those  who  sit  before  the  great  spectacle:  how  the  French  successfully

represent the cleverness and amiability of old age, the English the experience

and reserve, the Italians the innocence and candor. Can the other masks of old

age be wanting? Where is the proud old man, the domineering old man, the

covetous old man?—The most dangerous region in Germany was Saxony and

Thuringia: nowhere else was there more mental nimbleness, more knowledge

of men, side by side with freedom of thought; and all this was so modestly

veiled by the ugly dialect and the zealous officiousness of the inhabitants that

one  hardly  noticed  that  one  here  had  to  deal  with  the  intellectual  drill-

sergeants of Germany, her teachers for good or evil.—The arrogance of the

North Germans was kept in check by their tendency to obey, that of the South

Germans by their tendency—to make themselves comfortable.—It appeared

to  him  that  in  their  women  German  men  possessed  awkward  but  self-opinionated housewives, who belauded themselves so perseveringly that they

had  almost  persuaded  the  world,  and  at  any  rate  their  husbands,  of  their

peculiarly  German  housewifely  virtue.—When  the  conversation  turned  on

Germany's home and foreign policy, he used to say (he called it "betray the

secret") that Germany's greatest statesman did not believe in great statesmen.

—The future of Germany he found menaced and menacing, for Germans had

forgotten  how  to  enjoy  themselves  (an  art  that  the  Italians  understood  so

well), but, by the great games of chance called wars and dynastic revolutions,

had accustomed themselves to emotionalism, and consequently would one

day  have  an  émeute.  For  that  is  the  strongest  emotion  that  a  nation  can

procure for itself—The German Socialist was all the more dangerous because

impelled by no definite necessity: his trouble lay in not knowing what he

wanted; so, even if he attained many of his objects, he would still pine away

from desire in the midst of delights, just like Faust, but presumably like a

very vulgar Faust. "For the Faust-Devil," he finally exclaimed, "by whom

cultured Germans were so much plagued, was exorcised by Bismarck; but

now the Devil has entered into the swine, [17] and is worse than ever!" [17]

Luke viii.

  33.

  —Tr.

  325.

    Opinions.—Most men are nothing and count for nothing until they have

arrayed themselves in universal convictions and public opinions. This is in

accordance with the tailors' philosophy, "The apparel makes the man." Of

exceptional men, however, it must be said, "The wearer primarily makes the

apparel." Here opinions cease to be public, and become something else than

masks, ornament, and disguise.

  326.

  Two Kinds of Sobriety.—In order not to confound the sobriety arising

from mental exhaustion with that arising from moderation, one must remark

that the former is peevish, the latter cheerful.

  327.

    Debasement  of  Joy.—To  call  a  thing  good  not  a  day  longer  than  it

appears to us good, and above all not a day earlier—that is the only way to

keep joy pure. Otherwise, joy all too easily becomes insipid and rotten to the

taste, and counts, for whole strata of the people, among the adulterated food-

stuffs.  328.

  The Scapegoat of Virtue.—When a man does his very best, those who

mean well towards him, but are not capable of appreciating him, speedily

seek a scapegoat to immolate, thinking it is the scapegoat of sin—but it is the

scapegoat of virtue.

  329.

    Sovereignty.—To honour and acknowledge even the bad, when it pleases

one,  and  to  have  no  conception  of  how  one  could  be  ashamed  of  being

pleased thereat, is the mark of sovereignty in things great and small.

  330.

    Influence a Phantom, not a Reality.—The man of mark gradually learns

that so far as he has influence he is a phantom in other brains, and perhaps he

falls into a state of subtle vexation of soul, in which he asks himself whether

he must not maintain this phantom of himself for the benefit of his fellow-

men.

  331.

    Giving and Taking.—When one takes away (or anticipates) the smallest

thing that another possesses, the latter is blind to the fact that he has been

given something greater, nay, even the greatest thing.

  332.

  Good Ploughland.—All rejection and negation betoken a deficiency in

fertility. If we were good ploughland, we should allow nothing to be unused

or lost, and in everything, event, or person we should welcome manure, rain,

or sunshine.

  333.

    Intercourse  as  an  Enjoyment.—If  a  man  renounces  the  world  and

intentionally lives in solitude, he may come to regard intercourse with others,

which he enjoys but seldom, as a special delicacy.

  334.

  To Know how to Suffer in Public.—We must advertise our misfortunes

and  from  time  to  time  heave  audible  sighs  and  show  visible  marks  of

impatience. For if we could let others see how assured and happy we are in

spite of pain and privation, how envious and ill-tempered they would become

at the sight!—But we must take care not to corrupt our fellow-men; besides,

if they knew the truth, they would levy a heavy toll upon us. At any rate our

public misfortune is our private advantage.

  335.  Warmth on the Heights.—On the heights it is warmer than people in the

valleys suppose, especially in winter. The thinker recognizes the full import

of this simile.

  336.

  To Will the Good and be Capable of the Beautiful.—It is not enough to

practise the good one must have willed it, and, as the poet says, include the

Godhead in our will. But the beautiful we must not will, we must be capable

of it, in innocence and blindness, without any psychical curiosity. He that

lights his lantern to find perfect men should remember the token by which to

know them. They are the men who always act for the sake of the good and in

so  doing  always  attain  to  the  beautiful  without  thinking  of  the  beautiful.

Many better and nobler men, from impotence or from want of beauty in their

souls, remain unrefreshing and ugly to behold, with all their good will and

good works. They rebuff and injure even virtue through the repulsive garb in

which their bad taste arrays her.

  337.

    Danger of Renunciation.—We must beware of basing our lives on too

narrow a foundation of appetite. For if we renounce all the joys involved in

positions,  honours,  associations,  revels,  creature  comforts,  and  arts,  a  day

may come when we perceive that this repudiation has led us not to wisdom

but to satiety of life.

  338.

  Final Opinion on Opinions.—Either we should hide our opinions or hide

ourselves behind our opinions. Whoever does otherwise, does not know the

way of the world, or belongs to the order of pious fire-eaters.

  339.

    "Gaudeamus Igitur."—Joy must contain edifying and healing forces for

the moral nature of man. Otherwise, how comes it that our soul, as soon as it

basks in the sunshine of joy, unconsciously vows to itself, "I will be good!" "I

will become perfect!" and is at once seized by a premonition of perfection

that is like a shudder of religious awe?

  340.

  To One who is Praised.—So long as you are praised, believe that you are

not yet on your own course but on that of another.

  341.

  Loving the Master.—The apprentice and the master love the master in

different ways.  342.

    All-too-Beautiful and Human.—"Nature is too beautiful for thee, poor

mortal," one often feels. But now and then, at a profound contemplation of all

that is human, in its fullness, vigour, tenderness, and complexity, I have felt

as  if  I  must  say,  in  all  humility,  "Man  also  is  too  beautiful  for  the

contemplation of man!" Nor did I mean the moral man alone, but everyone.

  343.

  Real  and  Personal  Estate.—When  life  has  treated  us  in  true  robber

fashion, and has taken away all that it could of honour, joys, connections,

health, and property of every kind, we perhaps discover in the end, after the

first shock, that we are richer than before. For now we know for the first time

what is so peculiarly ours that no robber hand can touch it, and perhaps, after

all the plunder and devastation, we come forward with the airs of a mighty

real estate owner.

  344.

    Involuntarily Idealized.—The most painful feeling that exists is finding

out that we are always taken for somethinghigher than we really are. For we

must thereby confess to ourselves, "There is in you some element of fraud—

your speech, your expression, your bearing, your eye, your dealings; and this

deceitful  something  is  as  necessary  as  your  usual  honesty,  but  constantly

destroys its effect and its value."

  345.

    Idealist and Liar.—We must not let ourselves be tyrannized even by that

finest faculty of idealizing things: otherwise, truth will one day part company

from us with the insulting remark: "Thou arch-liar, what have I to do with

thee?"

  346.

  Being  Misunderstood.—When  one  is  misunderstood  generally,  it  is

impossible  to  remove  a  particular  misunderstanding.  This  point  must  be

recognized, to save superfluous expenditure of energy in self-defence.

  347.

  The  Water-Drinker  Speaks.—Go  on  drinking  your  wine,  which  has

refreshed you all your life—what affair is it of yours if I have to be a water-

drinker? Are not wine and water peaceable, brotherly elements, that can live

side by side without mutual recriminations?

  348.

  From  Cannibal  Country.—In  solitude  the  lonely  man  is  eaten  up  byhimself, among crowds by the many. Choose which you prefer.

  349.

  The Freezing-Point of the Will.—"Some time the hour will come at last,

the hour that will envelop you in the golden cloud of painlessness; when the

soul enjoys its own weariness and, happy in patient playing with patience

resembles the waves of a lake, which on a quiet summer day, in the reflection

of a many-hued evening sky, sip and sip at the shore and again are hushed—

without  end,  without  purpose,  without  satiety,  without  need—all  calm

rejoicing in change, all ebb and flow of Nature's pulse." Such is the feeling

and  talk  of  all  invalids,  but  if  they  attain  that  hour,  a  brief  period  of

enjoyment is followed by ennui. But this is the thawing-wind of the frozen

will, which awakes, stirs, and once more begets desire upon desire.—Desire

is a sign of convalescence or recovery.

  350.

  The Disclaimed Ideal.—It happens sometimes by an exception that a man

only reaches the highest when he disclaims his ideal. For this ideal previously

drove him onward too violently, so that in the middle of the track he regularly

got out of breath and had to rest.

  351.

  A Treacherous Inclination.—It should be regarded as a sign of an envious

but aspiring man, when he feels himself attracted by the thought that with

regard to the eminent there is but one salvation—love.

  352.

    Staircase Happiness.—Just as the wit of many men does not keep pace

with opportunity (so that opportunity has already passed through the door

while  wit  still  waits  on  the  staircase  outside),  so  others  have  a  kind  of

staircase happiness, which walks too slowly to keep pace with swift-footed

Time. The best that it can enjoy of an experience, of a whole span of life,

falls  to  its  share  long  afterwards,  often  only  as  a  weak,  spicy  fragrance,

giving rise to longing and sadness—as if "it might have been possible"—

some time or other—to drink one's fill of this element: but now it is too late.

  353.

    Worms.—The fact that an intellect contains a few worms does not detract

from its ripeness.

  354.

  The Seat of Victory.—A good seat on horseback robs an opponent of his

courage, the spectator of his heart—why attack such a man? Sit like one whohas been victorious!

  355.

    Danger  in  Admiration.—From  excessive  admiration  for  the  virtues  of

others  one  can  lose  the  sense  of  one's  own,  and  finally,  through  lack  of

practice, lose these virtues themselves, without retaining the alien virtues as

compensation.

  356.

  Uses  of  Sickliness.—He  who  is  often  ill  not  only  has  a  far  greater

pleasure in health, on account of his so often getting well, but acquires a very

keen sense of what is healthy or sickly in actions and achievements, both his

own and others'. Thus, for example, it is just the writers of uncertain health—

among whom, unfortunately, nearly all great writers must be classed—who

are wont to have a far more even and assured tone of health in their writings,

because  they  are  better  versed  than  are  the  physically  robust  in  the

philosophy  of  psychical  health  and  convalescence  and  in  their  teachers—

morning, sunshine, forest, and fountain.

  357.

    Disloyalty a Condition of Mastery.—It cannot be helped—every master

has but one pupil, and he becomes disloyal to him, for he also is destined for

mastery.

  358.

  Never in Vain.—In the mountains of truth you never climb in vain. Either

you already reach a higher point to-day, or you exercise your strength in

order to be able to climb higher to-morrow.

  359.

    Through: Grey Window-Panes.—Is what you see through this window of

the world so beautiful that you do not wish to look through any other window

—ay, and even try to prevent others from so doing?

  360.

  A Sign of Radical Changes.—When we dream of persons long forgotten

or dead, it is a sign that we have suffered radical changes, and that the soil on

which we live has been completely undermined. The dead rise again, and our

antiquity becomes modernity.

  361.

    Medicine  of  the  Soul.—To  lie  still  and  think  little  is  the  cheapest

medicine for all diseases of the soul, and, with the aid of good-will, becomes

pleasanter every hour that it is used.  362.

    Intellectual Order of Precedence.—You rank far below others when you

try to establish the exception and they the rule.

  363.

  The Fatalist.—You must believe in fate—science can compel you thereto.

All that develops in you out of that belief—cowardice, devotion or loftiness,

and uprightness—bears witness to the soil in which the grain was sown, but

not to the grain itself, for from that seed anything and everything can grow.

  364.

  The Reason for Much Fretfulness.—He that prefers the beautiful to the

useful in life will undoubtedly, like children who prefer sweetmeats to bread,

destroy his digestion and acquire a very fretful outlook on the world.

  365.

  Excess  as  a  Remedy.—We  can  make  our  own  talent  once  more

acceptable to ourselves by honoring and enjoying the opposite talent for some

time to excess.—Using excess as a remedy is one of the more refined devices

in the art of life.

  366.

  "Will  a  Self."—Active,  successful  natures  act,  not  according  to  the

maxim,  "Know  thyself,"  but  as  if  always  confronted  with  the  command,

"Will a self, so you will become a self"—Fate seems always to have left them

a choice. Inactive, contemplative natures, on the other hand, reflect on how

they have chosen their self "once for all" at their entry into life.

  367.

  To  Live  as  Far  as  Possible  without  a  Following.—How  small  is  the

importance  of  followers  we  first  grasp  when  we  have  ceased  to  be  the

followers of our followers.

  368.

  Obscuring Oneself.—We must understand how to obscure ourselves in

order to get rid of the gnat-swarms of pestering admirers.

  369.

    Ennui.—There  is  an  ennui  of  the  most  subtle  and  cultured  brains,  to

which the best that the world can offer has become stale. Accustomed to eat

ever more and more recherché fare and to feel disgust at coarser diet, they are

in danger of dying of hunger. For the very best exists but in small quantities,

and has sometimes become inaccessible or hard as stone, so that even good

teeth can no longer bite it.  370.

  The Danger in Admiration.—The admiration of a quality or of an art may

be so strong as to deter us from aspiring to possess that quality or art.

  371.

  What is Required of Art.—One man wants to enjoy himself by means of

art,  another  for  a  time  to  get  out  of  or  above  himself.—To  meet  both

requirements there exists a twofold species of artists.

  372.

      Secessions.—Whoever  secedes  from  us  offends  not  us,  perhaps,  but

certainly our adherents.

  373.

  After Death.—It is only long after the death of a man that we find it

inconceivable that he should be missed—in the case of really great men, only

after decades. Those who are honest usually think when any one dies that he

is  not  much  missed,  and  that  the  pompous  funeral  oration  is  a  piece  of

hypocrisy. Necessity first teaches the necessariness of an individual, and the

proper epitaph is a belated sigh.

  374.

  Leaving in Hades.—We must leave many things in the Hades of half-

conscious feeling, and not try to release them from their shadow-existence, or

else they will become, as thoughts and words, our demoniacal tyrants, with

cruel lust after our blood.

  375.

  Near to Beggary.—Even the richest intellect sometimes mislays the key

to the room in which his hoarded treasures repose. He is then like the poorest

of the poor, who must beg to get a living.

  376.

    Chain-Thinkers.—To  him  who  has  thought  a  great  deal,  every  new

thought that he hears or reads at once assumes the form of a chain.

  377.

  Pity.—In the gilded sheath of pity is sometimes hidden the dagger of

envy.

  378.

  What is Genius?—To aspire to a lofty aim and to will the means to that

aim.

  379.

  Vanity of Combatants.—He who has no hope of victory in a combat, orwho is obviously worsted, is all the more desirous that his style of fighting

should be admired.

  380.

  The  Philosophic  Life  Misinterpreted.—At  the  moment  when  one  is

beginning to take philosophy seriously, the whole world fancies that one is

doing the reverse.

  381.

    Imitation.—By imitation, the bad gains, the good loses credit—especially

in art.

  382.

  Final Teaching of History.—"Oh that I had but lived in those times!" is

the exclamation of foolish and frivolous men. At every period of history that

we seriously review, even if it be the most belauded era of the past, we shall

rather cry out at the end, "Anything but a return to that! The spirit of that age

would oppress you with the weight of a hundred atmospheres, the good and

beautiful in it you would not enjoy, its evil you could not digest." Depend

upon it, posterity will pass the same verdict on our own epoch, and say that it

was unbearable, that life under such conditions was intolerable. "And yet

every one can endure his own times?" Yes, because the spirit of his age not

only lies upon him but is in him. The spirit of the age offers resistance to

itself and can bear itself.

  383.

  Greatness as a Mask.—By greatness in our comportment we embitter our

foes; by envy that we do not conceal we almost reconcile them to us. For

envy  levels  and  makes  equal;  it  is  an  unconscious,  plaintive  variety  of

modesty.—It may be indeed that here and there, for the sake of the above-

named advantage, envy has been assumed as a mask by those who are not

envious. Certainly, however, greatness in comportment is often used as the

mask  of  envy  by  ambitious  men  who  would  rather  suffer  drawbacks  and

embitter their foes than let it be seen that they place them on an equal footing

with themselves.

  384.

    Unpardonable.—You gave him an opportunity of displaying the greatness

of his character, and he did not make use of the opportunity. He will never

forgive you for that.

  385.

    Contrasts.—The most senile thought ever conceived about men lies in thefamous saying, "The ego is always hateful," the most childish in the still

more  famous  saying,  "Love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."—With  the  one

knowledge of men has ceased, with the other it has not yet begun.

  386.

  A Defective Ear.—"We still belong to the mob so long as we always shift

the blame on to others; we are on the track of wisdom when we always make

ourselves alone responsible; but the wise man finds no one to blame, neither

himself nor others."—Who said that? Epictetus, eighteen hundred years ago.

—The  world  has  heard  but  forgotten  the  saying.—No,  the  world  has  not

heard and not forgotten it: everything is not forgotten. But we had not the

necessary ear, the ear of Epictetus.—So he whispered it into his own ear?—

Even so: wisdom is the whispering of the sage to himself in the crowded

market-place.

  387.

  A Defect of Standpoint, not of Vision.—We always stand a few paces too

near ourselves and a few paces too far from our neighbour. Hence we judge

him too much in the lump, and ourselves too much by individual, occasional,

insignificant features and circumstances.

  388.

  Ignorance about Weapons.—How little we care whether another knows a

subject or not!—whereas he perhaps sweats blood at the bare idea that he

may be considered ignorant on the point. Yes, there are exquisite fools, who

always go about with a quiverful of mighty, excommunicatory utterances,

ready  to  shoot  down  any  one  who  shows  freely  that  there  are  matters  in

which their judgment is not taken into account.

  389.

  At the Drinking-Table of Experience.—People whose innate moderation

leads them to drink but the half of every glass, will not admit that everything

in the world has its lees and sediment.

  390.

    Singing-Birds.—The followers of a great man often put their own eyes

out, so that they may be the better able to sing his praise.

  391.

  Beyond our Ken.—The good generally displeases us when it is beyond

our ken.

  392.

  Rule as Mother or as Child.—There is one condition that gives birth torules, another to which rules give birth.

  393.

    Comedy.—We  sometimes  earn  honour  or  love  for  actions  and

achievements which we have long since sloughed as the snake sloughs his

skin. We are hereby easily seduced into becoming the comic actors of our

own past, and into throwing the old skin once more about our shoulders—and

that not merely from vanity, but from good-will towards our admirers.

  394.

  A Mistake of Biographers.—The small force that is required to launch a

boat into the stream must not be confounded with the force of the stream that

carries the boat along. Yet this mistake is made in nearly all biographies.

  395.

  Not Buying too Dear.—The things that we buy too dear we generally turn

to bad use, because we have no love for them but only a painful recollection.

Thus they involve a twofold drawback.

  396.

  The  Philosophy  that  Society  always  Needs.—The  pillars  of  the  social

structure  rest  upon  the  fundamental  fact  that  everyone  cheerfully

contemplates all that he is, does, and attempts, his sickness or health, his

poverty or affluence, his honour or insignificance, and says to himself, "After

all,  I  would  not  change  places  with  anyone!"—Whoever  wishes  to  add  a

stone to the social structure should always try to implant in mankind this

cheerful philosophy of contentment and refusal to change places.

  397.

  The Mark of a Noble Soul.—A noble soul is not that which is capable of

the highest flights, but that which rises little and falls little, living always in a

free and bright atmosphere and altitude

  398.

  Greatness and its Contemplator.—The noblest effect of greatness is that it

gives the contemplator a power of vision that magnifies and embellishes.

  399.

  Being  Satisfied.—We  show  that  we  have  attained  maturity  of

understanding  when  we  no  longer  go  where  rare  flowers  lurk  under  the

thorniest  hedges  of  knowledge,  but  are  satisfied  with  gardens,  forests,

meadows, and ploughlands, remembering that life is too short for the rare and

uncommon.

  400.  Advantage in Privation.—He who always lives in the warmth and fullness

of the heart, and, as it were, in the summer air of the soul, cannot form an

idea of that fearful delight which seizes more wintry natures, who for once in

a  way  are  kissed  by  the  rays  of  love  and  the  milder  breath  of  a  sunny

February day.

  401.

  Recipe for the Sufferer.—You find the burden of life too heavy? Then

you must increase the burden of your life. When the sufferer finally thirsts

after and seeks the river of Lethe, then he must become a hero to be certain of

finding it.

  402.

  The  Judge.—He  who  has  seen  another's  ideal  becomes  his  inexorable

judge, and as it were his evil conscience.

  403.

  The  Utility  of  Great  Renunciation.—The  useful  thing  about  great

renunciation is that it invests us with that youthful pride through which we

can thenceforth easily demand of ourselves small renunciations.

  404.

  How Duty Acquires a Glamour.—You can change a brazen duty into

gold in the eyes of all by always performing something more than you have

promised.

  405.

  Prayer  to  Mankind.—"Forgive  us  our  virtues"—so  should  we  pray  to

mankind.

  406.

  They that Create and They that Enjoy.—Everyone who enjoys thinks that

the principal thing to the tree is the fruit, but in point of fact the principal

thing to it is the seed.—Herein lies the difference between them that create

and them that enjoy.

  407.

  The Glory of all Great Men.—What is the use of genius if it does not

invest him who contemplates and reveres it with such freedom and loftiness

of  feeling  that  he  no  longer  has  need  of  genius?—To  make  themselves

superfluous is the glory of all great men.

  408.

  The  Journey  to  Hades.—I  too  have  been  in  the  underworld,  even  as

Odysseus, and I shall often be there again. Not sheep alone have I sacrificed,that I might be able to converse with a few dead souls, but not even my own

blood  have  I  spared.  There  were  four  pairs  who  responded  to  me  in  my

sacrifice: Epicurus and Montaigne, Goethe and Spinoza, Plato and Rousseau,

Pascal and Schopenhauer. With them I have to come to terms. When I have

long wandered alone, I will let them prove me right or wrong; to them will I

listen, if they prove each other right or wrong. In all that I say, conclude, or

think out for myself and others, I fasten my eyes on those eight and see their

eyes fastened on mine.—May the living forgive me if I look upon them at

times as shadows, so pale and fretful, so restless and, alas! so eager for life.

Those eight, on the other hand, seem to me so living that I feel as if even

now, after their death, they could never become weary of life. But eternal

vigour of life is the important point: what matters "eternal life," or indeed life

at all?

    HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN SECOND SEQUEL: THE WANDERER

                                AND HIS SHADOW

  A Dialog between The Shadow and The wanderer:

  The Shadow Since I haven't heard your voice in so long, I would like to

give you an opportunity to speak. The Wanderer Someone said something --

where? and who? It almost seems as if I myself were speaking, though in an

even weaker voice than mine.

  The Shadow (after a pause) : Are you not happy to have an opportunity to

speak?

  The  Wanderer  By  God  and  all  things,  in  which  I  do  not  believe,  my

shadow speaks; I hear it, but I don't believe it.

  The Shadow Let's accept it and don't continue to think about it -- in one

hour it will all be over.

  The  Wanderer  That's  what  I  thought,  when  I  saw  two  and  then  five

camels in a forest near Pisa.

  The Shadow. It's good, that we are both indulgent in the same way, if our

reason stands still: thus we will not become annoying and press each other in

conversation when something sounds incomprehensible to us. If one does not

know how to answer, then it is already enough to say something -- that's the

reasonable policy under which I agree to converse. With longer discussions,

the wisest one becomes once the fool and three times the dullard.

  The Wanderer Your modesty is not complimentary to your confessor.

  The Shadow Am I to flatter?

  The Wanderer I thought a man's shadow was his vanity, but his vanitywould never ask: "Am I to flatter?"

  The Shadow. Nor would man's vanity, as far as I know, inquire -- as I did

twice already -- whether it could speak: it always speaks.

  The Wanderer Only now do I notice how impolite I am, my beloved

shadow: I have not said a word about how pleased I am to see you as well as

hear you. You should know that I love the shadow as much as I cherish the

light. For facial beauty, clarity of speech, quality and firmness of character,

shadow  is  as  necessary  as  light.  They  are  not  opponents:  they  are  rather

affectionate, holding hands -- and if the light disappears, the shadow slips

away after it.

  The Shadow And I hate the same thing you hate: the night; I love human

beings, because they are devotees of light and I'm pleased when their eyes

shine  as  they  discern  and  discover  knowledge  --  untiring  knowers  and

discoverers that they are. That shadow, which all things cast, if the sunshine

of perception falls upon them -- that shadow am I as well. su The Wanderer I

believe I understand you, despite your somewhat shadowy expressions. But

you were right: good friends give each other -- here and there -- a cryptic

word as a sign of agreement, which should be a mystery to any third party.

And we are good friends. Therefore, let's dispense with the preliminaries! A

few hundred questions press upon my soul, and the time you have to answer

them is perhaps only brief. Let's see what, in all haste and peaceableness, we

can agree upon.

  The Shadow But shadows are shier than human beings: you won't tell

anyone how we have spoken together!

  The Wanderer How we have spoken together? Heaven forfend! especially

from long drawn-out literary discussions. If Plato had less desire to "spin" his

readers, they would find more pleasure in Plato. A really amusing discussion

--  when  written  down  --  is  merely  a  painting  with  false  perspectives:

everything is too long or too short -- nevertheless, perhaps you'll allow me to

indicate what we agreed upon?

  The Shadow. I'm happy with that, since everyone will recognize therein

only your opinions -- nobody will think of the shadow.

  The  Wanderer.  Perhaps  you  are  wrong,  my  friend!  Up  to  now  one

assumed in my opinions more of shadow than of me.

  The Shadow More shadow than light? Is it possible?

  The  Wanderer.  Dear  fool,  be  serious!  My  first  question  requires

seriousness.  SECOND SEQUEL: THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW

  1.

  Of the Tree of Knowledge.—Probability, but no truth; the semblance of

freedom, but no freedom—these are the two fruits by virtue of which the tree

of knowledge cannot be confounded with the tree of life.

  2.

  The World's Reason.—That the world is not the abstract essence of an

eternal reasonableness is sufficiently proved by the fact that that bit of the

world which we know—I mean our human reason—is none too reasonable.

And if this is not eternally and wholly wise and reasonable, the rest of the

world will not be so either. Here the conclusion a minori ad majus, a parte ad

totum holds good, and that with decisive force.

  3.

  "In the Beginning was."—To glorify the origin—that is the metaphysical

after-shoot  which  sprouts  again  at  the  contemplation  of  history,  and

absolutely makes us imagine that in the beginning of things lies all that is

most valuable and essential.

  4.

  Standard for the Value of Truth.—The difficulty of climbing mountains is

no gauge of their height. Yet in the case of science it is different!—we are

told  by  certain  persons  who  wish  to  be  considered  "the  initiated,"—the

difficulty  in  finding  truth  is  to  determine  the  value  of  truth!  This  insane

morality  originates  in  the  idea  that  "truths"  are  really  nothing  more  than

gymnastic appliances, with which we have to exercise ourselves until we are

thoroughly tired. It is a morality for the athletes and gymnasts of the intellect.

  5.

  Use of Words and Reality.—There exists a simulated contempt for all the

things that mankind actually holds most important, for all everyday matters.

For instance, we say "we only eat to live"—an abominable lie, like that which

speaks  of  the  procreation  of  children  as  the  real  purpose  of  all  sexual

pleasure. Conversely, the reverence for "the most important things" is hardly

ever quite genuine. The priests and metaphysicians have indeed accustomed

us to a hypocritically exaggerated use of words regarding these matters, but

they have not altered the feeling that these most important things are not so

important as those despised "everyday matters." A fatal consequence of this

twofold hypocrisy is that we never make these everyday matters (such as

eating,  housing,  clothes,  and  intercourse)  the  object  of  a  constantunprejudiced and universal reflection and revision, but, as such a process

appears degrading, we divert from them our serious intellectual and artistic

side. Hence in such matters habit and frivolity win an easy victory over the

thoughtless,  especially  over  inexperienced  youth.  On  the  other  hand,  our

continual transgressions of the simplest laws of body and mind reduce us all,

young and old, to a disgraceful state of dependence and servitude—I mean to

that  fundamentally  superfluous  dependence  upon  physicians,  teachers  and

clergymen, whose dead-weight still lies heavy upon the whole of society.

  6.

    Earthly Infirmities and their Main Cause.—If we look about us, we are

always  coming  across  men  who  have  eaten  eggs  all  their  lives  without

observing  that  the  oblong-shaped  taste  the  best;  who  do  not  know  that  a

thunder-storm is beneficial to the stomach; that perfumes are most fragrant in

cold, clear air; that our sense of taste varies in different parts of our mouths;

that  every  meal  at  which  we  talk  well  or  listen  well  does  harm  to  the

digestion. If we are not satisfied with these examples of defective powers of

observation, we shall concede all the more readily that the everyday matters

are very imperfectly seen and rarely observed by the majority. Is this a matter

of indifference?—Let us remember, after all, that from this defect are derived

nearly all the bodily and spiritual infirmities of the individual. Ignorance of

what is good and bad for us, in the arrangement of our mode of life, the

division of our day, the selection of our friends and the time we devote to

them,  in  business  and  leisure,  commanding  and  obeying,  our  feeling  for

nature and for art, our eating, sleeping, and meditation; ignorance and lack of

keen perceptions in the smallest and most ordinary details—this it is that

makes the world "a vale of tears" for so many. Let us not say that here as

everywhere the fault lies with human unreason. Of reason there is enough and

to spare, but it is wrongly directed and artificially diverted from these little

intimate things. Priests and teachers, and the sublime ambition of all idealists,

coarser and subtler, din it even into the child's ears that the means of serving

mankind at large depend upon altogether different things—upon the salvation

of the soul, the service of the State, the advancement of science, or even upon

social  position  and  property;  whereas  the  needs  of  the  individual,  his

requirements great and small during the twenty-four hours of the day, are

quite paltry or indifferent.—Even Socrates attacked with all his might this

arrogant  neglect  of  the  human  for  the  benefit  of  humanity,  and  loved  to

indicate by a quotation from Homer the true sphere and conception of allanxiety and reflection: "All that really matters," he said, "is the good and evil

hap I find at home."

  7.

  Two  Means  of  Consolation.—Epicurus,  the  soul-comforter  of  later

antiquity, said, with that marvelous insight which to this very day is so rarely

to be found, that for the calming of the spirit the solution of the final and

ultimate theoretical problems is by no means necessary. Hence, instead of

raising a barren and remote discussion of the final question, whether the Gods

existed, it sufficed him to say to those who were tormented by "fear of the

Gods": "If there are Gods, they do not concern themselves with us." The

latter position is far stronger and more favorable, for, by conceding a few

points to the other, one makes him readier to listen and to take to heart. But

as  soon  as  he  sets  about  proving  the  opposite  (that  the  Gods  do  concern

themselves with us), into what thorny jungles of error must the poor man fall,

quite  of  his  own  accord,  and  without  any  cunning  on  the  part  of  his

interlocutor!  The  latter  must  only  have  enough  subtlety  and  humanity  to

conceal  his  sympathy  with  this  tragedy.  Finally,  the  other  comes  to  feel

disgust—the strongest argument against any proposition—disgust with his

own hypothesis. He becomes cold, and goes away in the same frame of mind

as the pure atheist who says, "What do the Gods matter to me? The devil take

them!"—In  other  cases,  especially  when  a  half-physical,  half-moral

assumption  had  cast  a  gloom  over  his  spirit,  Epicurus  did  not  refute  the

assumption. He agreed that it might be true, but that there was a second

assumption to explain the same phenomenon, and that it could perhaps be

maintained  in  other  ways.  The  plurality  of  hypotheses  (for  example,  that

concerning the origin of conscientious scruples) suffices even in our time to

remove from the soul the shadows that arise so easily from pondering over a

hypothesis  which  is  isolated,  merely  visible,  and  hence  overvalued  a

hundredfold.—Thus whoever wishes to console the unfortunate, the criminal,

the hypochondriac, the dying, may call to mind the two soothing suggestions

of Epicurus, which can be applied to a great number of problems. In their

simplest form they would run: firstly, granted the thing is so, it does not

concern us; secondly, the thing may be so, but it may also be otherwise.

  8.

  In the Night.—So soon as night begins to fall our sensations concerning

everyday matters are altered. There is the wind, prowling as if on forbidden

paths, whispering as if in search of something, fretting because he cannot findit. There is the lamplight, with its dim red glow, its weary look, unwillingly

fighting against night, a sullen slave to wakeful man. There are the breathings

of the sleeper, with their terrible rhythm, to which an ever-recurring care

seems to blow the trumpet-melody—we do not hear it, but when the sleeper's

bosom heaves we feel our heart-strings tighten; and when the breath sinks

and  almost  dies  away  into  a  deathly  stillness,  we  say  to  ourselves,  "Rest

awhile, poor troubled spirit!" All living creatures bear so great a burden that

we wish them an eternal rest; night invites to death.—If human beings were

deprived of the sun and resisted night by means of moonlight and oil-lamps,

what a philosophy would cast its veil over them! We already see only too

plainly how a shadow is thrown over the spiritual and intellectual nature of

man by that moiety of darkness and sunlessness that envelops life.

  9.

  Origin of the Doctrine of Free Will.—Necessity sways one man in the

shape of his passions, another as a habit of hearing and obeying, a third as a

logical  conscience,  a  fourth  as  a  caprice  and  a  mischievous  delight  in

evasions. These four, however, seek the freedom of their will at the very

point where they are most securely fettered. It is as if the silkworm sought

freedom of will in spinning. What is the reason? Clearly this, that everyone

thinks himself most free where his vitality is strongest; hence, as I have said,

now in passion, now in duty, now in knowledge, now in caprice. A man

unconsciously  imagines  that  where  he  is  strong,  where  he  feels  most

thoroughly  alive,  the  element  of  his  freedom  must  lie.  He  thinks  of

dependence  and  apathy,  independence  and  vivacity  as  forming  inevitable

pairs.—Thus  an  experience  that  a  man  has  undergone  in  the  social  and

political sphere is wrongly transferred to the ultimate metaphysical sphere.

There the strong man is also the free man, there the vivid feeling of joy and

sorrow, the high hopes, the keen desires, the powerful hates are the attributes

of the ruling, independent natures, while the thrall and the slave live in a state

of dazed oppression.—The doctrine of free will is an invention of the ruling

classes.

  10.

    "'Absence of Feeling of New Chains.—So long as we do not feel that we

are  in  some  way  dependent,  we  consider  ourselves  independent—a  false

conclusion that shows how proud man is, how eager for dominion. For he

hereby  assumes  that  he  would  always  be  sure  to  observe  and  recognize

dependence so soon as he suffered it, the preliminary hypothesis being that hegenerally lives in independence, and that, should he lose that independence

for  once  in  a  way,  he  would  immediately  detect  a  contrary  sensation.—

Suppose,  however,  the  reverse  to  be  true—that  he  is  always  living  in  a

complex state of dependence, but thinks himself free where, through long

habit, he no longer feels the weight of the chain? He only suffers from new

chains, and "free will" really means nothing more than an absence of feeling

of new chains.

  11.

  Freedom of the Will and the Isolation of Facts.—Our ordinary inaccurate

observation  takes  a  group  of  phenomena  as  one  and  calls  them  a  fact.

Between this fact and another we imagine a vacuum, we isolate each fact. In

reality, however, the sum of our actions and cognitions is no series of facts

and intervening vacua, but a continuous stream. Now the belief in free will is

incompatible with the idea of a continuous, uniform, undivided, indivisible

flow.  This  belief  presupposes  that  every  single  action  is  isolated  and

indivisible; it is an atomic theory as regards volition and cognition.—We

misunderstand  facts  as  we  misunderstand  characters,  speaking  of  similar

characters  and  similar  facts,  whereas  both  are  non-existent.  Further,  we

bestow praise and blame only on this false hypothesis, that there are similar

facts, that a graduated order of species of facts exists, corresponding to a

graduated order of values. Thus we isolate not only the single fact, but the

groups of apparently equal facts (good, evil, compassionate, envious actions,

and so forth). In both cases we are wrong.—The word and the concept are the

most obvious reason for our belief in this isolation of groups of actions. We

do not merely thereby designate the things; the thought at the back of our

minds is that by the word and the concept we can grasp the essence of the

actions.  We  are  still  constantly  led  astray  by  words  and  actions,  and  are

induced to think of things as simpler than they are, as separate, indivisible,

existing  in  the  absolute.  Language  contains  a  hidden  philosophical

mythology, which, however careful we may be, breaks out afresh at every

moment. The belief in free will—that is to say, in similar facts and isolated

facts—finds in language its continual apostle and advocate.

  12.

  The Fundamental Errors.—A man cannot feel any psychical pleasure or

pain unless he is swayed by one of two illusions. Either he believes in the

identity of certain facts, certain sensations, and in that case finds spiritual

pleasure and pain in comparing present with past conditions and in notingtheir similarity or difference (as is invariably the case with recollection); or

he believes in the freedom of the will, perhaps when he reflects, "I ought not

to have done this," "This might have turned out differently," and from these

reflections likewise he derives pleasure and pain. Without the errors that are

rife  in  every  psychical  pain  and  pleasure,  humanity  would  never  have

developed. For the root idea of humanity is that man is free in a world of

bondage—man, the eternal wonder-worker, whether his deeds be good or evil

—man, the amazing exception, the super-beast, the quasi-God, the mind of

creation, the indispensable, the key-word to the cosmic riddle, the mighty

lord of nature and despiser of nature, the creature that calls its history "the

history of the world"! Vanitas vanitatum homo.

  13.

    Repetition.—It is an excellent thing to express a thing consecutively in

two ways, and thus provide it with a right and a left foot. Truth can stand

indeed on one leg, but with two she will walk and complete her journey.

  14.

  Man as the Comic Actor of the World.—It would require beings more

intellectual than men to relish to the full the humorous side of man's view of

himself as the goal of all existence and of his serious pronouncement that he

is satisfied only with the prospect of fulfilling a world-mission. If a God

created the world, he created man to be his ape, as a perpetual source of

amusement in the midst of his rather tedious eternities. The music of the

spheres  surrounding  the  world  would  then  presumably  be  the  mocking

laughter of all the other creatures around mankind. God in his boredom uses

pain for the tickling of his favorite animal, in order to enjoy his proudly tragic

gestures  and  expressions  of  suffering,  and,  in  general,  the  intellectual

inventiveness of the vainest of his creatures—as inventor of this inventor. For

he who invented man as a joke had more intellect and more joy in intellect

than has man.—Even here, where our human nature is willing to humble

itself, our vanity again plays us a trick, in that we men should like in this

vanity at least to be quite marvelous and incomparable. Our uniqueness in the

world! Oh, what an improbable thing it is! Astronomers, who occasionally

acquire a horizon outside our world, give us to understand that the drop of

life on the earth is without significance for the total character of the mighty

ocean  of  birth  and  decay;  that  countless  stars  present  conditions  for  the

generation  of  life  similar  to  those  of  the  earth—and  yet  these  are  but  a

handful in comparison with the endless number that have never known, orhave long been cured, of the eruption of life; that life on each of these stars,

measured by the period of its existence, has been but an instant, a flicker,

with long, long intervals afterwards—and thus in no way the aim and final

purpose of their existence. Possibly the ant in the forest is quite as firmly

convinced that it is the aim and purpose of the existence of the forest, as we

are convinced in our imaginations (almost unconsciously) that the destruction

of mankind involves the destruction of the world. It is even modesty on our

part to go no farther than this, and not to arrange a universal twilight of the

world and the Gods as the funeral ceremony of the last man. Even to the eye

of  the  most  unbiased  astronomer  a  lifeless  world  can  scarcely  appear

otherwise than as a shining and swinging star wherein man lies buried.

  15.

  The Modesty of Man.—How little pleasure is enough for the majority to

make them feel that life is good! How modest is man!

  16.

  Where Indifference is Necessary.—Nothing would be more perverse than

to wait for the truths that science will finally establish concerning the first

and  last  things,  and  until  then  to  think  (and  especially  to  believe)  in  the

traditional way, as one is so often advised to do. The impulse that bids us

seek nothing but certainties in this domain is a religious offshoot, nothing

better—a hidden and only apparently skeptical variety of the "metaphysical

need,"  the  underlying  idea  being  that  for  a  long  time  no  view  of  these

ultimate certainties will be obtainable, and that until then the "believer" has

the right not to trouble himself about the whole subject. We have no need of

these certainties about the farthermost horizons in order to live a full and

efficient human life, any more than the ant needs them in order to be a good

ant. Rather must we ascertain the origin of that troublesome significance that

we have attached to these things for so long. For this we require the history of

ethical and religious sentiments, since it is only under the influence of such

sentiments that these most acute problems of knowledge have become so

weighty and terrifying. Into the outermost regions to which the mental eye

can penetrate (without ever penetrating into them), we have smuggled such

concepts as guilt and punishment (everlasting punishment, too!). The darker

those regions, the more careless we have been. For ages men have let their

imaginations run riot where they could establish nothing, and have induced

posterity to accept these fantasies as something serious and true, with this

abominable  lie  as  their  final  trump-card:  that  faith  is  worth  more  thanknowledge.  What  we  need  now  in  regard  to  these  ultimate  things  is  not

knowledge as against faith, but indifference as against faith and pretended

knowledge in these matters!—Everything must lie nearer to us than what has

hitherto  been  preached  to  us  as  the  most  important  thing,  I  mean  the

questions: "What end does man serve?" "What is his fate after death?" "How

does he make his peace with God?" and all the rest of that bag of tricks. The

problems  of  the  dogmatic  philosophers,  be  they  idealists,  materialists,  or

realists, concern us as little as do these religious questions. They all have the

same object in view—to force us to a decision in matters where neither faith

nor  knowledge  is  needed.  It  is  better  even  for  the  most  ardent  lover  of

knowledge that the territory open to investigation and to reason should be

encircled  by  a  belt  of  fog-laden,  treacherous  marshland,  a  strip  of  ever

watery,  impenetrable,  and  indeterminable  country.  It  is  just  by  the

comparison  with  the  realm  of  darkness  on  the  edge  of  the  world  of

knowledge that the bright, accessible region of that world rises in value.—We

must once more become good friends of the "everyday matters," and not, as

hitherto, despise them and look beyond them at clouds and monsters of the

night. In forests and caverns, in marshy tracts and under dull skies, on the

lowest rungs of the ladder of culture, man has lived for æons, and lived in

poverty. There he has learnt to despise the present, his neighbours, his life,

and himself, and we, the inhabitants of the brighter fields of Nature and mind,

still inherit in our blood some taint of this contempt for everyday matters.

  17.

    Profound Interpretations.—He who has interpreted a passage in an author

"more profoundly" than was intended, has not interpreted the author but has

obscured  him.  Our  metaphysicians  are  in  the  same  relation,  or  even  in  a

worse  relation,  to  the  text  of  Nature.  For,  to  apply  their  profound

interpretations, they often alter the text to suit their purpose—or, in other

words, corrupt the text. A curious example of the corruption and obscuration

of  an  author's  text  is  furnished  by  the  ideas  of  Schopenhauer  on  the

pregnancy of women. "The sign of a continuous will to life in time," he says,

"is copulation; the sign of the light of knowledge which is associated anew

with this will and holds the possibility of a deliverance, and that too in the

highest degree of clearness, is the renewed incarnation of the will to life. This

incarnation is betokened by pregnancy, which is therefore frank and open,

and even proud, whereas copulation hides itself like a criminal." He declares

that every woman, if surprised in the sexual act, would be likely to die ofshame, but "displays her pregnancy without a trace of shame, nay even with a

sort of pride." Now, firstly, this condition cannot easily be displayed more

aggressively than it displays itself, and when Schopenhauer gives prominence

only to the intentional character of the display, he is fashioning his text to suit

the  interpretation.  Moreover,  his  statement  of  the  universality  of  the

phenomenon  is  not  true.  He  speaks  of  "every  woman."  Many  women,

especially the younger, often appear painfully ashamed of their condition,

even in the presence of their nearest kinsfolk. And when women of riper

years, especially in the humbler classes, do actually appear proud of their

condition, it is because they would give us to understand that they are still

desirable to their husbands. That a neighbour on seeing them or a passing

stranger should say or think "Can it be possible?"—that is an alms always

acceptable to the vanity of women of low mental capacity. In the reverse

instance,  to  conclude  from  Schopenhauer's  proposition,  the  cleverest  and

most intelligent women would tend more than any to exult openly in their

condition. For they have the best prospect of giving birth to an intellectual

prodigy, in whom "the will" can once more "negative" itself for the universal

good. Stupid women, on the other hand, would have every reason to hide

their pregnancy more modestly than anything they hide.—It cannot be said

that this view corresponds to reality. Granted, however, that Schopenhauer

was right on the general principle that women show more self-satisfaction

when pregnant than at any other time, a better explanation than this lies to

hand. One might imagine the clucking of a hen even before she lays an egg,

saying, "Look! look! I shall lay an egg! I shall lay an egg!"

  18.

  The Modern Diogenes.—Before we look for man, we must have found

the lantern.—Will it have to be the Cynic's lantern?

  19.

    Immoralists.—Moralists  must  now  put  up  with  being  rated  as

immoralists, because they dissect morals. He, however, who would dissect

must kill, but only in order that we may know more, judge better, live better,

not in order that all the world may dissect. Unfortunately, men still think that

every moralist in his every action must be a pattern for others to imitate. They

confound  him  with  the  preacher  of  morality.  The  older  moralists  did  not

dissect  enough  and  preached  too  often,  whence  that  confusion  and  the

unpleasant consequences for our latter-day moralists are derived.

  20.  A Caution against Confusion.—There are moralists who treat the strong,

noble, self-denying attitude of such beings as the heroes of Plutarch, or the

pure, enlightened, warmth-giving state of soul peculiar to truly good men and

women, as difficult scientific problems. They investigate the origin of such

phenomena, indicating the complex element in the apparent simplicity, and

directing  their  gaze  to  the  tangled  skein  of  motives,  the  delicate  web  of

conceptual illusions, and the sentiments of individuals or of groups, that are a

legacy of ancient days gradually increased. Such moralists are very different

from  those  with  whom  they  are  most  commonly  confounded,  from  those

petty minds that do not believe at all in these modes of thought and states of

soul,  and  imagine  their  own  poverty  to  be  hidden  somewhere  behind  the

glamour of greatness and purity. The moralists say, "Here are problems," and

these pitiable creatures say, "Here are impostors and deceptions." Thus the

latter deny the existence of the very things which the former are at pains to

explain.

  21.

  Man as the Measurer.—Perhaps all human morality had its origin in the

tremendous  excitement  that  seized  primitive  man  when  he  discovered

measure and measuring, scales and weighing (for the word Mensch [man]

means  "the  measurer"—he  wished  to  name  himself  after  his  greatest

discovery!). With these ideas they mounted into regions that are quite beyond

all measuring and weighing, but did not appear to be so in the beginning.

  22.

  The Principle of Equilibrium.—The robber and the man of power who

promises to protect a community from robbers are perhaps at bottom beings

of the same mould, save that the latter attains his ends by other means than

the  former—that  is  to  say,  through  regular  imposts  paid  to  him  by  the

community, and no longer through forced contributions. (The same relation

exists between merchant and pirate, who for a long period are one and the

same  person:  where  the  one  function  appears  to  them  inadvisable,  they

exercise the other. Even to-day mercantile morality is really nothing but a

refinement on piratical morality—buying in the cheapest market, at prime

cost if possible, and selling in the dearest.) The essential point is that the man

of power promises to maintain the equilibrium against the robber, and herein

the weak find a possibility of living. For either they must group themselves

into an equivalent power, or they must subject themselves to some one of

equivalent  power  (i.e.  render  service  in  return  for  his  efforts).  The  lattercourse is generally preferred, because it really keeps two dangerous beings in

check—the robber through the man of power, and the man of power through

the standpoint of advantage; for the latter profits by treating his subjects with

graciousness  and  tolerance,  in  order  that  they  may  support  not  only

themselves but their ruler. As a matter of fact, conditions may still be hard

and cruel enough, yet in comparison with the complete annihilation that was

formerly always a possibility, men breathe freely.—The community is at first

the  organization  of  the  weak  to  counterbalance  menacing  forces.  An

organization  to  outweigh  those  forces  would  be  more  advisable,  if  its

members grew strong enough to destroy the adverse power: and when it is a

question of one mighty oppressor, the attempt will certainly be made. But if

the one man is the head of a clan, or if he has a large following, a rapid and

decisive annihilation is improbable, and a long or permanent feud is only to

be expected. This feud, however, involves the least desirable condition for

the  community,  for  it  thereby  loses  the  time  to  provide  for  its  means  of

subsistence with the necessary regularity, and sees the product of all work

hourly threatened. Hence the community prefers to raise its power of attack

and defence to the exact plane on which the power of its dangerous neighbour

stands, and to give him to understand that an equal weight now lies in its own

side of the scales—so why not be good friends?—Thus equilibrium is a most

important conception for the understanding of the ancient doctrines of law

and morals. Equilibrium is, in fact, the basis of justice. When justice in ruder

ages  says,  "An  eye  for  an  eye,  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,"  it  presupposes  the

attainment  of  this  equilibrium  and  tries  to  maintain  it  by  means  of  this

compensation; so that, when crime is committed, the injured party will not

take the revenge of blind anger. By means of the jus talionis the equilibrium

of the disturbed relations of power is restored, for in such primitive times an

eye or an arm more means a bit more power, more weight.—In a community

where all consider themselves equal, disgrace and punishment await crime—

that is, violations of the principle of equilibrium. Disgrace is thrown into the

scale as a counter-weight against the encroaching individual, who has gained

profit by his encroachment, and now suffers losses (through disgrace) which

annul and outweigh the previous profits. Punishment, in the same way, sets

up  a  far  greater  counter-weight  against  the  preponderance  which  every

criminal  hopes  to  obtain—imprisonment  as  against  a  deed  of  violence,

restitution and fines as against theft. Thus the sinner is reminded that his

action has excluded him from the community and from its moral advantages,since the community treats him as an inferior, a weaker brother, an outsider.

For this reason punishment is not merely retaliation, but has something more,

something of the cruelty of the state of nature, and of this it would serve as a

reminder.

  23.

  Whether the Adherents of the Doctrine OF Free Will have a Right to

Punish?—Men whose vocation it is to judge and punish try to establish in

every case whether an evil-doer is really responsible for his act, whether he

was able to apply his reasoning powers, whether he acted with motives and

not unconsciously or under constraint. If he is punished, it is because he

preferred the worse to the better motives, which he must consequently have

known. Where this knowledge is wanting, man is, according to the prevailing

view, not responsible—unless his ignorance, e.g. his ignorantia legis, be the

consequence of an intentional neglect to learn what he ought: in that case he

already preferred the worse to the better motives at the time when he refused

to learn, and must now pay the penalty of his unwise choice. If, on the other

hand,  perhaps  through  stupidity  orshortsightedness,  he  has  never  seen  the

better motives, he is generally not punished, for people say that he made a

wrong choice, he acted like a brute beast. The intentional rejection of the

better reason is now needed before we treat the offender as fit to be punished.

But how can anyone be intentionally more unreasonable than he ought to be?

Whence  comes  the  decision,  if  the  scales  are  loaded  with  good  and  bad

motives? So the origin is not error or blindness, not an internal or external

constraint?  (It  should  furthermore  be  remembered  that  every  so-called

"external constraint" is nothing more than the internal constraint of fear and

pain.) Whence? is the repeated question. So reason is not to be the cause of

action, because reason cannot decide against the better motives? Thus we call

"free will" to our aid. Absolute discretion is to decide, and a moment is to

intervene when no motive exercises an influence, when the deed is done as a

miracle, resulting from nothing. This assumed discretion is punished in a case

where no discretion should rule. Reason, which knows law, prohibition, and

command, should have left no choice, they say, and should have acted as a

constraint and a higher power. Hence the offender is punished because he

makes use of "free will"—in other words, has acted without motive where he

should have been guided by motives. But why did he do it? This question

must  not  even  be  asked;  the  deed  was  done  without  a  "Why?"  without

motive, without origin, being a thing purposeless, unreasoned.—However,according to the above-named preliminary condition of punishability, such a

deed should not be punished at all! Moreover, even this reason for punishing

should not hold good, that in this case something had not been done, had

been  omitted,  that  reason  had  not  been'  used  at  all:  for  at  any  rate  the

omission  was  unintentional  and  only  intentional  omission  is  considered

punishable.  The  offender  has  indeed  preferred  the  worse  to  the  better

motives, but without motive and purpose: he has indeed failed to apply his

reason,  but  not  exactly  with  the  object  of  not  applying  it.  The  very

assumption  made  in  the  case  of  punishable  crime,  that  the  criminal

intentionally renounced his reason, is removed by the hypothesis of "free

will." According to your own principles, you must not punish, you adherents

of the doctrine of free will!—These principles are, however, nothing but a

very marvelous conceptual mythology, and the hen that hatched them has

brooded on her eggs far away from all reality.

  24.

  Judging  the  Criminal  and  his  Judge.—The  criminal,  who  knows  the

whole  concatenation  of  circumstances,  does  not  consider  his  act  so  far

beyond  the  bounds  of  order  and  comprehension  as  does  his  judge.  His

punishment, however, is measured by the degree of astonishment that seizes

the  judge  when  he  finds  the  crime  incomprehensible.—If  the  defending

counsel's knowledge of the case and its previous history extends far enough,

the so-called extenuating circumstances which he duly pleads must end by

absolving his client from all guilt. Or, to put it more plainly, the advocate

will, step by step, tone down and finally remove the astonishment of the

judge, by forcing every honest listener to the tacit avowal, "He was bound to

act  as  he  did,  and  if  we  punished,  we  should  be  punishing  eternal

Necessity."—Measuring  the  punishment  by  the  degree  of  knowledge  we

possess or can obtain of the previous history of the crime—is that not in

conflict with all equity?

  25.

  Exchange and Equity.—In an exchange, the only just and honest course

would  be  for  either  party  to  demand  only  so  much  as  he  considers  his

commodity to be worth, allowance being made for trouble in acquisition,

scarcity, time spent and so forth, besides the subjective value. As soon as you

make your price bear a relation to the other's need, you become a refined sort

of robber and extortioner.—If money is the sole medium of exchange, we

must remember that a shilling is by no means the same thing in the hands of arich heir, a farm labourer, a merchant, and a university student. It would be

equitable for everyone to receive much or little for his money, according as

he has done much or little to earn it. In practice, as we all know, the reverse is

the case. In the world of high finance the shilling of the idle rich man can buy

more than that of the poor, industrious man.

  26.

  Legal Conditions as Means.—Law, where it rests upon contracts between

equals, holds good so long as the power of the parties to the contract remains

equal or similar. Wisdom created law to end all feuds and useless expenditure

among men on an equal footing. Quite as definite an end is put to this waste,

however,  when  one  party  has  become  decidedly  weaker  than  the  other.

Subjection enters and law ceases, but the result is the same as that attained by

law. For now it is the wisdom of the superior which advises to spare the

inferior and not uselessly to squander his strength. Thus the position of the

inferior  is  often  more  favorable  than  that  of  the  equal.—Hence  legal

conditions are temporary means counseled by wisdom, and not ends.

  27.

    Explanation  of  Malicious  Joy.—Malicious  joy  arises  when  a  man

consciously finds himself in evil plight and feels anxiety or remorse or pain.

The misfortune that overtakes B. makes him equal to A., and A. is reconciled

and no longer envious.—If A. is prosperous, he still hoards up in his memory

B.'s misfortune as a capital, so as to throw it in the scale as a counter-weight

when he himself suffers adversity. In this case too he feels "malicious joy"

(Schadenfreude). The sentiment of equality thus applies its standard to the

domain of luck and chance. Malicious joy is the commonest expression of

victory and restoration of equality, even in a higher state of civilization. This

emotion has only been in existence since the time when man learnt to look

upon another as his equal—in other words, since the foundation of society.

  28.

  The Arbitrary Element in the Award of Punishment.—To most criminals

punishment comes just as illegitimate children come to women. They have

done  the  same  thing  a  hundred  times  without  any  bad  consequences.

Suddenly comes discovery, and with discovery punishment. Yet habit should

make the deed for which the criminal is punished appear more excusable, for

he  has  developed  a  propensity  that  is  hard  to  resist.  Instead  of  this,  the

criminal is punished more severely if the suspicion of habitual crime rests on

him, and habit is made a valid reason against all extenuation. On the otherhand, a model life, wherein crime shows up in more terrible contrast, should

make  the  guilt  appear  more  heavy!  But  here  the  custom  is  to  soften  the

punishment. Everything is measured not from the standpoint of the criminal

but from that of society and its losses and dangers. The previous utility of an

individual  is  weighed  against  his  one  nefarious  action,  his  previous

criminality is added to that recently discovered, and punishment is thus meted

out as highly as possible. But if we thus punish or reward a man's past (for in

the former case the diminution of punishment is a reward) we ought to go

farther back and punish and reward the cause of his past—I mean parents,

teachers, society. In many instances we shall then find the judges somehow

or other sharing in the guilt. It is arbitrary to stop at the criminal himself

when we punish his past: if we will not grant the absolute excusability of

every crime, we should stop at each individual case and probe no farther into

the  past—in  other  words,  isolate  guilt  and  not  connect  it  with  previous

actions. Otherwise we sin against logic. The teachers of free will should draw

the inevitable conclusion from their doctrine of "free will" and boldly decree:

"No action has a past."

  29.

  Envy and her Nobler Sister.—Where equality is really recognized and

permanently established, we see the rise of that propensity that is generally

considered immoral, and would scarcely be conceivable in a state of nature—

envy. The envious man is susceptible to every sign of individual superiority

to the common herd, and wishes to depress every one once more to the level

—or raise himself to the superior plane. Hence arise two different modes of

action, which Hesiod designated good and bad Eris. In the same way, in a

condition of equality there arises indignation if A. is prosperous above and B.

unfortunate  beneath  their  deserts  and  equality.  These  latter,  however,  are

emotions of nobler natures. They feel the want of justice and equity in things

that are independent of the arbitrary choice of men—or, in other words, they

desire the equality recognized by man to be recognized as well by Nature and

chance.  They  are  angry  that  men  of  equal  merits  should  not  have  equal

fortune.

  30.

  The Envy of the Gods.—"The envy of the Gods" arises when a despised

person sets himself on an equality with his superior (like Ajax), or is made

equal with him by the favor of fortune (like Niobe, the too favored mother).

In the social class system this envy demands that no one shall have meritsabove his station, that his prosperity shall be on a level with his position, and

especially that his self-consciousness shall not outgrow the limits of his rank.

Often the victorious general, or the pupil who achieves a masterpiece, has

experienced "the envy of the gods."

  31.

  Vanity as an Anti-Social Aftergrowth.—As men, for the sake of security,

have made themselves equal in order to found communities, but as also this

conception is imposed by a sort of constraint and is entirely opposed to the

instincts of the individual, so, the more universal security is guaranteed, the

more do new offshoots of the old instinct for predominance appear. Such

offshoots appear in the setting-up of class distinctions, in the demand for

professional  dignities  and  privileges,  and,  generally  speaking,  in  vanity

(manners, dress, speech, and so forth). So soon as danger to the community is

apparent, the majority, who were unable to assert their preponderance in a

time of universal peace, once more bring about the condition of equality, and

for  the  time  being  the  absurd  privileges  and  vanities  disappear.  If  the

community,  however,  collapses  utterly  and  anarchy  reigns  supreme,  there

arises the state of nature: an absolutely ruthless inequality as recounted by

Thucydides in the case of Corcyra. Neither a natural justice nor a natural

injustice exists.

  32.

    Equity.—Equity is a development of justice, and arises among such as do

not  come  into  conflict  with  the  communal  equality.  This  more  subtle

recognition of the principle of equilibrium is applied to cases where nothing

is prescribed by law. Equity looks forwards and backwards, its maxim being,

"Do unto others as you would that they should do unto you." Aequum means:

"This principle is conformable to our equality; it tones down even our small

differences to an appearance of equality, and expects us to be indulgent in

cases where we are not compelled to pardon."

  33.

    Elements of Revenge.—The word "revenge" is spoken so quickly that it

almost  seems  as  if  it  could  not  contain  more  than  one  conceptual  and

emotional root. Hence we are still at pains to find this root. Our economists,

in the same way, have never wearied of scenting a similar unity in the word

"value," and of hunting after the primitive root idea of value. As if all words

were not pockets, into which this or that or several things have been stuffed at

once!  So  "revenge"  is  now  one  thing,  now  another,  and  sometimes  morecomposite.  Let  us  first  distinguish  that  defensive  counter-blow,  which  we

strike, almost unconsciously, even at inanimate objects (such as machinery in

motion) that have hurt us. The notion is to set a check to the object that has

hurt  us,  by  bringing  the  machine  to  a  stop.  Sometimes  the  force  of  this

counter-blow, in order to attain its object, will have to be strong enough to

shatter the machine. If the machine be too strong to be disorganized by one

man, the latter will all the same strike the most violent blow he can—as a sort

of last attempt. We behave similarly towards persons who hurt us, at the

immediate sensation of the hurt. If we like to call this an act of revenge, well

and good: but we must remember that here self-preservation alone has set its

cog-wheels of reason in motion, and that after all we do not think of the doer

of the injury but only of ourselves. We act without any idea of doing injury in

return, only with a view to getting away safe and sound.—It needs time to

pass in thought from oneself to one's adversary and ask oneself at what point

he is most vulnerable. This is done in the second variety of revenge, the

preliminary idea of which is to consider the vulnerability and susceptibility of

the other. The intention then is to give pain. On the other hand, the idea of

securing himself against further injury is in this case so entirely outside the

avenger's  horizon,  that  he  almost  regularly  brings  about  his  own  further

injury and often foresees it in cold blood. If in the first sort of revenge it was

the fear of a second blow that made the counter-blow as strong as possible, in

this case there is an almost complete indifference to what one's adversary will

do:  the  strength  of  the  counter-blow  is  only  determined  by  what  he  has

already done to us. Then what has he done? What profit is it to us if he is now

suffering, after we have suffered through him? This is a case of readjustment,

whereas the first act of revenge only serves the purpose of self-preservation.

It may be that through our adversary we have lost property, rank, friends,

children—these losses are not recovered by revenge, the readjustment only

concerns a subsidiary loss which is added to all the other losses. The revenge

of readjustment does not preserve one from further injury, it does not make

good  the  injury  already  suffered—except  in  one  case.  If  our  honour  has

suffered through our adversary, revenge can restore it. But in any case honour

has  suffered  an  injury  if  intentional  harm  has  been  done  us,  because  our

adversary proved thereby that he was not afraid of us. By revenge we prove

that  we  are  not  afraid  of  him  either,  and  herein  lies  the  settlement,  the

readjustment. (The intention of showing their complete lack of fear goes so

far in some people that the dangers of revenge—loss of health or life or otherlosses—are in their eyes an indispensable condition of every vengeful act.

Hence  they  practise  the  duel,  although  the  law  also  offers  them  aid  in

obtaining satisfaction for what they have suffered. They are not satisfied with

a safe means of recovering their honour, because this would not prove their

fearlessness.)—In the first-named variety of revenge it is just fear that strikes

the counter-blow; in the second case it is the absence of fear, which, as has

been  said,  wishes  to  manifest  itself  in  the  counter-blow.—Thus  nothing

appears more different than the motives of the two courses of action which

are  designated  by  the  one  word  "revenge."  Yet  it  often  happens  that  the

avenger is not precisely certain as to what really prompted his deed: perhaps

he struck the counter-blow from fear and the instinct of self-preservation, but

in  the  background,  when  he  has  time  to  reflect  upon  the  standpoint  of

wounded honour, he imagines that he has avenged himself for the sake of his

honour—this  motive  is  in  any  case  more  reputable  than  the  other.  An

essential point is whether he sees his honour injured in the eyes of others (the

world) or only in the eyes of his offenders: in the latter case he will prefer

secret,  in  the  former  open  revenge.  Accordingly,  as  he  enters  strongly  or

feebly into the soul of the doer and the spectator, his revenge will be more

bitter or more tame. If he is entirely lacking in this sort of imagination, he

will not think at all of revenge, as the feeling of "honour" is not present in

him, and accordingly cannot be wounded. In the same way, he will not think

of revenge if he despises the offender and the spectator; because as objects of

his contempt they cannot give him honour, and accordingly cannot rob him of

honour. Finally, he will forego revenge in the not uncommon case of his

loving the offender. It is true that he then suffers loss of honour in the other's

eyes, and will perhaps become less worthy of having his love returned. But

even to renounce all requital of love is a sacrifice that love is ready to make

when its only object is to avoid hurting the beloved object: this would mean

hurting  oneself  more  than  one  is  hurt  by  the  sacrifice.—Accordingly,

everyone will avenge himself, unless he be bereft of honour or inspired by

contempt or by love for the offender. Even if he turns to the law-courts, he

desires revenge as a private individual; but also, as a thoughtful, prudent man

of society, he desires the revenge of society upon one who does not respect it.

Thus by legal punishment private honour as well as that of society is restored

—that is to say, punishment is revenge. Punishment undoubtedly contains the

first-mentioned element of revenge, in as far as by its means society helps to

preserve itself, and strikes a counter-blow in self-defence. Punishment desiresto  prevent  further  injury,  to  scare  other  offenders.  In  this  way  the  two

elements of revenge, different as they are, are united in punishment, and this

may perhaps tend most of all to maintain the above-mentioned confusion of

ideas, thanks to which the individual avenger generally does not know what

he really wants.

  34.

  The Virtues that Damage Us.—As members of communities we think we

have no right to exercise certain virtues which afford us great honour and

some  pleasure  as  private  individuals  (for  example,  indulgence  and  favor

towards miscreants of all kinds)—in short, every mode of action whereby the

advantage of society would suffer through our virtue. No bench of judges,

face  to  face  with  its  conscience,  may  permit  itself  to  be  gracious.  This

privilege is reserved for the king as an individual, and we are glad when he

makes use of it, proving that we should like to be gracious individually, but

not collectively. Society recognizes only the virtues profitable to her, or at

least not injurious to her—virtues like justice, which are exercised without

loss, or, in fact, at compound interest. The virtues that damage us cannot have

originated in society, because even now opposition to them arises in every

small society that is in the making. Such virtues are therefore those of men of

unequal standing, invented by the superior individuals; they are the virtues of

rulers, and the idea underlying them is: "I am mighty enough to put up with

an obvious loss; that is a proof of my power." Thus they are virtues closely

akin to pride.

  35.

  The Casuistry of Advantage.—There would be no moral casuistry if there

were no casuistry of advantage. The most free and refined intelligence is

often incapable of choosing between two alternatives in such a way that his

choice necessarily involves the greater advantage. In such cases we choose

because we must, and afterwards often feel a kind of emotional sea-sickness.

  36.

  Turning  Hypocrite.—Every  beggar  turns  hypocrite,  like  everyone  who

makes his living out of indigence, be it personal or public.—The beggar does

not feel want nearly so keenly as he must make others feel it, if he wishes to

make a living by mendicancy.

  37.

  A Sort of Cult of the Passions.—You hypochondriacs, you philosophic

blind-worms talk of the formidable nature of human passions, in order toinveigh against the dreadsomeness of the whole world-structure. As if the

passions were always and everywhere formidable! As if this sort of terror

must always exist in the world!—Through a carelessness in small matters,

through a deficiency in observation of self and of the rising generation, you

have yourselves allowed your passions to develop into such unruly monsters

that you are frightened now at the mere mention of the word "passion"! It

rests with you and it rests with us to divest the passions of their formidable

features and so to dam them that they do not become devastating floods.—

We must not exalt our errors into eternal fatalities. Rather shall we honestly

endeavor to convert all the passions of humanity into sources of joy. [18] [18]

The  play  on  Freudenschaften  (i.e.  pleasure-giving  passions)  and

Leidenschaften (i.e. pain-giving passions) is often used by Nietzsche, and is

untranslateable.—Tr.

  38.

  The Sting of Conscience.—The sting of conscience, like the gnawing of a

dog at a stone, is mere foolishness.

  39.

  Origin  of  Rights.—Rights  may  be  traced  to  traditions,  traditions  to

momentary agreements. At some time or other men were mutually content

with  the  consequences  of  making  an  agreement,  and,  again,  too  indolent

formally to renew it. Thus they went on living as if it had constantly been

renewed,  and  gradually,  when  oblivion  cast  its  veil  over  the  origin,  they

thought  they  possessed  a  sacred,  unalterable  foundation  on  which  every

generation would be compelled to build. Tradition was how a constraint, even

if  it  no  more  involved  the  profit  originally  derived  from  making  the

agreement.—Here the weak have always found their strong fortress. They are

inclined to immortalize the momentary agreement, the single act of favor

shown towards them.

  40.

  The Significance of Oblivion in Moral Sentiment.—The same actions that

in  primitive  society  first  aimed  at  the  common  advantage  were  later  on

performed  from  other  motives:  from  fear  or  reverence  of  those  who

demanded  and  recommended  them;  or  from  habit,  because  men  had  seen

them done about them from childhood upwards; or from kindness, because

the practicing of them caused delight and approving looks on all sides; or

from  vanity,  because  they  were  praised.  Such  actions,  in  which  the

fundamental motive, that of utility, has been forgotten, are then called moral;not, indeed, because they are done from those other motives, but because they

are  not  done  with  a  conscious  purpose  of  utility.—Whence  the  hatred  of

utility  that  suddenly  manifests  itself  here,  and  by  which  all  praiseworthy

actions formally exclude all actions for the sake of utility?—Clearly society,

the rallying-point of all morality and of all maxims in praise of moral action,

has had to battle too long and too fiercely with the selfishness and obstinacy

of the individual not to rate every motive morally higher than utility. Hence it

looks as if morals had not sprung from utility, whereas in fact morals are

originally the public utility, which had great difficulty in prevailing over the

interests of the unit and securing a loftier reputation.

  41.

  The Heirs to the Wealth of Morality.—Even in the domain of morals

there  is  an  inherited  wealth,  which  is  owned  by  the  gentle,  the  good-

tempered, the compassionate, the indulgent. They have inherited from their

forefathers their gentle mode of action, but not common sense (the source of

that mode of action). The pleasant thing about this wealth is that one must

always bestow and communicate a portion of it, if its presence is to be felt at

all. Thus this wealth unconsciously aims at bridging the gulf between the

morally rich and the morally poor, and, what is its best and most remarkable

feature, not for the sake of a future mean between rich and poor, but for the

sake of a universal prosperity and superfluity.—Such may be the prevailing

view  of  inherited  moral  wealth,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  this  view  is

maintained more in majorem gloriam of morality than in honour of truth.

Experience  at  least  establishes  a  maxim  which  must  serve,  if  not  as  a

refutation,  at  any  rate  as  an  important  check  upon  that  generalization.

Without the most exquisite intelligence, says experience, without the most

refined capacity for choice and a strong propensity to observe the mean, the

morally  rich  will  become  spendthrifts  of  morality.  For  by  abandoning

themselves  without  restraint  to  their  compassionate,  gentle,  conciliatory,

harmonizing  instincts,  they  make  all  about  them  more  careless,  more

covetous,  and  more  sentimental.  The  children  of  these  highly  moral

spendthrifts  easily  and  (sad  to  relate)  at  best  become  pleasant  but  futile

wasters.

  42.

  The Judge and Extenuating Circumstances.—"One should behave as a

man of honour even towards the devil and pay his debts," said an old soldier,

when the story of Faust had been related to him in rather fuller detail. "Hell isthe right place for Faust!" "You are terrible, you men!"cried his wife; "how

can that be? After all, his only fault was having no ink in his ink-stand! It is

indeed a sin to write with blood, but surely for that such a handsome man

ought not to burn in Hell-fire?"

  43.

  Problem  of  the  Duty  of  Truth.—Duty  is  an  imperious  sentiment  that

forces  us  to  action.  We  call  it  good,  and  consider  it  outside  the  pale  of

discussion. The origin, limits, and justification of duty we will not debate or

allow to be debated. But the thinker considers everything an evolution and

every evolution a subject for discussion, and is accordingly without duty so

long as he is merely a thinker. As such, he would not recognize the duty of

seeing and speaking the truth; he would not feel the sentiment at all. He asks,

whence comes it and whither will it go? But even this questioning appears to

him  questionable.  Surely,  however,  the  consequence  would  be  that  the

thinker's machinery would no longer work properly if he could really feel

himself unencumbered by duty in the search for knowledge? It would appear,

then, that for fuel the same element is necessary as must be investigated by

means of the machine.—Perhaps the formula will be: granted there were a

duty of recognizing truth, what is then the truth in regard to every other kind

of duty?—But is not a hypothetical sense of duty a contradiction in terms?

  44.

  Grades  of  Morals.—Morality  is  primarily  a  means  of  preserving  the

community and saving it from destruction. Next it is a means of maintaining

the community on a certain plane and in a certain degree of benevolence. Its

motives are fear and hope, and these in a more coarse, rough, and powerful

form, the more the propensity towards the perverse, one-sided, and personal

still persists. The most terrible means of intimidation must be brought into

play  so  long  as  milder  forms  have  no  effect  and  that  twofold  species  of

preservation cannot be attained. (The strongest intimidation, by the way, is

the invention of a hereafter with a hell everlasting.) For this purpose we must

have  racks  and  torturers  of  the  soul.  Further  grades  of  morality,  and

accordingly means to the end referred to, are the commandments of a God (as

in the Mosaic law). Still further and higher are the commandments of an

absolute  sense  of  duty  with  a  "Thou  shalt"—all  rather  roughly  hewn  yet

broad steps, because on the finer, narrower steps men cannot yet set their

feet. Then comes a morality of inclination, of taste, finally of insight—which

is beyond all the illusory motives of morality, but has convinced itself thathumanity for long periods could be allowed no other.

  45.

  The Morality of Pity in the Mouths of the Intemperate.—All those who

are not sufficiently masters of themselves and do not know morality as a self-

control and self-conquest continuously exercised in things great and small,

unconsciously come to glorify the good, compassionate, benevolent impulses

of that instinctive morality which has no head, but seems merely to consist of

a heart and helpful hands. It is to their interest even to cast suspicion upon a

morality of reason and to set up the other as the sole morality.

  46.

  Sewers of the Soul.—Even the soul must have its definite sewers, through

which it can allow its filth to flow off: for this purpose it may use persons,

relations, social classes, its native country, or the world, or finally—for the

wholly arrogant (I mean our modern "pessimists")—le bon Dieu.

  47.

  A  Kind  of  Rest  and  Contemplation.—Beware  lest  your  rest  and

contemplation resemble that of a dog before a butcher's stall, prevented by

fear from advancing and by greed from retiring, and opening its eyes wide as

though they were mouths.

  48.

    Prohibitions without Reasons.—A prohibition, the reason of which we do

not understand or admit, is almost a command, not only for the stiff-necked

but for the thirster after knowledge. We at once make an experiment in order

to learn why the prohibition was made. Moral prohibitions, like those of the

Decalogue, are only suited to ages when reason lies vanquished. Nowadays a

prohibition like "Thou shalt not kill," "Thou shalt not commit adultery," laid

down without reasons, would have an injurious rather than a beneficial effect.

  49.

    Character Portrait.—What sort of a man is it that can say of himself: "I

despise very easily, but never hate. I at once find out in every man something

which can be honored and for which I honour him: the so-called amiable

qualities attract me but little"?

  50.

  Pity  and  Contempt.—The  expression  of  pity  is  regarded  as  a  sign  of

contempt, because one has clearly ceased to be an object of fear as soon as

one  becomes  an  object  of  pity.  One  has  sunk  below  the  level  of  the

equilibrium. For this equilibrium does not satisfy human vanity, which isonly satisfied by the feeling that one is imposing respect and awe. Hence it is

difficult to explain why pity is so highly prized, just as we need to explain

why the unselfish man, who is originally despised or feared as being artful, is

praised.

  51.

  The Capacity of Being Small.—We must be as near to flowers, grasses,

and butterflies as a child, that is, not much bigger than they. We adults have

grown up beyond them and have to stoop to them. I think the grasses hate us

when we confess our love for them.—He who would have a share in all good

things must understand at times how to be small.

  52.

  The Sum-Total of Conscience.—The sum-total of our conscience is all

that has regularly been demanded of us, without reason, in the days of our

childhood, by people whom we respected or feared. From conscience comes

that feeling of obligation ("This I must do, this omit") which does not ask,

Why must I?—In all cases where a thing is done with "because" and "why,"

man  acts  without  conscience,  but  not  necessarily  on  that  account  against

conscience.—The belief in authority is the source of conscience; which is

therefore not the voice of God in the heart of man, but the voice of some men

in man.

  53.

    Conquest of the Passions.—The man who has overcome his passions has

entered into possession of the most fruitful soil, like the colonist who has

become lord over bogs and forests. To sow the seed of spiritual good works

on the soil of the vanquished passions is the next and most urgent task. The

conquest itself is a means, not an end: if it be not so regarded, all kind of

weeds and devil's crop quickly spring up upon the fertile soil that has been

cleared, and soon the growth is all wilder and more luxuriant than before.

  54.

  Skill  in  Service.—All  so-called  practical  men  have  skill  in  service,

whether it be serving others or themselves; this is what makes them practical.

Robinson owned a servant even better than Friday—his name was Crusoe.

  55.

    Danger  in  Speech  to  Intellectual  Freedom.—Every  word  is  a

preconceived judgment.

  56.

  Intellect and Boredom.—The proverb, "The Hungarian is far too lazy tofeel bored," gives food for thought. Only the highest and most active animals

are capable of being bored.—The boredom of God on the seventh day of

Creation would be a subject for a great poet.

  57.

    Intercourse  with  Animals.—The  origin  of  our  morality  may  still  be

observed in our relations with animals. Where advantage or the reverse do

not  come  into  play,  we  have  a  feeling  of  complete  irresponsibility.  For

example, we kill or wound insects or let them live, and as a rule think no

more about it. We are so clumsy that even our gracious acts towards flowers

and small animals are almost always murderous: this does not in the least

detract  from  our  pleasure  in  them.—To-day  is  the  festival  of  the  small

animals, the most sultry day of the year. .There is a swarming and crawling

around us, and we, without intention, but also without reflection, crush here

and there a little fly or winged beetle.—If animals do us harm, we strive to

annihilate them in every possible way. The means are often cruel enough,

even  without  our  really  intending  them  to  be  so—it  is  the  cruelty  of

thoughtlessness. If they are useful, we turn them to advantage, until a more

refined  wisdom  teaches  us  that  certain  animals  amply  reward  a  different

mode  of  treatment,  that  of  tending  and  breeding.  Here  responsibility  first

arises. Torturing is avoided in the case of the domestic animal. One man is

indignant if another is cruel to his cow, quite in accordance with the primitive

communal morality, which sees the commonwealth in danger whenever an

individual does wrong. He who perceives any transgression in the community

fears indirect harm to himself Thus we fear in this case for the quality of

meat,  agriculture,  and  means  of  communication  if  we  see  the  domestic

animals  ill-treated.  Moreover,  he  who  is  harsh  to  animals  awakens  a

suspicion that he is also harsh to men who are weak, inferior, and incapable

of revenge. He is held to be ignoble and deficient in the finer form of pride.

Thus arises a foundation of moral judgments and sentiments, but the greatest

contribution is made by superstition. Many animals incite men by glances,

tones, and gestures to transfer themselves into them in imagination, and some

religions  teach  us,  under  certain  circumstances,  to  see  in  animals  the

dwelling-place of human and divine souls: whencethey recommend a nobler

caution or even a reverential awe in intercourse with animals. Even after the

disappearance of this superstition the sentiments awakened by it continue to

exercise their influence, to ripen and to blossom.—Christianity, as is well

known, has shown itself in this respect a poor and retrograde religion.  58.

  New  Actors.—Among  human  beings  there  is  no  greater  banality  than

death.  Second  in  order,  because  it  is  possible  to  die  without  being  born,

comes  birth,  and  next  comes  marriage.  But  these  hackneyed  little  tragi-

comedies are always presented, at each of their unnumbered and innumerable

performances, by new actors, and accordingly do not cease to find interested

spectators: whereas we might well believe that the whole audience of the

world-theatre  had  long  since  hanged  themselves  to  every  tree  from  sheer

boredom at these performances. So much depends on new actors, so little on

the piece.

  59.

  What  is  "Being  Obstinate"?—The  shortest  way  is  not  the  straightest

possible,  but  that  wherein  favorable  winds  swell  our  sails.  So  says  the

wisdom  of  seamen.  Not  to  follow  his  course  is  obstinate,  firmness  of

character being then adulterated by stupidity.

  60.

  The Word "Vanity."—It is annoying that certain words, with which we

moralists  positively  cannot  dispense,  involve  in  themselves  a  kind  of

censorship  of  morals,  dating  from  the  times  when  the  most  ordinary  and

natural impulses were denounced. Thus that fundamental conviction that on

the waves of society we either find navigable waters or suffer shipwreck far

more through what we appear than through what we are (a conviction that

must act as guiding principle of all action in relation to society) is branded

with the general word "vanity." In other words, one of the most weighty and

significant of qualities is branded with an expression which denotes it as

essentially empty and negative: a great thing is designated by a diminutive,

ay, even slandered by the strokes of caricature. There is no help for it; we

must use such words, but then we must shut our ears to the insinuations of

ancient habits.

  61.

  The Fatalism of the Turk.—The fatalism of the Turk has this fundamental

defect, that it contrasts man and fate as two distinct things. Man, says this

doctrine, may struggle against fate and try to baffle it, but in the end fate will

always gain the victory. Hence the most rational course is to resign oneself or

to live as one pleases. As a matter of fact, every man is himself a piece of

fate. When he thinks that he is struggling against fate in this way, fate is

accomplishing its ends even in that struggle. The combat is a fantasy, but sois the resignation in fate—all these fantasies are included in fate.—The fear

felt by most people of the doctrine that denies the freedom of the will is a fear

of  the  fatalism  of  the  Turk.  They  imagine  that  man  will  become  weakly

resigned  and  will  stand  before  the  future  with  folded  hands,  because  he

cannot alter anything of the future. Or that he will give a free rein to his

caprices, because the predestined cannot be made worse by that course. The

follies of men are as much a piece of fate as are his wise actions, and even

that fear of belief in fate is a fatality. You yourself, you poor timid creature,

are  that  indomitable  Moira,  which  rules  even  the  Gods;  whatever  may

happen, you are a curse or a blessing, and in any case the fetters wherein the

strongest  lies  bound:  in  you  the  whole  future  of  the  human  world  is

predestined, and it is no use for you to be frightened of yourself.

  62.

  The Advocate of the Devil.—"Only by our own suffering do we become

wise, only by others' suffering do we become good"—so runs that strange

philosophy which derives all morality from pity and all intellectuality from

the  isolation  of  the  individual.  Herein  this  philosophy  is  the  unconscious

pleader for all human deterioration. For pity needs suffering, and isolation

contempt of others.

  63.

  The  Moral  Character-Masks.—In  ages  when  the  character-masks  of

different classes are definitely fixed, like the classes themselves, moralists

will be seduced into holding the moral character masks, too, as absolute, and

in  delineating  them  accordingly.  Thus  Molière  is  intelligible  as  the

contemporary of the society of Louis XIV.: in our society of transitions and

intermediate stages he would seem an inspired pedant.

  64.

  The Most Noble Virtue.—In the first era of the higher humanity courage

is  accounted  the  most  noble  virtue,  in  the  next  justice,  in  the  third

temperance, in the fourth wisdom. In which era do we live? In which do you

live?

  65.

  A Necessary Preliminary.—A man who will not become master of his

irritability, his venomous and vengeful feelings, and his lust, and attempts to

become master in anything else, is as stupid as the farmer who lays out his

field beside a torrent without guarding against that torrent.

  66.  What is Truth?—Schwarzert (Melanchthon): We often preach our faith

when we have lost it, and leave not a stone unturned to find it—and then we

often do not preach worst! Luther: Brother, you are really speaking like an

angel to-day. Schwarzert: But that is the idea of your enemies, and they apply

it to you. Luther: Then it would be a lie from the devil's hind-quarters.

  67.

  The Habit of Contrasts.—Superficial, inexact observation sees contrasts

everywhere  in  nature  (for  instance,  "hot  and  cold"),  where  there  are  no

contrasts, only differences of degree. This bad habit has induced us to try to

understand  and  interpret  even  the  inner  nature,  the  intellectual  and  moral

world,  in  accordance  with  such  contrasts.  An  infinite  amount  of  cruelty,

arrogance,  harshness,  estrangement,  and  coldness  has  entered  into  human

emotion, because men imagined they saw contrasts where there were only

transitions.

  68.

  Can We Forgive?—How can we forgive them at all, if they know not

what they do? We have nothing to forgive. But does a man ever fully know

what he is doing? And if this point at least remains always debatable, men

never  have  anything  to  forgive  each  other,  and  indulgence  is  for  the

reasonable  man  an  impossible  thing.  Finally,  if  the  evil-doers  had  really

known what they did, we should still only have a right to forgive if we had a

right to accuse and to punish. But we have not that right.

  69.

  Habitual Shame.—Why do we feel shame when some virtue or merit is

attributed to us which, as the saying goes, "we have not deserved"? Because

we appear to have intruded upon a territory to which we do not belong, from

which we should be excluded, as from a holy place or holy of holies, which

ought not to be trodden by our foot. Through the errors of others we have,

nevertheless, penetrated to it, and we are now swayed partly by fear, partly

by reverence, partly by surprise; we do not know whether we ought to fly or

to enjoy the blissful moment with all its gracious advantages. In all shame

there  is  a  mystery,  which  seems  desecrated  or  in  danger  of  desecration

through us. All favor begets shame.—But if it be remembered that we have

never really "deserved" anything, this feeling of shame, provided that we

surrender  ourselves  to  this  point  of  view  in  a  spirit  of  Christian

contemplation,  becomes  habitual,  because  upon  such  a  one  God  seems

continually  to  be  conferring  his  blessing  and  his  favors.  Apart  from  thisChristian interpretation, the state of habitual shame will be possible even to

the entirely godless sage, who clings firmly to the basic non-responsibility

and non-meritoriousness of all action and being. If he be treated as if he had

deserved this or that, he will seem to have won his way into a higher order of

beings, who do actually deserve something, who are free and can really bear

the burden of responsibility for their own volition and capacity. Whoever

says to him, "You have deserved it," appears to cry out to him, "You are not a

human being, but a God."

  70.

  The  Most  Unskillful  Teacher.—In  one  man  all  his  real  virtues  are

implanted  on  the  soil  of  his  spirit  of  contradiction,  in  another  on  his

incapacity to say "no"—in other words, on his spirit of acquiescence. A third

has made all his morality grow out of his pride as a solitary, a fourth from his

strong social instinct. Now, supposing that the seeds of the virtues in these

four cases, owing to mischance or unskillful teachers, were not sown on the

soil of their nature, which provides them with the richest and most abundant

mould, they would become weak, unsatisfactory men (devoid of morality).

And who would have been the most unskillful of teachers, the evil genius of

these men? The moral fanatic, who thinks that the good can only grow out of

the good and on the soil of the good.

  71.

  The  Cautious  Style.—A.  But  if  this  were  known  to  all,  it  would  be

injurious to the majority. You yourself call your opinions dangerous to those

in danger, and yet you make them public? B. I write so that neither the mob,

nor the populi, nor the parties of all kinds can read me. So my opinions will

never be "public opinions." A. How do you write, then? B. Neither usefully

nor pleasantly—for the three classes I have mentioned.

  72.

  Divine  Missionaries.—Even  Socrates  feels  himself  to  be  a  divine

missionary, but I am not sure whether we should not here detect a tincture of

that  Attic  irony  and  fondness  for  jesting  whereby  this  odious,  arrogant

conception would be toned down. He talks of the fact without unction—his

images of the gadfly and the horse are simple and not sacerdotal. The real

religious task which he has set himself—to test God in a hundred ways and

see whether he spoke the truth—betrays a bold and free attitude, in which the

missionary walked by the side of his God. This testing of God is one of the

most subtle compromises between piety and free-thinking that has ever beendevised.—Nowadays we do not even need this compromise any longer.

  73.

  Honesty in Painting.—Raphael, who cared a great deal for the Church (so

far as she could pay him), but, like the best men of his time, cared little for

the  objects  of  the  Church's  belief,  did  not  advance  one  step  to  meet  the

exacting, ecstatic piety of many of his patrons. He remained honest even in

that  exceptional  picture  which  was  originally  intended  for  a  banner  in  a

procession—the Sistine Madonna. Here for once he wished to paint a vision,

but such a vision as even noble youths without "faith" may and will have—

the vision of the future wife, a wise, high-souled, silent, and very beautiful

woman, carrying her first-born in her arms. Let men of an older generation,

accustomed to prayer and devotion, find here, like the worthy elder on the

left, something superhuman to revere. We younger men (so Raphael seems to

call to us) are occupied with the beautiful maiden on the right, who says to

the spectator of the picture, with her challenging and by no means devout

look, "The mother and her child—is not that a pleasant, inviting sight?" The

face and the look are reflected in the joy in the faces of the beholders. The

artist  who  devised  all  this  enjoys  himself  in  this  way,  and  adds  his  own

delight to the delight of the art-lover. As regards the "messianic" expression

in the face of the child, Raphael, honest man, who would not paint any state

of  soul  in  which  he  did  not  believe,  has  amiably  cheated  his  religious

admirers. He painted that freak of nature which is very often found, the man's

eye in the child's face, and that, too, the eye of a brave, helpful man who sees

distress. This eye should be accompanied by a beard. The fact that a beard is

wanting,  and  that  two  different  ages  are  seen  in  one  countenance,  is  the

pleasing paradox which believers have interpreted in accordance with their

faith  in  miracles.  The  artist  could  only  expect  as  much  from  their  art  of

exposition and interpretation.

  74.

    Prayer.—On two hypotheses alone is there any sense in prayer, that not

quite extinct custom of olden times. It would have to be possible either to fix

or alter the will of the godhead, and the devotee would have to know best

himself what he needs and should really desire. Both hypotheses, axiomatic

and traditional in all other religions, are denied by Christianity. If Christianity

nevertheless maintained prayer side by side with its belief in the all-wise and

all-provident divine reason (a belief that makes prayer really senseless and

even blasphemous), it showed here once more its admirable "wisdom of theserpent." For an outspoken command, "Thou shalt not pray," would have led

Christians by way of boredom to the denial of Christianity. In the Christian

ora et labora ora plays the rôle of pleasure. Without ora what could those

unlucky saints who renounced labora have done? But to have a chat with

God, to ask him for all kinds of pleasant things, to feel a slight amusement at

one's own folly in still having any wishes at all, in spite of so excellent a

father—all that was an admirable invention for saints.

  75.

  A Holy Lie.—The lie that was on Arria's lips when she died (Paete, non

dolet [19]) obscures all the truths that have ever been uttered by the dying. It

is the only holy lie that has become famous, whereas elsewhere the odor of

sanctity has clung only to errors. [19] The wife of the Stoic Thrasea Paetus,

when their complicity in the great conspiracy of

  65 a. d. against Nero was discovered, is reported to have said as she

committed suicide, "It doesn't hurt, Paetus."—Tr.

  76.

  The Most Necessary Apostle.—Among twelve apostles one must always

be hard as stone, in order that upon him the new church may be built.

  77.

  Which is more Transitory, the Body or the Spirit?—In legal, moral, and

religious  institutions  the  external  and  concrete  elements—in  other  words,

rites, gestures, and ceremonies—are the most permanent. They are the body

to  which  a  new  spirit  is  constantly  being  superadded.  The  cult,  like  an

unchangeable text, is ever interpreted anew. Concepts and emotions are fluid,

customs are solid.

  78.

  The Belief in Disease qua Disease.—Christianity first painted the devil on

the wall of the world. Christianity first brought the idea of sin into the world.

The belief in the remedies, which is offered as an antidote, has gradually been

shaken  to  its  very  foundations.  But  the  belief  in  the  disease,  which

Christianity has taught and propagated, still exists.

  79.

  Speech and Writings of Religious Men.—If the priest's style and general

expression, both in speaking and writing, do not clearly betray the religious

man, we need no longer take his views upon religion and his pleading for

religion seriously. These opinions have become powerless for him if, judging

by his style, he has at command irony, arrogance, malice, hatred, and all thechanging  eddies  of  mood,  just  like  the  most  irreligious  of  men—how  far

more powerless will they be for his hearers and readers! In short, he will

serve to make the latter still more irreligious.

  80.

  The  Danger  in  Personality.—The  more  God  has  been  regarded  as  a

personality in himself, the less loyal have we been to him. Men are far more

attached to their thought-images than to their best beloved. That is why they

sacrifice  themselves  for  State,  Church,  and  even  for  God—so  far  as  he

remains their creation, their thought, and is not too much looked upon as a

personality. In the latter case they almost always quarrel with him. After all,

it was the most pious of men who let slip that bitter cry: "My God, why hast

thou forsaken me?"

  81.

  Worldly  Justice.—It  is  possible  to  unhinge  worldly  justice  with  the

doctrine of the complete non-responsibility and innocence of every man. An

attempt has been made in the same direction on the basis of the opposite

doctrine of the full responsibility and guilt of every man. It was the founder

of Christianity who wished to abolish worldly justice and banish judgment

and punishment from the world. For he understood all guilt as "sin"—that is,

an outrage against God and not against the world. On the other hand, he

considered every man in a broad sense, and almost in every sense, a sinner.

The guilty, however, are not to be the judges of their peers—so his rules of

equity decided. Thus all dispensers of worldly justice were in his eyes as

culpable as those they condemned, and their air of guiltlessness appeared to

him hypocritical and pharisaical. Moreover, he looked to the motives and not

to the results of actions, and thought that only one was keen-sighted enough

to give a verdict on motives—himself or, as he expressed it, God.

  82.

  An Affectation in Parting.—He who wishes to sever his connection with

a party or a creed thinks it necessary for him to refute it. This is a most

arrogant notion. The only thing necessary is that he should clearly see what

tentacles hitherto held him to this party or creed and no longer hold him, what

views impelled him to it and now impel him in some other directions. We

have not joined the party or creed on strict grounds of knowledge. We should

not affect this attitude on parting from it either.

  83.

  Savior and Physician.—In his knowledge of the human soul the founderof Christianity was, as is natural, not without many great deficiencies and

prejudices, and, as physician of the soul, was addicted to that disreputable,

laical belief in a universal medicine. In his methods he sometimes resembles

that dentist who wishes to heal all pain by extracting the tooth. Thus, for

example,  he  assails  sensuality  with  the  advice:  "If  thine  eye  offend  thee,

pluck it out."—Yet there still remains the distinction that the dentist at least

attains  his  object—painlessness  for  the  patient—although  in  so  clumsy  a

fashion that he becomes ridiculous; whereas the Christian who follows that

advice and thinks he has killed his sensuality, is wrong, for his sensuality still

lives in an uncanny, vampire form, and torments him in hideous disguises.

  84.

    Prisoners.—One morning the prisoners entered the yard for work, but the

warder was not there. Some, as their manner was, set to work at once; others

stood idle and gazed defiantly around. Then one of them strode forward and

cried, "Work as much as you will or do nothing, it all comes to the same.

Your secret machinations have come to light; the warder has been keeping

his eye on you of late, and will cause a terrible judgment to be passed upon

you  in  a  few  days'  time.  You  know  him—he  is  of  a  cruel  and  resentful

disposition. But now, listen: you have mistaken me hitherto. I am not what I

seem, but far more—I am the son of the warder, and can get anything I like

out of him. I can save you—nay, I will save you. But remember this: I will

only save those of you who believe that I am the son of the prison warder.

The rest may reap the fruits of their unbelief." "Well," said an old prisoner

after an interval of silence, "what can it matter to you whether we believe you

or not? If you are really the son, and can do what you say, then put in a good

word for us all. That would be a real kindness on your part. But have done

with all talk of belief and unbelief!" "What is more," cried a younger man, "I

don't believe him: he has only got a bee in his bonnet. I'll wager that in a

week's time we shall find ourselves in the same place as we are to-day, and

the warder will know nothing." "And if the warder ever knew anything, he

knows it no longer," said the last of the prisoners, coming down into the yard

at that moment, "for he has just died suddenly." "Ah ha!" cried several in

confusion, "ah ha! Sir Son, Sir Son, how stands it now with your title? Are

we  by  any  chance  your  prisoners  now?"  "I  told  you,"  answered  the  man

gently, "I will set free all who believe in me, as surely as my father still

lives."—The prisoners did not laugh, but shrugged their shoulders and left

him to himself.  85.

  The Persecutors of God.—Paul conceived and Calvin followed up the

idea that countless creatures have been predestined to damnation from time

immemorial, and that this fair world was made in order that the glory of God

might be manifested therein. So heaven and hell and mankind merely exist to

satisfy  the  vanity  of  God!  What  a  cruel,  insatiable  vanity  must  have

smoldered in the soul of the first or second thinker of such a thought!—Paul,

then, after all, remained Saul—the persecutor of God.

  86.

    Socrates.—If all goes well, the time will come when, in order to advance

themselves  on  the  path  of  moral  reason,  men  will  rather  take  up  the

Memorabilia of Socrates than the Bible, and when Montaigne and Horace

will be used as pioneers and guides for the understanding of Socrates, the

simplest and most enduring of interpretative sages. In him converge the roads

of the most different philosophic modes of life, which are in truth the modes

of  the  different  temperaments,  crystallized  by  reason  and  habit  and  all

ultimately  directed  towards  the  delight  in  life  and  in  self  The  apparent

conclusion is that the most peculiar thing about Socrates was his share in all

the temperaments. Socrates excels the founder of Christianity by virtue of his

merry style of seriousness and by that wisdom of sheer roguish pranks which

constitutes  the  best  state  of  soul  in  a  man.  Moreover,  he  had  a  superior

intelligence.

  87.

    Learning to Write Well.—The age of good speaking is over, because the

age of city-state culture is over. The limit allowed by Aristotle to the great

city—in which the town-crier must be able to make himself heard by the

whole  assembled  community—troubles  us  as  little  as  do  any  city-

communities, us who even wish to be understood beyond the boundaries of

nations. Therefore everyone who is of a good European turn of mind must

learn to write well, and to write better and better. He cannot help himself, he

must learn that: even if he was born in Germany, where bad writing is looked

upon as a national privilege. Better writing means better thinking; always to

discover matter more worthy of communication; to be able to communicate it

properly; to be translatable into the tongues of neighboring nations; to make

oneself comprehensible to foreigners who learn our language; to work with

the view of making all that is good common property, and of giving free

access everywhere to the free; finally, to pave the way for that still remotestate of things, when the great task shall come for good Europeans—guidance

and  guardianship  of  the  universal  world  culture.—Whoever  preaches  the

opposite doctrine of not troubling about good writing and good reading (both

virtues grow together and decline together) is really showing the peoples a

way of becoming more and more national. He is intensifying the malady of

this century, and is a foe to good Europeans, a foe to free spirits.

  88.

  The Theory of the Best Style.—The theory of the best style may at one

time be the theory of finding the expression by which we transfer every mood

of ours to the reader and the listener. At another, it may be the theory of

finding expressions for the more desirable human moods, the communication

and transference of which one desires most—for the mood of a man moved

from the depth of his heart, intellectually cheerful, bright, and sincere, who

has conquered his passions. This will be the theory of the best style, a theory

that corresponds to the good man.

  89.

    Paying Attention to Movement.—The movement of the sentences shows

whether the author be tired. Individual expressions may nevertheless be still

strong and good, because they were invented earlier and for their own sake,

when the thought first flashed across the author's mind. This is frequently the

case with Goethe, who too often dictated when he was tired.

  90.

    "Already"  and  "Still."—A.  German  prose  is  still  very  young.  Goethe

declares that Wieland is its father. B. So young and already so ugly! C. But,

so far as I am aware, Bishop Ulfilas already wrote German prose, which must

therefore be fifteen hundred years old. B. So old and still so ugly!

  91.

  Original German.—German prose, which is really not fashioned on any

pattern and must be considered an original creation of German taste, should

give the eager advocate of a future original German culture an indication of

how real German dress, German society, German furniture, German meals

would  look  without  the  imitation  of  models.—Someone  who  had  long

reflected on these vistas finally cried in great horror, "But, Heaven help us,

perhaps  we  already  have  that  original  culture—only  we  don't  like  to  talk

about it!"

  92.

  Forbidden  Books.—One  should  never  read  anything  written  by  thosearrogant wiseacres and puzzle-brains who have the detestable vice of logical

paradox.  They  apply  logical  formulæ  just  where  everything  is  really

improvised at random and built in the air. ("Therefore" with them means,

"You idiot of a reader, this 'therefore' does not exist for you, but only for me."

The answer to this is: "You idiot of a writer, then why do you write?")

  93.

    Displaying One's Wit.—Everyone who wishes to display his wit thereby

proclaims that he has also a plentiful lack of wit. That vice which clever

Frenchmen have of adding a touch of dédain to their best ideas arises from a

desire to be considered richer than they really are. They wish to be carelessly

generous, as if weary of continual spending from overfull treasuries.

  94.

  French  and  German  Literature.—The  misfortune  of  the  French  and

German literature of the last hundred years is that the Germans ran away too

early from the French school, and the French, later on, went too early to the

German school.

  95.

  Our Prose.—None of the present-day cultured nations has so bad a prose

as the German. When clever, blasé Frenchmen say, "There is no German

prose," we ought really not to be angry, for this criticism is more polite than

we  deserve.  If  we  look  for  reasons,  we  come  at  last  to  the  strange

phenomenon  that  the  German  knows  only  improvised  prose  and  has  no

conception of any other. He simply cannot understand the Italian, who says

that prose is as much harder than poetry as the representation of naked beauty

is harder to the sculptor than that of draped beauty. Verse, images, rhythm,

and rhyme need honest effort—that even the German realizes, and he is not

inclined to set a very high value on extempore poetry. But the notion of

working at a page of prose as at a statue sounds to him like a tale from

fairyland.

  96.

  The Grand Style.—The grand style comes into being when the beautiful

wins a victory over the monstrous.

  97.

    Dodging.—We do not realize, in the case of distinguished minds, wherein

lies the excellence of their expression, their turn of phrase, until we can say

what  word  every  mediocre  writer  would  inevitably  have  hit  upon  in

expressing  the  same  idea.  All  great  artists,  in  steering  their  car,  showthemselves prone to dodge and leave the track, but never to fall over.

  98.

  Something like Bread.—Bread neutralizes and takes out the taste of other

food, and is therefore necessary to every long meal. In all works of art there

must be something like bread, in order that they may produce divers effects.

If these effects followed one another without occasional pauses and intervals,

they would soon make us weary and provoke disgust—in fact, a long meal of

art would then be impossible.

  99.

  Jean Paul.—Jean Paul knew a great deal, but had no science; understood

all manner of tricks of art, but had no art; found almost everything enjoyable,

but had no taste; possessed feeling and seriousness, but in dispensing them

poured over them a nauseous sauce of tears; had even wit, but, unfortunately

for his ardent desire for it, far too little—whence he drives the reader to

despair by his very lack of wit. In short, he was the bright, rank-smelling

weed that shot up overnight in the fair pleasaunces of Schiller and Goethe.

He was a good, comfortable man, and yet a destiny, a destiny in a dressing-

gown.  [20]  [20]  It  is  interesting  to  compare  this  judgment  with  Carlyle's

praise of Jean Paul. The dressing-gown is an allusion to Jean Paul's favorite

costume.—Tr.

  100.

  Palate  for  Opposites.—In  order  to  enjoy  a  work  of  the  past  as  its

contemporaries enjoyed it, one must have a palate for the prevailing taste of

the age which it attacked.

  101.

    Spirits-of-Wine Authors.—Many writers are neither spirit nor wine, but

spirits of wine. They can flare up, and then they give warmth.

  102.

  The Interpretative Sense.—The sense of taste, as the true interpretative

sense, often talks the other senses over to its point of view and imposes upon

them its laws and customs. At table one can receive disclosures about the

most subtle secretsof the arts; it suffices to observe what tastes good and

when and after what and how long it tastes good.

  103.

    Lessing.—Lessing had a genuine French talent, and, as writer, went most

assiduously to the French school. He knows well how to arrange and display

his wares in his shop-window. Without this true art his thoughts, like theobjects  of  them,  would  have  remained  rather  in  the  dark,  nor  would  the

general loss be great. His art, however, has taught many (especially the last

generation  of  German  scholars)  and  has  given  enjoyment  to  a  countless

number. It is true his disciples had no need to learn from him, as they often

did,  his  unpleasant  tone  with  its  mingling  of  petulance  and  candour.—

Opinion is now unanimous on Lessing as "lyric poet," and will some day be

unanimous on Lessing as "dramatic poet."

  104.

    Undesirable Readers.—How an author is vexed by those stolid, awkward

readers who always fall at every place where they stumble, and always hurt

themselves when they fall!

  105.

  Poets' Thoughts.—Real thoughts of real poets always go about with a veil

on,  like  Egyptian  women;  only  the  deep  eye  of  thought  looks  out  freely

through  the  veil.—Poets'  thoughts  are  as  a  rule  not  of  such  value  as  is

supposed. We have to pay for the veil and for our own curiosity into the

bargain.

  106.

  Write Simply and Usefully.—Transitions, details, color in depicting the

passions—we make a present of all these to the author because we bring them

with us and set them down to the credit of his book, provided he makes us

some compensation.

  107.

    Wieland.—Wieland wrote German better than anyone else, and had the

genuine adequacies and inadequacies of the master. His translations of the

letters of Cicero and Lucian are the best in the language. His ideas, however,

add nothing to our store of thought. We can endure his cheerful moralities as

little as his cheerful immoralities, for both are very closely connected. The

men who enjoyed them were at bottom better men than we are, but also a

good deal heavier. They needed an author of this sort. The Germans did not

need Goethe, and therefore cannot make proper use of him. We have only to

consider the best of our statesmen and artists in this light. None of them had

or could have had Goethe as their teacher.

  108.

  Rare  Festivals.—Pithy  conciseness,  repose,  and  maturity—where  you

find these qualities in an author, cry halt and celebrate a great festival in the

desert. It will be long before you have such a treat again.