far as he feels that in contrast to that excess of deformity, disease, exhaustion,

and effeteness whose odour is beginning to pollute present-day Europe, he at

any rate has achieved a relative success, he at any rate still says "yes" to life.

  s12

  I cannot refrain at this juncture from uttering a sigh and one last hope.

What is it precisely which I find intolerable? That which I alone cannot get

rid of, which makes me choke and faint? Bad air! Bad air! That something

misbegotten comes near me; that I must inhale the odour of the entrails of a

misbegotten soul! - ? That excepted, what can one not endure in the way of

need, privation, bad weather, sickness, toil, solitude? In point of fact, one

manages to get over everything, born as one is to a burrowing and battling

existence; one always returns once again to the light, one always lives again

one's  golden  hour  of  victory  -  and  then  one  stands  as  one  was  born,

unbreakable, tense, ready for something more difficult, for something more

distant, like a bow stretched but the tauter by every strain, from time to time

do ye grant me - assuming that "beyond good and evil" there are goddesses

who can grant - one glimpse, grant me but one glimpse only, of something

perfect,  fully  realised,  happy,  mighty,  triumphant,  of  something  that  still

gives cause for fear! A glimpse of a man that justifies the existence of man, a

glimpse of an incarnate human happiness that realises and redeems, for the

sake of which one may hold fast to the belie] in man! For the position is this:

in the dwarfing and levelling of the European man lurks our greatest peril, for

it is this outlook which fatigues - we see today nothing which wishes to be

greater, we surmise that the process is always still backwards, still backwards

towards something more attentuated, more inoffensive, more cunning, more

comfortable, more mediocre, more indifferent, more Chinese, more Christian

- man, there is no doubt about it, grows always "better" - the destiny of

Europe lies even in this - that in losing the fear of man, we have also lost the

hope in man, yea, the will to be man. The sight of man now fatigues. - What

is present-day Nihilism if it is n.)t that? - We are tired of man.

  s13

  But let us come back to it; the problem of another origin of the good - of

the good, as the resentful man has thought it out - demands its solution. It is

not surprising that the lambs should bear a grudge against the great birds of

prey, but that is no reason for blaming the great birds of prey for taking the

little lambs. And when the lambs say among themselves, "Those birds of prey

are evil, and he who is as far removed from being a bird of prey, who israther its opposite, a lamb, - is he not good?" then there is nothing to cavil at

in the setting up of this ideal, though it may also be that the birds of prey will

regard it a little sneeringly, and perchance say to themselves, "We bear no

grudge against them, these good lambs, we even like them: nothing is tastier

than a tender lamb." To require of strength that it should not express itself as

strength, that it should not be a wish to overpower, a wish to overthrow, a

wish to become master, a thirst for enemies and antagonisms and triumphs, is

just  as  absurd  as  to  require  of  weakness  that  it  should  express  itself  as

strength.  A  quantum  of  force  is  just  such  a  quantum  of  movement,  will,

action - rather it is nothing else than just those very phenomena of moving,

willing, acting, and can only appear otherwise in the misleading errors of

language  (and  the  fundamental  fallacies  of  reason  which  have  become

petrified therein), which understands, and understands wrongly, all working

as conditioned by a worker, by a "subject." And just exactly as the people

separate the lightning from its flash, and interpret the latter as a thing done, as

the working of a subject which is called lightning, so also does the popular

morality separate strength from the expression of strength, as though behind

the  strong  man  there  existed  some  indifferent  neutral  substratum,  which

enjoyed a caprice and option as to whether or not it should express strength.

But there is no such substratum, there is no "being" behind doing, working,

becoming;  "the  doer"  is  a  mere  appendage  to  the  action.  The  action  is

everything. In point of fact, the people duplicate the doing, when they make

the  lightning  lighten,  that  is  a  "doing-doing";  they  make  the  same

phenomenon first a cause, and then, secondly, the effect of that cause. The

scientists fail to improve matters when they say, "Force moves, force causes,"

and so on. Our whole science is still, in spite of all its coldness, of all its

freedom  from  passion,  a  dupe  of  the  tricks  of  language,  and  has  never

succeeded in getting rid of that superstitious changeling "the subject" (the

atom,  to  give  another  instance,  is  such  a  changeling,  just  as  the  Kantian

"Thing-in-itself"). ? What wonder, if the suppressed and stealthily simmering

passions of revenge and hatred exploit for their own advantage their belief,

and indeed hold no belief with a more steadfast enthusiasm than this - "that

the strong has the option of being weak, and the bird of prey of being a

lamb." Thereby do they win for themselves the right of attributing to the birds

of  prey  the  responsibility  for  being  birds  of  prey:  when  the  oppressed,

downtrodden, and overpowered say to themselves with the vindictive guile of

weakness,  "Let  us  be  otherwise  than  evil,  namely,  good!  and  good  iseveryone who does not oppress, who hurts no one, who does not attack, who

does not pay back, who hands over revenge to God, who holds himself, as we

do, in hiding; who goes out of the way of evil, and demands, in short, little

from life; like ourselves the patient, the meek, the just," - yet all this, in its

cold and unprejudiced interpretation, means nothing more than "once for all,

the weak are weak; it is good to do nothing for which we are not strong

enough"; but this dismal state of affairs, this prudence of the lowest order,

which even insects possess (which in a great danger are ready to sham death

so as to avoid doing "too much"), has, thanks to the counterfeiting and self-

deception of weakness, come to masquerade in the pomp of an ascetic, mute,

and expectant virtue, just as though the very weakness of the weak - that is,

indeed, its being, its working, its whole unique inevitable inseparable reality -

were a voluntary result, something wished, chosen, a deed, an act of merit.

This  kind  of  man  finds  the  belief  in  a  neutral,  free-choosing  "subject"

necessary from an instinct of self-preservation, of self-assertion, in which

every lie is ready to sanctify itself. The subject (or, to use popular language,

the  soul)  has  perhaps  proved  itself  the  best  dogma  in  the  world  simply

because it rendered possible to the horde of mortal, weak, and oppressed

individuals of every kind, that most sublime specimen of self-deception, the

interpretation of weakness as freedom, of being this, or being that, as merit.

  s14

  Will anyone look a little into - right into - the mystery of how ideals are

manufactured in this world? Who has the courage to do it? Come! Here we

have a vista opened into these grimy workshops. Wait just a moment, dear

Mr. Inquisitive and Foolhardy; your eye must first grow accustomed to this

false changing light - Yes! Enough! Now speak! What is happening below

down yonder? Speak out! Tell what you see, man of the most dangerous

curiosity - for now / am the listener. "I see nothing, I hear the more. It is a

cautious, spiteful, gentle whispering and muttering together in all the corners

and crannies. It seems to me that they are lying; a sugary softness adheres to

every sound. Weakness is turned to merit, there is no doubt about it - it is just

as you say." Further ! "And the impotence which requites not, is turned to

'goodness,'  craven  baseness  to  meekness,  submission  to  those  whom  one

hates, to obedience (namely, obedience to one of whom they say that he

ordered this submission - they call him God). The inoffensive character of the

weak, the very cowardice in which he is rich, his standing at the door, his

forced necessity of waiting, gain here fine names, such as 'patience,' which isalso called 'virtue 1

  ; not being able to avenge one's self, is called not wishing to avenge one's

self, perhaps even forgiveness (for they know not what they do - we alone

know what they do). They also talk of the 'love of their enemies' and sweat

thereby." Further! "They are miserable, there is no doubt about it, all these

whisperers and counterfeiters in the corners, although they try to get warm by

crouching close to each other, but they tell me that their misery is a favour

and distinction given to them by God, just as one beats the dogs one likes

best; that perhaps this misery is also a preparation, a probation, a training;

that perhaps it is still more something which will one day be compensated

and paid back with a tremendous interest in gold, nay in happiness. This they

call 'Blessedness.' " Further ! "They are now giving me to understand, that not

only are they better men than the mighty, the lords of the earth, whose spittle

they have got to lick {not out of fear, not at all out of fear! But because God

ordains that one should honour all authority) - not only are they better men,

but that they also have a 'better time,' at any rate, will one day have a 'better

time.' But enough! Enough! I can endure it no longer. Bad air! Bad air! These

workshops where ideals are manufactured - verily they reek with the crassest

lies." Nay. Just one minute! You are saying nothing about the masterpieces of

these  virtuosos  of  black  magic,  who  can  produce  whiteness,  milk,  and

innocence out of any black you like: have you not noticed what a pitch of

refinement is attained by their chef d'oeuvre, their most audacious, subtle,

ingenious,  and  lying  artist-trick?  Take  care!  These  cellar-beasts,  full  of

revenge and hate - what do they make, indeed, out of their revenge and hate?

Do you hear these words? Would you suspect, if you trusted only their words,

that you are among men of resentment and nothing else? "I understand, I

prick my ears up again (ah! ah! ah! and I hold my nose). Now do I hear for

the  first  time  that  which  they  have  said  so  often:  'We  good,  we  are  the

righteous' - what they demand they call not revenge but f the triumph of

righteousness'  ;  what  they  hate  is  not  their  enemy,  no,  they  hate

'unrighteousness,'  'godless-ness';  what  they  believe  in  and  hope  is  not  the

hope of revenge, the intoxication of sweet revenge ( - "sweeter than honey,"

did Homer call it?), but the victory of God, of the righteous God over the

'godless'; what is left for them to love in this world is not their brothers in

hate, but their 'brothers in love,' as they say, all the good and righteous on the

earth." And how do they name that which serves them as a solace against all

the  troubles  of  life  -  their  phantasmagoria  of  their  anticipated  futureblessedness? "How? Do I hear right? They call it 'the last judgement,' the

advent of their kingdom, 'the kingdom of God' - but in the meanwhile they

live 'in faith,' 'in love,' 'in hope.' " Enough ! Enough !

  s15

  In the faith in what? In the love for what? In the hope of what? These

weaklings! - they also, in truth, wish to be strong some time; there is no doubt

about it. some time their kingdom also must come - "the kingdom of God" is

their name for it, as has been mentioned: - they are so meek in everything!

Yet in order to experience that kingdom it is necessary to live long, to live

beyond death, - yes, eternal life is necessary so that one can make up for ever

for that earthly life "in faith," "in love," "in hope." Make up for what? Make

up  by  what?  Dante,  as  it  seems  to  me,  made  a  crass  mistake  when  with

aweinspiring ingenuity he placed that inscription over the gate of his hell,

"Me too made eternal love": at any rate the following inscription would have

a much better right to stand over the gate of the Christian Paradise and its

"eternal blessedness" - "Me too made eternal hate" - granted of course that a

truth may rightly stand over the gate to a lie! For what is the blessedness of

that Paradise? Possibly we could quickly surmise it; but it is better that it

should be explicitly attested by an authority who in such matters is not to be

disparaged, Thomas of Aquinas, the great teacher and saint. "Beati in regno

celesti,"  says  he,  as  gently  as  a  lamb,  "videbunt  poenas  damnatorum,  ut

beatitudo illis magis complaceat." Or if we wish to hear a stronger tone, a

word from the mouth of a triumphant father of the Church, who warned his

disciples against the cruel ecstasies of the public spectacles - But why? Faith

offers us much more, - says he, De Spectaculis, ch. 29f., - something much

stronger; thanks to the redemption, joys of quite another kind stand at our

disposal; instead of athletes we have our martyrs; we wish for blood, well, we

have the blood of Christ - but what then awaits us on the day of his return, of

his triumph? And then does he proceed, does this enraptured visionary: At

enim  supersunt  alia  spectacula,  ille  ultimus  et  perpetuus  judicii  dies,  ille

nationibus  insperatus,  ille  derisus,  cum  tanta  saeculi  vetustas  et  tot  ejus

nativitates uno igne haurientur. Quae tunc spectaculi latitudo! Quid admirer!

Quid rideam! Ubi gaudeam! Ubi exultem, spectans tot et tantos reges, qui in

coelum  recepti  nuntiabantur,  cum  ipso  Jove  et  ipsis  suis  testibus  in  imis

tenebris  congemescentes!  Item  praesides  (the  provincial  governors)

persecutores  dominici  nominis  saevioribus  quam  ipsi  flammis  saevierunt

insultantibus contra Christianos liquescentes! Quos praeterea sapientes illosphilosophos coram discipulis suis una conflagrantibus erubescentes, quibus

nihil  ad  deum  pertinere  suadebant,  quibus  animas  aut  nullas  aut  non  in

pristine corpora redituras affirmabant! Etiam po�t�s non ad Rhadamanti

nec  ad  Minois,  sed  ad  inopinati  Christi  tribunal  palpitantes!  Tunc  magis

tragoedi  audiendi,  magis  scilicet  vocales  (better  voices  since  they  will  be

screaming  in  greater  terror)  in  sua  propria  calamitate;  tunc  histriones

cognoscendi, solutiores multo per ignem; tunc spectandus auriga in flammea

rota totus rubens, tunc xystici contemplandi non in gymnasiis, sed in igne

jaculati, nisi quod ne tunc quidem illos velim vivos, ut qui malim ad eos

potius conspectum insatiabilem conferre, qui in dominum desaevierung. 'Hic

est ille, dicam, fabri aut quaestuariae filis (in everything that follows and

especially in the well-known description of the mother of Jesus from the

Talamud  Tertullian  from  this  point  on  is  referring  to  the  Jews),  sabbati

destructor, Samarites et daemonium habens. Hic est, quem a Juda redemistis,

hic est ille arundine et colaphis diverberatus, sputamentis dedecoratus, felle et

aceto  potatus.  Hic  est,  quem  clam  discentes  subripuerunt,  ut  resurrexisse

dicatur  vel  hortulanus  detraxit,  ne  lactucae  suae  frequentia  commeantium

laederentur.' Ut talia spectes, ut talibus exultes, quis tibi praetor aut consul aut

quaestor  aut  sacerdos  de  sua  liberalitate  praestabit?  Et  tamen  haec  jam

habemus quodammodo per fidem spiritu imaginante repraesentata. Ceterum

qualia illa sunt, quae nec oculus vidit nec auris audivit nec in cor hominis

ascenderunt" (1. Cor. 2, 9.) Credo circo et utraque cavea" (first and fourth

row, or, according to others, the comic and the tragic stage) "et omni studio

gratiora." Per fidem: so stands it written. [However there are other spectacles

-- that last eternal day of judgment, ignored by nations, derided by them,

when  the  accumulation  of  the  years  and  all  the  many  things  which  they

produced will be burned in a single fire. What a broad spectacle then appears!

How I will be lost in admiration! How I will laugh! How I will rejoice! I'll be

full of exaltation then as I see so many great kings who by public report were

accepted into heaven groaning in the deepest darkness with Jove himself and

alongside those very men who testified on their behalf! They will include

governors  of  provinces  who  persecuted  the  name  of  our  lord  burning  in

flames  more  fierce  that  those  with  which  they  proudly  raged  against  the

Christians! And those wise philosophers who earlier convinced their disciples

that god was irrelevant and who claimed either that there is no such thing as a

soul  or  that  our  souls  would  not  return  to  their  original  bodies  will  be

ashamed as they burn in the conflagration with those very disciples. And thepoets  will  be  there,  shaking  with  fear,  not  in  front  of  the  tribunal  of

Rhadamanthus or Minos, but of the Christ they did not anticipate! Then it

will  be  easier  to  hear  the  tragic  actors,  because  their  voice  will  be  more

resonant in their own calamity (better voices since they will be screaming in

greater terror). The actors will then be easier to recognize, for the fire will

make them much more agile. Then the charioteer will be on show, all red in a

wheel of fire, and the athletes will visible, thrown, not in the gymnasium, but

in the fire, unless I have no wish to look at their bodies then, so that I can

more readily cast an insatiable gaze on those who raged against our Lord.

"This  is  the  man,"  I  will  say,  "the  son  of  a  workman  or  a  prostitute  (in

everything that follows and especially in the well-known description of the

mother of Jesus from the Talamud Tertullian from this point on is refering to

the Jews), the destroyer of the sabbath, the Samaritan possessed by the devil.

He is the man whom you brought from Judas, the man who was beaten with a

reed and with fists, reviled with spit, who was given gall and vinegar to drink.

He is the man whom his disciples took away in secret, so that it could be said

that he was resurrected or whom the gardener took away, so that the crowd of

visitors would not harm his lettuces." What praetor or consul or quaestor or

priest will from his own generosity grant you the sight of such things or the

exultation in them? And yet we already have these things to a certain extent

through faith, represented to us by the imagining spirit. Besides, what sorts of

things has the eye not seen or the ear not heard and what sorts of things have

not arisen in the human heart (1. Cor. 2, 9)? I believe these are more pleasing

than the race track and the circus and both enclosures (first and fourth tier of

seats or, according to others, the comic and tragic stages). Through faith:

that's how it's written.] (trans. Ian Johnston)

  s16

  Let us come to a conclusion. The two opposing values, "good and bad,"

"good and evil," have fought a dreadful, thousand-year fight in the world, and

though  indubitably  the  second  value  has  been  for  a  long  time  in  the

preponderance, there are not wanting places where the fortune of the fight is

still undecisive. It can almost be said that in the meanwhile the fight reaches a

higher and higher level, and that in the meanwhile it has become more and

more intense, and always more and more psychological; so that nowadays

there is perhaps no more decisive mark of the higher nature, of the more

psychological nature, than to be in that sense self-contradictory, and to be

actually still a battleground for those two opposites. The symbol of this fight,written in a writing which has remained worthy of perusal throughout the

course of history up to the present time, is called "Rome against Judaea,

Judaea against Rome." Hitherto there has been no greater event than that

fight, the putting of that question, that deadly antagonism. Rome found in the

Jew  the  incarnation  of  the  unnatural,  as  though  it  were  its  diametrically

opposed monstrosity, and in Rome the Jew was held to be convicted of hatred

of the whole human race: and rightly so, in so far as it is right to link the

well-being and the future of the human race to the unconditional mastery of

the aristocratic values, of the Roman values. What, conversely, did the Jews

feel against Rome? One can surmise it from a thousand symptoms, but it is

sufficient to carry one's mind back, to the Johannian Apocalypse, that most

obscene of all the written outbursts, which has revenge on its conscience.

(One should also appraise at its full value the profound logic of the Christian

instinct, when over this very book of hate it wrote the name of the Disciple of

Love,  that  self-same  disciple  to  whom  it  attributed  that  impassioned  and

ecstatic  Gospel  -  therein  lurks  a  portion  of  truth,  however  much  literary

forging may have been necessary for this purpose.) The Romans were the

strong  and  aristocratic;  a  nation  stronger  and  more  aristocratic  has  never

existed in the world, has never even been dreamed of; every relic of them,

every inscription enraptures, granted that one can divine what it is that writes

the inscription. The Jews, conversely, were that priestly nation of resentment

par  excellence,  possessed  by  a  unique  genius  for  popular  morals:  just

compare with the Jews the nations with analogous gifts, such as the Chinese

or the Germans, so as to realise afterwards what is first rate, and what is fifth

rate. Which of them has been provisionally victorious. Rome or Judaea? but

there  is  not  a  shadow  of  doubt;  just  consider  to  whom  in  Rome  itself

nowadays you bow down, as though before the quintessence of all the highest

values - and not only in Rome, but almost over half the world, everywhere

where man has been tamed or is about to be tamed - to three Jews, as we

know, and one Jewess (to Jesus of Nazareth, to Peter the fisher, to Paul the

tent-maker, and to the mother of the aforesaid Jesus, named Mary). This is

very remarkable: Rome is undoubtedly defeated. At any rate there took place

in the Renaissance a brilliantly sinister revival of the classical ideal, of the

aristocratic valuation of all things: Rome herself, like a man waking up from

a trance, stirred beneath the burden of the new Judaised Rome that had been

built over her, which presented the appearance of an oecumenical synagogue

and  was  called  the  "Church":  but  immediately  Judaea  triumphed  again,thanks to that fundamentally popular (German and English) movement of

revenge, which is called the Reformation, and taking also into account its

inevitable corollary, the restoration of the Church - the restoration also of the

ancient graveyard peace of classical Rome. Judaea proved yet once more

victorious over the classical ideal in the French Revolution, and in a sense

which  was  even  more  crucial  and  even  more  profound:  the  last  political

aristocracy  that  existed  in  Europe,  that  of  the  French  seventeenth  and

eighteenth centuries, broke into pieces beneath the instincts of a resentful

populace - never had the world heard a greater jubilation, a more uproarious

enthusiasm: indeed, there took place in the midst of it the most monstrous

and unexpected phenomenon; the ancient ideal itself swept before the eyes

and conscience of humanity with all its life and with unheard-of splendour,

and in opposition to resentment's lying war-cry of the prerogative of the of

the most, in opposition to the will to lowliness, abasement, and equalisation,

the  will  to  a  retrogression  and  twilight  of  humanity,  there  rang  out  once

again,  stronger,  simpler,  more  penetrating  than  ever,  the  terrible  and

enchanting counter-war-cry of the prerogative of the few! Like a final sign-

post to other ways, there appeared Napoleon, the most unique and violent

anachronism  that  ever  existed,  and  in  him  the  incarnate  problem  of  the

aristocratic ideal in itself - consider well what a problem it is: - Napoleon,

that synthesis of Monster and overman.

  s17

  Was it therewith over? Was that greatest of all antitheses of ideals thereby

relegated ad acta for all time? Or only postponed, postponed for a long time?

May there not take place at some time or other a much more awful, much

more carefully prepared flaring up of the old conflagration? Further! Should

not one wish that consummation with all one's strength? - will it one's self?

demand it one's self? He who at this juncture begins, like my readers, to

reflect,  to  think  further,  will  have  difficulty  in  coming  quickly  to  a

conclusion, - ground enough for me to come myself to a conclusion, taking it

for granted that for some time past what I mean has been sufficiently clear,

what I exactly mean by that dangerous motto which is inscribed on the body

of my last book: Beyond Good and Evil - at any rate that is not the same as

"Beyond Good and Bad." Note. - I avail myself of the opportunity offered by

this treatise to express, openly and formally, a wish which up to the present

has only been expressed in occasional conversations with scholars, namely,

that some Faculty of philosophy should, by means of a series of prize essays,gain the glory of having promoted the further study of the history of morals -

perhaps this book may serve to give a forcible impetus in such a direction.

With regard to a possibility of this character, the following question deserves

consideration.  It  merits  quite  as  much  the  attention  of  philologists  and

historians  as  of  actual  professional  philosophers.  "What  indication  of  the

history  of  the  evolution  of  the  moral  ideas  is  afforded  by  philology,  and

especially by etymological investigation ?" On the other hand, it is, of course,

equally necessary to induce physiologists and doctors to be interested in these

problems  (of  the  value  of  the  valuations  which  have  prevailed  up  to  the

present) : in this connection the professional philosophers may be trusted to

act as the spokesmen and intermediaries in these particular instances, after, of

course, they have quite succeeded in transforming the relationship between

philosophy and physiology and medicine, which is originally one of coldness

and suspicion, into the most friendly and fruitful reciprocity. In point of fact,

all tables of values, all the "thou shalts" known to history and ethnology, need

primarily  a  physiological,  at  any  rate  in  preference  to  a  psychological,

elucidation and interpretation : all equally require a critique from medical

science. The question, "What is the value of this or that table of 'values' and

morality?" will be asked from the most varied standpoints. For instance, the

question of "valuable for what" can never be analysed with sufficient nicety.

That,  for  instance,  which  would  evidently  have  value  with  regard  to

promoting in a race the greatest possible powers of endurance (or with regard

to  increasing  its  adaptability  to  a  specific  climate,  or  with  regard  to  the

preservation of the greatest number) would have nothing like the same value,

if it were a question of evolving a stronger species. In gauging values, the

good of the majority and the good of the minority are opposed standpoints :

we leave it to the naivete of English biologists to regard the former standpoint

as intrinsically superior. All the sciences have now to pave the way for the

future task of the philosopher ; this task being understood to mean, that he

must solve the problem of value, that he has to fix the hierarchy of values.

SECOND ESSAY "GUILT," "BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE

                                          ESSAY 2

  s1

  The breeding of an animal that can promise - is not this just that very

paradox of a task which nature has set itself in regard to man? Is not this the

very problem of man? The fact that this problem has been to a great extent

solved, must appear all the more phenomenal to one who can estimate at itsfull  value  that  force  of  forgetfulness  which  works  in  opposition  to  it.

Forgetfulness is no mere vis inertia:, as the superficial believe, rather is it a

power of obstruction, active and, in the strictest sense of the word, positive -

a power responsible for the fact that what we have lived, experienced, taken

into  ourselves,  no  more  enters  into  consciousness  during  the  process  of

digestion (it might be called psychic absorption) than all the whole manifold

process  by  which  our  physical  nutrition,  the  so-called  "incorporation,"  is

carried  on.  The  temporary  shutting  of  the  doors  and  windows  of

consciousness,  the  relief  from  the  clamant  alarums  and  excursions,  with

which our subconscious world of servant organs works in mutual cooperation

and antagonism; a little quietude, a little tabula rasa of the consciousness, so

as  to  make  room  again  for  the  new,  and  above  all  for  the  more  noble

functions  and  functionaries,  room  for  government,  foresight,

predetermination (for our organism is on an oligarchic model) - this is the

utility, as I have said, of the active forgetfulness, which is a very sentinel and

nurse of psychic order, repose, etiquette; and this shows at once why it is that

there can exist no happiness, no gladness, no hope, no pride, no real present,

without  forgetfulness.  The  man  in  whom  this  preventative  apparatus  is

damaged and discarded, is to be compared to a dyspeptic, and it is something

more than a comparison - he can "get rid of" nothing. But this very animal

who  finds  it  necessary  to  be  forgetful,  in  whom,  in  fact,  forgetfulness

represents a force and a form of robust health, has reared for himself an

opposition-power,  a  memory,  with  whose  help  forgetfulness  is,  in  certain

instances, kept in check - in the cases, namely, where promises have to be

made; - so that it is by no means a mere passive inability to get rid of a once

indented  impression,  not  merely  the  indigestion  occasioned  by  a  once

pledged word, which one cannot dispose of, but an active refusal to get rid of

it, a continuing and a wish to continue what has once been willed, an actual

memory of the will; so that between the original "I will," "I shall do," and the

actual discharge of the will, its act, we can easily interpose a world of new

strange phenomena, circumstances, veritable volitions, without the snapping

of this long chain of the will. But what is the underlying hypothesis of all

this? How thoroughly, in order to be able to regulate the future in this way,

must man have first learnt to distinguish between necessitated and accidental

phenomena, to think casually, to see the distant as present and to anticipate it,

to fix with certainty what is the end, and what is the means to that end; above

all, to reckon, to have power to calculate - how thoroughly must man havefirst become calculable, disciplined, necessitated even for himself and his

own conception of himself, that, like a man entering a promise, he could

guarantee himself as a future.

  s2

  This is simply the long history of the origin of responsibility. That task of

breeding an animal which can make promises, includes, as we have already

grasped, as its condition and preliminary, the more immediate task of first

making man to a certain extent, necessitated, uniform, like among his like,

regular,  and  consequently  calculable.  The  immense  work  of  what  I  have

called, "morality of custom"* (cp. Dawn of Day, Aphs. 9, 14, and 16), the

actual work of man on himself during the longest period of the human race,

his whole prehistoric work, finds its meaning, its great justification (in spite

of all its innate hardness, despotism, stupidity, and idiocy) in this fact: man,

with the help of the morality of customs and of social strait-waistcoats, was

made genuinely calculable. If, however, we place ourselves at the end of this

colossal process, at the point where the tree finally matures its fruits, when

society and its morality of custom finally bring to light that to which it was

only the means, then do we find as the ripest fruit on its tree the sovereign

individual, that resembles only himself, that has got loose from the morality

of custom, the autonomous "super-moral" individual (for "autonomous" and

"moral" are mutually exclusive terms), - in short, the man of the personal,

long, and independent will, competent to promise, - and we find in him a

proud  consciousness  (vibrating  in  every  fibre),  of  what  has  been  at  last

achieved and become vivified in him, a genuine consciousness of power and

freedom, a feeling of human perfection in general. And this man who has

grown to freedom, who is really competent to promise, this lord of the free

will, this sovereign - how is it possible for him not to know how great is his

superiority  over  everything  incapable  of  binding  itself  by  promises,  or  of

being its own security, how great is the trust, the awe, the reverence that he

awakes - he "deserves" all three - not to know that with this mastery over

himself he is necessarily also given the mastery over circumstances, over

nature,  over  all  creatures  with  shorter  wills,  less  reliable  characters?  The

"free" man, the owner of a long unbreakable will, finds in this possession his

standard of value: looking out from himself upon the others, he honours or he

despises, and just as necessarily as he honours his peers, the strong and the

reliable (those who can bind themselves by promises), - that is, everyone who

promises like a sovereign, with difficulty, rarely and slowly, who is sparingwith his trusts but confers honour by the very fact of trusting, who gives his

word as something that can be relied on, because he knows himself strong

enough to keep it even in the teeth of disasters, even in the "teeth of fate," -

so with equal necessity will he have the heel of his foot ready for the lean and

empty jackasses, who promise when they have no business to do so, and his

rod of chastisement ready for the liar, who already breaks his word at the

very minute when it is on his lips. The proud knowledge of the extraordinary

privilege  of  responsibility,  the  consciousness  of  this  rare  freedom,  of  this

power  over  himself  and  over  fate,  has  sunk  right  down  to  his  innermost

depths, and has become an instinct, a dominating instinct - what name will he

give to it, to this dominating instinct, if he needs to have a word for it? But

there is no doubt about it - the sovereign man calls it his conscience.

  s3

  His conscience? - One apprehends at once that the idea "conscience,"

which is here seen in its supreme manifestation, supreme in fact to almost the

point  of  strangeness,  should  already  have  behind  it  a  long  history  and

evolution. The ability to guarantee one's self with all due pride, and also at

the same time to say yes to one's self - that is, as has been said, a ripe fruit,

but also a late fruit: - How long must needs this fruit hang sour and bitter on

the tree! And for an even longer period there was not a glimpse of such a fruit

to be had - no one had taken it on himself to promise it, although everything

on the tree was quite ready for it, and everything was maturing for that very

consummation. ''How is a memory to be made for the man-animal? How is an

impression to be so deeply fixed upon this ephemeral understanding, half

dense,  and  half  silly,  upon  this  incarnate  forgetfulness,  that  it  will  be

permanently present?" As one may imagine, this primeval problem was not

solved by exactly gentle answers and gentle means; perhaps there is nothing

more awful and more sinister in the early history of man than his system of

mnemonics. "Something is burnt in so as to remain in his memory: only that

which never stops hurting remains in his memory." This is an axiom of the

oldest (unfortunately also the longest) psychology in the world. It might even

be said that wherever solemnity, seriousness, mystery, and gloomy colours

are now found in the life of the men and of nations of the world, there is

some survival of that horror which was once the universal concomitant of all

promises,  pledges,  and  obligations.  The  past,  the  past  with  all  its  length,

depth, and hardness, wafts to us its breath, and bubbles up in us again, when

we become "serious." When man thinks it necessary to make for himself amemory, he never accomplishes it without blood, tortures and sacrifice; the

most dreadful sacrifices and forfeitures (among them the sacrifice of the first-

born), the most loathsome mutilation (for instance, castration), the most cruel

rituals of all the religious cults (for all religions are really at bottom systems

of cruelty) - all these things originate from that instinct which found in pain

its most potent mnemonic. In a certain sense the whole of asceticism is to be

ascribed  to  this:  certain  ideas  have  got  to  be  made  inextinguishable,

omnipresent, "fixed," with the object of hypnotising the whole nervous and

intellectual system through these "fixed ideas" - and the ascetic methods and

modes of life are the means of freeing those ideas from the competition of all

other ideas so as to make them "unforgettable." The worse memory man had,

the ghastlier the signs presented by his customs; the severity of the penal laws

affords in particular a gauge of the extent of man's difficulty in conquering

forgetfulness, and in keeping a few primal postulates of social intercourse

ever present to the minds of those who were the slaves of every momentary

emotion and every momentary desire. We Germans do certainly not regard

ourselves  as  an  especially  cruel  and  hard-hearted  nation,  still  less  as  an

especially casual and happy-go-lucky one; but one has only to look at our old

penal ordinances in order to realise what a lot of trouble it takes in the world

to evolve a ''nation of thinkers" (I mean: the European nation which exhibits

at  this  very  day  the  maximum  of  reliability,  seriousness,  bad  taste,  and

positiveness, which has on the strength of these qualities a right to train every

kind  of  European  mandarin).  These  Germans  employed  terrible  means  to

make  for  themselves  a  memory.  to  enable  them  to  master  their  rooted

plebeian instincts and the brutal crudity of those instincts: think of the old

German punishments, for instance, stoning (as far back as the legend, the

millstone falls on the head of the guilty man), breaking on the wheel (the

most original invention and speciality of the German genius in the sphere of

punishment), dart-throwing, tearing, or trampling by horses ("'quartering"),

boiling  the  criminal  in  oil  or  wine  (still  prevalent  in  the  fourteenth  and

fifteenth centuries >. the highly popular flaying (''slicing into strips"), cutting

the flesh out of the breast; think also of the evil-doer being besmeared with

honey, and then exposed to the flies in a blazing sun. It was by the help of

such images and precedents that man eventually kept in his memory five or

six "I will nots" with regard to which he had already given his promise, so as

to be able to enjoy the advantages of society - and verily with the help of this

kind of memory man eventually attained "reason"! Alas! reason, seriousness,mastery over the emotions, all these gloomy, dismal things which are called

reflection, all these privileges and pageantries of humanity: how dear is the

price that they have exacted! How much blood and cruelty is the foundation

of all "good things"!

  s4

  But how is it that that other melancholy object, the consciousness of sin,

the whole "bad conscience," came into the world? And it is here that we turn

back to our genealogists of morals. For the second time I say - or have I not

said  it  yet?  -  that  they  are  worth  nothing.  Just  their  own  five-spans-long

limited modern experience; no knowledge of the past, and no wish to know

it; still less a historic instinct, a power of "second sight" (which is what is

really required in this case) - and despite this to go in for the history of

morals. It stands to reason that this must needs produce results which are

removed from the truth by something more than a respectful distance. Have

these current genealogists of morals ever allowed themselves to have even

the  vaguest  notion,  for  instance,  that  the  cardinal  moral  idea  of  "ought"

originates  from  the  very  material  idea  of  "owe"?  Or  that  punishment

developed  as  a  retaliation  absolutely  independently  of  any  preliminary

hypothesis of the freedom or determination of the will? - And this to such an

extent, that a high degree of civilisation was always first necessary for the

animal  man  to  begin  to  make  those  much  more  primitive  distinctions  of

"intentional,"  "negligent,"  "accidental,"  "responsible,"  and  their  contraries,

and apply them in the assessing of punishment. That idea- "the wrong-doer

deserves punishment because he might have acted otherwise," in spite of the

fact that it is nowadays so cheap, obvious, natural, and inevitable, and that it

has had to serve as an illustration of the way in which the sentiment of justice

appeared on earth, is in point of fact an exceedingly late, and even refined

form of human judgment and inference; the placing of this idea back at the

beginning  of  the  world  is  simply  a  clumsy  violation  of  the  principles  of

primitive  psychology.  Throughout  the*  longest  period  of  human  history

punishment was never based on the responsibility of the evil-doer for his

action, and was consequently not based on the hypothesis that only the guilty

should be punished; - on the contrary, punishment was inflicted in those days

for the same reason that parents punish their children even nowadays, out of

anger  at  an  injury  that  they  have  suffered,  an  anger  which  vents  itself

mechanically on the author of the injury - but this anger is kept in bounds and

modified  through  the  idea  that  every  injury  has  somewhere  or  other  itsequivalent price, and can really be paid off, even though it be by means of

pain to the author. Whence is it that this ancient deep-rooted and now perhaps

ineradicable idea has drawn its strength, this idea of an equivalency between

injury  and  pain?  I  have  already  revealed  its  origin,  in  the  contractual

relationship between creditor anddebtor, that is as old as the existence of

legal rights at all, and in its turn points back to the primary forms of purchase,

sale, barter, and trade.

  s5

  The realisation of these contractual relations excites, of course (as would

be  already  expected  from  our  previous  observations),  a  great  deal  of

suspicion  and  opposition  towards  the  primitive  society  which  made  or

sanctioned them. In this society promises will be made; in this society the

object is to provide the promiser with a memory; in this society, so may we

suspect, there will be full scope for hardness, cruelty, and pain: the "ower," in

order  to  induce  credit  in  his  promise  of  repayment,  in  order  to  give  a

guarantee of the earnestness and sanctity of his promise, in order to drill into

his own conscience the duty, the solemn duty, of repayment, will, by virtue of

a contract with his creditor to meet the contingency of his not paying, pledge

something that he still possesses, something that he still has in his power, for

instance, his life or his wife, or his freedom or his body (or under certain

religious conditions even his salvation, his soul's welfare, even his peace in

the grave; so in Egypt, where the corpse of the debtor found even in the grave

no rest from the creditor - of course, from the Egyptian standpoint, this peace

was a matter of particular importance) . But especially has the creditor the

power of inflicting on the body of the debtor all kinds of pain and torture -

the  power,  for  instance,  of  cutting  off  from  it  an  amount  that  appeared

proportionate to the greatness of the debt; - this point of view resulted in the

universal  prevalence  at  an  early  date  of  precise  schemes  of  valuation,

frequently horrible in the minuteness and meticulosity of their application,

legally sanctioned schemes of valuation for individual limbs and parts of the

body. I consider it as already a progress, as a proof of a freer, less petty, and

more Roman conception of law, when the Roman Code of the Twelve Tables

decreed that it was immaterial how much or how little the creditors in such a

contingency cut off, "si plus minusve secuerunt, ne fraude esto" [let it not be

thought a crime if they cut off more or less]. Let us make the logic of the

whole of this equalisation process clear; it is strange enough. The equivalence

consists in this: instead of an advantage directly compensatory of his injury(that is, instead of an equalisation in money, lands, or some kind of chattel),

the  creditor  is  granted  by  way  of  repayment  and  compensation  a  certain

sensation of satisfaction - the satisfaction of being able to vent, without any

trouble, his power on one who is powerless, the delight "de fair le mal pour le

plaisir de le faire" [doing wrong for the pleasure of doing it] the joy in sheer

violence:  and  this  joy  will  be  relished  in  proportion  to  the  lowness  and

humbleness of the creditor in the social scale, and is quite apt to have the

effect of the most delicious dainty, and even seem the foretaste of a higher

social  position.  Thanks  to  the  punishment  of  the  ''ower,"  the  creditor

participates in the rights of the masters. At last he too, for once in a way,

attains  the  edifying  consciousness  of  being  able  to  despise  and  ill-treat  a

creature - as an "inferior" - or at any rate of seeing him being despised and ill-

treated,  in  case  the  actual  power  of  punishment,  the  administration  of

punishment,  has  already  become  transferred  to  the  "authorities."  The

compensation consequently consists in a claim on cruelty and a right to draw

thereon.

  s6

  It is then in this sphere of the law of contract that we find the cradle of the

whole  moral  world  of  the  ideas  of  "guilt,"  "conscience,"  "duty,"  the

"sacredness of duty," - their commencement, like the commencement of all

great  things  in  the  world,  is  thoroughly  and  continuously  saturated  with

blood. And should we not add that this world has never really lost a certain

savour of blood and torture (not even in old Kant: the categorical imperative

reeks of cruelty). It was in this sphere likewise that there first became formed

that sinister and perhaps now indissoluble association of the ideas of "guilt"

and  "suffering."  To  put  the  question  yet  again,  why  can  suffering  be  a

compensation for "owing"? - Because the infliction of suffering produces the

highest degree of happiness, because the injured party will get in exchange

for  his  loss  (including  his  vexation  at  his  loss)  an  extraordinary  counter-

pleasure: the infliction of suffering - a real feast, something that, as I have

said, was all the more appreciated the greater the paradox created by the rank

and social status of the creditor. These observations are purely conjectural;

for,  apart  from  the  painful  nature  of  the  task,  it  is  hard  to  plumb  such

profound  depths:  the  clumsy  introduction  of  the  idea  of  "revenge"  as  a

connecting-link simply hides and obscures the view instead of rendering it

clearer  (revenge  itself  simply  leads  back  again  to  the  identical  problem  -

"How can the infliction of suffering be a satisfaction?'). In my opinion it isrepugnant to the delicacy, and still more to the hypocrisy of tame domestic

animals  (that  is,  modern  men;  that  is,  ourselves),  to  realise  with  all  their

energy the extent to which cruelty constituted the great joy and delight of

ancient man, was an ingredient which seasoned nearly all his pleasures, and

conversely the extent of the naivete and innocence with which he manifested

his  need  for  cruelty,  when  he  actually  made  as  a  matter  of  principle

"disinterested  malice"  (or,  to  use  Spinoza's  expression,  the  sympathia

malevolens [malevolent sympathy] into a normal characteristic of man - as

consequently something to which the conscience says a hearty yes. The more

profound observer has perhaps already had sufficient opportunity for noticing

this most ancient and radical joy and delight of mankind; in Beyond Good

and Evil, Aph. 188

  (and  even  earlier,  in  The  Dawn  of  Day,  Aphs.  18,  77,  113),  I  have

cautiously indicated the continually growing spiritualisation and "deification"

of cruelty, which pervades the whole history of the higher civilisation (and in

the larger sense even constitutes it). At any rate the time is not so long past

when it was impossible to conceive of royal weddings and national festivals

on  a  grand  scale,  without  executions,  tortures,  or  perhaps  an  auto-da-fe

[burning at the stake], or similarly to conceive of an aristocratic household,

without a creature to serve as a butt for the cruel and malicious baiting of the

inmates. (The reader will perhaps remember Don Quixote at the court of the

Duchess: we read nowadays the whole of Don Quixote with a bitter taste in

the mouth, almost with a sensation of torture, a fact which would appear very

strange and very incomprehensible to the author and his contemporaries -

they read it with the best conscience in the world as the gayest of books; they

almost died with laughing at it.) The sight of suffering does one good, the

infliction of suffering does one more good - this is a hard maxim, but none

the less a fundamental maxim, old, powerful, and "human, all-too-human";

one, moreover, to which perhaps even the apes as well would subscribe: for it

is said that in inventing bizarre cruelties they are giving abundant proof of

their  future  humanity,  to  which,  as  it  were,  they  are  playing  the  prelude.

Without cruelty, no feast: so teaches the oldest and longest history of man -

and in punishment too is there so much of the festive.

  s7

    Entertaining,  as  I  do,  these  thoughts,  I  am,  let  me  say  in  parenthesis,

fundamentally  opposed  to  helping  our  pessimists  to  new  water  for  the

discordant and groaning mills of their disgust with life; on the contrary, itshould be shown specifically that, at the time when mankind was not yet

ashamed of its cruelty, life in the world was brighter than it is nowadays

when there are pessimists. The darkening of the heavens over man has always

increased in proportion to the growth of man's shame before man. The tired

pessimistic  outlook,  the  mistrust  of  the  riddle  of  life,  the  icy  negation  of

disgusted ennui, all those are not the signs of the most evil age of the human

race:  much  rather  do  they  come  first  to  the  light  of  day,  as  the  swamp-

flowers, which they are, when the swamp to which they belong, comes into

existence - I mean the diseased refinement and moralisation, thanks to which

the "animal man" has at last learnt to be ashamed of all his instincts. On the

road  to  angel-hood  (not  to  use  in  this  context  a  harder  word)  man  has

developed that dyspeptic stomach and coated tongue, which have made not

only the joy and innocence of the animal repulsive to him, but also life itself:

- so that sometimes he stands with stopped nostrils before his own self, and,

like Pope Innocent the Third, makes a black list of his own horrors ("unclean

generation, loathsome nutrition when in the maternal body, badness of the

matter out of which man develops, awful stench, secretion of saliva, urine,

and excrement"). Nowadays, when suffering is always trotted out as the first

argument against existence, as its most sinister query, it is well to remember

the times when men judged on converse principles because they could not

dispense with the infliction of suffering, and saw therein a magic of the first

order, a veritable bait of seduction to life. Perhaps in those days (this is to

solace the weaklings) pain did not hurt so much as it does nowadays: any

physician  who  has  treated  negroes  (granted  that  these  are  taken  as

representative  of  the  prehistoric  man)  suffering  from  severe  internal

inflammations  which  would  bring  a  European,  even  though  he  had  the

soundest constitution, almost to despair, would be in a position to come to

this conclusion. Pain has not the same effect with negroes. (The curve of

human  sensibilities  to  pain  seems  indeed  to  sink  in  an  extraordinary  and

almost sudden fashion, as soon as one has passed the upper ten thousand or

ten millions of over-civilised humanity, and I personally have no doubt that,

by comparison with one painful night passed by one single hysterical chit of a

cultured woman, the suffering of all the animals taken together who have

been put to the question of the knife, so as to give scientific answers, are

simply negligible.) We may perhaps be allowed to admit the possibility of the

craving  for  cruelty  not  necessarily  having  become  really  extinct:  it  only

requires,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  pain  hurts  more  nowadays,  a  certainsublimation and made more subtle, it must especially be translated to the

imaginative and psychic plane, and be adorned with such smug euphemisms,

that even the most fastidious and hypocritical conscience could never grow

suspicious of their real nature ("Tragic pity" is one of these euphemisms:

another is "les nostalgies de la croix" [nostalgia for the cross]). What really

raises one's indignation against suffering is not suffering intrinsically, but the

senselessness of suffering; such a senselessness, however, existed neither in

Christianity, which interpreted suffering into a whole mysterious salvation-

apparatus, nor in the beliefs of the naive ancient man, who only knew how to

find  a  meaning  in  suffering  from  the  standpoint  of  the  spectator,  or  the

inflictor  of  the  suffering.  In  order  to  get  the  secret,  undiscovered,  and

unwitnessed suffering out of the world it was almost compulsory to invent

gods  and  a  hierarchy  of  intermediate  beings,  in  short,  something  which

wanders even among secret places, sees even in the dark, and makes a point

of never missing an interesting and painful spectacle. It was with the help of

such inventions that life got to learn the tour de force, which has become part

of its stock-in-trade, the tour de force of self-justification, of the justification

of  evil;  nowadays  this  would  perhaps  require  other  auxiliary  devices  (for

instance, life as a riddle, life as a problem of knowledge). "Every evil is

justified in the sight of which a god finds edification," so rang the logic of

primitive  sentiment  -  and,  indeed,  was  it  only  of  primitive?  The  gods

conceived as friends of spectacles of cruelty - oh, how far does this primeval

conception extend even nowadays into our European civilisation! One would

perhaps like in this context to consult Luther and Calvin. It is at any rate

certain  that  even  the  Greeks  knew  no  more  piquant  seasoning  for  the

happiness of their gods than the joys of cruelty. What, do you think, was the

mood with which Homer makes his gods look down upon the fates of men?

What  final  meaning  have  at  bottom  the  Trojan  War  and  similar  tragic

horrors?  It  is  impossible  to  entertain  any  doubt  on  the  point:  they  were

intended as festival games for the gods, and, in so far as the poet is of a more

godlike breed than other men. as festival games also for the poets. It was in

just this spirit and no other, that at a later date the moral philosophers of

Greece  conceived  the  eyes  of  God  as  still  looking  down  on  the  moral

struggle, the heroism, and the self-torture of the virtuous; the Heracles of

duty was on a stage, and was conscious of the fact; virtue without witnesses

was  something  quite  unthinkable  for  this  nation  of  actors.  Must  not  that

philosophic invention, so audacious and so fatal, which was then absolutelynew to Europe, the invention of "free will," of the absolute spontaneity of

man in good and evil, simply have been made for the specific purpose of

justifying the idea, that the interest of the gods in humanity and human virtue

was inexhaustible? There would never on the stage of this free-will world be

a  dearth  of  really  new,  really  novel  and  exciting  situations,  plots,

catastrophes. A world thought out on completely deterministic lines would be

easily  guessed  by  the  gods,  and  would  consequently  soon  bore  them  -

sufficient reason for these friends of the gods, the philosophers, not to ascribe

to their gods such a deterministic world. The whole of ancient humanity is

full  of  delicate  consideration  for  the  spectator,  being  as  it  is  a  world  of

thorough publicity and theatricality, which could not conceive of happiness

without spectacles and festivals. - And, as has already been said, even in

great punishment there is so much which is festive.

  s8

  The feeling of "ought," of personal obligation (to take up again the train

of our inquiry), has had, as we saw, its origin in the oldest and most original

personal relationship that there is, the relationship between buyer and seller,

creditor and owner: here it was that individual confronted individual, and that

individual matched himself against individual. There has not yet been found a

grade of civilisation so low, as not to manifest some trace of this relationship.

Making prices, assessing values, thinking out equivalents, exchanging- all

this preoccupied the primal thoughts of man to such an extent that in a certain

sense it constituted thinking itself: it was here that was trained the oldest form

of sagacity, it was here in this sphere that we can perhaps trace the first

commencement  of  man's  pride,  of  his  feeling  of  superiority  over  other

animals. Perhaps our word "Mensch" (manas) still expresses just something

of this self-pride: man denoted himself as the being who measures values,

who values and measures, as the "assessing" animal par excellence. Sale and

purchase, together with their psychological concomitants, are older than the

origins of any form of social organisation and union: it is rather from the

most rudimentary form of individual right that the budding consciousness of

exchange,  commerce,  debt,  right,  obligation,  compensation  was  first

transferred to the rudest and most elementary of the social complexes (in their

relation  to  similar  complexes),  the  habit  of  comparing  force  with  force,

together with that of measuring, of calculating. His eye was now focussed to

this perspective; and with that ponderous consistency characteristic of ancient

thought, which, though set in motion with difficulty, yet proceeds inflexiblyalong  the  line  on  which  it  has  started,  man  soon  arrived  at  the  great

generalisation, "everything has its price, all can be paid for," the oldest and

most naive moral canon of justice, the beginning of all "kindness," of all

"equity," of all "goodwill," of all "objectivity" in the world. Justice in this

initial phase is the goodwill among people of about equal power to come to

terms with each other, to come to an understanding again by means of a

settlement, and with regard to the less powerful, to compel them to agree

among themselves to a settlement.

  s9

  Measured always by the standard of antiquity (this antiquity, moreover, is

present  or  again  possible  at  all  periods)  ,  the  community  stands  to  its

members in that important and radical relationship of creditor to his debtors."

Man lives in a community, man enjoys the advantages of a community (and

what advantages! we occasionally underestimate them nowadays), man lives

protected,  spared,  in  peace  and  trust,  secure  from  certain  injuries  and

enmities, to which the man outside the community, the "peaceless" man, is

exposed, - a German understands the original meaning of "Elend" {elend), -

secure because he has entered into pledges and obligations to the community

in respect of these very injuries and enmities. What happens when this is not

the case? The community, the defrauded creditor, will get itself paid, as well

as  it  can,  one  can  reckon  on  that.  In  this  case  the  question  of  the  direct

damage done by the offender is quite subsidiary: quite apart from this the

criminal* is above all a breaker, a breaker of word and covenant to the whole,

as regards all the advantages and amenities of the communal life in which up

to that time he had participated. The criminal is an "debtor" who not only

fails to repay the advances and advantages that have been given to him, but

even sets out to attack his creditor: consequently he is in the future not only,

as is fair, deprived of all these advantages and amenities - he is in addition

reminded of the importance of those advantages. The wrath of the injured

creditor, of the community, puts him back in the wild and outlawed status

from which he was previously protected: the community repudiates him - and

now every kind of enmity can vent itself on him. Punishment is in. this stage

of civilisation simply the copy, the mimic, of the normal treatment of the

hated, disdained, and conquered enemy, who is not only deprived of every

right and protection but of every mercy; so we have the martial law and

triumphant  festival  of  the  vae  victis  [woe  to  the  conquered]  in  all  its

mercilessness and cruelty. This shows why war itself (counting the sacrificialcult  of  war)  has  produced  all  the  forms  under  which  punishment  has

manifested itself in history.

  s10

  As it grows more powerful, the community tends to take the offences of

the individual less seriously, because they are now regarded as being much

less revolutionary and dangerous to the corporate existence: the evil-doer is

no more outlawed and put outside the pale, the common wrath can no longer

vent itself upon him with its old license, - on the contrary, from this very time

it is against this wrath, and particularly against the wrath of those directly

injured,  that  the  evil-doer  is  carefully  shielded  and  protected  by  the

community. As, in fact, the penal law develops, the following characteristics

become more and more clearly marked: compromise with the wrath of those

directly  affected  by  the  misdeed;  a  consequent  endeavour  to  localise  the

matter and to prevent a further, or indeed a general spread of the disturbance;

attempts  to  find  equivalents  and  to  settle  the  whole  matter  (compositio);

above all, the will, which manifests itself with increasing definiteness, to treat

every  offence  as  in  a  certain  degree  capable  of  being  paid  off,  and

consequently, at any rate up to a certain point, to isolate the offender from his

act. As the power and the self-consciousness of a community increases, so

proportionately  does  the  penal  law  become  mitigated;  conversely  every

weakening and jeopardising of the community revives the harshest forms of

that law. The creditor has always grown more humane proportionately as he

has grown more rich; finally the amount of injury he can endure without

really suffering becomes the criterion of his wealth. It is possible to conceive

of a society blessed with so great a consciousness of its own power as to

indulge in the most aristocratic luxury of letting its wrong-doers go scot-free.

- "What do my parasites matter to me?" might society say. "Let them live and

flourish!  I  am  strong  enough  for  it."  -  The  justice  which  began  with  the

maxim, "Everything can be paid off, everything must be paid off," ends with

connivance at the escape of those who cannot pay to escape - it ends, like

every  good  thing  on  earth,  by  destroying  itself.  -  The  self-destruction  of

Justice! we know the pretty name it calls itself - Grace! it remains, as is

obvious, the privilege of the strongest, better still, their super-law.

  s11

  A deprecatory word here against the attempts, that have lately been made,

to  find  the  origin  of  justice  on  quite  another  basis  -  namely,  on  that  of

resentment. Let me whisper a word in the ear of the psychologists, if theywould  rather  study  revenge  itself  at  close  quarters:  this  plant  blooms  its

prettiest at present among Anarchists and anti-Semites, a hidden flower, as it

has ever been, like the violet, though, in truth, with another perfume. And as

like must necessarily emanate from like, it will not be a matter for surprise

that it is just in such circles that we see the birth of endeavours (it is their old

birthplace - compare above, First Essay, paragraph 14), to sanctify revenge

under  the  name  of  justice  (as  though  Justice  were  at  bottom  merely  a

development of the consciousness of injury), and thus with the rehabilitation

of revenge to reinstate generally and collectively all the reactive emotions. I

object to this last point least of all. It even seems meritorious when regarded

from the standpoint of the whole problem of biology (from which standpoint

the value of these emotions has up to the present been underestimated). And

that to which I alone call attention, is the circumstance that it is the spirit of

revenge itself, from which develops this new nuance of scientific equity (for

the  benefit  of  hate,  envy,  mistrust,  jealousy,  suspicion,  rancour,  revenge).

This scientific "equity" stops immediately and makes way for the accents of

deadly enmity and prejudice, so soon as another group of emotions comes on

the scene, which in my opinion are of a much higher biological value than

these reactions, and consequently have a paramount claim to the valuation

and  appreciation  of  science:  I  mean  the  really  active  emotions,  such  as

personal and material ambition, and so forth. (E. Duhring, Value of Life;

Course of Philosophy, and passim.) So much against this tendency in general:

but as for the particular maxim of Duhring's, that the home of Justice is to be

found in the sphere of the reactive feelings, our love of truth compels us

drastically  to  invert  his  own  proposition  and  to  oppose  to  him  this  other

maxim: the last sphere conquered by the spirit of justice is the sphere of the

feeling of reaction! When it really comes about that the just man remains just

even  as  regards  his  injurer  (and  not  merely  cold,  moderate,  reserved,

indifferent: being just is always a positive state); when, in spite of the strong

provocation of personal insult, contempt, and calumny, the lofty and clear

objectivity of the just and judging eye (whose glance is as profound as it is

gentle) is untroubled, why then we have a piece of perfection, a past master

of the world - something, in fact, which it would not be wise to expect, and

which should not at any rate be too easily believed. Speaking generally, there

is no doubt but that even the justest individual only requires a little dose of

hostility, malice, or innuendo to drive the blood into his brain and the fairness

from it. The active man, the attacking, aggressive man is always a hundreddegrees nearer to justice than the man who merely reacts; he certainly has no

need to adopt the tactics, necessary in the case of the reacting man, of making

false and biased valuations of his object. It is, in point of fact, for this reason

that the aggressive man has at all times enjoyed the stronger, bolder, more

aristocratic, and also freer outlook, the better conscience. On the other hand,

we already surmise who it really is that has on his conscience the invention of

the "bad conscience," - the resentful man ! Finally, let man look at himself in

history. In what sphere up to the present has the whole administration of law,

the actual need of law, found its earthly home? Perchance in the sphere of the

reacting  man?  Not  for  a  minute:  rather  in  that  of  the  active,  strong,

spontaneous,  aggressive  man?  I  deliberately  defy  the  above-mentioned

agitator (who himself makes this self-confession, "the creed of revenge has

run through all my works and endeavours like the red thread of Justice"), and

say, that judged historically law in the world represents the very war against

the reactive feelings, the very war waged on those feelings by the powers of

activity and aggression, which devote some of their strength to damming and

keeping  within  bounds  this  effervescence  of  hysterical  re-activity,  and  to

forcing it to some compromise. Everywhere where justice is practiced and

justice  is  maintained,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  stronger  power,  when

confronted with the weaker powers which are inferior to it (whether they be

groups, or individuals), searches for weapons to put an end to the senseless

fury of resentment, while it carries on its object, partly by taking the victim of

resentment out of the clutches of revenge, partly by substituting for revenge a

campaign  of  its  own  against  the  enemies  of  peace  and  order,  partly  by

finding,  suggesting,  and  occasionally  enforcing  settlements,  partly  by

standardising  certain  equivalents  for  injuries,  to  which  equivalents  the

element  of  resentment  is  henceforth  finally  referred.  The  most  drastic

measure, however, taken and effectuated by the supreme power, to combat

the preponderance of the feelings of spite and vindictiveness - it takes this

measure as soon as it is at all strong enough to do so - is the foundation of

law, the imperative declaration of what in its eyes is to be regarded as just

and lawful, and what unjust and unlawful: and while, after the foundation of

law, the supreme power treats the aggressive and arbitrary acts of individuals,

or  of  whole  groups,  as  a  violation  of  law,  and  a  revolt  against  itself,  it

distracts the feelings of its subjects from the immediate injury inflicted by

such a violation, and thus eventually attains the very opposite result to that

always  desired  by  revenge,  which  sees  and  recognises  nothing  but  thestandpoint of the injured party. From henceforth the eye becomes trained to a

more and more impersonal valuation of the deed, even the eye of the injured

party himself (though this is in the final stage of all, as has been previously

remarked) - on this principle "right" and "wrong" first manifest themselves

after the foundation of law (and not, as Duhring maintains, only after the act

of  violation).  To  talk  of  intrinsic  right  and  intrinsic  wrong  is  absolutely

nonsensical;  intrinsically,  an  injury,  an  oppression,  an  exploitation,  an

annihilation can be nothing wrong, inasmuch as life is essentially (that is, in

its  cardinal  functions)  something  which  functions  by  injuring,  oppressing,

exploiting, and annihilating, and is absolutely inconceivable without such a

character. It is necessary to make an even more serious confession: - viewed

from the most advanced biological standpoint, conditions of legality can be

only exceptional conditions, in that they are partial restrictions of the real

life-will, which makes for power, and in that they are subordinated to the life-

will's general end as particular means, that is, as means to create larger units

of strength. A legal organisation, conceived of as sovereign and universal, not

as  a  weapon  in  a  fight  of  complexes  of  power,  but  as  a  weapon  against

fighting, generally something after the style of Duhring's communistic model

of treating every will as equal with every other will, would be a principle

hostile to life, a destroyer and dissolver of man, an outrage on the future of

man, a symptom of fatigue, a secret cut to Nothingness. -

  s12

  A word more on the origin and end of punishment - two problems which

are or ought to be kept distinct, but which unfortunately are usually lumped

into one. And what tactics have our moral genealogists employed up to the

present in these cases? Their inveterate naivete. They find out some "end" in

the punishment, for instance, revenge and deterrence, and then in all their

innocence set this end at the beginning, as the causa fiendi [creative cause] of

the punishment, and - they have done the trick. But the patching up of a

history of the origin of law is the last use to which the "End in Law"* ought

to be put. Perhaps there is no more pregnant principle for any kind of history

than the following, which, difficult though it is to master, should none the

less be mastered in every detail. - The origin of the existence of a thing and

its final utility, its practical application and incorporation in a system of ends,

are toto ado opposed to each other - everything, anything, which exists and

which prevails anywhere, will always be put to new purposes by a force

superior  to  itself,  will  be  commandeered  afresh,  will  be  turned  andtransformed to new uses; all "happening" in the organic world consists of

overpowering and dominating, and again all overpowering and domination is

a  new  interpretation  and  adjustment,  which  must  necessarily  obscure  or

absolutely extinguish the subsisting "meaning" and "end." The most perfect

comprehension of the utility of any-physiological organ (or also of a legal

institution, social custom, political habit, form in art or in religious worship)

does not for a minute imply any simultaneous comprehension of its origin:

this may seem uncomfortable and unpalatable to the older men, - for it has

been the immemorial belief that understanding the final cause or the utility of

a thing, a form, an institution, means also understanding the reason for its

origin: to give an example of this logic, the eye was made to see, the hand

was made to grasp. So even punishment was conceived as invented with a

view to punishing. But all ends and all utilities are only signs that a Will to

Power has mastered a less powerful force, has impressed thereon out of its

own self the meaning of a function; and the whole history of a "Thing," an

organ, a custom, can on the same principle be regarded as a continuous "sign-

chain" of perpetually new interpretations and adjustments, whose causes, so

far from needing to have even a mutual connection, sometimes follow and

alternate with each other absolutely haphazard. Similarly, the evolution of a

"Thing," of a custom, is anything but its progression to an end, still less a

logical and direct progress attained with the minimum expenditure of energy

and cost: it is rather the succession of processes of subjugation, more or less

profound, more or less mutually independent, which operate on the thing

itself; it is, further, the resistance which in each case invariably displayed this

subjugation,  the  Protean  wriggles  by  way  of  defence  and  reaction,  and,

further, the results of successful counter-efforts. The form is fluid, but the

meaning is even more so - even inside every individual organism the case is

the  same:  with  every  genuine  growth  of  the  whole,  the  "function"  of  the

individual organs becomes shifted, - in certain cases a partial perishing of

these  organs,  a  diminution  of  their  numbers  (for  instance,  through

annihilation  of  the  connecting  members),  can  be  a  symptom  of  growing

strength  and  perfection.  What  I  mean  is  this:  even  partial  loss  of  utility,

decay,  and  degeneration,  loss  of  function  and  purpose,  in  a  word,  death,

appertain to the conditions of the genuine progress; which always appears in

the shape of a will and way to greater power, and is always realised at the

expense of innumerable smaller powers. The magnitude of a "progress" is

gauged by the greatness of the sacrifice that it requires: humanity as a masssacrificed to the prosperity of the one stronger species of Man - that would be

a. progress. I emphasise all the more this cardinal characteristic of the historic

method,  for  the  reason  that  in  its  essence  it  runs  counter  to  predominant

instincts  and  prevailing  taste,  which  must  prefer  to  put  up  with  absolute

casualness, even with the mechanical senselessness of ail phenomena, than

with  the  theory  of  a  power-will,  in  exhaustive  play  throughout  all

phenomena. The democratic idiosyncrasy against everything which rules and

wishes to rule, the modern misarchism (to coin a bad word for a bad thing),

has  gradually  but  so  thoroughly  transformed  itself  into  the  guise  of

intellectualism,  the  most  abstract  intellectualism,  that  even  nowadays  it

penetrates and has the right to penetrate step by step into the most exact and

apparently the most objective sciences: this tendency has, in fact, in my view

already  dominated  the  whole  of  physiology  and  biology,  and  to  their

detriment, as is obvious, in so far as it has spirited away a radical idea, the

idea of true activity. The tyranny of this idiosyncrasy, however, results in the

theory of "adaptation" being pushed forward into the van of the argument,

exploited;  adaptation  -  that  means  to  say,  a  second-class  activity,  a  mere

capacity  for  "reacting";  in  fact,  life  itself  has  been  defined  (by  Herbert

Spencer)  as  an  increasingly  effective  internal  adaptation  to  external

circumstances. This definition, however, fails to realise the real essence of

life, its will to power. It fails to appreciate the paramount superiority enjoyed

by those plastic forces of spontaneity, aggression, and encroachment with

their new interpretations and tendencies, to the operation of which adaptation

is only a natural corollary: consequently the sovereign office of the highest

functionaries in the organism itself (among which the life-will appears as an

active  and  formative  principle)  is  repudiated.  One  remembers  Huxley's

reproach  to  Spencer  of  his  "administrative  Nihilism":  but  it  is  a  case  of

something much more than "administration."

  s13

  To return to our subject, namely punishment, we must make consequently

a double distinction: first, the relatively permanent element, the custom, the

act, the "drama," a certain rigid sequence of methods of procedure; on the

other hand, the fluid element, the meaning, the end, the expectation which is

attached to the operation of such procedure. At this point we immediately

assume, per analogiam (in accordance with the theory of the historic method,

which we have elaborated above), that the procedure itself is something older

and  earlier  than  its  utilisation  in  punishment,  that  this  utilisation  wasintroduced and interpreted into the procedure (which had existed for a long

time, but whose employment had another meaning), in short, that the case is

different from that hftherto supposed by our naif genealogists of morals and

of  law,  who  thought  that  the  procedure  was  invented  for  the  purpose  of

punishment, in the same way that the hand had been previously thought to

have been invented for the purpose of grasping. With regard to the other

element in punishment, its fluid element, its meaning, the idea of punishment

in a very Jate stage of civilisation (for instance, contemporary Europe) is not

content  with  manifesting  merely  one  meaning,  but  manifests  a  whole

synthesis "of meanings." The past general history of punishment, the history

of its employment for the most diverse ends, crystallises eventually into a

kind of unity, which is difficult to analyse into its parts, and which, it is

necessary  to  emphasise,  absolutely  defies  definition.  (It  is  nowadays

impossible to say definitely the precise reason fur punishment: all ideas, in

which a whole process is promiscuously comprehended, elude definition; it is

only that which has no history, which can be defined.) At an earlier stage, on

the contrary, that synthesis of meanings appears much less rigid and much

more elastic; we can realise how in each individual case the elements of the

synthesis change their value and their position, so that now one element and

now another stands nut and predominates over the others, nay, in certain

cases one element (perhaps the end of deterrence) seems to eliminate all the

rest. At any rate, so as to give some idea of the uncertain, supplementary, and

accidental nature of the meaning of punishment and of the manner in which

one  identical  procedure  can  be  employed  and  adapted  for  the  most

diametrically opposed objects, I will at this point give a scheme that has

suggested itself to me, a scheme itself based on comparatively small and

accidental  material.  -  Punishment,  as  rendering  the  criminal  harmless  and

incapable  of  further  injury.  -  Punishment,  as  compensation  for  the  injury

sustained by the injured party, in any form whatsoever (including the form of

sentimental  compensation).  -  Punishment,  as  an  isolation  of  that  which

disturbs  the  equilibrium,  so  as  to  prevent  the  further  spreading  of  the

disturbance.  -  Punishment  as  a  means  of  inspiring  fear  of  those  who

determine  and  execute  the  punishment.  -  Punishment  as  a  kind  of

compensation  for  advantages  which  the  wrong-doer  has  up  to  that  time

enjoyed  (for  example,  when  he  is  utilised  as  a  slave  in  the  mines)  .  -

Punishment, as the elimination of an element of decay (sometimes of a whole

branch, as according to the Chinese laws, consequently as a means to thepurification of the race, or the preservation of a social type). - Punishment as

a festival, as the violent oppression and humiliation of an enemy that has at

last been subdued. - Punishment as a mnemonic, whether for him who suffers

the  punishment  -  the  so-called  "correction,"  or  for  the  witnesses  of  its

administration. - Punishment, as the payment of a fee stipulated for by the

power  which  protects  the  evil-doer  from  the  excesses  of  revenge.  -

Punishment, as a compromise with the natural phenomenon of revenge, in so

far as revenge is still maintained and claimed as a privilege by the stronger

races. - Punishment as a declaration and measure of war against an enemy of

peace,  of  law,  of  order,  of  authority,  who  is  fought  by  society  with  the

weapons which war provides, as a spirit dangerous to the community, as a

breaker of the contract on which the community is based, as a rebel, a traitor,

and a breaker of the peace.

  s14

  This  list  is  certainly  not  complete;  it  is  obvious  that  punishment  is

overloaded with utilities of all kinds. This makes it all the more permissible

to eliminate one supposed utility, which passes, at any rate in the popular

mind. for its most essential utility, and which is just what even now provides

the  strongest  support  for  that  faith  in  punishment  which  is  nowadays  for

many reasons tottering. Punishment is supposed to have the value of exciting

in the guilty the consciousness of guilt; in punishment is sought the proper

instrumcntum  of  that  psychic  reaction  which  becomes  known  as  a  "bad

conscience," "remorse." But this theory is even, from the point of view of the

present, a violation of reality and psychology: and how much more so is the

case  when  we  have  to  deal  with  the  longest  period  of  man's  history,  his

primitive history! Genuine remorse is certainly extremely rare among wrong-

doers and the victims of punishment; prisons and houses of correction are not

the  soil  on  which  this  worm  of  remorse  pullulates  for  choice-  this  is  the

unanimous opinion of all conscientious observers, who in many cases arrive

at such a judgment with enough reluctance and against their own personal

wishes.  Speaking  generally,  punishment  hardens  and  numbs,  it  produces

concentration, it sharpens the consciousness of alienation, it strengthens the

power of resistance. When it happens that it breaks the man's energy and

brings about a piteous prostration and abjectness, such a result is certainly

even  less  salutary  than  the  average  effect  of  punishment,  which  is

characterised  by  a  harsh  and  sinister  doggedness.  The  thought  of  those

prehistoric  millennia  brings  us  to  the  unhesitating  conclusion,  that  it  wassimply through punishment that the evolution of the consciousness of guilt

was most forcibly retarded - at any rate in the victims of the punishing power.

In particular, let us not underestimate the extent to which, by the very sight of

the judicial and executive procedure, the wrong-doer is himself prevented

from  feeling  that  his  deed,  the  character  of  his  act,  is  intrinsically

reprehensible:  for  he  sees  clearly  the  same  kind  of  acts  practised  in  the

service  of  justice,  and  then  called  good,  and  practised  with  a  good

conscience;  acts  such  as  espionage,  trickery,  bribery,  trapping,  the  whole

intriguing and insidious art of the policeman and the informer - the whole

system, in fact, manifested in the different kinds of punishment (a system not

excused by passion, but based on principle), of robbing, oppressing, insulting,

imprisoning, racking, murdering. - All this he sees treated by his judges, not

as  acts  meriting  censure  and  condemnation  in  themselves,  but  only  in  a

particular context and application. It was not on this soil that grew the "bad

conscience," that most sinister and interesting plant of our earthly vegetation

- in point of fact, throughout a most lengthy period, no suggestion of having

to do with a 'oguilty man" manifested itself in the consciousness of the man

who  judged  and  punished.  One  had  merely  to  deal  with  an  author  of  an

injury, an irresponsible piece of fate. And the man himself, on whom the

punishment subsequently fell like a piece of fate, was occasioned no more of

an "inner pain" than would be occasioned by the sudden approach of some

uncalculated  event,  some  terrible  natural  catastrophe,  a  rushing,  crushing

avalanche against which there is no resistance.

  s15

  This truth came insidiously enough to the consciousness of Spinoza (to

the disgust of his commentators, who (like Kuno Fischer, for instance) give

themselves no end of trouble to misunderstand him on this point), when one

afternoon (as he sat raking up who knows what memory ) he indulged in the

question of what was really left for him personally of the celebrated Morsus

coiiscicnt'uc - Spinoza, who had relegated ''good and evil" to the sphere of

human imagination, and indignantly defended the honour of his "free" God

against those blasphemers who affirmed that God did everything sub rationc

bom ("but this was tantamount to subordinating God to fate, and would really

be the greatest of all absurdities"). For Spinoza the world had returned again

to that innocence in which it lay before the discovery of the bad conscience:

what,  then,  had  happened  to  the  morsus  consdentia?  "The  antithesis  of

gaudium,"  said  he  at  last  to  himself,  -  "A  sadness  accompanied  by  therecollection of a past event which has turned out contrary to all expectation"

(Eth. iii., Propos. xviii. Schol. i. ii.). Evil-doers have throughout thousands of

years felt when overtaken by punishment exactly like Spinoza, on the subject

of  their  "offence":  "here  is  something  which  went  wrong  contrary  to  my

anticipation,"  not  "I  ought  not  to  have  done  this."  -  They  submitted

themselves to punishment, just as one submits one's self to a disease, to a

misfortune, or to death, with that stubborn and resigned fatalism which gives

the Russians, for instance, even nowadays, the advantage over us Westerners,

in the handling of life. If at that period there was a critique of action, the

criterion  was  prudence:  the  real  effect  of  punishment  is  unquestionably

chiefly to be found in a sharpening of the sense of prudence, in a lengthening

of the memory, in a will to adopt more of a policy of caution, suspicion, and

secrecy;  in  the  recognition  that  there  are  many  things  which  are

unquestionably  beyond  one's  capacity;  in  a  kind  of  improvement  in  self-

criticism. The broad effects which can be obtained by punishment in man and

beast, are the increase of fear, the sharpening of the sense of cunning, the

mastery of the desires: so it is that punishment tames man, but does not make

him "better" - it would be more correct even to go so far as to assert the

contrary ("Injury makes a man cunning," says a popular proverb: so far as it

makes  him  cunning,  it  makes  him  also  bad.  Fortunately,  it  often  enough

makes him stupid).

  s16

  At this juncture I cannot avoid trying to give a tentative and provisional

expression  to  my  own  hypothesis  concerning  the  origin  of  the  bad

conscience:  it  is  difficult  to  make  it  fully  appreciated,  and  it  requires

continuous meditation, attention, and digestion. I regard the bad conscience

as the serious illness which man was bound to contract under the stress of the

most radical change which he has ever experienced - that change, when he

found himself finally imprisoned within the pale of society and of peace. Just

like  the  plight  of  the  water-animals,  when  they  were  compelled  either  to

become land-animals or to perish, so was the plight of these half-animals,

perfectly  adapted  as  they  were  to  the  savage  life  of  war,  prowling,  and

adventure  -  suddenly  all  their  instincts  were  rendered  worthless  and

"switched  off."  Henceforward  they  had  to  walk  on  their  feet  -  "carry

themselves," whereas heretofore they had been carried by the water: a terrible

heaviness  oppressed  them.  They  found  themselves  clumsy  in  obeying  the

simplest directions, confronted with this new and unknown world they had nolonger  their  old  guides  -  the  regulative  instincts  that  had  led  them

unconsciously to safety - they were reduced, were those unhappy creatures, to

thinking, inferring, calculating, putting together causes and results, reduced to

that poorest and most erratic organ of theirs, their "consciousness." I do not

believe there was ever in the world such a feeling of misery, such a leaden

discomfort  -  further,  those  old  instincts  had  not  immediately  ceased  their

demands! Only it was difficult and rarely possible to gratify them: speaking

broadly, they were compelled to satisfy themselves by new and, as it were,

hole-and-corner methods. All instincts which do not find a vent without, turn

inwards  -  this  is  what  I  mean  by  the  growing  "internalisation"  of  man:

consequently we have the first growth in man, of what subsequently was

called his soul. The whole inner world, originally as thin as if it had been

stretched  between  two  layers  of  skin,  burst  apart  and  expanded

proportionately, and obtained depth, breadth, and height, when man's external

outlet  became  obstructed.  These  terrible  bulwarks,  with  which  the  social

organisation protected itself against the old instincts of freedom (punishments

belong  pre-eminently  to  these  bulwarks),  brought  it  about  that  all  those

instincts of wild, free, prowling man became turned backwards against man

himself.  Enmity,  cruelty,  the  delight  in  persecution,  in  surprises,  change,

destruction - the turning all these instincts against their own possessors: this

is  the  origin  of  the  "bad  conscience."  It  was  man,  who,  lacking  external

enemies  and  obstacles,  and  imprisoned  as  he  was  in  the  oppressive

narrowness  and  monotony  of  custom,  in  his  own  impatience  lacerated,

persecuted, gnawed, frightened, and ill-treated himself; it was this animal in

the hands of the tamer, which beat itself against the bars of its cage; it was

this being who, pining and yearning for that desert home of which it had been

deprived, was compelled to create out of its own self, an adventure, a torture-

chamber, a hazardous and perilous desert - it was this fool, this homesick and

desperate  prisoner-  who  invented  the  "bad  conscience."  But  thereby  he

introduced that most grave and sinister illness, from which mankind has not

yet recovered, the suffering of man from the disease called man, as the result

of  a  violent  breaking  from  his  animal  past,  the  result,  as  it  were,  of  a

spasmodic plunge into a new environment and new conditions of existence,

the result of a declaration of war against the old instincts, which up to that

time had been the staple of his power, his joy, his formidableness. Let us

immediately add that this fact of an animal ego turning against itself, taking

part  against  itself,  produced  in  the  world  so  novel,  profound,  unheard-of,problematic, inconsistent, and pregnant a phenomenon, that the aspect of the

world was radically altered thereby. In sooth, only divine spectators could

have appreciated the drama that then began, and whose end baffles conjecture

as yet - a drama too subtle, too wonderful, too paradoxical to warrant its

undergoing  a  nonsensical  and  unheeded  performance  on  some  random

grotesque  planet!  Henceforth  man  is  to  be  counted  as  one  of  the  most

unexpected and sensational lucky shots in the game of the "big baby" of

Heracleitus, whether he be called Zeus or Chance - he awakens on his behalf

the  interest,  excitement,  hope,  almost  the  confidence,  of  his  being  the

harbinger  and  forerunner  of  something,  of  man  being  no  end,  but  only  a

stage, an interlude, a bridge, a great promise.

  s17

  It  is  primarily  involved  in  this  hypothesis  of  the  origin  of  the  bad

conscience, that that alteration was no gradual and no voluntary alteration,

and that it did not manifest itself as an organic adaptation to new conditions,

but as a break, a jump, a necessity, an inevitable fate, against which there was

no  resistance  and  never  a  spark  of  resentment.  And  secondarily,  that  the

fitting of a hitherto unchecked and amorphous population into a fixed form,

starting as it had done in an act of violence, could only be accomplished by

acts  of  violence  and  nothing  else  -  that  the  oldest  "State"  appeared

consequently as a ghastly tyranny, a grinding ruthless piece of machinery,

which went on working, till this raw material of a semi-animal populace was

not only thoroughly kneaded and elastic, but also moulded. I used the word

"State"; my meaning is self-evident, namely, a herd of blonde beasts of prey,

a race of conquerors and masters, which with all its war-like organisation and

all its organising power pounces with its terrible claws en a population, in

numbers possibly tremendously superior, but as yet formless, as yet nomad.

Such is the origin of the "State." That fantastic theory that makes it begin

with a contract is, I think, disposed of. He who can command, he who is a

master by "nature," he who comes on the scene forceful in deed and gesture -

what has he to do with contracts? Such beings defy calculation, they come

like fate, without cause, reason, notice, excuse, they are there as the lightning

is  there,  too  terrible,  too  sudden,  too  convincing,  too  "different,"  to  be

personally even hated. Their work is an instinctive creating and impressing of

forms, they are the most involuntary, unconscious artists that there are: - their

appearance produces instantaneously a scheme of sovereignty which is live,

in which the functious are partitioned and apportioned, in which above all nopart is received or finds a place, until pregnant with a "meaning" in regard to

the  whole.  They  are  ignorant  of  the  meaning  of  guilt,  responsibility,

consideration, are these born organisers; in them predominates that terrible

artist-ego-ism, that gleams like brass, and that knows itself justified to all

eternity, in its work, even as a mother in her child. It is not in them that there

grew the bad conscience, that is elementary -but it would not have grown

without  than,  repulsive  growth  as  it  was,  it  would  be  missing,  had  not  a

tremendous quantity of freedom been expelled from the world by the stress of

their hammer-strokes, their artist violence, or been at any rate made invisible

and, as it were, latent. This instinct of freedom forced into being latent - it is

already clear - this instinct of freedom farced back, trodden back, imprisoned

within itself, and finally only able to find vent and relief in itself; this, only

this, is the beginning of the "bad conscience."

  s18

  Beware of thinking lightly of this phenomenon, by reason of its initial

painful ugliness. At bottom it is the same active force which is at work on a

more grandiose scale in those potent artists and organisers, and builds states,

where here, internally, on a smaller and pettier scale and with a retrogressive

tendency, makes itself a bad conscience in the "labyrinth of the breast," to use

Goethe's phrase, and which builds negative ideals; it is, I repeat, that identical

instinct of freedom (to use my own language, the will to power) : only the

material, on which this force with all its constructive and tyrannous nature is

let loose, is here man himself, his whole old animal self - and not as in the

case  of  that  more  grandiose  and  sensational  phenomenon,  the  other  man,

other men. This secret self-tyranny, this cruelty of the artist, this delight in

giving a form to one's self as a piece of difficult, refractory, and suffering

material,  in  burning  in  a  will,  a  critique,  a  contradiction,  a  contempt,  a

negation; this sinister and ghastly labour of love on the part of a soul, whose

will is cloven in two within itself, which makes itself suffer from delight in

the infliction of suffering; this wholly active bad conscience has finally (as

one  already  anticipates)  -  true  fountainhead  as  it  is  of  idealism  and

imagination  -  produced  an  abundance  of  novel  and  amazing  beauty  and

affirmation, and perhaps has really been the first to give birth to beauty at all.

What  would  beauty  be,  in  truth,  if  its  contradiction  had  not  first  been

presented to consciousness, if the ugly had not first said to itself, "I am ugly"?

At any rate, after this hint the problem of how far idealism and beauty can be

traced  in  such  opposite  ideas  as  "selflessness,"  self-denial,  self-sacrifice,becomes  less  problematical;  and  indubitably  in  future  we  shall  certainly

know  the  real  and  original  character  of  the  delight  experienced  by  the

selfless,  the  self-denying,  the  self-sacrificing:  this  delight  is  a  phase  of

cruelty. - So much provisionally for the origin of "altruism" as a moral value,

and the marking out the ground from which this value has grown: it is only

the bad conscience, only the will for self-abuse, that provides the necessary

conditions for the existence of altruism as a value.

  s19

    Undoubtedly the bad conscience is an illness, but an illness as pregnancy

is an illness. If we search out the conditions under which this illness reaches

its most terrible and sublime zenith, we shall see what really first brought

about its entry into the world. But to do this we must take a long breath, and

we  must  first  of  all  go  back  once  again  to  an  earlier  point  of  view.  The

relation  at  civil  law  of  the  debtor  to  his  creditor  (which  has  ready  been

discussed in detail), has been interpreted once again (and indeed in a manner

which  historically  is  exceedingly  remarkable  and  suspicious)  into  a

relationship, which is perhaps more incomprehensible to us moderns than to

any other era; that is, into the relationship of the existing generation to its

ancestors. Within the original tribal association - we are talking of primitive

times  -  each  living  generation  recognises  a  legal  obligation  towards  the

earlier generation, and particularly towards the earliest, which founded the

family (and this is something much more than a mere sentimental obligation,

the existence of which, during the longest period of man's history, is by no

means indisputable). There prevails in them the conviction that it is only

thanks to sacrifices and efforts of their ancestors, that the race persists at all -

and that this has to be paid back to them by sacrifices and services. Thus is

recognized the owing of a debt, which accumulates continually by reason of

these  ancestors  never  ceasing  in  their  subsequent  life  as  potent  spirits  to

secure  by  their  power  new  privileges  and  advantages  to  the  race.  Gratis,

perchance? But there is no gratis for that raw and "mean-souled" age. What

return can be made?- Sacrifice (at first, nourishment, in its crude;! sense),

festivals,  temples,  tributes  of  veneration,  above  all,  obedience  -  since  all

customs  are,  qua  works  of  the  ancestors,  equally  their  precepts  and

commands - are the ancestors ever given enough? This suspicion remains and

grows:  from  time  to  time  it  extorts  a  great  wholesale  ransom,  something

monstrous in the way of repayment of the creditor (the notorious sacrifice of

the first-born, for example, blood, human blood in any case). The fear ofancestors  and  their  power,  the  consciousness  of  owing  debts  to  them,

necessarily increases, according to this kind of logic, in the exact proportion

that the race itself increases, that the race itself becomes more victorious,

more independent, more honoured, more feared. This, and not the contrary, is

the fact. Each step towards race decay, all disastrous events, all symptoms of

degeneration, of approaching disintegration, always diminish the fear of the

founders' spirit, and whittle away the idea of his sagacity, providence, and

potent presence. Conceive this crude kind of logic carried to its climax: it

follows  that  the  ancestors  of  the  most  powerful  races  must,  through  the

growing fear that they exercise on the imaginations, grow themselves into

monstrous  dimensions,  and  become  relegated  to  the  gloom  of  a  divine

mystery that transcends imagination - the ancestor becomes at last necessarily

transfigured into a god. Perhaps this is the very origin of the gods, that is, an

origin from fear/ And those who feel bound to add, "but from piety also," will

have difficulty in maintaining this theory, with regard to the primeval and

longest period of the human race. And, of course, this is even more the case

as regards the middle period, the formative period of the aristocratic races -

the aristocratic races which have given back with interest to their founders,

the ancestors (heroes, gods), all those qualities which in the meanwhile have

appeared in themselves, that is, the aristocratic qualities. We will later on

glance again at the ennobling and promotion of the gods (which, of course, is

totally distinct from their "sanctification") : let us now provisionally follow to

its end the course of the whole of this development of the consciousness of

"owing."

  s20

    According to the teaching of history, the consciousness of owing debts to

the deity by no means came to an end with the decay of the clan organisation

of society; just as mankind has inherited the ideas of "good" and "bad" from

the race-nobility (together with its fundamental tendency towards establishing

social distinctions) , so with the heritage of the racial and tribal gods it has

also inherited the incubus of debts as yet unpaid and the desire to discharge

them.  The  transition  is  effected  by  those  large  populations  of  slaves  and

bondsmen,  who,  whether  through  compulsion  or  through  submission  and

"mimicry" have accommodated themselves to the religion of their masters;

through  this  channel  these  inherited  tendencies  inundate  the  world.  The

feeling  of  owing  a  debt  to  the  deity  has  grown  continuously  for  several

centuries, always in the same proportion in which the idea of God and theconsciousness of God have grown and become exalted among mankind. (The

whole  history  of  ethnic  fights,  victories,  reconciliations,  amalgamations,

everything, in fact, which precedes the eventual classing of all the social

elements  in  each  great  race-synthesis,  are  mirrored  in  the  hodge-podge

genealogy  of  their  gods,  in  the  legends  of  their  fights,  victories,  and

reconciliations.  Progress  towards  universal  empires  invariably  means

progress  towards  universal  deities;  despotism,  with  its  subjugation  of  the

independent  nobility,  always  paves  the  way  for  some  system  or  other  of

monotheism.) The appearance of the Christian god, as the record god up to

this time, has for that very reason brought equally into the world the record

amount of guilt consciousness. Granted that we have gradually started on the

reverse movement, there is no little probability in the deduction, based on the

continuous decay in the belief in the Christian god, to the effect that there

also already exists a considerable decay in the human consciousness of owing

(ought) ; in fact, we cannot shut our eyes to the prospect of the complete and

eventual  triumph  of  atheism  freeing  mankind  from  all  this  feeling  of

obligation to their origin, their causa prima [first cause] . Atheism and a kind

of second innocence complement and supplement each other.

  s21

  So much for my rough and preliminary sketch of the interrelation of the

ideas  "ought"  (owe)  and  "duty"  with  the  postulates  of  religion.  I  have

intentionally shelved up to the present the actual moralisation of these ideas

(their  being  pushed  back  into  the  conscience,  or  more  precisely  the

interweaving of the bad conscience with the idea of God), and at the end of

the last paragraph used language to the effect that this moralisation did not

exist, and that consequently these ideas had necessarily come to an end, by

reason  of  what  had  happened  to  their  hypothesis,  the  credence  in  our

"creditor," in God. The actual facts differ terribly from this theory. It is with

the moralisation of the ideas "ought" and "duty," and with their being pushed

back into the bad conscience, that comes the first actual attempt to reverse the

direction of the development we have just described, or at any rate to arrest

its evolution ; it is just at this juncture that the very hope of an eventual

redemption has to put itself once for all into the prison of pessimism, it is at

this juncture that the eye likes to recoil and rebound in despair from off an

adamantine impossibility, it is at this juncture that the ideas "guilt" and "duty"

have to turn backwards - turn backwards against whom? There is no doubt

about it; primarily against the "debtor," in whom the bad conscience nowestablishes  itself,  eats,  extends,  and  grows  like  a  polypus  throughout  its

length and breadth, all with such virulence, that at last, with the impossibility

of paying the debt, there becomes conceived the idea of the impossibility of

paying  the  penalty,  the  thought  of  its  inexpiability  (the  idea  of  "eternal

punishment") - finally, too, it turns against the "creditor," whether found in

the causa prima [first cause] of man, the origin of the human race, its sire,

who  henceforth  becomes  burdened  with  a  curse  (o'Adam,"  "original  sin,"

"determination of the will"), or in Nature from whose womb man springs, and

on  whom  the  responsibility  for  the  principle  of  evil  is  now  cast

("Diabolisation  of  Nature"),  or  in  existence  generally,  on  this  logic  an

absolute white elephant, with which mankind is landed (the Nihilistic flight

from life, the demand for Nothingness, or for the opposite of existence, for

some other existence, Buddhism and the like) - till suddenly we stand before

that paradoxical and awful expedient, through which a tortured humanity has

found a temporary alleviation, that stroke of genius called Christianity: - God

personally  immolating  himself  for  the  debt  of  man,  God  paying  himself

personally out of a pound of his own flesh, God as the one being who can

deliver  man  from  what  man  had  become  unable  to  deliver  himself  -  the

creditor playing scapegoat for his debtor, from love (can you believe it?),

from love of his debtor! . . .

  s22

  The reader will already have conjectured what took place on the stage and

behind  the  scenes  of  this  drama.  That  will  for  self-torture,  that  inverted

cruelty  of  the  animal  man,  who,  turned  subjective  and  scared  into

introspection  (encaged  as  he  was  in  "the  State,"  as  part  of  his  taming

process), invented the bad conscience so as to hurt himself, after the natural

outlet for this will to hurt, became blocked - in other words, this man of the

bad  conscience  exploited  the  religious  hypothesis  so  as  to  carry  his

martyrdom to the ghastliest pitch of agonised intensity. Owing something to

God: this thought becomes his instrument of torture. He apprehends in God

the most extreme antitheses that he can find to his own characteristic and

ineradicable animal instincts, he himself gives a new interpretation to these

animal instincts as being against what he "owes" to God (as enmity, rebellion,

and revolt against the "Lord," the "Father," the "Sire," the "Beginning of the

world"), he places himself between the horns of the dilemma, "God" and

"Devil." Every negation which he is inclined to utter to himself, to the nature,

naturalness, and reality of his being, he whips into an ejaculation of "yes,"uttering  it  as  something  existing,  living,  efficient,  as  being  God,  as  the

holiness  of  God,  the  judgment  of  God,  as  the  hangmanship  of  God,  as

transcendence,  as  eternity,  as  unending  torment,  as  hell,  as  infinity  of

punishment and guilt. This is a kind of madness of the will in the sphere of

psychological cruelty which is absolutely unparalleled: - man's will to find

himself guilty and blameworthy to the point of inexpiability, his will to think

of himself as punished, without the punishment ever being able to balance the

guilt, his will to infect and to poison the fundamental basis of the universe

with the problem of punishment and guilt, in order to cut off once and for all

any escape out of this labyrinth of "fixed ideas," his will for rearing an ideal -

that of the "holy God" - face to face with which he can have tangible proof of

his  own  unworthiness.  Alas  for  this  mad  melancholy  beast  man!  What

phantasies invade it, what paroxysms of perversity, hysterical senselessness,

and mental bestiality break out immediately, at the very slightest check on its

being the beast of action ! All this is excessively interesting, but at the same

time tainted with a black, gloomy, enervating melancholy, so that a forcible

veto must be invoked against looking too long into these abysses. Here is

disease, indubitably, the most ghastly disease that has as yet played havoc

among men: and he who can still hear (but man turns now deaf ears to such

sounds), how in this night of torment and nonsense there has rung out the cry

of love, the cry of the most passionate ecstasy, of redemption in love, he turns

away gripped by an invincible horror - in man there is so much that is ghastly

- too long has the world been a mad-house.

  s23

  Let this suffice once for all concerning the origin of the "holy God." The

fact that in itself the conception of gods is not bound to lead necessarily to

this  degradation  of  the  imagination  (a  temporary  representation  of  whose

vagaries we felt bound to give), the fact that there exist nobler methods of

utilising  the  invention  of  gods  than  in  this  self-crucifixion  and  self-

degradation of man, in which the last two thousand years of Europe have

been past masters - these facts can fortunately be still perceived from every

glance that we cast at the Grecian gods, these mirrors of noble and grandiose

men, in which the animal in man felt itself deified, and did not devour itself

in subjective frenzy. These Greeks long utilised their gods as simple buffers

against  the  "bad  conscience"-  so  that  they  could  continue  to  enjoy  their

freedom of soul: this, of course, is diametrically opposed to Christianity's

theory of its god. They went very jar on this principle, did these splendid andlion-hearted children; and there is no lesser authority than that of the Homeric

Zeus  for  making  them  realise  occasionally  that  they  are  taking  life  too

casually. "Wonderful," says he on one occasion - it has to do with the case of

Aegisthus,  a  very  bad  case  indeed  -  "Wonderful  how  they  grumble,  the

mortals against the immortals Only from us, they presume, comes evil, but in

their folly, Fashion they, spite of fate, the doom of their own disaster." Yet

the reader will note and observe that this Olympian spectator and judge is far

from being angry with them and thinking evil of them on this score. "How

foolish  they  are,"  so  thinks  he  of  the  misdeeds  of  mortals  -  and  "folly,"

"imprudence," "a little brain disturbance." and nothing more, are what the

Greeks, even of the strongest, bravest period, have admitted to be the ground

of much that is evil and fatal. - Folly, not sin, do you understand? . . . But

even this brain disturbance was a problem - "Come, how is it even possible?

How  could  it  have  really  got  in  brains  like  ours,  the  brains  of  men  of

aristocratic ancestry, of men of fortune, of men of good natural endowments,

of men of the best society, of men of nobility and virtue?" This was the

question that for century on century the aristocratic Greek put to himself

when confronted with every (to him incomprehensible) outrage and sacrilege

with which one of his peers had polluted himself. "It must be that a god had

infatuated him," he would say at last, nodding his head. - This solution is

typical of the (?reeks, . . . accordingly the gods in those times subserved the

functions of justifying man to a certain extent even in evil- in those days they

took upon themselves not the punishment, but, what is more noble, the guilt.

  s24

  I conclude with three queries, as you will sec. "Is an ideal actually set up

here,  or  is  one  pulled  down?"  I  am  perhaps  asked.  .  .  .  But  have  ye

sufficiently asked yourselves how dear a payment has the setting up of every

ideal in the world exacted? To achieve that consummation how much truth

must  always  be  traduced  and  misunderstood,  how  many  lies  must  be

sanctified, hew much conscience has got to be disturbed, how many pounds

of "God" have got to be sacrificed every time?^ To enable a sanctuary to be

set up a sanctuary has got to be destroyed: that is a law - show me an instance

where  it  has  not  been  fulfilled!  .  .  .  We  modern  men,  we  inherit  the

immemorial tradition of vivisecting the conscience, and practicing cruelty to

our animal selves. That is the sphere of our most protracted training, perhaps

of our artistic prowess, at any rate of our dilettantism and our perverted taste.

Man has for too long regarded his natural proclivities with an "evil eye," sothat eventually they have become in his system affiliated to a bad conscience.

A converse endeavour would be intrinsically feasible - but who is strong

enough to attempt it? - namely, to affiliate to the "bad conscience" all those

unnatural proclivities, all those transcendental aspirations, contrary to sense,

instinct, nature, and animalism - in short, all past and present ideals, which

are all ideals opposed to life, and traducing the world. To whom is one to turn

nowadays with such hopes and pretensions? - It is just the good men that we

should thus bring about our ears; and in addition, as stands to reason, the

indolent, the hedgers, the vain, the hysterical, the tired. . . . What is more

offensive or more thoroughly calculated to alienate, than giving any hint of

the  exalted  severity  with  which  we  treat  ourselves?  And  again  how

conciliatory, how full of love does all the world show itself towards us so

soon as we do as all the world does, and "let ourselves go" like all the world.

For such a consummation we need spirits of different caliber than seems

really feasible in this age; spirits rendered potent through wars and victories,

to whom conquest, adventure, danger, even pain, have become a need; for

such  a  consummation  we  need  habituation  to  sharp,  rare  air,  to  winter

wanderings, to literal and metaphorical ice and mountains; we even need a

kind  of  sublime  malice,  a  supreme  and  most  self  conscious  insolence  of

knowledge, which is the apanage of great health; we need (to summarise the

awful truth) just this great health'. Is this even feasible today? . . . But some

day, in a stronger age than this rotting and introspective present, must he in

sooth come to us, even the redeemer of great love and scorn, the creative

spirit, rebounding by the impetus of his own force back again away from

every  transcendental  plane  and  dimension,  he  whose  solitude  is

misunderstanded of the people, as though it were a flight from reality; - while

actually it is only his diving, burrowing, and penetrating into reality, so that

when he comes again to the light he can at once bring about by these means

the redemption of this reality; its redemption from the curse which the old

ideal has laid upon it. This man of the future, who in this wise will redeem us

from the old ideal, as he will from that ideal's necessary corollary of great

nausea, will to nothingness, and Nihilism; this tocsin of noon and of the great

verdict, which renders the will again free, who gives back to the world its

goal and to man his hope, this Antichrist and Anti-nihilist, this conqueror of

God and of Nothingness - he must one day come.

  s25

  But what am I talking of? Enough! Enough? At this juncture I have onlyone proper course, silence: otherwise I trespass on a domain open alone to

one who is younger than I, one stronger, more "future" than I - open alone to

Zarathustra,  Zarathustra  the  godless.  THIRD  ESSAY  WHAT  IS  THE

MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? "Careless, mocking, forceful - so does

wisdom wish us: she is a woman, and never loves anyone but a warrior."

Thus Spake Zarathustra.

                                          ESSAY 3

  s1

  What is the meaning of ascetic ideals? In artists, nothing, or too much; in

philosophers and scholars, a kind of "flair" and instinct for the conditions

most favourable to advanced intellectualism; in women, at best an additional

seductive fascination, a little morbidezza [softness] on a fine piece of flesh,

the  angelic  quality  of  a  fat,  pretty  animal;  in  physiological  failures  and

whiners (in the majority of mortals), an attempt to pose as "too good" for this

world,  a  holy  form  of  debauchery,  their  chief  weapon  in  the  battle  with

lingering pain and ennui; in priests, the actual priestly faith, their best engine

of power, and also the supreme authority for power; in saints, finally a pretext

for hibernation, their novissima gloriae cupido [most recent desire for glory],

their peace in nothingness ("God"), their form of madness. but in the very

fact  that  the  ascetic  ideal  has  meant  so  much  to  man,  lies  expressed  the

fundamental feature of man's will, his horror vacui [horror of a vacuum]: he

needs a goal - and he will sooner will nothingness than not will at all. - Am I

not understood? - Have I not been understood? - "Certainly not, sir?" - Well,

let us begin at the beginning.

  s2

  What is the meaning of ascetic ideals? Or, to take an individual case in

regard  to  which  I  have  often  been  consulted,  what  is  the  meaning,  for

example, of an artist like Richard Wagner paying homage to chastity in his

old age? He had always done so, of course, in a certain sense, but it was not

till quite the end, that he did so in an ascetic sense. What is the meaning of

this "change of attitude," this radical revolution in his attitude - for that was

what it was? Wagner veered thereby straight round into his own opposite.

What is the meaning of an artist veering round into his own opposite? At this

point (granted that we do not mind stopping a little over this question), we

immediately call to mind the best, strongest, gayest, and boldest period, that

there perhaps ever was in Wagner's life: that was the period when he was

genuinely and deeply occupied with the idea of "Luther's Wedding." Whoknows what chance is responsible for our now having the Die Meistersinger

[Wagner's opera The Master Singers] singers instead of this wedding music?

And how much in the latter is perhaps just an echo of the former? But there is

no doubt but that the theme would have dealt with the praise of chastity. And

certainly it would also have dealt with the praise of sensuality, and even so, it

would  seem  quite  in  order,  and  even  so,  it  would  have  been  equally

Wagnerian.  For  there  is  no  necessary  antithesis  between  chastity  and

sensuality: every good marriage, every authentic heartfelt love transcends this

antithesis. Wagner would, it seems to me, have done well to have brought

this pleasing reality home once again to his Germans, by means of a bold and

graceful "Luther Comedy," for there were and are among the Germans many

revilers of sensuality; and perhaps Luther's greatest merit lies just in the fact

of his having had the courage of his sensuality (it used to be called, prettily

enough, "evangelistic freedom''). But even in those cases where that antithesis

between  chastity  and  sensuality  does  exist,  there  has  fortunately  been  for

some time no necessity for it to be in any way a tragic antithesis. This should,

at any rate, be the case with all beings who are sound in mind and body, who

are far from reckoning their delicate balance between "animal" and "angel,"

as being on the face of it one of the principles opposed to existence - the most

subtle and brilliant spirits, such as Goethe, such as Hafiz, have even seen in

this a further charm of life. Such "conflicts" actually allure one to life. On the

other hand, it is only too clear that when once these ruined swine are reduced

to  worshipping  chastity  -  and  there  are  such  swine  -  they  only  see  and

worship in it the antithesis to themselves, the antithesis to ruined swine. Oh,

what a tragic grunting and eagerness! You can just think of it - they worship

that  painful  and  superfluous  contrast,  which  Richard  Wagner  in  his  latter

days undoubtedly wished to set to music, and to place on the stage! "For what

purpose, indeed'" as we may reasonably ask. What did the swine matter to

him; what do they matter to us?

  s3

  At this point it is impossible to beg the further question of what he really

had to do with that manly (ah, so unmanly) country bumpkin, that poor devil

and natural, Parsifal, whom he eventually made a Catholic by such fraudulent

devices.  What?  Was  this  Parsifal  really  meant  seriously?  One  might  be

tempted to suppose the contrary, even to wish it - that the Wagnerian Parsifal

was meant joyously, like a concluding play of a trilogy or satyric drama, in

which Wagner the tragedian wished to take farewell of us, of himself, aboveall of tragedy, and to do so in a manner that should be quite fitting and

worthy, that is, with an excess of the most extreme and flippant parody of the

tragic itself, of the ghastly earthly seriousness and earthly woe of old - a

parody of that most crude phase in the unnaturalness of the ascetic ideal, that

had at length been overcome. That, as I have said, would have been quite

worthy of a great tragedian; who like every artist first attains the supreme

pinnacle of his greatness when he can look down into himself and his art,

when  he  can  laugh  at  himself.  Is  Wagner's  Parsifal  his  secret  laugh  of

superiority over himself, the triumph of that supreme artistic freedom and

artistic transcendency which he has at length attained. We might, I repeat,

wish it were so, for what can Parsifal, taken seriously, amount to? Is it really

necessary to see in it (according to an expression once used against me) the

product of an insane hate of knowledge, mind, and flesh? A curse on flesh

and spirit in one breath of hate? An apostasy and reversion to the morbid

Christian  and  obscurantist  ideals?  And  finally  a  self-negation  and  self-

elimination on the part of an artist, who till then had devoted all the strength

of his will to the contrary, namely, the highest artistic expression of soul and

body. And not only his art; of his life as well. Just remember with what

enthusiasm  Wagner  followed  in  the  footsteps  of  Feuerbach.  Feuerbach's

motto of "healthy sensuality" rang in the ears of Wagner during the thirties

and forties of the century, as it did in the ears of many Germans (they dubbed

themselves  "Young  Germans"),  like  the  word  of  redemption.  Did  he

eventually change Ids mind on the subject? For it seems at any rate that he

eventually wished to change his teaching on that subject . . . and not only is

that  the  case  with  the  Parsifal  trumpets  on  the  stage:  in  the  melancholy,

cramped,  and  embarrassed  cloudy  writings  of  his  later  years,  there  are  a

hundred places in which there are manifestations of a secret wish and will, a

despondent,  uncertain,  unavowed  will  to  preach  actual  retrogression,

conversion,  Christianity,  medievalism,  and  to  say  to  his  disciples,  "All  is

vanity! Seek salvation elsewhere!" Even the "blood of the Redeemer" is once

invoked.

  s4

  Let me speak out my mind in a case like this, which has many painful

elements - and it is a typical case: it is certainly best to separate an artist from

his work so completely that he cannot be taken as seriously as his work. He is

after all merely the presupposition of his work, the womb, the soil, in certain

cases  the  dung  and  manure,  on  which  and  out  of  which  it  grows  -  andconsequently, in most cases, something that must be forgotten if the work

itself is to be enjoyed. The insight into the origin of a work is a matter for

physiologists and vivisectionists of the spirit, but never either in the present

or the future for the aesthetes, the artists. The author and creator of Parsifal

was as little spared the necessity of sinking and living himself into the terrible

depths and foundations of the conflicts of the mediaeval soul , the necessity

of  a  malignant  abstraction  from  all  intellectual  elevation,  severity,  and

discipline, the necessity of a kind of mental perversity (if the reader will

pardon me such a word), as little as a pregnant woman is spared the horrors

and marvels of pregnancy, which, as I have said, must be forgotten if the

child is to be enjoyed. We must guard ourselves against the confusion, into

which an artist himself would fall only too easily (to employ the English

terminology) out of psychological "contiguity"; as though the artist' himself

actually were the object which he is able to represent, imagine, and express.

In point of fact, the position is that even if he conceived he were such an

object, he would certainly not represent, conceive, express it. Homer would

not  have  created  an  Achilles,  nor  Goth  a  Faust,  if  Homer  had  been  an

Achilles or if Goth had been a Faust. A complete and perfect artist is to all

eternity separated from the "real," from the actual ; on the other hand, it will

be appreciated that he can at times get tired to the point of despair of this

eternal "unreality" and falseness of his innermost being - and that he then

sometimes attempts to trespass on to the most forbidden ground, on reality,

and attempts to have real existence. With what success? The success will be

guessed - it is the typical velleity of the artist; the same velleity to which

Wagner fell a victim in his old age, and for which he had to pay so dearly and

so fatally (he lost thereby his most valuable friends). But after all, quite apart

from this velleity, who would not wish emphatically for Wagner's own sake

that he had taken farewell of us and of his art in a different manner, not with a

Parsifal, but in more victorious, more self-confident, more Wagnerian style -

a  style  less  misleading,  a  style  less  ambiguous  with  regard  to  his  whole

meaning, less Schopenhauerian, less Nihilistic? . . .

  s5

  What, then, is the meaning of ascetic ideals? In the case of an artist we

are getting to understand their meaning: Nothing at all . . . or so much that it

is as good as nothing at all. Indeed, what is the use of them? Our artists have

for a long time past not taken up a sufficiently independent attitude, either in

the world or against it, to warrant their valuations and the changes in thesevaluations exciting interest. At all times they have played the valet of some

morality, philosophy, or religion, quite apart from the fact that unfortunately

they have often enough been the inordinately supple courtiers of their clients

and patrons, and the inquisitive toadies of the powers that are existing, or

even of the new powers to come. To put it at the lowest, they always need a

rampart, a support, an already constituted authority: artists never stand by

themselves,  standing  alone  is  opposed  to  their  deepest  instincts.  So,  for

example,  did  Richard  Wagner  take,  "when  the  time  had  come,"  the

philosopher  Schopenhauer  for  his  covering  man  in  front,  for  his  rampart.

Who would consider it even thinkable, that he would have had the courage

for an ascetic ideal, without the support afforded him by the philosophy of

Schopenhauer,  without  the  authority  of  Schopenhauer,  which  dominated

Europe  in  the  seventies?  (This  is  without  consideration  of  the  question

whether  an  artist  without  the  milk  *  of  an  orthodoxy  would  have  been

possible at all.) This brings us to the more serious question: What is the

meaning of a real philosopher paying homage to the ascetic ideal, a really

self-dependent intellect like Schopenhauer, a man and knight with a glance of

bronze, who has the courage to be himself, who knows how to stand alone

without first waiting for men who cover him in front, and the nods of his

superiors?  Let  us  now  consider  at  once  the  remarkable  attitude  of

Schopenhauer towards art, an attitude which has even a fascination for certain

types. For that is obviously the reason why Richard Wagner all at once went

over to Schopenhauer (persuaded thereto, as one knows, by a poet, Herwegh),

went  over  so  completely  that  there  ensued  the  cleavage  of  a  complete

theoretic contradiction between his earlier and his later aesthetic faiths - the

earlier, for example, being expressed in Opera and Drama, the later in the

writings which he published from 1870

  onwards. In particular, Wagner from that time onwards (and this is the

volte-face which alienates us the most) had no scruples about changing his

judgment concerning the value and position of music itself. What did he care

if up to that time he had made of music a means, a medium, a "woman," that

in order to thrive needed an end, a man - that is, the drama? He suddenly

realised that more could be effected by the novelty of the Schopenhauerian

theory in majorem musicae gloriam [for the greater glory of music] - that is to

say, by means of the sovereignty of music, as Schopenhauer understood it;

music  abstracted  from  and  opposed  to  all  the  other  arts,  music  as  the

independent art-in-itself, not like the other arts, affording reflections of thephenomenal world, but rather the language of the will itself, speaking straight

out of the "abyss" as its most personal, original, and direct manifestation.

This extraordinary rise in the value of music (a rise which seemed to grow

out  of  the  Schopenhauerian  philosophy)  was  at  once  accompanied  by  an

unprecedented rise in the estimation in which the musician himself was held:

he  became  now  an  oracle,  a  priest,  nay,  more  than  a  priest,  a  kind  of

mouthpiece for the "intrinsic essence of things," a telephone from the other

world - from henceforward he talked not only music, did this ventriloquist of

God, he talked metaphysic; what wonder that one day he eventually talked

ascetic ideals!

  s6

    Schopenhauer  has  made  use  of  the  Kantian  treatment  of  the  aesthetic

problem - though he certainly did not regard it with the Kantian eyes. Kant

thought that he showed honour to art when he favoured and placed in the

foreground  those  of  the  predicates  of  the  beautiful,  which  constitute  the

honour of knowledge: impersonality and universality. This is not the place to

discuss whether this was not a complete mistake; all that I wish to emphasise

is that Kant, just like other philosophers, instead of envisaging the aesthetic

problem from the standpoint of the experiences of the artist (the creator), has

only considered art and beauty from the standpoint of the spectator, and has

thereby  imperceptibly  imported  the  spectator  himself  into  the  idea  of  the

"beautiful"!  But  if  only  the  philosophers  of  the  beautiful  had  sufficient

knowledge  of  this  "spectator"!  -  Knowledge  of  him  as  a  great  fact  of

personality, as a great experience, as a wealth of strong and most individual

events,  desires,  surprises,  and  raptures  in  the  sphere  of  beauty!  But,  as  I

feared,  the  contrary  was  always  the  case.  And  so  we  get  from  our

philosophers, from the very beginning, definitions on which the lack of a

subtler personal experience squats like a fat worm of crass error, as it does on

Kant's  famous  definition  of  the  beautiful.  "That  is  beautiful,"  says  Kant,

"which  pleases  without  interesting."  Without  interesting!  Compare  this

definition with this other one, made by a real "spectator" and "artist" - by

Stendhal, who once called the beautiful a promesse de bonheur [a promise of

happiness]. Here the disinterestedness [desinteressement] which Kant made

the single element in the aesthetic state is clearly rejected and deleted. Who's

right,  Kant  or  Stendhal?  Naturally  if  our  aestheticians  never  get  tired  of

throwing into the scales in Kant's favour the fact that under the magic of

beauty men can look at even naked female statues "without interest," w T ecan certainly laugh a little at their expense: - in regard to this ticklish point

the experiences of artists are more "interesting," and at any rate Pygmalion

was not necessarily an "unaesthetic man." Let us think all the better of the

innocence of our aesthetes, reflected as it is in such arguments; let us, for

instance, count to Kant's honour the country-parson naivete of his doctrine

concerning the peculiar character of the sense of touch! And here we come

back to Schopenhauer, who stood in much closer neighbourhood to the arts

than  did  Kant,  and  yet  never  escaped  outside  the  pale  of  the  Kantian

definition;  how  was  that?  The  circumstance  is  marvellous  enough:  he

interprets the expression, "without interest," in the most personal fashion, out

of an experience which must in his case have been part and parcel of his

regular  routine.  On  few  subjects  does  Schopenhauer  speak  with  such

certainty as on the working of aesthetic contemplation: he says of it that it

simply counteracts sexual interest, like lupulin and camphor; he never gets

tired of glorifying this escape from the "Life-will" as the great advantage and

utility of the aesthetic state. In fact, one is tempted to ask if his fundamental

conception of Will and Idea, the thought that there can only exist freedom

from the "will" by means of "idea," did not originate in a generalisation from

this  sexual  experience.  (In  all  questions  concerning  the  Schopenhauerian

philosophy, one should, by the bye, never lose sight of the consideration that

it is the conception of a youth of twenty-six, so that it participates not only in

what is peculiar to Schopenhauer's life, but in what is peculiar to that special

period of his life.) Let us listen, for instance, to one of the most expressive

among the countless passages which he has written in honour of the aesthetic

state (World as Will and Idea, i. 231); let us listen to the tone, the suffering,

the happiness, the gratitude, with which such words are uttered: "This is the

painless state which Epicurus praised as the highest good and as the state of

the gods; we are during that moment freed from the vile pressure of the will,

we celebrate the Sabbath of the will's hard labour, the wheel of Ixion stands

still." What vehemence of language! What images of anguish and protracted

revulsion! How almost pathological is that temporal antithesis between "that

moment" and everything else, the "wheel of Ixion," "the hard labour of the

will," "the vile pressure of the will." But granted that Schopenhauer was a

hundred times right for himself personally, how does that help our insight

into the nature of the beautiful? Schopenhauer has described one effect of the

beautiful, - the calming of the will,- but is this effect really normal? As has

been mentioned, Stendhal, an equally sensual but more happily constitutednature  than  Schopenhauer,  gives  prominence  to  another  effect  of  the

"beautiful."  "The  beautiful  promises  happiness."  To  him  it  is  just  the

excitement of the will (the "interest") by the beauty that seems the essential

fact. And does not Schopenhauer ultimately lay himself open to the objection,

that he is quite wrong in regarding himself as a Kantian on this point, that he

has absolutely failed to understand in a Kantian sense the Kantian definition

of  the  beautiful  -  that  the  beautiful  pleased  him  as  well  by  means  of  an

interest, by means, in fact, of the strongest and most personal interest of all,

that of the victim of torture who escapes from his torture? - And to come

back  again  to  our  first  question,  "What  is  the  meaning  of  a  philosopher

paying homage to ascetic ideals?" We get now, at any rate, a first hint; he

wishes to escape from a torture.

  s7

  Let us beware of making dismal faces at the word "torture" - there is

certainly in this case enough to deduct, enough to discount - there is even

something to laugh at. For we must certainly not underestimate the fact that

Schopenhauer,  who  in  practice  treated  sexuality  as  a  personal  enemy

(including its tool, woman, that "instrumentum diaboli" [tool of the devil]),

needed enemies to keep him in a good humour; that he loved grim, bitter,

blackish-green words; that he raged for the sake of raging, out of passion;

that he would have grown ill, would have become a pessimist (for he was not

a pessimist, however much he wished to be), without his enemies, without

Hegel, woman, sensuality, and the whole "will for existence" "keeping on."

Without them Schopenhauer would not have "kept on," that is a safe wager;

he would have run away: but his enemies held him fast, his enemies always

enticed him back again to existence, his wrath was just as theirs was to the

ancient Cynics, his balm, his recreation, his recompense, his remedy against

disgust, his happiness. So much with regard to what is most personal in the

case of Schopenhauer; on the other hand, there is still much which is typical

in him - and only now we come back to our problem. It is an accepted and

indisputable  fact,  so  long  as  there  are  philosophers  in  the  world,  and

wherever  philosophers  have  existed  (from  India  to  England,  to  take  the

opposite poles of philosophic ability), that there exists a real irritation and

rancour  on  the  part  of  philosophers  towards  sensuality.  Schopenhauer  is

merely  the  most  eloquent,  and  if  one  has  the  ear  for  it,  also  the  most

fascinating and enchanting outburst. There similarly exists a real philosophic

bias and affection for the whole ascetic ideal; there should be no illusions onthis score. Both these feelings, as has been said, belong to the type; if a

philosopher lacks both of them, then he is - you may be certain of it - never

anything but a "pseudo." What does this mean? For this state of affairs must

first be interpreted: in itself it stands there stupid to all eternity, like any

"Thing-in-itself."  Every  animal,  including  la  b�te  philosophe  [the

philosophical  beast],  strives  instinctively  after  an  optimum  of  favourable

conditions, under which he can let his whole strength have play, and achieves

his maximum consciousness of power; with equal instinctiveness, and with a

fine perceptive flair which is superior to any reason, every animal shudders

mortally at every kind of disturbance and hindrance which obstructs or could

obstruct his way to that optimum (it is not his way to happiness of which I am

talking, but his way to power, to action, the most powerful action, and in

point  of  fact  in  many  cases  his  way  to  unhappiness)  .  Similarly,  the

philosopher  shudders  mortally  at  marriage,  together  with  all  that  could

persuade him to it - marriage as a fatal hindrance on the way to the optimum.

Up to the present what great philosophers have been married? Heracleitus,

Plato,  Descartes,  Spinoza,  Leibnitz,  Kant,  Schopenhauer  -  they  were  not

married,  and,  further,  one  cannot  imagine  them  as  married.  A  married

philosopher belongs to comedy, that is my rule; as for that exception of a

Socrates - the malicious Socrates married himself, it seems, ironically, just to

prove this very rule. Every philosopher would say, as Buddha said, when the

birth of a son was announced to him: "Rahula has been born to me, a fetter

has been forged for me" (Rahula means here "a little demon") ; there must

come an hour of reflection to every "free spirit" (granted that he has had

previously an hour of thoughtlessness), just as one came once to the same

Buddha: "Narrowly cramped," he reflected, "is life in the house; it is a place

of uncleanness; freedom is found in leaving the house." Because he thought

like this, he left the house. So many bridges to independence are shown in the

ascetic ideal, that the philosopher cannot refrain from exultation and clapping

of hands when he hears the history of all those resolute ones, who on one day

uttered a nay to all servitude and went into some desert; even granting that

they were only strong asses, and the absolute opposite of strong minds. What,

then, does the ascetic ideal mean in a philosopher? This is my answer - it will

have been guessed long ago: when he sees this ideal the philosopher smiles

because  he  sees  therein  an  optimum  of  the  conditions  of  the  highest  and

boldest  intellectuality;  he  does  not  thereby  deny  '"existence,"  he  rather

affirms thereby his existence and only his existence, and this perhaps to thepoint of not being far off the blasphemous wish,perat mundus, fiat philosphia,

fiat phiosophus, fiam! [let the world perish, but let philosophy exist, let the

philosopher exist, let me exist] . . .

  s8

  These philosophers, you see, are by no means uncorrupted witnesses and

judges of the value of the ascetic ideal. They think of themselves - what is the

"saint"  to  them?  They  think  of  that  which  to  them  personally  is  most

indispensable;  of  freedom  from  compulsion,  disturbance,  noise;  freedom

from business, duties, cares; of a clear head; of the dance, spring, and flight

of thoughts; of good air - rare, clear, free, dry, as is the air on the heights, in

which every animal creature becomes more intellectual and gains wings; they

think of peace in every cellar; all the hounds neatly chained; no baying of

enmity and uncouth rancour; no remorse of wounded ambition; quiet and

submissive  internal  organs,  busy  as  mills,  but  unnoticed;  the  heart  alien,

transcendent, future, posthumous - to summarise, they mean by the ascetic

ideal the joyous asceticism of a deified and newly fledged animal, sweeping

over life rather than resting. We know what are the three great catch- words

of the ascetic ideal: poverty, humility, chastity; and now just look closely at

the life of all the great fruitful inventive spirits - you will always find again

and again these three qualities up to a certain extent. Not for a minute, as is

self-evident, as though, perchance, they were part of their virtues - what has

this type of man to do with virtues - but as the most essential and natural

conditions of their best existence, their finest fruitfulness. In this connection

it is quite possible that their predominant intellectualism had first to curb an

unruly and irritable pride, or an insolent sensualism, or that it had all its work

cut out to maintain its wish for the "desert" against perhaps an inclination to

luxury and dilettantism, or similarly against an extravagant liberality of heart

and hand. But their intellect did effect all this, simply because it was the

dominant instinct, which carried through its orders in the case of all the other

instincts.  It  effects  it  still:  if  it  ceased  to  do  so,  it  ?would  simply  not  be

dominant. But there is not one iota of "virtue" in all this. Further, the desert,

of which I just spoke, in which the strong, independent, and well-equipped

spirits retreat into their hermitage - oh, how different is it from the cultured

classes'  dream  of  a  desert!  In  certain  cases,  in  fact,  the  cultured  classes

themselves are the desert. And it is certain that all the actors of the intellect

would not endure this desert for a minute. It is nothing like romantic and

Syrian enough for them, nothing like enough of a stage desert! Here as wellthere are plenty of asses, but at this point the resemblance ceases. But a desert

nowadays is something like this - perhaps a deliberate obscurity; a getting-

out-of the way of one's self; a fear of noise, admiration, papers, influence; a

little office, a daily task, something that hides rather than brings to light;

sometimes associating with harmless, cheerful beasts and fowls, the sight of

which refreshes; a mountain for company, but not a dead one, one with eyes

(that is, with lakes) ; in certain cases even a room in a crowded hotel where

one  can  reckon  on  not  being  recognised,  and  on  being  able  to  talk  with

impunity to every one: here is the desert - oh, it is lonely enough, believe me!

I  grant  that  when  Heracleitus  retreated  to  the  courts  and  cloisters  of  the

colossal temple of Artemis, that "wilderness" was worthier; why do we lack

such temples? (perchance we do not lack them: I just think of my splendid

study in the Piazza di San Marco, in spring, of course, and in the morning,

between ten and twelve). But that which Heracleitus shunned is still just what

we too avoid nowadays: the noise and democratic babble of the Ephesians,

their politics, their news from the "empire" (I mean, of course, Persia), their

market-trade in "the things of today" - for there is one thing from which we

philosophers especially need a rest - from the things of "today." We honour

the silent, the cold, the noble, the far, the past, everything, in fact, at the sight

of which the soul is not bound to brace itself up and defend itself - something

with which one can speak without speaking aloud. Just listen now to the tone

a spirit has when it speaks; every spirit has its own tone and loves its own

tone. That thing yonder, for instance, is bound to be an agitator, that is, a

hollow head, a hollow mug: whatever may go into him, everything comes

back from him dull and thick, heavy with the echo of the great void. That

spirit yonder nearly always speaks hoarse: has he, perchance, thought himself

hoarse? It may be so - ask the physiologists - but he who thinks in words,

thinks as a speaker and not as a thinker (it shows that he does not think of

objects or think objectively, but only of his relations with objects - that, in

point of fact, he only thinks of himself and his audience). This third one

speaks aggressively, he comes too near our body, his breath blows on us - we

shut our mouth involuntarily, although he speaks to us through a book: the

tone of his style supplies the reason - he has no time, he has small faith in

himself, he finds expression now or never. But a spirit who is sure of himself

speaks softly; he seeks secrecy, he lets himself be awaited. A philosopher is

recognised by the fact that he shuns three brilliant and noisy things - fame,

princes, and women: which is not to say that they do not come to him. Heshuns  every  glaring  light:  therefore  he  shuns  his  time  and  its  "daylight."

Therein he is as a shadow; the deeper sinks the sun, the greater grows the

shadow. As for his humility, he endures, as he endures darkness, a certain

dependence and obscurity: further, he is afraid of the shock of lightning, he

shudders at the insecurity of a tree which is too isolated and too exposed, on

which every storm vents its temper, every temper its storm. His "maternal"

instinct, his secret love for that which grows in him, guides him into states

where he is relieved from the necessity of taking care of himself, in the same

way in which the "mother" instinct in woman has thoroughly maintained up

to  the  present  woman's  dependent  position.  After  all,  they  demand  little

enough, do these philosophers, their favourite motto is, "He who possesses is

possessed." All this is not, as I must say again and again, to be attributed to a

virtue, to a meritorious wish for moderation and simplicity: but because their

supreme lord so demands of them, demands wisely and inexorably; their lord

who is eager only for one thing, for which alone he musters, and for which

alone he hoards everything - time, strength, love, interest. This kind of man

likes not to be disturbed by enmity, he likes not to be disturbed by friendship,

it is a type which forgets or despises easily. It strikes him as bad form to play

the martyr, "to suffer for truth" - he leaves all that to the ambitious and to the

stage-heroes of the intellect, and to all those, in fact, who have time enough

for such luxuries (they themselves, the philosophers, have something to do

for truth). They make a sparing use of big words; they are said to be adverse

to the word "truth" itself: it has a "high falutin' " ring. Finally, as far as the

chastity of philosophers is concerned, the fruitfulness of this type of mind is

manifestly in another sphere than that of children; perchance in some other

sphere,  too,  they  have  the  survival  of  their  name,  their  little  immortality

(philosophers in ancient India would express themselves with still greater

boldness: "Of what use is posterity to him whose soul is the world?"). In this

attitude there is not a trace of chastity, by reason of any ascetic scruple or

hatred of the flesh, any more than it is chastity for an athlete or a jockey to

abstain from women; it is rather the will of the dominant instinct, at any rate,

during  the  period  of  their  advanced  philosophic  pregnancy.  Every  artist

knows the harm done by sexual intercourse on occasions of great mental

strain and preparation; as far as the strongest artists and those with the surest

instincts are concerned, this is not necessarily a case of experience - hard

experience  -  but  it  is  simply  their  "maternal"  instinct  which,  in  order  to

benefit the growing work, disposes recklessly (beyond all its normal stocksand supplies) of the vigour of its animal life; the greater power then absorbs

the lesser. Let us now apply this interpretation to gauge correctly the case of

Schopenhauer, which we have already mentioned: in his case, the sight of the

beautiful acted manifestly like a resolving irritant on the chief power of his

nature (the power of contemplation and of intense penetration) ; so that this

strength exploded and became suddenly master of his consciousness. But this

by no means excludes the possibility of that particular sweetness and fullness,

which is peculiar to the aesthetic state, springing directly from the ingredient

of sensuality (just as that "idealism" which is peculiar to girls at puberty

originates in the same source) - it may be, consequently, that sensuality is not

removed by the approach of the aesthetic state, as Schopenhauer believed, but

merely becomes transfigured, and ceases to enter into the consciousness as

sexual excitement. (I shall return once again to this point in connection with

the more delicate problems of the physiology of the (esthetic, a subject which

up to the present has been singularly untouched and unelucidated.)

  s9

  A certain asceticism, a grimly gay wholehearted renunciation, is, as we

have  seen,  one  of  the  most  favourable  conditions  for  the  highest

intellectualism, and, consequently, for the most natural corollaries of such

intellectualism:  we  shall  therefore  be  proof  against  any  surprise  at  the

philosophers  in  particular  always  treating  the  ascetic  ideal  with  a  certain

amount  of  predilection.  A  serious  historical  investigation  shows  the  bond

between the ascetic ideal and philosophy to be still much tighter and still

much stronger. It may be said that it was only in the leading strings of this

ideal that philosophy really learnt to make its first steps and baby paces - alas

how clumsily, alas how crossly, alas how ready to tumble down and lie on its

stomach was this shy little darling of a brat with its bandy legs! The early

history of philosophy is like that of all good things; - for a long time they had

not the courage to be themselves, they kept always looking round to see if no

one would come to their help; further, they were afraid of all who looked at

them. Just enumerate in order the particular tendencies and virtues of the

philosopher- his tendency to doubt, his tendency to deny, his tendency to wait

(the "ephectic" desire), his tendency to analyse, search, explore, dare, his

tendency to compare and to equalise, his will to be neutral and objective, his

will for everything which is "sine ira et studio" [without anger and partiality]:

has it yet been realised that for quite a lengthy period these tendencies went

counter to the first claims of morality and conscience? (To say nothing at allof Reason, which even Luther liked to call Mrs. Clever, the Clever Whore.)

Has it been yet appreciated that a philosopher, in the event of his arriving at

self-consciousness, must needs feel himself an incarnate "nitimur in vetitum"

[we search for what's forbidden],- and consequently guard himself against

"his own sensations," against self -consciousness? It is, I repeat, just the same

with all good things, on which we now pride ourselves; even judged by the

standard of the ancient Greeks, our whole modern life, in so far as it is not

weakness, but power and the consciousness of power, appears pure "Hubris"

and godlessness: for the things which are the very reverse of those which we

honour today, have had for a long time conscience on their side, and God as

their  guardian.  "Hubris"  is  our  whole  attitude  to  nature  nowadays,  our

violation  of  nature  with  the  help  of  machinery,  and  all  the  unscrupulous

ingenuity of our scientists and engineers. "Hubris" is our attitude to God, that

is, to some alleged teleological and ethical spider behind the meshes of the

great trap of the causal web. Like Charles the Bold in his war with Louis the

Eleventh, we may say, "Je combats l'universealle araignee" [I am fighting the

universal spider]; our attitude to ourselves is hubris, - for we experiment with

ourselves  in  a  way  that  we  would  not  allow  with  any  animal,  and  with

pleasure and curiosity open our soul in our living body: what matters now to

us  the  "salvation"  of  the  soul?  We  heal  ourselves  afterwards:  being  ill  is

instructive,  we  doubt  it  not,  even  more  instructive  than  being  well  -

inoculators  of  disease  seem  to  us  today  even  more  necessary  than  any

medicine-men and "saviours." There is no doubt we do violence to ourselves

nowadays.-, we crackers of the soul's kernel, we incarnate riddles, who are

ever asking riddles, as though life were naught else than the cracking of a nut;

and even thereby must we necessarily become day by day more and more

worthy to be asked questions and worthy to ask them, even thereby do we

perchance also become worthier to - live? . . . All good things were once bad

thins;?: from every original sin has grown an original virtue. Marriage, for

example, seemed for a long time a sin against the rights of the community ; a

man formerly paid a fine for the insolence of claiming one woman to himself

(to this phase belongs, for instance, the jus primae noctis [the right of the first

night], today still in Cambodia the privilege of the priest, that guardian of the

"good old customs"). The soft, benevolent, yielding, sympathetic feelings -

eventually valued so highly that they almost became "intrinsic values," were

for a very long time actually despised by their possessors: gentleness was

then a subject for shame, just as hardness is now (compare Beyond Good andEvil, Aph. 260). The submission to law: oh, with what qualms of conscience

was it that the noble races throughout the world renounced the vendetta and

gave the law power over themselves! Law was long a vetitum [something

prohibited], a blasphemy, an innovation; it was introduced with force like a

force, to which men only submitted with a sense of personal shame. Every

tiny step forward in the world was formerly made at the cost of mental and

physical torture. Nowadays the whole of this point of view - "that not only

stepping forward, nay, stepping at all, movement, change, all needed their

countless martyrs," rings in our ears quite strangely. I have put it forward in

the Dawn of Day, Aph. 18. "Nothing is purchased more dearly," says the

same book a little later, "than the modicum of human reason and freedom

which is now our pride. But that pride is the reason why it is now almost

impossible for us to feel in sympathy with those immense periods of the

'Morality  of  Custom,'  which  lie  at  the  beginning  of  the  'world's  history,'

constituting as they do the real decisive historical principle which has fixed

the character of humanity; those periods, I repeat, when throughout the world

suffering passed for virtue, cruelty for virtue, deceit for virtue, revenge for

virtue, repudiation of the reason for virtue; and when, conversely, well-being

passed  current  for  danger,  the  desire  for  knowledge  for  danger,  pity  for

danger, peace for danger, being pitied for shame, work for shame, madness

for divinity, and change for immorality and incarnate corruption!"

  s10

  There  is  in  the  same  book,  Aph.  12,  an  explanation  of  the  burden  of

unpopularity under which the earliest race of contemplative men had to live -

despised  almost  as  widely  as  they  were  first  feared!  Contemplation  first

appeared on earth in a disguised shape, in an ambiguous form, with an evil

heart and often with an uneasy head: there is no doubt about it. The inactive,

brooding,  un-warlike  element  in  the  instincts  of  contemplative  men  long

invested them with a cloud of suspicion: the only way to combat this was to

excite a definite fear. And the old Brahmans, for example, knew to a nicety

how to do this! The oldest philosophers were well versed in giving to their

very existence and appearance, meaning, firmness, background, by reason

whereof men learnt to fear them; considered more precisely, they did this

from an even more fundamental need, the need of inspiring in themselves

fear  and  self-reverence.  For  they  found  even  in  their  own  souls  all  the

valuations turned against themselves; they had to fight down every kind of

suspicion and antagonism against "the philosophic element in themselves."Being men of a terrible age, they did this with terrible means: cruelty to

themselves, ingenious self-mortification - this was the chief method of these

ambitious hermits and intellectual revolutionaries, who were obliged to force

down the gods and the traditions of their own soul, so as to enable themselves

to believe in their own revolution. I remember the famous story of the King

Vishvamitra,  who,  as  the  result  of  a  thousand  years  of  self-martyrdom,

reached such a consciousness of power and such a confidence in himself that

he undertook to build a new heaven: the sinister symbol of the oldest and

newest history of philosophy in the whole world. everyone who has ever built

anywhere a "new heaven" first found the power thereto in his own hell. . . .

Let us compress the facts into a short formula. The philosophic spirit had, in

order to be possible to any extent at all, to masquerade and disguise itself as

one of the previously fixed types of the contemplative man, to disguise itself

as priest, wizard, soothsayer, as a religious man generally: the ascetic ideal

has  for  a  long  time  served  the  philosopher  as  a  superficial  form,  as  a

condition which enabled him to exist. ... To be able to be a philosopher he

had to exemplify the ideal; to exemplify it, he was bound to believe in it. The

peculiarly etherealised abstraction of philosophers, with their negation of the

world,  their  enmity  to  life,  their  disbelief  in  the  senses,  which  has  been

maintained up to the most recent time, and has almost thereby come to be

accepted as the ideal philosophic attitude - this abstraction is the result of

those enforced conditions under which philosophy came into existence, and

continued to exist; inasmuch as for quite a very long time philosophy would

have been absolutely impossible in the world without an ascetic cloak and

dress,  without  an  ascetic  self-misunderstanding.  Expressed  plainly  and

palpably, the ascetic priest has taken the repulsive and sinister form of the

caterpillar, beneath which and behind which alone philosophy could live and

slink  about.  .  .  .  Has  all  that  really  changed?  Has  that  flamboyant  and

dangerous  winged  creature,  that  "spirit"  which  that  caterpillar  concealed

within itself, has it, I say, thanks to a sunnier, warmer, lighter world, really

and finally flung off its hood and escaped into the light? Can we today point

to  enough  pride,  enough  daring,  enough  courage,  enough  self-confidence,

enough mental will, enough will for responsibility, enough freedom of the

will, to enable the philosopher to be now in the world really - possible?

  s11

  And now, after we have caught sight of the ascetic priest, let us tackle our

problem.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  ascetic  ideal?  It  now  first  becomesserious - vitally serious. We are now confronted with the real representatives

of the serious. "What is the meaning of all seriousness?" This even more

radical question is perchance already on the tip of our tongue: a question,

fairly, for physiologists, but which we for the time being skip. In that ideal

the ascetic priest finds not only his faith, but also his will, his power, his

interest. His right to existence stands and falls with that ideal. What wonder

that we here run up against a terrible opponent (on the supposition, of course,

that we are the opponents of that ideal), an opponent fighting for his life

against those who repudiate that ideal! ... On the other hand, it is from the

outset improbable that such a biased attitude towards our problem will do

him any particular good; the ascetic priest himself will scarcely prove the

happiest champion of his own ideal (on the same principle on which a woman

usually fails when she wishes to champion "woman") - let alone proving the

most  objective  critic  and  judge  of  the  controversy  now  raised.  We  shall

therefore - so much is already obvious - rather have actually to help him to

defend himself properly against ourselves, than we shall have to fear being

too well beaten by him. The idea, which is the subject of this dispute, is the

value of our life from the standpoint of the ascetic priests: this life, then

(together with the whole of which it is a part, "Nature," "the world," the

whole sphere of becoming and passing away), is placed by them in relation to

an existence of quite another character, which it excludes and to which it is

opposed, unless it deny its own self: in this case, the case of an ascetic life,

life is taken as a bridge to another existence. The ascetic treats life as a maze,

in which one must walk backwards till one comes to the place where it starts;

or he treats it as an error which one may, nay must, refute by action: for he

demands that he should be followed; he enforces, where he can, his valuation

of existence. What does this mean? Such a monstrous valuation is not an

exceptional case, or a curiosity recorded in human history: it is one of the

most general and persistent facts that there are. The reading from the vantage

of a distant star of the capital letters of our earthly life, would perchance lead

to the conclusion that the earth was the especially ascetic planet, a den of

discontented, arrogant, and repulsive creatures, who never got rid of a deep

disgust of themselves, of the world, of all life, and did themselves as much

hurt as possible out of pleasure in hurting - presumably their one and only

pleasure. Let us consider how regularly, how universally, how practically at

every single period the ascetic priest puts in his appearance: he belongs to no

particular race; he thrives everywhere; he grows out of all classes. Not that heperhaps bred this valuation by heredity and propagated it - the contrary is the

case.  It  must  be  a  necessity  of  the  first  order  which  makes  this  species,

hostile, as it is, to life, always grow again and always thrive again. - Life

itself must certainly have an interest in the continuance of such a type of self-

contradiction. For an ascetic life is a self-contradiction: here rules resentment

without parallel, the resentment of an insatiate instinct and ambition, that

would be master, not over some element in life, but over life itself, over life's

deepest, strongest, innermost conditions; here is an attempt made to utilise

power to dam the sources of power; here does the green eye of jealousy turn

even against physiological well-being, especially against the expression of

such well-being, beauty, joy, while a sense of pleasure is experienced and

sought in abortion, in decay, in pain, in misfortune, in ugliness, in voluntary

punishment, in the exercising, flagellation, and sacrifice of the self. All this is

in the highest degree paradoxical: we are here confronted with a rift that wills

itself to be a rift, which enjoys itself in this very suffering, and even becomes

more and more certain of itself, more and more triumphant, in proportion as

its own presupposition, physiological vitality, decreases. "The triumph just in

the supreme agony": under this extravagant emblem did the ascetic ideal fight

from  of  old;  in  this  mystery  of  seduction,  in  this  picture  of  rapture  and

torture, it recognised its brightest light, its salvation, its final victory. Crux,

nux, lux [cross, nut, light]- it has all these three in one.

  s12

  Granted that such an incarnate will for contradiction and unnaturalness is

induced to philosophise; on what will it vent its pet caprice? On that which

has been felt with the greatest certainty to be true, to be real; it will look for

error in those very places where the life instinct fixes truth with the greatest

positiveness. It will, for instance, after the example of the ascetics of the

Vedanta Philosophy, reduce matter to an illusion, and similarly treat pain,

multiplicity, the whole logical contrast of "Subject" and "Object" - errors,

nothing but errors! To renounce the belief in one's own ego, to deny to one's

self one's own "reality" - what a triumph! and here already we have a much

higher kind of triumph, which is not merely a triumph over the senses, over

the palpable, but an infliction of violence and cruelty on reason; and this

ecstasy culminates in the ascetic self-contempt, the ascetic scorn of one's own

reason making this decree: there is a domain of truth and of life, but reason is

specially excluded from there. ... By the bye, even in the Kantian idea of "the

intelligible character of things" there remains a trace of that schism, so dearto the heart of the ascetic, that schism which likes to turn reason against

reason; in fact, "intelligible character" means in Kant a kind of quality in

things of which the intellect comprehends so much, that for it, the intellect, it

is absolutely incomprehensible. After all, let us, in our character of knowers,

not  be  ungrateful  towards  such  determined  reversals  of  the  ordinary

perspectives and values, with which the mind had for too long raged against

itself with an apparently futile sacrilege! In the same way the very seeing of

another vista, the very wishing to see another vista, is no little training and

preparation of the intellect for its eternal "Objectivity" - objectivity being

understood not as "contemplation without interest" (for that is inconceivable

and nonsensical), but as the ability to have the pros and cons in one's power

and to switch them on and off, so as to get to know how to utilise, for the

advancement  of  knowledge,  the  difference  in  the  perspective  and  in  the

emotional  interpretations.  But  let  us,  indeed,  my  philosophic  colleagues,

henceforward  guard  ourselves  more  carefully  against  this  mythology  of

dangerous ancient ideas, which has set up a "pure, will-less, painless, timeless

subject  of  knowledge";  let  us  guard  ourselves  from  the  tentacles  of  such

contradictory ideas as "pure reason," "absolute spirituality," "knowledge-in-

itself": - in these theories an eye that cannot be thought of is required to think,

an eye which ex hypothesi has no direction at all, an eye in which the active

and interpreting functions are cramped, are absent; those functions, I say, by

means of which "abstract" seeing first became seeing something; in these

theories consequently the absurd and the nonsensical is always demanded of

the eye. There is only a seeing from a perspective, only a "knowing" from a

perspective, and the more emotions we express over a thing, the more eyes,

different eyes, we train on the same thing, the more complete will be our

"idea"  of  that  thing,  our  "objectivity."  But  the  elimination  of  the  will

altogether, the switching off of the emotions all and sundry, granted that we

could do so, what! would not that be called intellectual castration?

  s13

  But let us turn back. Such a self-contradiction, as apparently manifests

itself  among  the  ascetics,  "Life  turned  against  Life,"  is  -  so  much  is

absolutely  obvious  -  from  the  physiological  and  not  now  from  the

psychological  standpoint,  simply  nonsense.  It  can  only  be  an  apparent

contradiction; it must be a kind of provisional expression, an explanation, a

formula,  an  adjustment,  a  psychological  misunderstanding  of  something,

whose real nature could not be understood for a long time, and whose realessence could not be described; a mere word jammed into an old gap of

human knowledge. To put briefly the facts against its being real: the ascetic

ideal springs from the prophylactic and self-preservative instincts which mark

a decadent life, which seeks by every means in its power to maintain its

position  and  fight  for  its  existence;  it  points  to  a  partial  physiological

depression and exhaustion, against which the most profound and intact life-

instincts  fight  ceaselessly  with  new  weapons  and  discoveries.  The  ascetic

ideal is such a weapon: its position is consequently exactly the reverse of that

which the worshippers of the ideal imagine - life struggles in it and through it

with death and against death; the ascetic ideal is a dodge for the preservation

of life. An important fact is brought out in the extent to which, as history

teaches, this ideal could rule and exercise power over man, especially in all

those places where the civilisation and taming of man was completed: that

fact is, the diseased state of man up to the present, at any rate, of the man

who has been tamed, the physiological struggle of man with death (more

precisely, with the disgust with life, with exhaustion, with the wish for the

"end"). The ascetic priest is the incarnate wish for an existence of another

kind, an existence on another plane, - he is, in fact, the highest point of this

wish, its official ecstasy and passion: but it is the very power of this wish

which is the fetter that binds him here; it is just that which makes him into a

tool  that  must  labour  to  create  more  favourable  conditions  for  earthly

existence, for existence on the human plane - it is with this very power that

he  keeps  the  whole  herd  of  failures,  distortions,  abortions,  unfortunates,

sufferers from themselves of every kind, fast to existence, while he as the

herdsman  goes  instinctively  on  in  front.  You  understand  me  already:  this

ascetic priest, this apparent enemy of life, this denier - he actually belongs to

the really great conservative and affirmative forces of life. . . . What does it

come from, this diseased state? For man is more diseased, more uncertain,

more changeable, more unstable than any other animal, there is no doubt of it

- he is the diseased animal : what does it spring from? Certainly he has also

dared,  innovated,  braved  more,  challenged  fate  more  than  all  the  other

animals put together; he, the great experimenter with himself, the unsatisfied,

the insatiate, who struggles for the supreme mastery with beast, Nature, and

gods, he, the as yet ever uncompelled, the ever future, who finds no more any

rest from his own aggressive strength, goaded inexorably on by the spur of

the future dug into the flesh of the present: - how should not so brave and rich

an  animal  also  be  the  most  endangered,  the  animal  with  the  longest  anddeepest sickness among all sick animals?. . . Man is sick of it, oft enough

there  are  whole  epidemics  of  this  satiety  (as  about  1348,  the  time  of  the

Dance of Death) : but even this very nausea, this tiredness, this disgust with

himself, all this is discharged from him with such force that it is immediately

made into a new fetter. His "nay," which he utters to life, brings to light as

though by magic an abundance of graceful "yeas"; even when he wounds

himself, this master of destruction, of self-destruction, it is subsequently the

wound itself that forces him to live.

  s14

  The more normal is this sickliness in man - and we cannot dispute this

normality - the higher honour should be paid to the rare cases of psychical

and physical powerfulness, the windfalls of humanity, and the more strictly

should the sound be guarded from that worst of air, the air of the sickroom. Is

that done? The sick are the greatest danger for the healthy; it is not from the

strongest that harm comes to the strong, but from the weakest. Is that known?

Broadly considered, it is not for a minute the fear of man, whose diminution

should be wished for; for this fear forces the strong to be strong, to be at

times terrible- it preserves in its integrity the sound type of man. What is to

be feared, what does work with a fatality found in no other fate, is not the

great fear of, but the great nausea with, man; and equally so the great pity for

man. Supposing that both these things were one day to espouse each other,

then inevitably the maximum of monstrousness would immediately come into

the world - the "last will" of man, his will for nothingness, Nihilism. And, in

sooth, the way is well paved thereto. He who not only has his nose to smell

with, but also has eyes and ears, he sniffs almost wherever he goes today an

air something like that of a mad-house, the air of a hospital - I am speaking,

as  stands  to  reason,  of  the  cultured  areas  of  mankind,  of  every  kind  of

"Europe'' that there is in fact in the world. The sick are the great danger of

man, not the evil, not the "beasts of prey." They who are from the outset

botched, oppressed, broken, those are they, the weakest are they, who most

undermine the life beneath the feet of man, who instill the most dangerous

venom and skepticism into our trust in life, in man, in ourselves. Where shall

we escape from it, from that covert look (from which we carry away a deep

sadness), from that averted look of him who is misborn from the beginning,

that look which betrays what such a man says to himself - that look which is

a groan? "Would that I were something else," so groans this look, "but there

is no hope. I am what I am: how could I get away from myself? And, verily -/ am sick of myself!" On such a soil of self-contempt, a veritable swamp soil,

grows  that  weed,  that  poisonous  growth,  and  all  so  tiny.  so  hidden,  so

ignoble, so sugary. Here teem the worms of revenge and vindictiveness; here

the air reeks of things secret and unmentionable; here is ever spun the net of

the most malignant conspiracy - the conspiracy of the sufferers against the

sound and the victorious; here is the sight of the victorious hated. And what

lying so as not to acknowledge this hate as hate! What a show of big words

and attitudes, what an art of "righteous" calumniation! These abortions! what

a noble eloquence gushes from their lips! What an amount of sugary, slimy,

humble submission oozes in their eyes! What do they really want? At any

rate to represent righteousness, love, wisdom, superiority, that is the ambition

of  these  "lowest  ones,"  these  sick  ones!  And  how  clever  does  such  an

ambition  make  them!  You  cannot,  in  fact,  but  admire  the  counterfeiter

dexterity with which the stamp of virtue, even the ring, the golden ring of

virtue,  is  here  imitated.  They  have  taken  a  lease  of  virtue  absolutely  for

themselves, have these weaklings and wretched invalids, there is no doubt of

it; "We alone are the good, the righteous," so do they speak, "we alone are the

homines bonae voluntatis [men of good will]." They stalk about in our midst

as living reproaches, as warnings to us - as though health, fitness, strength,

pride, the sensation of power, were really vicious things in themselves, for

which one would have some day to do penance, bitter penance. Oh, how they

themselves are ready in their hearts to exact penance, how they thirst after

being hangmen! Among them is an abundance of revengeful ones disguised

as judges, who ever mouth the word righteousness like a venomous spittle -

with mouth, I say, always pursed, always ready to spit at everything, which

does not wear a discontented look, but is of good cheer as it goes on its way.

Among them, again, is that most loathsome species of the vain, the lying

abortions, who make a point of representing "beautiful souls," and perchance

of  bringing  to  the  market  as  "purity  of  heart"  their  distorted  sensualism

swathed in verses and other bandages; the species of "self-comforters" and

masturbators of their own souls. The sick man's will to represent some form

or other of superiority, his instinct for crooked paths, which lead to a tyranny

over the healthy - where can it not be found, this will to power of the very

weakest? The sick woman especially: no one surpasses her in refinements for

ruling, oppressing, tyrannising. The sick woman, moreover, spares nothing

living, nothing dead; she grubs up again the most buried things (the Bogos

say, "Woman is a hyena"). Look into the background of every family, ofevery body, of every community: everywhere the fight of the sick against the

healthy - a silent fight for the most part with minute poisoned powders, with

pin-pricks,  with  spiteful  grimaces  of  patience,  but  also  at  times  with  that

diseased practices of the Pharisees of pure pantomime, which plays for the

choice role of "righteous indignation." Right into the hallowed chambers of

knowledge can it make itself heard, can this hoarse yelping of sick hounds,

this, rabid lying and frenzy of such "noble" Pharisees (I remind readers, who

have ears, once more of that Berlin apostle of revenge, Eugen Duhring, who

makes most disreputable and revolting use in all present-day Germany of

moral  refuse;  Duhring,  the  paramount  moral  blusterer  that  there  is  today,

even  among  his  own  kidney,  the  Anti-Semites).  They  are  all  men  of

resentment, are these physiological distortions and worm-riddled objects, a

whole quivering kingdom of burrowing revenge, indefatigable and insatiable

in its out-bursts against the happy, and equally so in disguises for revenge, in

pretexts for revenge: when will they really reach their final, fondest, most

sublime triumph of revenge? At that time, doubtless, when they succeed in

pushing their own misery, in fact, all misery, into the consciousness of the

happy: so that the latter begin one day to be ashamed of their happiness, and

perchance say to themselves when they meet, "It is a shame to be happy;

there is too much misery!" . . . But there could not possibly be a greater and

more fatal misunderstanding than that of the happy, the fit, the strong in body

and soul, beginning in this way to doubt their right to happiness. Away with

this "perverse world"! Away with this shameful soddenness of sentiment!

Preventing  the  sick  making  the  healthy  sick  -  for  that  is  what  such  a

soddenness comes to - this ought to be our supreme object in the world - but

for this it is above all essential that the healthy should remain separated from

the sick, that they should even guard themselves from the look of the sick,

that they should not even associate with the sick. Or may it, perchance, be

their mission to be nurses or doctors? But they could not mistake and disown

their mission more grossly - the higher must not degrade itself to be the tool

of the lower, the pathos of distance must to all eternity keep their missions

also separate. The right of the happy to existence, the right of bells with a full

tone over the discordant cracked bells, is verily a thousand times greater: they

alone are the sureties of the future, they alone are bound to man's future.

What they can, what they must do, that can the sick never do, should never

do! but if they are to be enabled to do what only they must do, how can they

possibly be free to play the doctor, the comforter, the "Saviour" of the sick?, ..  And  therefore  good  air!  good  air!  and  away,  at  any  rate,  from  the

neighbourhood  of  all  the  madhouses  and  hospitals  of  civilisation!  And

therefore good company, our own company, or solitude, if it must be so! but

away, at any rate, from the evil fumes of internal corruption and the secret

worm-eaten  state  of  the  sick!  that,  in  truth,  my  friends,  we  may  defend

ourselves, at any rate for still a time, against the two worst plagues that could

have been reserved for us - against the great nausea with man! against the

great pity for man!

  s15

  If you have understood in all their depths - and I demand that you should

grasp them profoundly and understand them profoundly - the reasons for the

impossibility of its being the business of the healthy to nurse the sick, to

make the sick healthy, it follows that you have grasped this further necessity -

the necessity of doctors and nurses who themselves are sick. And now we

have and hold with both our hands the essence of the ascetic priest. The

ascetic priest must be accepted by us as the predestined saviour, herdsman,

and  champion  of  the  sick  herd:  thereby  do  we  first  understand  his  awful

historic mission. The lordship over sufferers is his kingdom, to that points his

instinct,  in  that  he  finds  his  own  special  art,  his  master-skill,  his  kind  of

happiness. He must himself be sick, he must be kith and kin to the sick and

the abortions so as to understand them, so as to arrive at an understanding

with them; but he must also be strong, even more master of himself than of

others, impregnable, in truth, in his will for power, so as to acquire the trust

and  the  awe  of  the  weak,  so  that  he  can  be  their  hold,  bulwark,  prop,

compulsion, overseer, tyrant, god. He has to protect them, protect his herds -

against whom? Against the healthy, doubtless also against the envy towards

the healthy. He must be the natural adversary and scorner of every rough,

stormy, reinless, hard, violently-predatory health and power. The priest is the

first form of the more delicate animal that scorns more easily than it hates. He

will not be spared the waging of war with the beasts of prey, a war of guile

(of "spirit") rather than of force, as is self-evident - he will in certain cases

find it necessary to conjure up out of himself, or at any rate to represent

practically a new type of the beast of prey - a new animal monstrosity in

which  the  polar  bear,  the  supple,  cold,  crouching  panther,  and,  not  least

important,  the  fox,  are  joined  together  in  a  trinity  as  fascinating  as  it  is

fearsome. If necessity exacts it, then will he come on the scene with bearish

seriousness,  venerable,  wise,  cold,  full  of  treacherous  superiority,  as  theherald and mouthpiece of mysterious powers, sometimes going among even

the other kind of beasts of prey, determined as he is to sow on their soil,

wherever he can, suffering, discord, self-contradiction, and only too sure of

his  art,  always  to  be  lord  of  sufferers  at  all  times.  He  brings  with  him,

doubtless, salve and balsam; but before he can play the physician he must

first wound; so, while he soothes the pain which the wound makes, he at the

same time poisons the wound. Well versed is he in this above all things, is

this wizard and wild beast tamer, in whose vicinity everything healthy must

needs become ill, and everything ill must needs become tame. He protects, in

sooth, his sick herd well enough, does this strange herdsman; he protects

them also against themselves, against the sparks (even in the centre of the

herd) of wickedness, knavery, malice, and all the other ills that the plaguey

and the sick are heir to; he fights with cunning, hardness, and stealth against

anarchy  and  against  the  ever  imminent  break-up  inside  the  herd,  where

resentment,  that  most  dangerous  blasting-stuff  and  explosive,  ever

accumulates and accumulates. Getting rid of this blasting-stuff in such a way

that it does not blow up the herd and the herdsman, that is his real feat, his

supreme utility; if you wish to comprise in the shortest formula the value of

the priestly life, it would be correct to say the priest is the diverter of the

course  of  resentment.  Every  sufferer,  in  fact,  searches  instinctively  for  a

cause of his suffering; to put it more exactly, a doer, - to put it still more

precisely, a sentient responsible doer, - in brief, something living, on which,

either actually or in effigy, he can on any pretext vent his emotions. For the

venting of emotions is the sufferer's greatest attempt at alleviation, that is to

say, stupefaction, his mechanically desired narcotic against pain of any kind.

It is in this phenomenon alone that is found, according to my judgment, the

real physiological cause of resentment, revenge, and their family is to be

found - that is, in a demand for the deadening of pain through emotion: this

cause  is  generally,  but  in  my  view  very  erroneously,  looked  for  in  the

defensive  parry  of  a  bare  protective  principle  of  reaction,  of  a  "reflex

movement" in the case of any sudden hurt and danger, after the manner that a

decapitated frog still moves in order to get away from a corrosive acid. But

the difference is fundamental. In one case the object is to prevent being hurt

any more; in the other case the object is to deaden a racking, insidious, nearly

unbearable pain by a more violent emotion of any kind whatsoever, and at

any  rate  for  the  time  being  to  drive  it  out  of  the  consciousness-  for  this

purpose an emotion is needed, as wild an emotion as possible, and to excitethat emotion some excuse or other is needed. "It must be somebody's fault

that I feel bad" - this kind of reasoning is peculiar to all invalids, and is but

the more pronounced, the more ignorant they remain of the real cause of their

feeling bad, the physiological cause (the cause may lie in a disease of the

nervous sympathicus, or in an excessive secretion of bile, or in a want of

sulphate and phosphate of potash in the blood, or in pressure in the bowels

which stops the circulation of the blood, or in degeneration of the ovaries,

and so forth). All sufferers have an awful resourcefulness and ingenuity in

finding excuses for painful emotions; they even enjoy their jealousy, their

broodings over base actions and apparent injuries, they burrow through the

intestines  of  their  past  and  present  in  their  search  for  obscure  mysteries,

wherein they will be at liberty to wallow in a torturing suspicion and get

drunk on the venom of their own malice - they tear open the oldest wounds,

they make themselves bleed from the scars which have long been healed,

they  make  evil-doers  out  of  friends,  wife,  child,  and  everything  which  is

nearest to them. "I suffer: it must be somebody's fault" - so thinks every sick

sheep. But his herdsman, the ascetic priest, says to him, "Quite so, my sheep,

it must be the fault of some one; but thou thyself art that same one, it is all the

fault of thyself alone - it is* the fault of thyself alone against thyself'': that is

bold enough, false enough, but one thing is at least attained; thereby, as I

have said, the course of resentment is - diverted.

  s16

  You can see now what the remedial instinct of life has at least tried to

effect,  according  to  my  conception,  through  the  ascetic  priest,  and  the

purpose for which he had to employ a temporary tyranny of such paradoxical

and  anomalous  ideas  as  "guilt,"  "sin,"  "sinfulness,"  "corruption,"

"damnation." What was done was to make the sick harmless up to a certain

point, to destroy the incurable by means of themselves, to turn the milder

cases  severely  on  to  themselves,  to  give  their  resentment  a  backward

direction  ("man  needs  but  one  thing"),  and  to  exploit  similarly  the  bad

instincts of all sufferers with a view to self-discipline, self-surveillance, self-

mastery. It is obvious that there can be no question at all in the case of a

"medication" of this kind, a mere emotional medication, of any real healing

of the sick in the physiological sense; it cannot even for a moment be asserted

that in this connection the instinct of life has taken healing as its goal and

purpose. On the one hand, a kind of congestion and organisation of the sick

(the word "Church" is the most popular name for it) ; on the other, a kind ofprovisional  safeguarding  of  the  comparatively  healthy,  the  more  perfect

specimens, the cleavage of a rift between healthy and sick - for a long time

that was all! and it was much! it was very much! I am proceeding, as you see,

in this essay, from an hypothesis which, as far as such readers as I want are

concerned, does not require to be proved; the hypothesis that "sinfulness" in

man is not an actual fact, but rather merely the interpretation of a fact, of a

physiological  discomfort,  -  a  discomfort  seen  through  a  moral  religious

perspective  which  is  no  longer  binding  upon  us.  The  fact,  therefore,  that

anyone feels "guilty," "sinful," is certainly not yet any proof that he is right in

feeling so, any more than anyone is healthy simply because he feels healthy.

Remember the celebrated witch-ordeals: in those days the most acute and

humane judges had no doubt but that in these cases they were confronted

with guilt, - the "witches" themselves had no doubt on the point, - and yet the

guilt was lacking. Let me elaborate this hypothesis: I do not for a minute

accept the very "pain in the soul" as a real fact, but only as an explanation (a

casual explanation) of facts that could not hitherto be precisely formulated; I

regard it therefore as something as yet absolutely in the air and devoid of

scientific  cogency  -  just  a  nice  fat  word  in  the  place  of  a  lean  note  of

interrogation. When anyone fails to get rid of this "pain in the soul," the cause

is, speaking crudely, to be found not in his "soul" but more probably in his

stomach (speaking crudely, I repeat, but by no means wishing thereby that

you should listen to me or understand me in a crude spirit). A strong and

well-constituted  man  digests  his  experiences  (deeds  and  misdeeds  all

included) just as he digests his meats, even when he has some tough morsels

to swallow. If he fails to "relieve himself" of an experience, this kind of

indigestion  is  quite  as  much  physiological  as  the  other  indigestion  -  and

indeed, in more ways than one, simply one of the results of the other. With

such an view, a person can, just between ourselves, still remain the strongest

opponent of materialism.

  s17

  But is he really a physician, this ascetic priest? We already understand

why we are scarcely allowed to call him a physician, however much he likes

to feel a "saviour" and let himself be worshipped as a saviour. It is only the

actual suffering, the discomfort of the sufferer, which he combats, not its

cause, not the actual state of sickness - this needs must constitute our most

radical objection to priestly medication. But just once put yourself into that

point of view, of which the priests have a monopoly, you will find it hard toexhaust your amazement, at what from that standpoint he has completely

seen,  sought,  and  found.  The  mitigation  of  suffering,  every  kind  of

"consoling" - all this manifests itself as his very genius: with what ingenuity

has he interpreted his mission of consoler, with what aplomb and audacity

has  he  chosen  weapons  necessary  for  the  part.  Christianity  in  particular

should be dubbed a great treasure-chamber of ingenious consolations, - such

a store of refreshing, soothing, deadening drugs has it accumulated within

itself; so many of the most dangerous and daring expedients has it hazarded;

with  such  subtlety,  refinement.  Oriental  refinement,  has  it  divined  what

emotional stimulants can conquer, at any rate for a time, the deep depression,

the  leaden  fatigue,  the  black  melancholy  of  physiological  cripples  -  for,

speaking generally, all religions are mainly concerned with fighting a certain

fatigue and heaviness that has infected everything. You can regard it as prima

facie probable that in certain places in the world there was almost bound to

prevail from time to time among large masses of the population a sense of

physiological  depression,  which,  however,  owing  to  their  lack  of

physiological knowledge, did not appear to their consciousness as such, so

that consequently its "cause" and its cure can only be sought and essayed in

the science of moral psychology (this, in fact, is my most general formula for

what is generally called a "religion"). Such a feeling of depression can have

the  most  diverse  origins;  it  may  be  the  result  of  the  crossing  of  too

heterogeneous races (or of classes- genealogical and racial differences are

also  brought  out  in  the  classes:  the  European  "Weltschmerz,"  the

"Pessimism" of the nineteenth century, is really the result of an absurd and

sudden class-mixture) ; it may be brought about by a mistaken emigration - a

race falling into a climate for which its power of adaptation is insufficient

(the case of the Indians in India) ; it may be the effect of old age and fatigue

(the Parisian pessimism from 1850

    onwards) ; it may be a wrong diet (the alcoholism of the Middle Ages, the

nonsense  of  vegetarianism  -  which,  however,  have  in  their  favour  the

authority of Sir Christopher in Shakespeare) ; it may be blood-deterioration,

malaria, syphilis, and the like (German depression after the Thirty Years'

War, which infected half Germany with evil diseases, and thereby paved the

way for German servility, for German pusillanimity). In such a case there is

invariably recourse to a war on a grand scale with the feeling of depression;

let us inform ourselves briefly on its most important practices and phases (I

leave on one side, as stands to reason, the actual philosophic war against thefeeling of depression which is usually simultaneous - it is interesting enough,

but too absurd, too practically negligible, too full of cobwebs, too much of a

hole-and-corner affair, especially when pain is proved to be a mistake, on the

naif hypothesis that pain must needs vanish when the mistake underlying it is

recognised - but behold! it does anything but vanish . . .)o That dominant

depression is primarily fought by weapons which reduce the consciousness of

life itself to the lowest degree. Wherever possible, no more wishes, no more

wants;  shun  everything  which  produces  emotion,  which  produces  "blood"

(eating no salt, the fakir hygiene); no love; no hate; equanimity; no revenge;

no getting rich; no work; begging! as far as possible, no woman, or as little

woman as possible; as far as the intellect is concerned, Pascal's principle, "l

faut s'ab�tir" [it's necessary to turn oneself into an animal] To put the result

in ethical and psychological language, "self-annihilation," "sanctification"; to

put  it  in  physiological  language,  "hypnotism"  -  the  attempt  to  find  some

approximate human equivalent for what hibernation is for certain animals, for

what (hibernation is for many tropical plants, a minimum of assimilation and

metabolism in which life just manages to subsist without r�ally coming into

the consciousness. An amazing amount of human energy has been devoted to

this object - perhaps uselessly? There cannot be the slightest doubt but that

such sportsmen of "saintliness," in whom at times nearly every nation has

abounded,  have  really  found  a  genuine  relief  from  that  which  they  have

combated  with  such  a  rigorous  training  -  in  countless  cases  they  really

escaped  by  the  help  of  their  system  of  hypnotism  away  from  deep

physiological depression; their method is consequently counted among the

most universal ethnological facts. Similarly it is improper to consider such a

plan for starving the physical element and the desires, as in itself a symptom

of insanity (as a clumsy species of roast-beef-eating "freethinkers" and Sir

Christophers are ready to do) ; all the more certain is it that their method can

and does pave the way to all kinds of mental disturbances, for instance, "inner

lights" (as far as the case of the Hesychasts on Mount Athos), auditory and

visual hallucinations, voluptuous ecstasies and effervescences of sensualism

(the history of St. Theresa). The explanation of such events given by the

victims is always the acme of fanatical falsehood; this is self-evident. Note

well, however, the tone of implicit gratitude that rings in the very will for an

explanation of such a character. The supreme state, salvation itself, that final

goal  of  universal  hypnosis  and  peace,  is  always  regarded  by  them  as  the

mystery of mysteries, which even the most supreme symbols are inadequateto  express;  it  is  regarded  as  an  entry  and  homecoming  to  the  essence  of

things,  as  a  liberation  from  all  illusions,  as  "knowledge,"  as  "truth,"  as

"being," as an escape from every end, every wish, every action, as something

even beyond Good and Evil. "Good and Evil," quoth the Buddhists, "both are

fetters. The perfect man is master of them both." "The done and the undone,"

quoth the disciple of the Vedanta, "do him no hurt; the good and the evil he

shakes from off him, sage that he is; his kingdom suffers no more from any

act;  good  and  evil,  he  goes  beyond  them  both."  -  An  absolutely  Indian

conception, as much Brahmanist as Buddhist. Neither in the Indian nor in the

Christian doctrine is this "Redemption" regarded as attainable by means of

virtue and moral improvement, however, high they may place the value of the

hypnotic  efficiency  of  virtue:  keep  clear  on  this  point  -  indeed  it  simply

corresponds with the facts. The fact that they remained true on this point is

perhaps to be regarded as the best specimen of realism in the three great

religions,  absolutely  soaked  as  they  are  with  morality,  with  this  one

exception.  "For  those  who  know,  there  is  no  duty."  "Redemption  is  not

attained by the acquisition of virtues; for redemption consists in being one

with Brahman, who is incapable of acquiring any perfection; and equally

little does it consist in the giving up of faults, for the Brahman, unity with

whom is what constitutes redemption, is eternally pure" (these passages are

from the Commentaries of the Shankara, quoted from the first real European

expert  of  the  Indian  philosophy,  my  friend  Paul  Deussen).  We  wish,

therefore, to pay honour to the idea of "redemption" in the great religions, but

it is somewhat hard to remain serious in view of the appreciation meted out to

the deep sleep by these exhausted pessimists who are too tired even to dream

- to the deep sleep considered, that is, as already a fusing into Brahman, as

the attainment of the unio mystica [mysterious union] with God. "When he

has  completely  gone  to  sleep,"  says  on  this  point  the  oldest  and  most

venerable "script," "and come to perfect rest, so that he sees no more any

vision, then, oh dear one, is he united with Being, he has entered into his own

self - encircled by the Self with its absolute knowledge, he has no more any

consciousness of that which is without or of that which is within. Day and

night cross not these bridges, nor age, nor death, nor suffering, nor good

deeds, nor evil deeds." "In deep sleep," say similarly the believers in this

deepest of the three great religions, "does the soul lift itself from out this

body of ours, enters the supreme light and stands out therein in its true shape:

therein is it he supreme spirit itself, which travels about, while it jests andplays and enjoys itself, whether with women, or chariots, or friends; there do

its thoughts turn no more back to this appendage of a body, to which the

'prana' 'the vital breath) is harnessed like a beast of burden to the cart." None

the less we will take care to realise (as we did when discussing "redemption")

that  in  spite  of  all  its  splendours  of  Oriental  extravagance  this  simply

expresses the same criticism on life as did the clear, cold, Greekly cold, but

yet suffering Epicurus. The hypnotic sensation of nothingness, the peace of

deepest sleep, anaesthesia in short - that is what passes with the sufferers and

the  absolutely  depressed  for,  in  truth,  their  supreme  good,  their  value  of

values ; that is what must be treasured by them as something positive, be felt

by them as the essence of the Positive (according to the same logic of the

feelings, nothingness is in all pessimistic religions called God).

  s18

  Such a hypnotic deadening of sensibility and susceptibility to pain, which

presupposes somewhat rare powers, especially courage, contempt of opinion,

intellectual stoicism, is less frequent than another and certainly easier framing

which is tried against states of depression. I mean mechanical activity. It is

indisputable that a suffering existence can be thereby considerably alleviated.

This fact is called today by the somewhat ignoble title of the "Blessing of

work."  The  alleviation  consists  in  the  attention  of  the  sufferer  being

absolutely  diverted  from  suffering,  in  the  incessant  monopoly  of  the

consciousness  by  action,  so  that  consequently  there  is  little  room  left  for

suffering  -  for  narrow  is  it,  this  chamber  of  human  consciousness!

Mechanical  activity  and  its  corollaries,  such  as  absolute  regularity,

punctilious unreasoning obedience, the chronic routine of life, the complete

occupation  of  time,  a  certain  liberty  to  be  impersonal,  nay,  a  training  in

"impersonality," self-forgetfulness, "incuria sui [no care for oneself]" - with

what thoroughness and expert subtlety have all these methods been exploited

by the ascetic priest in his war with pain! When he has to tackle sufferers of

the lower orders, slaves, or prisoners (or women, who for the most part are a

compound of labour-slave and prisoner), all he has to do is to juggle a little

with  the  names,  and  to  re-christen,  so  as  to  make  them  see  henceforth  a

benefit, a comparative happiness, in objects which they hated - the slave's

discontent with his lot was at any rate not invented by the priests. An even

more popular means of fighting depression is die ordaining of a little joy,

which is easily accessible and can be made into a rule; this medication is

frequently used in conjunction with the former ones. The most frequent formin which joy is prescribed as a cure is the joy in producing joy (such as doing

good, giving presents, alleviating, helping, exhorting, comforting, praising,

treating  with  distinction)  ;  together  with  the  prescription  of  "love  your

neighbour." The ascetic priest prescribes, though in the most cautious doses,

what  is  practically  a  stimulation  of  the  strongest  and  most  life-assertive

impulse  -  the  Will  for  Power.  The  happiness  involved  in  the  "smallest

superiority" which is the concomitant of all benefiting, helping, extolling,

making one's self useful, is the most ample consolation, of which, if they are

well-advised, physiological distortions avail themselves: in other cases they

hurt each other, and naturally in obedience to the same radical instinct. An

investigation of the origin of Christianity in the Roman world shows that

cooperative unions for poverty, sickness, and burial sprang up in the lowest

stratum  of  contemporary  society,  amid  which  the  chief  antidote  against

depression,  the  little  joy  experienced  in  mutual  benefits,  was  deliberately

fostered. Perchance this was then a novelty, a real discovery? This conjuring

up of the will for cooperation, for family organisation, for communal life, for

"Coznacula," necessarily brought the Will for Power, which had been already

infinitesimally stimulated, to a new and much fuller manifestation. The herd

organisation is a genuine advance and triumph in the fight with depression.

With the growth of the community there matures even to individuals a new

interest, which often enough takes him out of the more personal element in

his discontent, his aversion to himself, the "despectio sui" [self-contempt] of

Geulincx.  All  sick  and  diseased  people  strive  instinctively  after  a  herd-

organisation, out of a desire to shake off their sense of oppressive discomfort

and  weakness;  the  ascetic  priest  divines  this  instinct  and  promotes  it;

wherever a herd exists it is the instinct of weakness which has wished for the

herd, and the cleverness of the priests which has organised it, for, mark this:

by an equally natural necessity the strong strive as much for isolation as the

weak for union: when the former bind themselves it is only with a view to an

aggressive joint action and joint satisfaction of their Will for Power, much

against the wishes of their individual consciences; the latter, on the contrary,

range  themselves  together  with  positive  delimit  in  such  a  muster  -  their

instincts are as much gratified thereby as the instincts of the "born master"

(that is, the solitary beast-of-prey species of man) are disturbed and wounded

to  the  quick  by  organisation.  There  is  always  lurking  beneath  every

oligarchy- such is the universal lesson of history - the desire for tyranny.

Every  oligarchy  is  continually  quivering  with  the  tension  of  the  effortrequired by each individual to keep mastering this desire. (Such, e.g., was the

Greek;  Plato  shows  it  in  a  hundred  places,  Plato,  who  knew  his

contemporaries - and himself.)

  s19

  The methods employed by the ascetic priest, which we have already leant

to  know-  stifling  of  all  vitality,  mechanical  energy,  the  little  joy,  and

especially  the  method  of  "love  your  neighbour"  herd-organisation,  the

awaking of the communal consciousness of power, to such a pitch that the

individual's  disgust  with  himself  becomes  eclipsed  by  his  delight  in  the

thriving of the community - these are, according to modern standards, the

"innocent" methods employed in the fight with depression; let us turn now to

the more interesting topic of the "guilty" methods. The guilty methods spell

one  thing:  to  produce  emotional  excess  -  which  is  used  as  the  most

efficacious anaesthetic against their depressing state of protracted pain; this is

why priestly ingenuity has proved quite inexhaustible in thinking out this one

question:  "By  what  means  can  you  produce  an  emotional  excess?"  This

sounds harsh: it is manifest that it would sound nicer and would grate on

one's ears less, if I were to say, indeed: "The ascetic priest made use at all

times of the enthusiasm contained in all strong emotions." But why keep

caressing the mollycoddled ears of our modern delicate sensibilities? Why

should we, for our part, retreat even one step back from the hypocrisy of their

vocabulary? Doing something like that would make us psychologists active

hypocrites -- apart from the fact that it would be disgusting. The good taste

(others might say, the righteousness) of a psychologist nowadays consists, if

at  all,  in  combating  the  shamefully  moralised  language  with  which  all

modern  judgments  on  men  and  things  are  smeared.  For,  do  not  deceive

yourself:  what  constitutes  the  chief  characteristic  of  modern  souls  and  of

modern books is not the lying, but the innocence which is part and parcel of

their  intellectual  dishonesty.  The  inevitable  running  up  against  this

"innocence"  everywhere  constitutes  the  most  distasteful  feature  of  the

somewhat dangerous business which a modern psychologist has to undertake:

it is a part of our great danger - it is a road which perhaps leads us straight to

the great nausea- I know quite well the purpose which all modern books will

and can serve (granted that they last, which I am not afraid of, and granted

equally that there is to be at some future day a generation with a more rigid,

more severe, and healthier taste) - the junction which all modernity generally

will serve with posterity: that of an emetic, - and this by reason of its moralsugariness  and  falsity,  its  ingrained  feminism,  which  it  is  pleased  to  call

"Idealism,"  and  at  any  rate  believes  to  be  idealism.  Our  cultured  men  of

today, our "good" men, do not lie - that is true; but it doe? not redound to

their honour! The real lie, the genuine, determined, "honest" lie (on whose

value you can listen to Plato) would prove too tough and strong an article for

them by a long way; it would be asking them to do what people have been

forbidden to ask them to do, to open their eyes to their own selves, and to

learn  to  distinguish  between  "true"  and  "false"  in  their  own  selves.  The

dishonest lie alone suits them: everything which fools a good man is perfectly

incapable of any other attitude to anything than that of a dishonourable liar,

an absolute liar, but none the less an innocent liar, a blue-eyed liar, a virtuous

liar. These "good men," they are all now tainted with morality through and

through, and as far as honour is concerned they are disgraced and corrupted

for all eternity. Which of them could stand a further truth "about man"? or,

put more tangibly, which of them could put up with a true biography? One or

two  instances:  Lord  Byron  composed  a  most  personal  autobiography,  but

Thomas  Moore  was  "too  good"  for  it;  he  burnt  his  friend's  papers.  Dr.

Gwinner,  Schopenhauer's  executor,  is  said  to  have  done  the  same;  for

Schopenhauer as well wrote much about himself, and perhaps also against

himself  ("eis  auton").  The  virtuous  American  Thayer,  Beethoven's

biographer, suddenly stopped his work: he had come to a certain point in that

honourable  and  simple  life,  and  could  stand  it  no  longer.  Moral:  What

sensible  man  nowadays  writes  one  honest  word  about  himself?  He  must

already  belong  to  the  Order  of  Holy  Foolhardiness.  We  are  promised  an

autobiography of Richard Wagner; who doubts but that it would be a clever

autobiography? Think, indeed, of the grotesque horror which the Catholic

priest  Janssen  aroused  in  Germany  with  his  inconceivably  square  and

harmless pictures of the German Reformation; what wouldn't people do if

some real psychologist were to tell us about a genuine Luther, tell us, not

with the moralist simplicity of a country priest or the sweet and cautious

modesty of a Protestant historian, but say with the fearlessness of a Taine,

that  springs  from  force  of  character  and  not  from  a  prudent  toleration  of

force. (The Germans, by the bye, have already produced the classic specimen

of this toleration - they may well be allowed to reckon him as one of their

own, in Leopold Ranke, that born classical advocate of every causa fortior

[stronger cause], that cleverest of all the clever opportunists.)

  s20  But you will soon understand me. - Putting it shortly, there is reason

enough, is there not, for us psychologists nowadays never to get away from a

certain mistrust of our own selves? Probably even we ourselves are still "too

good" for our work; probably, whatever contempt we feel for this popular

craze for morality, we ourselves are perhaps none the less its victims, prey,

and slaves; probably it infects even us. Of what was that diplomat warning

us,  when  he  said  to  his  colleagues:  "Let  us  especially  mistrust  our  first

impulses, gentlemen! they arc almost always good"? So should nowadays

every  psychologist  talk  to  his  colleagues.  And  thus  we  get  back  to  our

problem, which in point of fact does require from us a certain severity, a

certain mistrust especially against "first impulses." The ascetic ideal in the

service  of  projected  emotional  excess:  -  he  who  remembers  the  previous

essay will already partially anticipate the essential meaning compressed into

these above ten words. The thorough unswitching of the human soul, the

plunging of it into terror, frost, ardour, rapture, so as to free it, as through

some lightning shock, from all the smallness and pettiness of unhappiness,

depression, and discomfort: what ways lead to this goal? And which of these

ways does so most safely? ... At bottom all great emotions have this power,

provided that they find a sudden outlet - emotions such as rage, fear, lust,

revenge, hope, triumph, despair, cruelty; and, in sooth, the ascetic priest has

had no scruples in taking into his service the whole pack of hounds that rage

in the human kennel, unleashing now these and now those, with the same

constant object of waking man out of his protracted melancholy, of chasing

away, at any rate for a time, his dull pain, his shrinking misery, but always

under  the  sanction  of  a  religious  interpretation  and  justification.  This

emotional  excess  has  subsequently  to  be  paid  for,  this  is  self-evident  -  it

makes the ill more ill - and therefore this kind of remedy for pain is according

to  modern  standards  a  "guilty"  kind.  The  dictates  of  fairness,  however,

require that we should all the more emphasise the fact that this remedy is

applied with a good conscience, that the ascetic priest has prescribed it in the

most implicit belief in its utility and indispensability ; - often enough almost

collapsing in the presence of the pain which he created; - that we should

similarly emphasise the fact that the violent physiological revenges of such

excesses,  even  perhaps  the  mental  disturbances,  are  not  absolutely

inconsistent  with  the  general  tenor  of  this  kind  of  remedy;  this  remedy,

which,  as  we  have  shown  previously,  is  not  for  the  purpose  of  healing

diseases, but of fighting the unhappiness of that depression, the alleviationand  deadening  of  which  was  its  object.  The  object  was  consequently

achieved. The keynote by which the ascetic priest was enabled to get every

kind of agonising and ecstatic music to play on the fibres of the human soul -

was, as everyone knows, the exploitation of the feeling of "guilt." I have

already indicated in the previous essay the origin of this feeling - as a piece of

animal  psychology  and  nothing  else:  we  were  thus  confronted  with  the

feeling of "guilt," in its crude state, as it were. It was first in the hands of the

priest, real artist that he was in the feeling of guilt, that it took shape- oh,

what a shape! "Sin" - for that is the name of the new priestly version of the

animal "bad-conscience" (the inverted cruelty) - has up to the present been

the greatest event in the history of the diseased soul; in "sin" we find the most

perilous  and  fatal  masterpiece  of  religious  interpretation.  Imagine  man,

suffering from himself, some way or other but at any rate physiologically,

perhaps like an animal shut up in a cage, not clear as to the why and the

wherefore! imagine him in his desire for reasons - reasons bring relief - in his

desire again for remedies, narcotics at last, consulting one, who knows even

the occult - and see, lo and behold, he gets a hint from his wizard, the ascetic

priest, his first hint on the "cause" of his trouble: he must search for it in

himself, in his guiltiness, in a piece of the past, he must understand his very

suffering as a state of punishment. He has heard, he has understood, has the

unfortunate: he is now in the plight of a hen round which a line has been

drawn. He never gets out of the circle of lines. The sick man has been turned

into "the sinner'' - and now for a few thousand years we t away from the sight

of this new invalid, of "a sinner" - shall we ever get away from it? - wherever

we just look, everywhere the hypnotic gaze of the sinner always moving in

one direction (in the direction of guilt, as the single cause of suffering)) ;

everywhere the evil conscience, this "greuliche Thier," [horrible beast] to use

Luther's language; everywhere rumination over the past, a distorted view of

action, the gaze of the "green-eyed monster" turned on all action: everywhere

the willful misunderstanding of Buffering, its transvaluation into feelings of

guilt, fear of retribution; everywhere the scourge, the hairy shirt, the starving

body,  contrition;  everywhere  the  sinner  breaking  himself  on  the  ghastly

wheel of a restless and morbidly eager conscience; everywhere mute pain,

extreme  fear,  the  agony  of  a  tortured  heart,  the  spasms  of  an  unknown

happiness, the shriek for "redemption." In point of fact, thanks to this system

of  procedure,  the  old  depression,  dullness,  and  fatigue  were  absolutely

conquered, life itself became very interesting again, awake, eternally awake,sleepless, glowing, burnt away, exhausted and yet not tired - such was the

figure cut by man, "the sinner," who was initiated into these mysteries. This

grand old wizard of an ascetic priest fighting with depression - he had clearly

triumphed, his kingdom had come: men no longer grumbled at pain, men

panted after pain: "More pain! More pain!" So for centuries on end shrieked

the demand of his acolytes and initiates. Every emotional excess which hurt;

everything  which  broke,  overthrew,  crushed,  transported,  ravished;  the

mystery of torture-chambers, the ingenuity of hell itself - all this was now

discovered, divined, exploited, all this was at the service of the wizard, all

this  served  to  promote  the  triumph  of  his  ideal,  the  ascetic  ideal.  "My

kingdom is not of this world," quoth he, both at the beginning and at the end:

had he still the right to talk like that? - Goethe has maintained that there are

only thirty-six tragic situations: we would infer from that, did we not know

otherwise, that Goethe was no ascetic priest. He - knows more.

  s21

  So far as all this kind of priestly medicine-mongering,the "guilty" kind, is

concerned, every word of criticism is superfluous. As for the suggestion that

emotional excess of the type, which in these cases the ascetic priest is ready

to order to his sick patients (under the most sacred euphemism, as is obvious,

and equally impregnated with the sanctity of his purpose), has ever really

been of use to any sick man, who, indeed, would feel inclined to maintain a

proposition  of  that  character?  At  any  rate,  some  understanding  should  be

come to as to the expression "be of use." If you only wish to express that such

a system of treatment has reformed man, I do not gainsay it: I merely add that

"reformed"  conveys  to  my  mind  much  as  "tamed,"  "weakened,"

"discouraged,"  "refined,"  daintified,"  "emasculated"  (and  thus  it  means

almost as much as injured). But when you have to deal principally with sick,

depressed, and oppressed creatures, such a system, even granted that it makes

the ill "better," under any circumstances also makes them more ill: ask the

mad-doctors  the  invariable  result  of  a  methodical  application  of  penance-

torture, contritions, and salvation ecstasies. Similarly ask history. In every

body politic where the ascetic priest has established this treatment of the sick,

disease has on every occasion spread with sinister speed throughout its length

and breadth. What was always the "result"? A shattered nervous system, in

addition to the existing malady, and this in the greatest as in the smallest, in

the individuals as in masses. We find, in consequence of the penance and

redemption-training, awful epileptic epidemics, the greatest known to history,such as the St. Vitus and St. John dances of the Middle Ages; we find, as

another phase of its after-effect, frightful mutilations and chronic depressions,

by means of which the temperament of a nation or a city (Geneva, Bale) is

turned once for all into its opposite; - this training, again, is responsible for

the witch-hysteria, a phenomenon analogous to somnambulism (eight great

epidemic outbursts of this only between 1564

  and 1605) ; - we find similarly in its train those delirious death-cravings

of large masses, whose awful "shriek," "eviva la morte" [long live death] was

heard over the whole of Europe, now interrupted by voluptuous variations

and anon by a rage for destruction, just as the same emotional sequence with

the same intermittencies and sudden changes is now universally observed in

every case where the ascetic doctrine of sin scores once more a great success

(religious neurosis appears as a manifestation of the devil, there is no doubt

of it. What is it? Quaeritur [that's what we need to ask]) . Speaking generally,

the ascetic ideal and its sublime-moral cult, this most ingenious, reckless, and

perilous systematisation of all methods of emotional excess, is writ large in a

dreadful  and  unforgettable  fashion  on  the  whole  history  of  man,  and

unfortunately not only on history. I was scarcely able to put forward any

other element which attacked the health and race efficiency of Europeans

with more destructive power than did this ideal; it can be dubbed, without

exaggeration, the real fatality in the history of the health of the European

man. At the most you can merely draw a comparison with the specifically

German influence: I mean the alcohol poisoning of Europe, which up to the

present has kept pace exactly with the political and racial predominance of

the Germans (where they inoculated their blood, there too did they inoculate

their vice). Third in the series comes syphilis - magno sed proxima intervallo

[next in line, but after a large gap].

  s22

  The ascetic priest has, wherever he has obtained the mastery, corrupted

the health of the soul, he has consequently also corrupted taste n artibus et

litteris [in arts and letters] - he corrupts it still. "Consequently?" I hope I shall

be granted this "consequently"; at any rate, I am not going to prove it first.

One solitary indication, it concerns the arch-book of Christian literature, their

real  model,  their  "book-in-itself."  In  the  very  midst  of  the  Greco-Roman

splendour, which was also a splendour of books, face to face with an ancient

world of writings which had not yet fallen into decay and ruin, at a time when

certain books were still to be read, to possess which we would give nowadayshalf  our  literature  in  exchange,  at  that  time  the  simplicity  and  vanity  of

Christian agitators (they are generally called Fathers of the Church) dared to

proclaim, "We also have our classical literature. We don't need the Greeks." -

and meanwhile they proudly pointed to their books of legends, their letters of

apostles, and their little apologetic treatises, just in the same way that today

the English "Salvation Army" wages its fight against Shakespeare and other

"heathens" with an analogous literature You already guess it, I do not like the

"New Testament"; it almost upsets me that I stand so isolated in my taste so

far  as  concerns  this  valued,  this  over-valued  Scripture;  the  taste  of  two

thousand years is against me; but what boots it! "Here I stand! I cannot help

myself" [Luther] - I have the courage of my bad taste. The Old Testament -

yes, that is something quite different, all honour to the Old Testament! I find

therein great men, an heroic landscape, and one of the rarest phenomena in

the world, the incomparable naivete of the strong heart; further still, I find a

people.In the New Testament, by contrast, I find nothing but small sectarian

households, nothing but spiritual rococo, nothing but ornament, twisty little

corners, oddities, nothing but conventional air, not to forget an occasional

whiff of bucolic sweetness which appertains to the epoch (and the Roman

province)  and  is  less  Jewish  than  Hellenistic.  Meekness  and  braggadocio

cheek by jowl; an emotional garrulousness that almost deafens; passionate

hysteria,  but  no  passion  ;  painful  pantomime  ;  here  manifestly  everyone

lacked good breeding. How dare anyone make so much fuss about their little

failings as do these pious little fellows! No one cares a straw about it- let

alone God. Finally they actually wish to have "the crown of eternal life," do

all these little provincials! In return for what, in sooth? For what end? It is

impossible  to  carry  insolence  any  further.  An  immortal  Peter!  who  could

stand him! They have an ambition which makes one laugh: the thing dishes

up cut and dried his most personal life, his melancholies, and common-or-

garden troubles, as though the Universe itself were under an obligation to

bother itself about them, for it never gets tired of wrapping up God Himself

in the petty misery in which its troubles are involved. And how about the

atrocious form of this chronic hobnobbing with God? This Jewish, and not

merely Jewish, excessive importuning God with mouth and paw! - There

exist little despised "heathen nations'' in East Africa, from whom these first

Christians  could  have  learnt  something  worth  learning,  a  little  tact  in

worshipping; these nations do not allow themselves to say aloud the name of

their  God.  This  seems  to  me  delicate  enough,  it  is  certain  that  it  is  toodelicate, and not only for primitive Christians; to take a contrast, just recollect

Luther, the most "eloquent" and insolent peasant whom Germany has had,

think of the Lutherian tone, in which he felt quite the most in his element

during his tete-a-tetes with God. Luther's opposition to the medieval saints of

the Church (in particular, against "that devil's hog, the Pope"), was, there is

no doubt, at bottom the opposition of a boor, who was offended at the good

etiquette of the Church, that worship-etiquette of the sacerdotal code, which

only admits to the holy of holies the initiated and the silent, and shuts the

door against the boors. These definitely were not to be allowed a hearing in

this planet - but Luther the peasant simply wished it otherwise; as it was, it

was not German enough for him. He personally wished himself to talk direct,

to talk personally, to talk "straight from the shoulder" with his God. Well,

he's done it. The ascetic ideal, you will guess, was at no time and in no place,

a school of good taste, still less of good manners - at the best it was a school

for sacerdotal manners: that is. it contains in itself something which was a

deadly enemy to all good manners. Lack of measure, opposition to measure it

is itself a "non plus ultra."

  s23

  The ascetic ideal has corrupted not only health and taste, there are also

third, fourth, fifth, and sixth things which it has corrupted - I shall take care

not to go through the catalogue (when should I get to the end?). I have here to

expose not what this ideal effected; but rather only what it means, on what it

is based, what lies lurking behind it and under it, that of which it is the

provisional  expression,  an  obscure  expression  bristling  with  queries  and

misunderstandings. And with this object only in view I presumed "not to

spare" my readers a glance at the awfulness of its results, a glance at its fatal

results;  I  did  this  to  prepare  them  for  the  final  and  most  awful  aspect

presented to me by the question of the significance of that ideal. What is the

significance of the power of that ideal, the monstrousness of its power? Why

is it given such an amount of scope? Why is not a better resistance offered

against it? The ascetic ideal expresses one will: where is the opposition will,

in which an opposition ideal expresses itself? The ascetic ideal has an aim -

this goal is, putting it generally, that all the other interests of human life

should,  measured  by  its  standard,  appear  petty  and  narrow;  it  explains

epochs,  nations,  men,  in  reference  to  this  one  end;  it  forbids  any  other

interpretation, any other end; it repudiates, denies, affirms, confirms, only in

the sense of its own interpretation (and was there ever a more thoroughlyelaborated system of interpretation?) ; it subjects itself to no power, rather

does  it  believe  in  its  own  precedence  over  every  power-  it  believes  that

nothing powerful exists in the world that has not first got to receive from "it"

a meaning, a right to exist, a value, as being an instrument in its work, a way

and means to its end, to one end. Where is the counterpart of this complete

system  of  will,  end,  and  interpretation?  Why  is  the  counterpart  lacking?

Where is the other "one aim"? But I am told it is not lacking, that not only has

it fought a long and fortunate fight with that ideal, but that further it has

already  won  the  mastery  over  that  ideal  in  all  essentials:  let  our  whole

modern science attest this - that modern science, which, like the genuine

reality-philosophy which it is, manifestly believes in itself alone, manifestly

has the courage to be itself, the will to be itself, and has got on well enough

without  God,  another  world,  and  negative  virtues.  With  all  their  noisy

agitator-babble, however, they effect nothing with me; these trumpeters of

reality  are  bad  musicians,  their  voices  do  not  come  from  the  deeps  with

sufficient audibility, they are not the mouthpiece for the abyss of scientific

knowledge - for today scientific knowledge is an abyss - the word "science,"

in such trumpeter-mouths, is a prostitution, an abuse, an impertinence. The

truth  is  just  the  opposite  from  what  is  maintained  in  the  ascetic  theory.

Science has today absolutely no belief in itself, let alone in an ideal superior

to Itself, and wherever science still consists of passion, love, ardour, suffering

it is not the opposition to that ascetic ideal, but rather the incarnation of its

latest and noblest form. Does that ring strange? There are enough brave and

decent working people, even among the learned men of today, who like their

little corner, and who, just because they are pleased so to do, become at times

indecently loud with their demand, that people today should be quite content,

especially in science - for in science there is so much useful work to do. I do

not deny it - there is nothing I should like less than to spoil the delight of

these honest workers in their handiwork; for I rejoice in their work. But the

fact of science requiring hard work, the fact of its having contented workers,

is absolutely no proof of science as a whole having today one end, one will,

one ideal, one passion for a great faith; the contrary, as I have said, is the

case. When science is not the latest manifestation of the ascetic ideal - but

these are cases of such rarity, selectness, and exquisiteness, as to preclude the

general judgment being affected thereby - science is a hiding-place for every

kind  of  cowardice,  disbelief,  remorse,  despectio  sui  [self-contempt],  bad

conscience - it is the very anxiety that springs from having no ideal, thesuffering  from  the  lack  of  a  great  love,  the  discontent  with  an  enforced

moderation. Oh, what does all science not cover today? How much, at any

rate,  does  it  not  try  to  cover?  The  diligence  of  our  best  scholars,  their

senseless industry, their burning the candle of their brain at both ends - their

very mastery in their handiwork - how often is the real meaning of all that to

prevent  themselves  continuing  to  see  a  certain  thing?  Science  as  a  self-

anaesthetic: do you know that? You wound them - everyone who consorts

with scholars experiences this - you wound them sometimes to the quick

through  just  a  harmless  word;  when  you  think  you  are  paying  them  a

compliment you embitter them beyond all bounds, simply because you didn't

have the finesse to infer the real kind of customers you had to tackle, the

sufferer kind (who won't own up even to themselves what they really are), the

dazed  and  unconscious  kind  who  have  only  one  fear  -  coming  to

consciousness.

  s24

  And now look at the other side, at those rare cases, of which I spoke, the

most  supreme  idealists  to  be  found  nowadays  among  philosophers  and

scholars. Have we, perchance, found in them the sought-for opponents of the

ascetic ideal, the opposing idealists? In fact, they believe themselves to be

such, these "unbelievers" (for they are all of them that) : it seems that this

idea is their last remnant of faith, the idea of being opponents of this ideal, so

earnest are they on this subject, so passionate in word and gesture; - but does

it follow that what they believe must necessarily be trite? We "knowers" have

grown by degrees suspicious of all kinds of believers, our suspicion has step

by step habituated us to draw just the opposite conclusions to what people

have  drawn  before;  that  is  to  say,  wherever  the  strength  of  a  belief  is

particularly prominent to draw the conclusion of the difficulty of proving

what is believed, the conclusion of its actual improbability. We do Dot again

deny that "faith produces salvation'': for that very reason we do deny that

faith  proves  anything,  -  a  strong  faith,  which  produces  happiness,  causes

suspicion of the object of that faith, it does not establish its "truth," it does

establish a certain probability of - illusion. What is now the position in these

cases? These solitaries and deniers of today; these fanatics in one thing, in

their  claim  to  intellectual  cleanness;  these  hard,  stern,  continent,  heroic

spirits,  who  constitute  the  glory  of  our  time;  all  these  pale  atheists,  anti-

Christians, immoralists, Nihilists; these skeptics, "ephectics," and "spiritually

hectics" of the intellect (in a certain sense they are the latter, both collectivelyand  individually)  ;  these  supreme  idealists  of  knowledge,  in  whom  alone

nowadays the intellectual conscience dwells and is alive - in point of fact they

believe themselves as far away as possible from the ascetic ideal, do these

"free, very free spirits": and yet, if I may reveal what they themselves cannot

see - for they stand too near themselves: this ideal is simply their ideal, they

represent it nowadays and perhaps no one else, they themselves are its most

spiritualised product, its most advanced picket of skirmishers and scouts, its

most insidious delicate and elusive form of seduction. - If I am in any way a

reader of riddles, then I will be one with this sentence: for some time past

there  have  been  no  free  spirits;  for  they  still  believe  in  truth.  When  the

Christian Crusaders in the East came into collision with that invincible order

of assassins, that order of free spirits par excellence, whose lowest grade lives

in a state of discipline such as no order of monks has ever attained, then in

some way or other they managed to get an inkling of that symbol and tally-

word, that was reserved for the highest grade alone as their secret, "Nothing

is  true,  everything  is  allowed,"  -  in  sooth,  that  was  freedom  of  thought,

thereby was taking leave of the very belief in truth. Has indeed any European,

any  Christian  freethinker,  ever  yet  wandered  into  this  proposition  and  its

labyrinthine consequences? Does he know from experience the Minotaur of

this den. - I doubt it - nay, I know otherwise. Nothing is more really alien to

these  "mono-fanatics,"  these  so-called  "free  spirits,"  than  freedom  and

unfettering in that sense; in no respect are they more closely tied, the absolute

fanaticism of their belief in truth is unparalleled. I know all this perhaps too

much  from  experience  at  close  quarters  -  that  dignified  philosophic

abstinence to which a belief like that binds its adherents, that stoicism of the

intellect, which eventually vetoes negation as rigidly as it does affirmation,

that wish for standing still in front of the actual, the factum brutum [brute

fact],  that  fatalism  of  the  "petits  faits"  [small  facts]  (what  I  call  ce  petit

faitalisme [this small factism], in which French Science now attempts a kind

of  moral  superiority  over  German,  this  renunciation  of  interpretation

generally  (that  is,  of  forcing,  doctoring,  abridging,  omitting,  suppressing,

inventing, falsifying, and all the other essential attributes of interpretation) -

all  this,  considered  broadly,  expresses  the  asceticism  of  virtue,  quite  as

efficiently as does any repudiation of the senses (it is at bottom only a modus

of that repudiation). Hut what forces it into that unqualified will for truth is

the  faith  in  the  ascetic  ideal  itself,  even  though  it  take  the  form  of  its

unconscious imperatives, - make no mistake about it, it is the faith, I repeat,in a metaphysical value, an intrinsic value of truth, of a character which is

only  warranted  and  guaranteed  in  this  ideal  (it  stands  and  falls  with  that

ideal). Judged strictly, there does not exist a science without its "hypotheses,"

the thought of such a science is inconceivable, illogical: a philosophy, a faith,

must  always  exist  first  to  enable  science  to  gain  thereby  a  direction,  a

meaning, a limit and method, a rigid to existence. (He who holds a contrary

opinion  on  the  subject  -  he,  for  example,  who  takes  it  upon  himself  to

establish philosophy "upon a strictly scientific basis" - has first got to "turn

upside-down" not only philosophy but also truth itself - the gravest insult

which could possibly be offered to two such respectable females!) Yes, there

is no doubt about it - and here I quote my Joyful Wisdom, cp. Book V. Aph.

344: "The man who is truthful in that daring and extreme fashion, which is

the presupposition of the faith in science, asserts thereby a different world

from that of life, nature, and history; and in so far as he asserts the existence

of that different world, come, must he not similarly repudiate its counterpart,

this world, our world? The belief on which our faith in science is based has

remained to this day a metaphysical belief - even we knowers of today, we

godless foes of metaphysics, we, too, take our fire from that conflagration

which was kindled by a thousand-year-old faith, from that Christian belief,

which was also Plato's belief, the belief that God is truth, that truth is divine. .

. . But what if this belief becomes more and more incredible, what if nothing

proves itself to be divine, unless it be error, blindness, lies - what if God

Himself proved Himself to be our oldest lie?" - It is necessary to stop at this

point  and  to  consider  the  situation  carefully.  Science  itself  now  needs  a

justification  (which  is  not  for  a  minute  to  say  that  there  is  such  a

justification). Turn in this context to the most ancient and the most modern

philosophers: they all fail to realise the extent of the need of a justification on

the part of the Will for Truth - here is a gap in every philosophy - what is it

caused  by?  Because  up  to  the  present  the  ascetic  ideal  dominated  all

philosophy, because Truth was fixed as Being, as God, as the Supreme Court

of  Appeal,  because  Truth  was  not  allowed  to  be  a  problem.  Do  you

understand this "allowed"? From the minute that the belief in the God of the

ascetic ideal is repudiated, there exists a new problem: the problem of the

value of truth. The Will for Truth needed a critique- let us define by these

words our own task - the value of truth is tentatively to be called in question.

... (If this seems too laconically expressed, I recommend the reader to peruse

again that passage from the Joyful Wisdom which bears the title, ''How farwe also are still pious," Aph. 344, and best of all the whole fifth book of that

work, as well as the Preface to The Dawn 0} Day.

  s25

  No! You can't get round me with science, when I search for the natural

antagonists  of  the  ascetic  ideal,  when  I  put  the  question:  "Where  is  the

opposed will in which the opponent ideal expresses itself?" Science is not. by

2

  long way, independent enough to fulfil this function ; in every department

science needs an ideal value, a power which creates values, and in whose

service it can believe in itself - science itself never creates values. Its relation

to the ascetic ideal is not in itself antagonistic: speaking roughly, it rather

represents the progressive force in the inner evolution of that ideal. Tested

more exactly, its opposition and antagonism are concerned not with the ideal

itself, but only with that ideal's outworks, its outer ASCETIC IDEALS 167

  garb,  its  masquerade,  with  its  temporary  hardening,  stiffening,  and

dogmatising - it makes the life in the ideal free once more, while it repudiates

its superficial elements. These two phenomena, science and the ascetic ideal,

both rest on the same basis - I have already made this clear - the basis, I say,

of the same over-appreciation of truth (more accurately the same belief in the

impossibility of valuing and of criticising truth), and consequently they are

necessarily  allies,  so  that,  in  the  event  of  their  being  attacked,  they  must

always  be  attacked  and  called  into  question  together.  A  valuation  of  the

ascetic ideal inevitably entails a valuation of science as well; lose no time in

seeing  this  clearly,  and  be  sharp  to  catch  it!  {Art,  I  am  speaking

provisionally, for I will treat it on some other occasion in greater detail, - art,

I repeat, in which lying is sanctified and the will for deception has good

conscience on its side, is much more fundamentally opposed to the ascetic

ideal than is science: Plato's instinct felt this - Plato, the greatest enemy of art

which Europe has produced up to the present. Plato versus Homer, that is the

complete,  the  true  antagonism  -  on  the  one  side,  the  whole-hearted

"transcendental,"  the  great  defamer  of  life;  on  the  other,  its  involuntary

panegyrist, the golden nature. An artistic subservience to the service of the

ascetic ideal is consequently the most absolute artistic corruption that there

can be, though unfortunately it is one of the most frequent phases, for nothing

is  more  corruptible  than  an  artist.)  Considered  physiologically,  moreover,

science  rests  on  the  same  basis  as  does  the  ascetic  ideal  :  a  certain

impoverishment 0} life is the presupposition of the latter as of the former-add, frigidity of the emotions, slackening of the tempo, the substitution of

dialectic for instinct, seriousness impressed on mien and gesture (seriousness,

that most unmistakable sign of strenuous metabolism, of Struggling, toiling

life). Consider the periods in a nation in which the learned man comes into

prominence; they are the periods of exhaustion, often of sunset, of decay - the

effervescing strength, the confidence in life, the confidence in the future are

no more. The preponderance of the mandarins never signifies any good, any

more than does the advent of democracy, or arbitration instead of war, equal

rights  for  women,  the  religion  of  pity,  and  all  the  other  symptoms  of

declining  life.  (Science  handled  as  a  problem!  what  is  the  meaning  of

science?  -  upon  this  point  the  Preface  to  the  Birth  of  Tragedy.)  No!  this

"modern science" - mark you this well - is at times the best ally for the ascetic

ideal, and for the very reason that it is the ally which is most unconscious,

most automatic, most secret, and most subterranean! They have been playing

into each other's hands up to the present, have these "poor in spirit" and the

scientific opponents of that ideal (take care, by the bye, not to think that these

opponents are the antithesis of this ideal, that they are the rich in spirit - that

they are not; I have called them the hectic in spirit). As for these celebrated

victories of science; there is no doubt that they are victories - but victories

over what? There was not for a single minute any victory among their list

over the ascetic ideal, rather was it made stronger, that is to say, more elusive,

more abstract, more insidious, from the fact that a wall, an out-work, that had

got built on to the main fortress and disfigured its appearance, should from

time  to  time  be  ruthlessly  destroyed  and  broken  down  by  science.  Does

anyone  seriously  suggest  that  the  downfall  of  the  theological  astronomy

signified the downfall of that ideal? - Has, perchance, man grown less in need

of a transcendental solution of his riddle of existence, because since that time

this  existence  has  become  more  random,  casual,  and  superfluous  in  the

visible order of the universe? Has there not been since the time of Copernicus

an unbroken progress in the self-belittling of man and his will for belittling

himself? Alas, his belief in his dignity, his uniqueness, his irreplaceable-ness

in  the  scheme  of  existence,  is  gone  -  he  has  become  animal,  literal,

unqualified, and unmitigated animal, he who in his earlier belief was almost

God ("child of God," "demi-God"). Since Copernicus man seems to have

fallen on to a steep plane - he rolls faster and faster away from the centre -

whither?  into  nothingness?  into  the  "thrilling  sensation  of  his  own

nothingness"? - Well! this would be the straight way - to the old ideal? - Allscience (and by no means only astronomy, with regard to the humiliating and

deteriorating  effect  of  which  Kant  has  made  a  remarkable  confession,  "it

annihilates my own importance"), all science, natural as much as unnatural- -

by unnatural I mean the self-critique of reason - nowadays sets out to talk

man out of his present opinion of himself, as though that opinion had been

nothing but a bizarre piece of conceit; you might go so far as to say that

science finds its peculiar pride, its peculiar bitter form of stoical ataraxia

[indifference], in preserving man's contempt of himself, that state which it

took so much trouble to bring about, as man's final and most serious claim to

self-appreciation (rightly so, in point of fact, for he who despises is always

"one who has not forgotten how to appreciate"). But does all this involve any

real effort to counteract the ascetic ideal? Is it really seriously suggested that

Kant's  victory  over  the  theological  dogmatism  about  "God,"  "Soul,"

"Freedom,"  "Immortality,"  has  damaged  that  ideal  in  any  way  (as  the

theologians have imagined to be the case for a long time past)? - And in this

connection  it  does  not  concern  us  for  a  single  minute,  if  Kant  himself

intended  any  such  consummation.  What  is  certain  is  that  all  sorts  of

transcendentalists  since  Kant  have  once  more  won  the  game  -  they  are

emancipated from the theologians; what luck! - he has revealed to them that

secret art, by which they can now pursue their "heart's desire" on their own

responsibility, and with all the respectability of science. Similarly, who can

grumble  at  the  agnostics,  reverers,  as  they  are,  of  the  unknown  and  the

absolute  mystery,  if  they  now  worship  their  very  query  as  God?  (Xaver

Doudan  talks  somewhere  of  the  ravages  which  l'habitude  d'admirer

l'inintelligible au lieu de rester tout simplement dans l'inconnu" [the habit of

admiring the unintelligible instead of simply staying in the unknown] has

produced  -  the  ancients,  he  thinks,  must  have  been  exempt  from  those

ravages.)  Supposing  that  everything,  "known"  to  man,  fails  to  satisfy  his

desires, and on the contrary contradicts and horrifies them, what a divine way

out of all this to be able to look for the responsibility, not in the "desiring" but

in "knowing"! - "There is no knowledge. Consequently there is a God"; what

a novel elegantia syllogismi ! [syllogistic excellence] what a triumph for the

ascetic ideal!

  s26

  Or, perchance, does the whole of modern history show in its demeanour

greater  confidence  in  life,  greater  confidence  in  its  ideals?  Its  loftiest

pretension is now to be a mirror; it repudiates all teleology; it will have nomore "improving"; it disdains to play the judge, and thereby follows its good

taste - it asserts as little as it denies, it ascertains, it "describes." All this is to a

high  degree  ascetic,  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  to  a  much  greater  degree

nihilistic; make no mistake about this! You see in the historian a gloomy,

hard, but determined gaze, - an eye that looks out as an isolated North Pole

explorer looks out (perhaps so as not to look within, so as not to look back? )

-there is snow - here is life silenced, the last crows which caw here are called

"whither?"  "Vanity,"  "nada"  [nothing]  -  here  nothing  more  flourishes  and

grows,  at  the  most  the  meta-politics  of  St.  Petersburg  and  the  "pity"  of

Tolstoy.  But  as  for  that  other  school  of  historians  a  perhaps  still  more

modern" school, a voluptuous and lascivious school which flirts with life and

the ascetic ideal with equal fervour, which uses the word "artist" as a glove,

and has nowadays established a "corner" for itself, in all the praise given to

contemplation ; oh, what a thirst do these sweet intellectuals excite even for

ascetics and winter landscapes! Nay! the devil take these "contemplative"

folk! I would even prefer to wander with those historical Nihilists, through

the gloomiest, grey, cold mist! - nay, I shall not mind listening (supposing I

have to choose) to one who is completely unhistorical and anti-historical (a

man,  like  Duhring  for  instance,  over  whose  periods  a  hitherto  shy  and

unavowed species of "beautiful souls" has grown intoxicated in contemporary

Germany,  the  species  anarchistica  within  the  educated  proletariat).  The

"contemplative" are a hundred times worse - I never knew anything which

produced such intense nausea as one of those "objective" chairs one of those

scented manikins-about-town of history, a thing half-priest, half-satyr, with

perfume by Renan, which betrays by the high, shrill falsetto of his applause

what he lacks and where he lacks it, who betrays where in this case the Fates

have plied their ghastly shears, alas: in too surgeon-like a fashion! This is

distasteful to me, and irritates my patience; let him keep patient at such sights

who has nothing to lose thereby, - such a sight enrages me, such spectators

embitter me against the "play," even more than does the play itself (history

itself,  you  understand);  Anacreontic  moods  imperceptibly  come  over  me.

This Nature, who gave to the steer its horn, to the lion its chasm odonton

[chasm of teeth], for what purpose did Nature give me my foot? - To kick, by

St. Anacreon, and not merely to run away! To trample on all the worm-eaten

"chairs," the cowardly contemplators, the lascivious eunuchs of history, the

flirters  with  ascetic  ideals,  the  righteous  hypocrites  of  impotence!  All

reverence on my part to the ascetic ideal, in so far as it is honourable! So longas it believes in itself and plays no pranks on us! But I like not all these

coquettish bugs who have an insatiate ambition to smell of the infinite, until

eventually the infinite smells of bugs; I like not the whited sepulchres with

their stagey reproduction of life; I like not the tired and the used up who wrap

themselves in wisdom and look "objective"; I like not the agitators dressed up

as heroes, who hide their dummy-heads behind the stalking-horse of an ideal;

I like not the ambitious artists who would rather play the ascetic and the

priest, and are at bottom nothing but tragic clowns; I like not, again, these

newest speculators in idealism, the Anti-Semites, who nowadays roll their

eyes in the patent Christian-Aryan-man-of-honour fashion, and by an abuse

of  moralist  attitudes  and  agitation  dodges,  so  cheap  as  to  exhaust  any

patience,  strive  to  excite  all  the  blockhead  elements  in  the  populace  (the

invariable success of every kind of intellectual charlatanism in present-day

Germany  hangs  together  with  the  almost  indisputable  and  already  quite

palpable desolation of the German mind, whose cause I look for in a too

exclusive diet, of papers, politics, beer, and Wagnerian music, not forgetting

the condition precedent of this diet, the national exclusiveness and vanity, the

strong  but  narrow  principle,  "Germany,  Germany  above  everything,"

[Patriotic song] and finally the paralysis agitans [trembling palsy] of "modern

ideas"). Europe nowadays is, above all, wealthy and ingenious in means of

excitement; it apparently has no more crying necessity than stimulants and

alcohol. Hence the enormous counterfeiting of ideals, those most fiery spirits

of  the  mind;  hence  too  the  repulsive,  evil-smelling,  perjured,  pseudo-

alcoholic  air  everywhere.  I  should  like  to  know  how  many  cargoes  of

imitation idealism, of hero-costumes and high falutin' clap- trap, how many

casks  of  sweetened  pity  liqueur  (Firm:  la  religion  de  la  souffrance  [the

religion of suffering]), how many crutches of righteous indignation for the

help  of  these  flat-footed  intellects,  how  many  comedians  of  the  Christian

moral ideal would need today to be exported from Europe, to enable its air to

smell pure again. It is obvious that, in regard to this over-production, a new

trade possibility lies open; it is obvious that there is a new business to be

done in little ideal idols and obedient "idealists"- don't pass over this tip!

Who  has  sufficient  courage?  We  have  in  our  hands  the  possibility  of

idealising the whole earth. But what am I talking about courage? we only

need one thing here - a hand, a free, a very free hand.

  s27

  Enough ! enough ! let us leave these curiosities and complexities of themodern spirit, which excite as much laughter as disgust. Our problem can

certainly do without them, the problem of the meaning of the ascetic ideal -

what has it got to do with yesterday or today? those things shall be handled

by me more thoroughly and severely in another connection (under the title "A

Contribution to the History of European Nihilism," I refer for this to a work

which I am preparing: The Will to Power, an Attempt at a Transvaluation of

All Values). The only reason why I come to allude to it here is this: the

ascetic ideal has at times, even in the most intellectual sphere, only one real

kind of enemies and dangers: these are the comedians of this ideal - for they

awake mistrust, everywhere otherwise, where the mind is at work seriously,

powerfully, and without counterfeiting, it dispenses altogether now with an

ideal  (the  popular  expression  for  this  abstinence  is  "Atheism")  -  with  the

exception of the will jar truth. Hut this will, this remnant of an ideal, is, If

you will believe me, that ideal itself in its severest and cleverest formulation,

esoteric through and through. stripped of all outworks, and consequently not

so much its remnant as its kernel. Unqualified honest atheism (and its air only

do we breathe, we, the most intellectual men of this age) is not opposed to

that ideal, to the extent that it appears to be; it is rather one of the final phases

of its evolution, one of its syllogisms and pieces of inherent logic - it is the

awe-inspiring  catastrophe  of  a  two-thousand-year  training  in  truth,  which

finally  forbids  itself  the  lie  of  the  belief  in  God.  (The  same  course  of

development  in  India  -  quite  independently,  and  consequently  of  some

demonstrative  value  -  the  same  ideal  driving  to  the  same  conclusion  the

decisive point reached five hundred years before the European era, or more

precisely at the time of Buddha - it started in the Sankhya philosophy, and

then this was popularised through Buddha, and made into a religion.) What, I

put the question with all strictness, has really triumphed over the Christian

God? The answer stands in my Joyful Wisdom, Aph. 357: "the Christian

morality itself, the idea of truth, taken as it was with increasing seriousness,

the confessor-subtlety of the Christian conscience translated and sublimated

into  the  scientific  conscience  into  intellectual  cleanness  at  any  price.

Regarding Nature as though it were a proof of the goodness and guardianship

of God; interpreting history in honour of a divine reason, as a constant proof

of a moral order of the world and a moral teleology; explaining our own

personal experiences, as pious men have for long enough explained them, as

though every arrangement, every nod, every single thing were invented and

sent out of love for the salvation of the soul; all this is now done away with,all  this  has  the  conscience  against  it,  and  is  regarded  by  every  subtler

conscience  as  disreputable,  dishonourable,  as  lying,  feminism,  weakness,

cowardice - by means of this severity, if by means of anything at all, are we,

in  sooth,  good  Europeans  and  heirs  of  Europe's  longest  and  bravest  self-

mastery." . . . All great things go to ruin by reason of themselves, by reason

of an act of self -dissolution: so wills the law of life, the law of necessary

"self-mastery"  even  in  the  essence  of  life  -  ever  is  the  law-giver  finally

exposed to the cry, "patere legem, quam ipse tulisti" [submit to the law which

you yourself have established] ; in thus wise did Christianity go to ruin as a

dogma, through its own morality; in thus wise must Christianity go again to

ruin today as a morality - we are standing on the threshold of this event. After

Christian  truthfulness  has  drawn  one  conclusion  after  the  other,  it  finally

draws its strongest conclusion, its conclusion against itself; this, however,

happens, when it puts the question, "what is the meaning of every will for

truth?"  And  here  again  do  I  touch  on  my  problem,  on  our  problem,  my

unknown friends (for as yet / know of no friends) : what sense has our whole

being, if it does not mean that in our own selves that will for truth has come

to its own consciousness as a problem/ - By reason of this attainment of self-

consciousness on the part of the will for truth, morality from hence forward -

there is no doubt about it - goes to pieces: this la that put hundred-act play

that is reserved for the next two centuries of Europe, the most terrible, the

most mysterious, and perhaps also the most hopeful of all plays.

  s28

  If you except the ascetic ideal, man, the animal man had no meaning. His

existence on earth contained no end; "What is the purpose of man at all?" was

a question without an answer; the will for man and the world was lacking;

behind every great human destiny rang as a refrain a still greater "Vanity!"

The  ascetic  ideal  simply  means  this:  that  something  was  lacking,  that  a

tremendous void encircled man - he did not know how to justify himself, to

explain himself, to affirm himself, he suffered from the problem of his own

meaning.  He  suffered  also  in  other  ways,  he  was  in  the  main  a  diseased

animal ; but his problem was not suffering itself, but the lack of an answer to

that  crying  question,  "To  what  purpose  do  we  suffer?"  Man,  the  bravest

animal and the one most inured to suffering, does not repudiate suffering in

itself: he wills it, he even seeks it out, provided that he is shown a meaning

for it, a purpose of suffering. Not suffering, but the senselessness of suffering

was the curse which till then lay spread over humanity - and the ascetic idealgave it a meaning! It was up till then the only meaning; but any meaning is

better than no meaning; the ascetic ideal was in that connection the "faute de

mieux" [for lack of something better] par excellence that existed at that time.

In  that  ideal  suffering  found  an  explanation;  the  tremendous  gap  seemed

filled; the door to all suicidal Nihilism was closed. The explanation - there is

no  doubt  about  it  -  brought  in  its  train  new  suffering,  deeper,  more

penetrating, more venomous, gnawing more brutally into life: it brought all

suffering under the perspective of guilt; but in spite of all that - man was

saved thereby, he had a meaning, and from henceforth was no more like a

leaf in the wind, a shuttle-cock of chance, of nonsense, he could now "will"

something - absolutely immaterial to what end, to what purpose, with what

means he wished: the will itself was saved. It is absolutely impossible to

disguise what in point of fact is made clear by every complete will that has

taken its direction from the ascetic ideal: this hate of the human, and even

more of the animal, and more still of the material, this horror of the senses, of

reason itself, this fear of happiness and beauty, this desire to get right away

from all illusion, change, growth, death, wishing and even desiring - all this

means - let us have the courage to grasp it - a will for Nothingness, a will

opposed to life, a repudiation of the most fundamental conditions of life, but

it is and remains a will! - and to say at the end that which I said at the

beginning - man will wish Nothingness rather than not wish at all. END OF



        THE CASE OF WAGNER - CONTRA-WAGNER - SELECTED

                                    APHORISMS

                            Translated by A. M. LUDOVICI.

                              TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

  Nietzsche wrote the rough draft of "The Case of Wagner" in Turin, during

the month of May 1888; he completed it in Sils Maria towards the end of

June  of  the  same  year,  and  it  was  published  in  the  following  autumn.

"Nietzsche contra Wagner" was written about the middle of December 1888;

but, although it was printed and corrected before the New Year, it was not

published until long afterwards owing to Nietzsche's complete breakdown in

the first days of 1889.

  In reading these two essays we are apt to be deceived, by their virulent

and forcible tone, into believing that the whole matter is a mere cover for

hidden  fire,-a  mere  blind  of �sthetic  discussion  concealing  a  deep  andimplacable personal feud which demands and will have vengeance. In spite

of all that has been said to the contrary, many people still hold this view of

the two little works before us; and, as the actual facts are not accessible to

every one, and rumours are more easily believed than verified, the error of

supposing  that  these  pamphlets  were  dictated  by  personal  animosity,  and

even  by  Nietzsche's  envy  of  Wagner  in  his  glory,  seems  to  be  a  pretty

common one. Another very general error is to suppose that the point at issue

here is not one concerning music at all, but concerning religion. It is taken for

granted  that  the  aspirations,  the  particular  quality,  the  influence,  and  the

method of an art like music, are matters quite distinct from the values and the

conditions prevailing in the culture with which it is in harmony, and that

however many Christian elements may be discovered in Wagnerian texts,

Nietzsche had no right to raise �sthetic objections because he happened to

entertain the extraordinary view that these Christian elements had also found

their way into Wagnerian music.

  To both of these views there is but one reply:-they are absolutely false.

  In  the  "Ecce  Homo,"  Nietzsche's  autobiography,-a  book  which  from

cover  to  cover  and  line  for  line  is  sincerity  itself-we  learn  what  Wagner

actually meant to Nietzsche. On pages 41, 44, 84, 122, 129, &c, we cannot

doubt that Nietzsche is speaking from his heart,-and what does he say?-In

impassioned tones he admits his profound indebtedness to the great musician,

his love for him, his gratitude to him,-how Wagner was the only German who

had ever been anything to him-how his friendship with Wagner constituted

the happiest and most valuable experience of his life,-how his breach with

Wagner almost killed him. And, when we remember, too, that Wagner on his

part  also  declared  that  he  was  "alone"  after  he  had  lost  "that  man"

(Nietzsche), we begin to perceive that personal bitterness and animosity are

out of the question here. We feel we are on a higher plane, and that we must

not judge these two men as if they were a couple of little business people who

had had a suburban squabble.

  Nietzsche declares ("Ecce Homo," p. 24) that he never attacked persons

as persons. If he used a name at all, it was merely as a means to an end, just

as one might use a magnifying glass in order to make a general, but elusive

and intricate fact more clear and more apparent, and if he used the name of

David Strauss, without bitterness or spite (for he did not even know the man),

when he wished to personify Culture-Philistinism, so, in the same spirit, did

he  use  the  name  of  Wagner,  when  he  wished  to  personify  the  generaldecadence of modern ideas, values, aspirations and Art.

  Nietzsche's  ambition,  throughout  his  life,  was  to  regenerate  European

culture. In the first period of his relationship with Wagner, he thought that he

had found the man who was prepared to lead in this direction. For a long

while he regarded his master as the Saviour of Germany, as the innovator and

renovator who was going to arrest the decadent current of his time and lead

men to a greatness which had died with antiquity. And so thoroughly did he

understand his duties as a disciple, so wholly was he devoted to this cause,

that, in spite of all his unquestioned gifts and the excellence of his original

achievements, he was for a long while regarded as a mere "literary lackey" in

Wagner's service, in all those circles where the rising musician was most

disliked.

    Gradually, however, as the young Nietzsche developed and began to gain

an  independent  view  of  life  and  humanity,  it  seemed  to  him  extremely

doubtful  whether  Wagner  actually  was  pulling  the  same  way  with  him.

Whereas, theretofore, he had identified Wagner's ideals with his own, it now

dawned  upon  him  slowly  that  the  regeneration  of  German  culture,  of

European culture, and the transvaluation of values which would be necessary

for this regeneration, really lay off the track of Wagnerism. He saw that he

had endowed Wagner with a good deal that was more his own than Wagner's.

In his love he had transfigured the friend, and the composer of "Parsifal" and

the man of his imagination were not one. The fact was realised step by step;

disappointment upon disappointment, revelation after revelation, ultimately

brought it home to him, and though his best instincts at first opposed it, the

revulsion of feeling at last became too strong to be scouted, and Nietzsche

was  plunged  into  the  blackest  despair.  Had  he  followed  his  own  human

inclinations, he would probably have remained Wagner's friend until the end.

As  it  was,  however,  he  remained  loyal  to  his  cause,  and  this  meant

denouncing his former idol.

  "Joyful Wisdom," "Thus Spake Zarathustra," "Beyond Good and Evil,"

"The Genealogy of Morals," "The Twilight of the Idols," "The Antichrist"-all

these books were but so many exhortations to mankind to step aside from the

general track now trodden by Europeans. And what happened? Wagner began

to write some hard things about Nietzsche; the world assumed that Nietzsche

and Wagner had engaged in a paltry personal quarrel in the press, and the

whole importance of the real issue was buried beneath the human, all-too-

human interpretations which were heaped upon it.  Nietzsche was a musician of no mean attainments. For a long while, in his

youth, his superiors had been doubtful whether he should not be educated for

a musical career, so great were his gifts in this art; and if his mother had not

been  offered  a  six-years'  scholarship  for  her  son  at  the  famous  school  of

Pforta, Nietzsche, the scholar and philologist, would probably have been an

able composer. When he speaks about music, therefore, he knows what he is

talking about, and when he refers to Wagner's music in particular, the simple

fact of his long intimacy with Wagner during the years at Tribschen, is a

sufficient guarantee of his deep knowledge of the subject. Now Nietzsche

was one of the first to recognise that the principles of art are inextricably

bound  up  with  the  laws  of  life,  that  an �sthetic  dogma  may  therefore

promote or depress all vital force, and that a picture, a symphony, a poem or

a  statue,  is  just  as  capable  of  being  pessimistic,  anarchic,  Christian  or

revolutionary, as a philosophy or a science is. To speak of a certain class of

music  as  being  compatible  with  the  decline  of  culture,  therefore,  was  to

Nietzsche  a  perfectly  warrantable  association  of  ideas,  and  that  is  why,

throughout  his  philosophy,  so  much  stress  is  laid  upon �sthetic

considerations.

  But if in England and America Nietzsche's attack on Wagner's art may

still seem a little incomprehensible, let it be remembered that the Continent

has  long  known  that  Nietzsche  was  actually  in  the  right.  Every  year

thousands are now added to the large party abroad who have ceased from

believing in the great musical revolutionary of the seventies; that he was one

with the French Romanticists and rebels has long since been acknowledged a

fact  in  select  circles,  both  in  France  and  Germany,  and  if  we  still  have

Wagner with us in England, if we still consider Nietzsche as a heretic, when

he declares that "Wagner was a musician for unmusical people," it is only

because  we  are  more  removed  than  we  imagine,  from  all  the  great

movements, intellectual and otherwise, which take place on the Continent.

  In Wagner's music, in his doctrine, in his whole concept of art, Nietzsche

saw the confirmation, the promotion-aye, even the encouragement, of that

decadence and degeneration which is now rampant in Europe; and it is for

this reason, although to the end of his life he still loved Wagner, the man and

the friend, that we find him, on the very eve of his spiritual death, exhorting

us to abjure Wagner the musician and the artist.

    Anthony M. Ludovici.

                        PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION  In spite of the adverse criticism with which the above preface has met at

the hands of many reviewers since the summer of last year, I cannot say that I

should  feel  justified,  even  after  mature  consideration,  in  altering  a  single

word or sentence it contains. If I felt inclined to make any changes at all,

these would take the form of extensive additions, tending to confirm rather

than to modify the general argument it advances; but, any omissions of which

I may have been guilty in the first place, have been so fully rectified since,

thanks to the publication of the English translations of Daniel Halevy's and

Henri Lichtenberger's works, "The Life of Friedrich Nietzsche,"(2) and "The

Gospel of Superman,"(3) respectively, that, were it not for the fact that the

truth about this matter cannot be repeated too often, I should have refrained

altogether from including any fresh remarks of my own in this Third Edition.

  In the works just referred to (pp. 129 et seq. in Halevy's book, and pp. 78

et  seq.  in  Lichtenberger's  book),  the  statement  I  made  in  my  preface  to

"Thoughts out of Season," vol. i., and which I did not think it necessary to

repeat in my first preface to these pamphlets, will be found to receive the

fullest confirmation.

  The statement in question was to the effect that many long years before

these  pamphlets  were  even  projected,  Nietzsche's  apparent  volte-face  in

regard  to  his  hero  Wagner  had  been  not  only  foreshadowed  but  actually

stated  in  plain  words,  in  two  works  written  during  his  friendship  with

Wagner,-the  works  referred  to  being  "The  Birth  of  Tragedy"  (1872),  and

"Wagner in Bayreuth" (1875) of which Houston Stuart Chamberlain declares

not only that it possesses "undying classical worth" but that "a perusal of it is

indispensable to all who wish to follow the question [of Wagner] to its roots."

(4)

  The idea that runs through the present work like a leitmotif-the idea that

Wagner was at bottom more of a mime than a musician-was so far an ever

present  thought  with  Nietzsche  that  it  is  ever  impossible  to  ascertain  the

period when it was first formulated.

  In  Nietzsche's  wonderful  autobiography  (Ecce  Homo,  p.  88),  in  the

section dealing with the early works just mentioned, we find the following

passage-"In  the  second  of  the  two  essays  [Wagner  in  Bayreuth]  with  a

profound certainty of instinct, I already characterised the elementary factor in

Wagner's nature as a theatrical talent which, in all his means and aspirations,

draws its final conclusions." And as early as 1874, Nietzsche wrote in his

diary-"Wagner is a born actor. Just as Goethe was an abortive painter, andSchiller an abortive orator, so Wagner was an abortive theatrical genius. His

attitude to music is that of the actor; for he knows how to sing and speak, as it

were out of different souls and from absolutely different worlds (Tristan and

the Meistersinger)."

  There is, however, no need to multiply examples, seeing, as I have said,

that in the translations of Halevy's and Lichtenberger's books the reader will

find all the independent evidence he could possibly desire, disproving the

popular, and even the learned belief that, in the two pamphlets before us we

have a complete, apparently unaccountable, and therefore "demented" volte-

face on Nietzsche's part. Nevertheless, for fear lest some doubt should still

linger in certain minds concerning this point, and with the view of adding

interest  to  these  essays,  the  Editor  considered  it  advisable,  in  the  Second

Edition, to add a number of extracts from Nietzsche's diary of the year 1878

(ten  years  before  "The  Case  of  Wagner,"  and  "Nietzsche  contra  Wagner"

were  written)  in  order  to  show  to  what  extent  those  learned  critics  who

complain  of  Nietzsche's  "morbid  and  uncontrollable  recantations  and

revulsions of feeling," have overlooked even the plain facts of the case when

forming their all-too-hasty conclusions. These extracts will be found at the

end of "Nietzsche contra Wagner." While reading them, however, it should

not be forgotten that they were never intended for publication by Nietzsche

himself-a fact which accounts for their unpolished and sketchy form-and that

they were first published in vol. xi. of the first German Library Edition (pp.

99-129) only when he was a helpless invalid, in 1897. Since then, in 1901

and 1906 respectively, they have been reprinted, once in the large German

Library  Edition  (vol.  xi.  pp.  181-202),  and  once  in  the  German  Pocket

Edition, as an appendix to "Human-All-too-Human," Part II.

  An altogether special interest now attaches to these pamphlets; for, in the

first  place  we  are  at  last  in  possession  of  Wagner's  own  account  of  his

development, his art, his aspirations and his struggles, in the amazing self-

revelation  entitled  My  Life;(5)  and  secondly,  we  now  have  Ecce  Homo,

Nietzsche's  autobiography,  in  which  we  learn  for  the  first  time  from

Nietzsche's own pen to what extent his history was that of a double devotion-

to Wagner on the one hand, and to his own life task, the Transvaluation of all

Values, on the other.

  Readers  interested  in  the  Nietzsche-Wagner  controversy  will  naturally

look  to  these  books  for  a  final  solution  of  all  the  difficulties  which  the

problem presents. But let them not be too sanguine. From first to last thisproblem is not to be settled by "facts." A good deal of instinctive choice,

instinctive  aversion,  and  instinctive  suspicion  are  necessary  here.  A  little

more  suspicion,  for  instance,  ought  to  be  applied  to  Wagner's  My  Life,

especially in England, where critics are not half suspicious enough about a

continental artist's self-revelations, and are too prone, if they have suspicions

at all, to apply them in the wrong place.

  An example of this want of finesse in judging foreign writers is to be

found in Lord Morley's work on Rousseau,-a book which ingenuously takes

for granted everything that a writer like Rousseau cares to say about himself,

without considering for an instant the possibility that Rousseau might have

practised some hypocrisy. In regard to Wagner's life we might easily fall into

the same error-that is to say, we might take seriously all he says concerning

himself and his family affairs.

  We should beware of this, and should not even believe Wagner when he

speaks badly about himself. No one speaks badly about himself without a

reason, and the question in this case is to find out the reason. Did Wagner-in

the  belief  that  genius  was  always  immoral-wish  to  pose  as  an  immoral

Egotist, in order to make us believe in his genius, of which he himself was

none too sure in his innermost heart? Did Wagner wish to appear "sincere" in

his biography, in order to awaken in us a belief in the sincerity of his music,

which he likewise doubted, but wished to impress upon the world as "true"?

Or did he wish to be thought badly of in connection with things that were not

true, and that consequently did not affect him, in order to lead us off the scent

of true things, things he was ashamed of and which he wished the world to

ignore-just  like  Rousseau  (the  similarity  between  the  two  is  more  than  a

superficial one) who barbarously pretended to have sent his children to the

foundling hospital, in order not to be thought incapable of having had any

children at all? In short, where is the bluff in Wagner's biography? Let us

therefore be careful about it, and all the more so because Wagner himself

guarantees the truth of it in the prefatory note. If we were to be credulous

here, we should moreover be acting in direct opposition to Nietzsche's own

counsel as given in the following aphorisms (Nos. 19 and 20, p. 89):-

  "It is very difficult to trace the course of Wagner's development,-no trust

must be placed in his own description of his soul's experiences. He writes

party-pamphlets for his followers.

  "It is extremely doubtful whether Wagner is able to bear witness about

himself."  While on p. 37 (the note), we read:-"He [Wagner] was not proud enough

to be able to suffer the truth about himself. Nobody had less pride than he.

Like  Victor  Hugo  he  remained  true  to  himself  even  in  his  biography,-he

remained an actor."

    However, as a famous English judge has said-"Truth will come out, even

in  the  witness  box,"  and,  as  we  may  add  in  this  case,  even  in  an

autobiography. There is one statement in Wagner's My Life which sounds

true  to  my  ears  at  least-a  statement  which,  in  my  opinion,  has  some

importance,  and  to  which  Wagner  himself  seems  to  grant  a  mysterious

significance. I refer to the passage on p. 93 of vol i., in which Wagner says:-

"Owing to the exceptional vivacity and innate susceptibility of my nature ... I

gradually became conscious of a certain power of transporting or bewildering

my more indolent companions."

  This seems innocent enough. When, however, it is read in conjunction

with Nietzsche's trenchant criticism, particularly on pp. 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18

of this work, and also with a knowledge of Wagner's music, it becomes one

of the most striking passages in Wagner's autobiography, for it records how

soon he became conscious of his dominant instinct and faculty.

  I know perfectly well that the Wagnerites will not be influenced by these

remarks. Their gratitude to Wagner is too great for this. He has supplied the

precious varnish wherewith to hide the dull ugliness of our civilisation. He

has given to souls despairing over the materialism of this world, to souls

despairing  of  themselves,  and  longing  to  be  rid  of  themselves,  the

indispensable hashish and morphia wherewith to deaden their inner discords.

These discords are everywhere apparent nowadays. Wagner is therefore a

common need, a common benefactor. As such he is bound to be worshipped

and adored in spite of all egotistical and theatrical autobiographies.

  Albeit,  signs  are  not  wanting-at  least  among  his  Anglo-Saxon

worshippers  who  stand  even  more  in  need  of  romanticism  than  their

continental brethren,-which show that, in order to uphold Wagner, people are

now beginning to draw distinctions between the man and the artist. They

dismiss the man as "human-all-too-human," but they still maintain that there

are  divine  qualities  in  his  music.  However  distasteful  the  task  of

disillusioning these psychological tyros may be, they should be informed that

no such division of a man into two parts is permissible, save in Christianity

(the body and the soul), but that outside purely religious spheres it is utterly

unwarrantable. There can be no such strange divorce between a bloom andthe plant on which it blows, and has a black woman ever been known to give

birth to a white child?

  Wagner, as Nietzsche tells us on p. 19, "was something complete, he was

a typical decadent in whom every sign of 'free will' was lacking, in whom

every  feature  was  necessary."  Wagner,  allow  me  to  add,  was  a  typical

representative  of  the  nineteenth  century,  which  was  the  century  of

contradictory  values,  of  opposed  instincts,  and  of  every  kind  of  inner

disharmony. The genuine, the classical artists of that period, such men as

Heine, Goethe, Stendhal, and Gobineau, overcame their inner strife, and each

succeeded in making a harmonious whole out of himself-not indeed without a

severe struggle; for everyone of them suffered from being the child of his

age, i.e., a decadent. The only difference between them and the romanticists

lies in the fact that they (the former) were conscious of what was wrong with

them,  and  possessed  the  will  and  the  strength  to  overcome  their  illness;

whereas the romanticists chose the easier alternative-namely, that of shutting

their eyes on themselves.

  "I am just as much a child of my age as Wagner-i.e., I am a decadent,"

says  Nietzsche.  "The  only  difference  is  that  I  recognised  the  fact,  that  I

struggled against it"(6)

  What Wagner did was characteristic of all romanticists and contemporary

artists: he drowned and overshouted his inner discord by means of exuberant

pathos and wild exaltation. Far be it from me to value Wagner's music in

extenso here-this is scarcely a fitting opportunity to do so;-but I think it might

well be possible to show, on purely psychological grounds, how impossible it

was for a man like Wagner to produce real art. For how can harmony, order,

symmetry,  mastery,  proceed  from  uncontrolled  discord,  disorder,

disintegration, and chaos? The fact that an art which springs from such a

marshy soil may, like certain paludal plants, be "wonderful," "gorgeous," and

"overwhelming," cannot be denied; but true art it is not. It is so just as little as

Gothic architecture is,-that style which, in its efforts to escape beyond the

tragic  contradiction  in  its  medi�val  heart,  yelled  its  hysterical  cry

heavenwards and even melted the stones of its structures into a quivering and

fluid jet, in order to give adequate expression to the painful and wretched

conflict then raging between the body and the soul.

  That  Wagner,  too,  was  a  great  sufferer,  there  can  be  no  doubt;  not,

however, a sufferer from strength, like a true artist, but from weakness-the

weakness of his age, which he never overcame. It is for this reason that heshould be rather pitied than judged as he is now being judged by his German

and  English  critics,  who,  with  thoroughly  neurotic  suddenness,  have

acknowledged their revulsion of feeling a little too harshly.

  "I have carefully endeavoured not to deride, or deplore, or detest..." says

Spinoza, "but to understand"; and these words ought to be our guide, not only

in the case of Wagner, but in all things.

  Inner discord is a terrible affliction, and nothing is so certain to produce

that nervous irritability which is so trying to the patient as well as to the outer

world, as this so-called spiritual disease. Nietzsche was probably quite right

when he said the only real and true music that Wagner ever composed did not

consist of his elaborate arias and overtures, but of ten or fifteen bars which,

dispersed here and there, gave expression to the composer's profound and

genuine melancholy. But this melancholy had to be overcome, and Wagner

with the blood of a cabotin in his veins, resorted to the remedy that was

nearest to hand-that is to say, the art of bewildering others and himself. Thus

he remained ignorant about himself all his life; for there was, as Nietzsche

rightly points out (p. 37, note), not sufficient pride in the man for him to

desire to know or to suffer gladly the truth concerning his real nature. As an

actor his ruling passion was vanity, but in his case it was correlated with a

semi-conscious knowledge of the fact that all was not right with him and his

art. It was this that caused him to suffer. His egomaniacal behaviour and his

almost Rousseauesque fear and suspicion of others were only the external

manifestations of his inner discrepancies. But, to repeat what I have already

said,  these  abnormal  symptoms  are  not  in  the  least  incompatible  with

Wagner's music, they are rather its very cause, the root from which it springs.

  In  reality,  therefore,  Wagner  the  man  and  Wagner  the  artist  were

undoubtedly one, and constituted a splendid romanticist. His music as well as

his  autobiography  are  proofs  of  his  wonderful  gifts  in  this  direction.  His

success in his time, as in ours, is due to the craving of the modern world for

actors, sorcerers, bewilderers and idealists who are able to conceal the ill-

health and the weakness that prevail, and who please by intoxicating and

exalting. But this being so, the world must not be disappointed to find the

hero of a preceding age explode in the next. It must not be astonished to find

a disparity between the hero's private life and his "elevating" art or romantic

and idealistic gospel. As long as people will admire heroic attitudes more

than heroism, such disillusionment is bound to be the price of their error. In a

truly great man, life-theory and life-practice, if seen from a sufficiently loftypoint of view, must and do always agree, in an actor, in a romanticist, in an

idealist, and in a Christian, there is always a yawning chasm between the two,

which,  whatever  well-meaning  critics  may  do,  cannot  be  bridged

posthumously by acrobatic feats in psychologicis.

  Let anyone apply this point of view to Nietzsche's life and theory. Let

anyone turn his life inside out, not only as he gives it to us in his Ecce Homo,

but as we find it related by all his biographers, friends and foes alike, and

what  will  be  the  result?  Even  if  we  ignore  his  works-the  blooms  which

blowed  from  time  to  time  from  his  life-we  absolutely  cannot  deny  the

greatness  of  the  man's  private  practice,  and  if  we  fully  understand  and

appreciate the latter, we must be singularly deficient in instinct and in flair if

we do not suspect that some of this greatness is reflected in his life-task.

    ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI

    London, July 1911.



                              TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

                              Translated by A.M. Ludovici

                                        PREFACE

    Maintaining cheerfulness in the midst of a gloomy affair, fraught with

immeasurable responsibility, is no small feat; and yet what is needed more

than cheerfulness? Nothing succeeds if prankishness has no part in it. Excess

of strength alone is the proof of strength. A revaluation of all values, this

question mark, so black, so tremendous that it casts shadows upon the man

who puts it down--such a destiny of a task compels one to run into the sun

every moment to shake off a heavy, all-too-heavy seriousness. Every means

is proper for this; every "case"--a case of luck. Especially, war. War has

always been the great wisdom of all spirits who have become too inward, too

profound; even in a wound there is the power to heal. A maxim, the origin of

which  I  withhold  from  scholarly  curiosity,  has  long  been  my  motto:

Increscunt animi, virescit volnere virtus. ["The spirits increase, vigor grows

through  a  wound."]  Another  mode  of  convalescence--under  certain

circumstances even more to my liking--is sounding out idols. There are more

idols than realities in the world: that is my "evil eye" for this world; that is

also my "evil ear." For once to pose questions here with a hammer, and,

perhaps, to hear as a reply that famous hollow sound which speaks of bloated

entrails--what a delight for one who has ears even behind his ears, for me, anold psychologist and pied piper before whom just that which would remain

silent must become outspoken. This essay too--the title betrays it--is above all

a  recreation,  a  spot  of  sunshine,  a  leap  sideways  into  the  idleness  of  a

psychologist. Perhaps a new war, too? And are new idols sounded out? This

little essay is a great declaration of war; and regarding the sounding out of

idols, this time they are not just idols of the age, but eternal idols, which are

here touched with a hammer as with a tuning fork: there are altogether no

older, no more convinced, no more puffed-up idols--and none more hollow.

That does not prevent them from being those in which people have the most

faith; nor does one ever say "idol," especially not in the most distinguished

instance. Turin, September 30, 1888, on the day when the first book of the

Revaluation of All Values was completed. FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE

                              MAXIMS AND ARROWS

  1 Idleness is the beginning of all psychology. What? Should psychology

be a vice? 2 Even the most courageous among us only rarely has the courage

for that which he really knows. 3 To live alone one must be a beast or a god,

says Aristotle. Leaving out the third case: one must be both--a philosopher. 4

"All truth is simple." Is that not doubly a lie? 5 I want, once and for all, not to

know many things. Wisdom sets limits to knowledge too. 6 In our own wild

nature we find the best recreation from our un-nature, from our spirituality. 7

What? Is man merely a mistake of God's? Or God merely a mistake of man's?

8 Out of life's school of war: What does not destroy me, makes me stronger. 9

Help yourself, then everyone will help you. Principle of neighbor-love. 10

Not to perpetrate cowardice against one's own acts! Not to leave them in the

lurch afterward! The bite of conscience is indecent. 11 Can an ass be tragic?

To perish under a burden one can neither bear nor throw off? The case of the

philosopher. 12 If we have our own why of life, we shall get along with

almost any how. Man does not strive for pleasure; only the Englishman does.

13 Man has created woman--out of what? Out of a rib of his god--of his

"ideal." 14 What? You search? You would multiply yourself by ten, by a

hundred?  You  seek  followers?  Seek  zeros!  15  Posthumous  men--I,  for

example--are  understood  worse  than  timely  ones,  but  heard  better.  More

precisely: we are never understood--hence our authority. 16 Among women:

"Truth? Oh, you don't know truth! Is it not an attempt to assassinate all our

pudeurs?" 17 That is an artist as I love artists, modest in his needs: he really

wants only two things, his bread and his art--panem et Circen. ["bread and

Circe"] 18 Whoever does not know how to lay his will into things, at leastlays some meaning into them: that means, he has the faith that they already

obey  a  will.  (Principle  of  "faith.)  19  What?  You  elected  virtue  and  the

swelled bosom and yet you leer enviously at the advantages of those without

qualms?  But  virtue  involves  renouncing  "advantages."  (Inscription  for  an

anti-Semite's  door.)  20  The  perfect  woman  perpetrates  literature  as  she

perpetrates a small sin: as an experiment, in passing, looking around to see if

anybody notices it--and to make sure that somebody does. 21 To venture into

all sorts of situations in which one may not have any sham virtues, where,

like the tightrope walker on his rope, one either stands or falls--or gets away.

22 "Evil men have no songs." How is it, then, that the Russians have songs?

23 "German spirit": for the past eighteen years a contradiction in terms. 24

By searching out origins, one becomes a crab. The historian looks backward;

eventually he also believes backward. 25 Contentment protects even against

colds. Has a woman who knew herself to be well dressed ever caught cold? I

am assuming that she was barely dressed. 26 I mistrust all systematizers and I

avoid  them.  The  will  to  a  system  is  a  lack  of  integrity.  27  Women  are

considered profound. Why? Because one never fathoms their depths. Women

aren't even shallow. 28 If a woman has manly virtues, one feels like running

away; and if she has no manly virtues, she herself runs away. 29 "How much

conscience has had to chew on in the past! And what excellent teeth it had!

And today--what is lacking?" A dentist's question. 30 One rarely rushes into a

single error. Rushing into the first one, one always does too much. So one

usually  perpetrates  another  one--and  now  one  does  too  little.  31  When

stepped on, a worm doubles up. That is clever. In that way he lessens the

probability of being stepped on again. In the language of morality: humility.

32  There  is  a  hatred  of  lies  and  simulation,  stemming  from  an  easily

provoked sense of honor. There is another such hatred, from cowardice, since

lies are forbidden by a divine commandment. Too cowardly to lie. 33 How

little is required for pleasure! The sound of a bagpipe. Without music, life

would be an error. The German imagines even God singing songs. 34 On ne

peut  penser  et  ecrire  qu'assis  [One  cannot  think  and  write  except  when

seated] (G. Flaubert). There I have caught you, nihilist! The sedentary life is

the very sin against the Holy Spirit. Only thoughts reached by walking have

value. 35 There are cases in which we are like horses, we psychologists, and

become restless: we see our own shadow wavering up and down before us. A

psychologist  must  turn  his  eyes  from  himself  to  eye  anything  at  all.  36

Whether we immoralists are harming virtue? Just as little as anarchists harmprinces. Only since the latter are shot at do they again sit securely on their

thrones. Moral: morality must be shot at. 37 You run ahead? Are you doing it

as a shepherd? Or as an exception? A third case would be the fugitive. First

question  of  conscience.  38  Are  you  genuine?  Or  merely  an  actor?  A

representative? Or that which is represented? In the end, perhaps you are

merely  a  copy  of  an  actor.  Second  question  of  conscience.  39  The

disappointed one speaks. I searched for great human beings; I always found

only the apes of their ideals. 40 Are you one who looks on? Or one who lends

a hand? Or one who looks away and walks off? Third question of conscience.

41 Do you want to walk along? Or walk ahead? Or walk by yourself? One

must  know  what  one  wants  and  that  one  wants.  Fourth  question  of

conscience. 42 Those were steps for me, and I have climbed up over them: to

that end I had to pass over them. Yet they thought that I wanted to retire on

them. 43 What does it matter if I remain right. I am much too right. And he

who laughs best today will also laugh last. 44 The formula of my happiness: a

Yes, a No, a straight line, a goal.

                          THE PROBLEM OF SOCRATES

  1 Concerning life, the wisest men of all ages have judged alike: it is no

good.  Always  and  everywhere  one  has  heard  the  same  sound  from  their

mouths--a sound full of doubt, full of melancholy, full of weariness of life,

full of resistance to life. Even Socrates said, as he died: "To live--that means

to be sick a long time: I owe Asclepius the Savior a rooster." Even Socrates

was tired of it. What does that evidence? What does it evince? Formerly one

would have said (--oh, it has been said, and loud enough, and especially by

our pessimists): "At least something of all this must be true! The consensus of

the sages evidences the truth." Shall we still talk like that today? May we?

"At least something must be sick here," we retort. These wisest men of all

ages--they should first be scrutinized closely. Were they all perhaps shaky on

their legs? late? tottery? decadents? Could it be that wisdom appears on earth

as a raven, inspired by a little whiff of carrion? 2 This irreverent thought that

the great sages are types of decline first occurred to me precisely in a case

where  it  is  most  strongly  opposed  by  both  scholarly  and  unscholarly

prejudice: I recognized Socrates and Plato to be symptoms of degeneration,

tools of the Greek dissolution, pseudo-Greek, anti-Greek (Birth of Tragedy,

1872). The consensus of the sages--I comprehended this ever more clearly--

proves least of all that they were right in what they agreed on: it shows rather

that they themselves, these wisest men, agreed in some physiological respect,and  hence  adopted  the  same  negative  attitude  to  life--had  to  adopt  it.

Judgments, judgments of value, concerning life, for it or against it, can, in the

end, never be true: they have value only as symptoms, they are worthy of

consideration  only  as  symptoms;  in  themselves  such  judgments  are

stupidities. One must by all means stretch out one's fingers and make the

attempt  to  grasp  this  amazing  finesse,  that  the  value  of  life  cannot  be

estimated. Not by the living, for they are an interested party, even a bone of

contention, and not judges; not by the dead, for a different reason. For a

philosopher to see a problem in the value of life is thus an objection to him, a

question mark concerning his wisdom, an un-wisdom. Indeed? All these great

wise men--they were not only decadents but not wise at all? But I return to

the problem of Socrates. 3 In origin, Socrates belonged to the lowest class:

Socrates was plebs. We know, we can still see for ourselves, how ugly he

was.  But  ugliness,  in  itself  an  objection,  is  among  the  Greeks  almost  a

refutation.  Was  Socrates  a  Greek  at  all?  Ugliness  is  often  enough  the

expression of a development that has been crossed, thwarted by crossing. Or

it  appears  as  declining  development.  The  anthropologists  among  the

criminologists tell us that the typical criminal is ugly: monstrum in fronte,

monstrum in animo. But the criminal is a decadent. Was Socrates a typical

criminal? At least that would not be contradicted by the famous judgment of

the physiognomist which sounded so offensive to the friends of Socrates. A

foreigner  who  knew  about  faces  once  passed  through  Athens  and  told

Socrates to his face that he was a monstrum--that he harbored in himself all

the bad vices and appetites. And Socrates merely answered: "You know me,

sir!" 4 Socrates' decadence is suggested not only by the admitted wantonness

and anarchy of his instincts, but also by the hypertrophy of the logical faculty

and  that  sarcasm  of  the  rachitic  which  distinguishes  him.  Nor  should  we

forget those auditory hallucinations which, as "the daimonion of Socrates,"

have been interpreted religiously. Everything in him is exaggerated, buffo, a

caricature; everything is at the same time concealed, ulterior, subterranean. I

seek to comprehend what idiosyncrasy begot that Socratic equation of reason,

virtue, and happiness: that most bizarre of all equations which, moreover, is

opposed to all the instincts of the earlier Greeks. 5 With Socrates, Greek taste

changes  in  favor  of  dialectics.  What  really  happened  there?  Above  all,  a

noble taste is thus vanquished; with dialectics the plebs come to the top.

Before  Socrates,  dialectic  manners  were  repudiated  in  good  society:  they

were  considered  bad  manners,  they  were  compromising.  The  young  werewarned against them. Furthermore, all such presentations of one's reasons

were distrusted. Honest things, like honest men, do not carry their reasons in

their hands like that. It is indecent to show all five fingers. What must first be

proved is worth little. Wherever authority still forms part of good bearing,

where one does not give reasons but commands, the dialectician is a kind of

buffoon: one laughs at him, one does not take him seriously. Socrates was the

buffoon who got himself taken seriously: what really happened there? 6 One

chooses dialectic only when one has no other means. One knows that one

arouses mistrust with it, that it is not very persuasive. Nothing is easier to

erase than a dialectical effect: the experience of every meeting at which there

are speeches proves this. It can only be self-defense for those who no longer

have other weapons. One must have to enforce one's right: until one reaches

that  point,  one  makes  no  use  of  it.  The  Jews  were  dialecticians  for  that

reason;  Reynard  the  Fox  was  one--and  Socrates  too?  7  Is  the  irony  of

Socrates an expression of revolt? Of plebeian ressentiment? Does he, as one

oppressed, enjoy his own ferocity in the knife-thrusts of his syllogisms? Does

he avenge himself on the noble people whom he fascinates? As a dialectician,

one holds a merciless tool in one's hand; one can become a tyrant by means

of it; one compromises those one conquers. The dialectician leaves it to his

opponent to prove that he is no idiot: he makes one furious and helpless at the

same time. The dialectician renders the intellect of his opponent powerless.

Indeed? Is dialectic only a form of revenge in Socrates? 8 I have given to

understand how it was that Socrates could repel: it is therefore all the more

necessary to explain his fascination. That he discovered a new kind of agon,

that he became its first fencing master for the noble circles of Athens, is one

point. He fascinated by appealing to the agonistic impulse of the Greeks--he

introduced  a  variation  into  the  wrestling  match  between  young  men  and

youths. Socrates was also a great erotic. 9 But Socrates guessed even more.

He saw through his noble Athenians; he comprehended that his own case, his

idiosyncrasy, was no longer exceptional. The same kind of degeneration was

quietly  developing  everywhere:  old  Athens  was  coming  to  an  end.  And

Socrates understood that all the world needed him--his means, his cure, his

personal  artifice  of  self-preservation.  Everywhere  the  instincts  were  in

anarchy everywhere one was within five paces of excess: monstrum in animo

was the general danger. "The impulses want to play the tyrant; one must

invent  a  counter-tyrant  who  is  stronger.  When  the  physiognomist  had

revealed to Socrates who he was--a cave of bad appetites--the great master ofirony let slip another word which is the key to his character. "This is true," he

said,  "but  I  mastered  them  all."  How  did  Socrates  become  master  over

himself? His case was, at bottom, merely the extreme case, only the most

striking instance of what was then beginning to be a universal distress: no one

was any longer master over himself, the instincts turned against each other.

He fascinated, being this extreme case; his awe-inspiring ugliness proclaimed

him as such to all who could see: he fascinated, of course, even more as an

answer,  a  solution,  an  apparent  cure  of  this  case.  10  When  one  finds  it

necessary to turn reason into a tyrant, as Socrates did, the danger cannot be

slight that something else will play the tyrant. Rationality was then hit upon

as the savior; neither Socrates nor his "patients" had any choice about being

rational: it was de rigeur, it was their last resort. The fanaticism with which

all  Greek  reflection  throws  itself  upon  rationality  betrays  a  desperate

situation; there was danger, there was but one choice: either to perish or--to

be absurdly rational. The moralism of the Greek philosophers from Plato on

is pathologically conditioned; so is their esteem of dialectics. Reason-virtue-

happiness, that means merely that one must imitate Socrates and counter the

dark appetites with a permanent daylight--the daylight of reason. One must

be clever, clear, bright at any price: any concession to the instincts, to the

unconscious, leads downward. 11 I have given to understand how it was that

Socrates fascinated: he seemed to be a physician, a savior. Is it necessary to

go on to demonstrate the error in his faith in "rationality at any price"? It is a

self-deception on the part of philosophers and moralists if they believe that

they are extricating themselves from decadence when they merely wage war

against  it.  Extrication  lies  beyond  their  strength:  what  they  choose  as  a

means,  as  salvation,  is  itself  but  another  expression  of  decadence;  they

change its expression, but they do not get rid of decadence itself. Socrates

was  a  misunderstanding;  the  whole  improvement-morality,  including  the

Christian, was a misunderstanding. The most blinding daylight; rationality at

any  price;  life,  bright,  cold,  cautious,  conscious,  without  instinct,  in

opposition to the instincts--all this too was a mere disease, another disease,

and by no means a return to "virtue," to "health," to happiness. To have to

fight  the  instincts--that  is  the  formula  of  decadence:  as  long  as  life  is

ascending, happiness equals instinct. 12 Did he himself still comprehend this,

this most brilliant of all self-outwitters? Was this what he said to himself in

the end, in the wisdom of his courage to die? Socrates wanted to die: not

Athens, but he himself chose the hemlock; he forced Athens to sentence him."Socrates is no physician," he said softly to himself, "here death alone is the

physician. Socrates himself has merely been sick a long time."

                              "REASON" IN PHILOSOPHY

  1 You ask me which of the philosophers' traits are really idiosyncrasies?

For example, their lack of historical sense, their hatred of the very idea of

becoming, their Egypticism. They think that they show their respect for a

subject when they de-historicize it, sub specie aeternitas--when they turn it

into a mummy. All that philosophers have handled for thousands of years

have been concept-mummies; nothing real escaped their grasp alive. When

these honorable idolators of concepts worship something, they kill it and stuff

it; they threaten the life of everything they worship. Death, change, old age,

as  well  as  procreation  and  growth,  are  to  their  minds  objections--even

refutations. Whatever has being does not become; whatever becomes does

not have being. Now they all believe, desperately even, in what has being.

But since they never grasp it, they seek for reasons why it is kept from them.

"There  must  be  mere  appearance,  there  must  be  some  deception  which

prevents us from perceiving that which has being: where is the deceiver?"

"We have found him," they cry ecstatically; "it is the senses! These senses,

which  are  so  immoral  in  other  ways  too,  deceive  us  concerning  the  true

world. Moral: let us free ourselves from the deception of the senses, from

becoming, from history, from lies; history is nothing but faith in the senses,

faith in lies. Moral: let us say No to all who have faith in the senses, to all the

rest  of  mankind;  they  are  all  'mob.'  Let  us  be  philosophers!  Let  us  be

mummies" Let us represent monotono-theism by adopting the expression of a

gravedigger! And above all, away with the body, this wretched idee fixe of

the senses, disfigured by all the fallacies of logic, refuted, even impossible,

although it is impudent enough to behave as if it were real!" 2 With the

highest  respect,  I  except  the  name  of  Heraclitus.  When  the  rest  of  the

philosophic folk rejected the testimony of the senses because they showed

multiplicity  and  change,  he  rejected  their  testimony  because  they  showed

things as if they had permanence and unity. Heraclitus too did the senses an

injustice.  They  lie  neither  in  the  way  the  Eleatics  believed,  nor  as  he

believed--they do not lie at all. What we make of their testimony, that alone

introduces  lies;  for  example,  the  lie  of  unity,  the  lie  of  thinghood,  of

substance, of permanence. "Reason" is the cause of our falsification of the

testimony of the senses. Insofar as the senses show becoming, passing away,

and change, they do not lie. But Heraclitus will remain eternally right withhis assertion that being is an empty fiction. The "apparent" world is the only

one:  the  "true"  world  is  merely  added  by  a  lie.  3  And  what  magnificent

instruments of observation we possess in our senses! This nose, for example,

of  which  no  philosopher  has  yet  spoken  with  reverence  and  gratitude,  is

actually the most delicate instrument so far at our disposal: it is able to detect

minimal  differences  of  motion  which  even  a  spectroscope  cannot  detect.

Today we possess science precisely to the extent to which we have decided to

accept the testimony of the senses--to the extent to which we sharpen them

further,  arm  them,  and  have  learned  to  think  them  through.  The  rest  is

miscarriage  and  not-yet-science--in  other  words,  metaphysics,  theology,

psychology, epistemology--or formal science, a doctrine of signs, such as

logic and that applied logic which is called mathematics. In them reality is

not encountered at all, not even as a problem--no more than the question of

the value of such a sign-convention as logic. 4 The other idiosyncrasy of the

philosophers is no less dangerous; it consists in confusing the last and the

first. They place that which comes at the end--unfortunately! for it ought not

to  come  at  all!--namely,  the  "highest  concepts,"  which  means  the  most

general, the emptiest concepts, the last smoke of evaporating reality, in the

beginning, as the beginning. This again is nothing but their way of showing

reverence: the higher may not grow out of the lower, may not have grown at

all. Moral: whatever is of the first rank must be causa sui. Origin out of

something else is considered an objection, a questioning of value. All the

highest values are of the first rank; all the highest concepts, that which has

being, the unconditional, the good, the true, the perfect--all these cannot have

become and must therefore be causes. All these, moreover, cannot be unlike

each  other  or  in  contradiction  to  each  other.  Thus  they  arrive  at  their

stupendous concept, "God." That which is last, thinnest, and emptiest is put

first,  as  the  cause,  as  ens  realissimum.  Why  did  mankind  have  to  take

seriously the brain afflictions of sick web-spinners? They have paid dearly

for it! 5 At long last, let us contrast the very different manner in which we

conceive the problem of error and appearance. (I say "we" for politeness'

sake.) Formerly, alteration, change, any becoming at all, were taken as proof

of mere appearance, as an indication that there must be something which led

us  astray.  Today,  conversely,  precisely  insofar  as  the  prejudice  of  reason

forces us to posit unity, identity, permanence, substance, cause, thinghood,

being, we see ourselves somehow caught in error, compelled into error. So

certain are we, on the basis of rigorous examination, that this is where theerror lies. It is no different in this case than with the movement of the sun:

there our eye is the constant advocate of error, here it is our language. In its

origin  language  belongs  in  the  age  of  the  most  rudimentary  form  of

psychology. We enter a realm of crude fetishism when we summon before

consciousness the basic presuppositions of the metaphysics of language, in

plain  talk,  the  presuppositions  of  reason.  Everywhere  it  sees  a  doer  and

doing; it believes in will as the cause; it believes in the ego, in the ego as

being, in the ego as substance, and it projects this faith in the ego-substance

upon  all  things--only  thereby  does  it  first  create  the  concept  of  "thing."

Everywhere "being" is projected by thought, pushed underneath, as the cause;

the concept of being follows, and is a derivative of, the concept of ego. In the

beginning there is that great calamity of an error that the will is something

which is effective, that will is a capacity. Today we know that it is only a

word.  Very  much  later,  in  a  world  which  was  in  a  thousand  ways  more

enlightened,  philosophers,  to  their  great  surprise,  became  aware  of  the

sureness, the subjective certainty, in our handling of the categories of reason:

they  concluded  that  these  categories  could  not  be  derived  from  anything

empirical--for everything empirical plainly contradicted them. Whence, then,

were they derived? And in India, as in Greece, the same mistake was made:

"We must once have been at home in a higher world (instead of a very much

lower one, which would have been the truth); we must have been divine, for

we have reason!" Indeed, nothing has yet possessed a more naive power of

persuasion than the error concerning being, as it has been formulated by the

Eleatics, for example. After all, every word and every sentence we say speak

in  its  favor.  Even  the  opponents  of  the  Eleatics  still  succumbed  to  the

seduction  of  their  concept  of  being:  Democritus,  among  others,  when  he

invented his atom. "Reason" in language--oh, what an old deceptive female

she  is!  I  am  afraid  we  are  not  rid  of  God  because  we  still  have  faith  in

grammar. 6 It will be appreciated if I condense so essential and so new an

insight into four theses. In that way I facilitate comprehension; in that way I

provoke contradiction. First proposition. The reasons for which "this" world

has been characterized as "apparent" are the very reasons which indicate its

reality;  any  other  kind  of  reality  is  absolutely  indemonstrable.  Second

proposition. The criteria which have been bestowed on the "true being" of

things  are  the  criteria  of  not-being,  of  naught,  the  "true  world"  has  been

constructed  out  of  contradiction  to  the  actual  world:  indeed  an  apparent

world, insofar as it is merely a moral-optical illusion. Third proposition. Toinvent fables about a world "other" than this one has no meaning at all, unless

an instinct of slander, detraction, and suspicion against life has gained the

upper  hand  in  us:  in  that  case,  we  avenge  ourselves  against  life  with  a

phantasmagoria  of  "another,"  a  "better"  life.  Fourth  proposition.  Any

distinction  between  a  "true"  and  an  "apparent"  world--whether  in  the

Christian  manner  or  in  the  manner  of  Kant  (in  the  end,  an  underhanded

Christian)--is only a suggestion of decadence, a symptom of the decline of

life. That the artist esteems appearance higher than reality is no objection to

this proposition. For "appearance" in this case means reality once more, only

by way of selection, reinforcement, and correction. The tragic artist is no

pessimist: he is precisely the one who says Yes to everything questionable,

even to the terrible--he is Dionysian.

    HOW THE "TRUE WORLD" FINALLY BECAME A FLE. The History

                                      of an Error

  1. The true world--attainable for the sage, the pious, the virtuous man; he

lives in it, he is it. (The oldest form of the idea, relatively sensible, simple,

and persuasive. A circumlocution for the sentence, "I, Plato, am the truth.") 2.

The true world--unattainable for now, but promised for the sage, the pious,

the  virtuous  man  ("for  the  sinner  who  repents").  (Progress  of  the  idea:  it

becomes  more  subtle,  insidious,  incomprehensible--it  becomes  female,  it

becomes  Christian.  )  3.  The  true  world--unattainable,  indemonstrable,

unpromisable;  but  the  very  thought  of  it--a  consolation,  an  obligation,  an

imperative. (At bottom, the old sun, but seen through mist and skepticism.

The  idea  has  become  elusive,  pale,  Nordic,  K�nigsbergian.)  4.  The  true

world--unattainable?  At  any  rate,  unattained.  And  being  unattained,  also

unknown. Consequently, not consoling, redeeming, or obligating: how could

something unknown obligate us? (Gray morning. The first yawn of reason.

The cockcrow of positivism.) 5. The "true" world--an idea which is no longer

good for anything, not even obligating--an idea which has become useless

and superfluous--consequently, a refuted idea: let us abolish it! (Bright day;

breakfast; return of bon sens and cheerfulness; Plato's embarrassed blush;

pandemonium of all free spirits.) 6. The true world--we have abolished. What

world has remained? The apparent one perhaps? But no! With the true world

we  have  also  abolished  the  apparent  one.  (Noon;  moment  of  the  briefest

shadow;  end  of  the  longest  error;  high  point  of  humanity;  INCIPIT

ZARATHUSTRA.)

                            MORALITY AS ANTI-NATURE  1 All passions have a phase when they are merely disastrous, when they

drag down their victim with the weight of stupidity--and a later, very much

later phase when they wed the spirit, when they "spiritualize" themselves.

Formerly, in view of the element of stupidity in passion, war was declared on

passion  itself,  its  destruction  was  plotted;  all  the  old  moral  monsters  are

agreed on this: il faut tuer les passions. The most famous formula for this is

to be found in the New Testament, in that Sermon on the Mount, where,

incidentally, things are by no means looked at from a height. There it is said,

for example, with particular reference to sexuality: "If thy eye offend thee,

pluck it out." Fortunately, no Christian acts in accordance with this precept.

Destroying the passions and cravings, merely as a preventive measure against

their stupidity and the unpleasant consequences of this stupidity--today this

itself  strikes  us  as  merely  another  acute  form  of  stupidity.  We  no  longer

admire dentists who "pluck out" teeth so that they will not hurt any more. To

be  fair,  it  should  be  admitted,  however,  that  on  the  ground  out  of  which

Christianity grew, the concept of the "spiritualization of passion" could never

have been formed. After all, the first church, as is well known, fought against

the "intelligent" in favor of the "poor in spirit." How could one expect from it

an intelligent war against passion? The church fights passion with excision in

every sense: its practice, its "cure," is castratism. It never asks: "How can one

spiritualize, beautify, deify a craving?" It has at all times laid the stress of

discipline on extirpation (of sensuality, of pride, of the lust to rule, of avarice,

of vengefulness). But an attack on the roots of passion means an attack on the

roots of life: the practice of the church is hostile to life. 2 The same means in

the fight against a craving--castration, extirpation--is instinctively chosen by

those  who  are  too  weak-willed,  too  degenerate,  to  be  able  to  impose

moderation on themselves; by those who are so constituted that they require

La Trappe, to use a figure of speech, or (without any figure of speech) some

kind of definitive declaration of hostility, a cleft between themselves and the

passion.  Radical  means  are  indispensable  only  for  the  degenerate;  the

weakness of the will--or, to speak more definitely, the inability not to respond

to  a  stimulus--is  itself  merely  another  form  of  degeneration.  The  radical

hostility,  the  deadly  hostility  against  sensuality,  is  always  a  symptom  to

reflect on: it entitles us to suppositions concerning the total state of one who

is excessive in this manner. This hostility, this hatred, by the way, reaches its

climax only when such types lack even the firmness for this radical cure, for

this renunciation of their "devil." One should survey the whole history of thepriests  and  philosophers,  including  the  artists:  the  most  poisonous  things

against the senses have been said not by the impotent, nor by ascetics, but by

the  impossible  ascetics,  by  those  who  really  were  in  dire  need  of  being

ascetics. 3 The spiritualization of sensuality is called love: it represents a

great triumph over Christianity. Another triumph is our spiritualization of

hostility.  It  consists  in  a  profound  appreciation  of  the  value  of  having

enemies: in short, it means acting and thinking in the opposite way from that

which has been the rule. The church always wanted the destruction of its

enemies; we, we immoralists and Antichristians, find our advantage in this,

that the church exists. In the political realm too, hostility has now become

more  spiritual--much  more  sensible,  much  more  thoughtful,  much  more

considerate. Almost every party understands how it is in the interest of its

own  self-preservation  that  the  opposition  should  not  lose  all  strength;  the

same is true of power politics. A new creation in particular--the new Reich,

for example--needs enemies more than friends: in opposition alone does it

feel  itself  necessary,  in  opposition  alone  does  it  become  necessary.  Our

attitude to the "internal enemy" is no different: here too we have spiritualized

hostility;  here  too  we  have  come  to  appreciate  its  value.  The  price  of

fruitfulness is to be rich in internal opposition; one remains young only as

long as the soul does not stretch itself and desire peace. Nothing has become

more alien to us than that desideratum of former times, "peace of soul," the

Christian desideratum; there is nothing we envy less than the moralistic cow

and the fat happiness of the good conscience. One has renounced the great

life when one renounces war. In many cases, to be sure, "peace of soul" is

merely a misunderstanding--something else, which lacks only a more honest

name. Without further ado or prejudice, a few examples. "Peace of soul" can

be,  for  one,  the  gentle  radiation  of  a  rich  animality  into  the  moral  (or

religious) sphere. Or the beginning of weariness, the first shadow of evening,

of any kind of evening. Or a sign that the air is humid, that south winds are

approaching.  Or  unrecognized  gratitude  for  a  good  digestion  (sometimes

called "love of man"). Or the attainment of calm by a convalescent who feels

a new relish in all things and waits. Or the state which follows a thorough

satisfaction of our dominant passion, the well-being of a rare repletion. Or the

senile weakness of our will, our cravings, our vices. Or laziness, persuaded

by vanity to give itself moral airs. Or the emergence of certainty, even a

dreadful  certainty,  after  long  tension  and  torture  by  uncertainty.  Or  the

expression of maturity and mastery in the midst of doing, creating, working,and willing--calm breathing, attained "freedom of the will." Twilight of the

Idols--who knows? perhaps also only a kind of "peace of soul." I reduce a

principle to a formula. Every naturalism in morality--that is, every healthy

morality--is dominated by an instinct of life, some commandment of life is

fulfilled by a determinate canon of "shalt" and "shalt not"; some inhibition

and hostile element on the path of life is thus removed. Anti-natural morality-

-that is, almost every morality which has so far been taught, revered, and

preached--turns, conversely, against the instincts of life: it is condemnation of

these instincts, now secret, now outspoken and impudent. When it says, "God

looks at the heart," it says No to both the lowest and the highest desires of

life, and posits God as the enemy of life. The saint in whom God delights is

the  ideal  eunuch.  Life  has  come  to  an  end  where  the  "kingdom  of  God"

begins. 5 Once one has comprehended the outrage of such a revolt against

life  as  has  become  almost  sacrosanct  in  Christian  morality,  one  has,

fortunately,  also  comprehended  something  else:  the  futility,  apparentness,

absurdity, and mendaciousness of such a revolt. A condemnation of life by

the living remains in the end a mere symptom of a certain kind of life: the

question whether it is justified or unjustified is not even raised thereby. One

would require a position outside of life, and yet have to know it as well as

one, as many, as all who have lived it, in order to be permitted even to touch

the problem of the value of life: reasons enough to comprehend that this

problem is for us an unapproachable problem. When we speak of values, we

speak with the inspiration, with the way of looking at things, which is part of

life: life itself forces us to posit values; life itself values through us when we

posit values. From this it follows that even that anti-natural morality which

conceives of God as the counter-concept and condemnation of life is only a

value judgment of life--but of what life? of what kind of life? I have already

given the answer: of declining, weakened, weary, condemned life. Morality,

as it has so far been understood--as it has in the end been formulated once

more by Schopenhauer, as "negation of the will to life"--is the very instinct of

decadence,  which  makes  an  imperative  of  itself.  It  says:  "Perish!"  It  is  a

condemnation pronounced by the condemned. 6 Let us finally consider how

naive it is altogether to say: "Man ought to be such and such!" Reality shows

us an enchanting wealth of types, the abundance of a lavish play and change

of forms--and some wretched loafer of a moralist comments: "No! Man ought

to be different." He even knows what man should be like, this wretched bigot

and prig: he paints himself on the wall and comments, "Ecce homo!" Buteven when the moralist addresses himself only to the single human being and

says to him, "You ought to be such and such!" he does not cease to make

himself ridiculous. The single human being is a piece of fatum from the front

and from the rear, one law more, one necessity more for all that is yet to

come  and  to  be.  To  say  to  him,  "Change  yourself!"  is  to  demand  that

everything  be  changed,  even  retroactively.  And  indeed  there  have  been

consistent moralists who wanted man to be different, that is, virtuous--they

wanted him remade in their own image, as a prig: to that end, they negated

the  world!  No  small  madness!  No  modest  kind  of  immodesty!  Morality,

insofar  as  it  condemns  for  its  own  sake,  and  not  out  of  regard  for  the

concerns, considerations, and contrivances of life, is a specific error with

which one ought to have no pity--an idiosyncrasy of degenerates which has

caused immeasurable harm. We others, we immoralists, have, conversely,

made room in our hearts for every kind of understanding, comprehending,

and approving. We do not easily negate; we make it a point of honor to be

affirmers.  More  and  more,  our  eyes  have  opened  to  that  economy  which

needs and knows how to utilize everything that the holy witlessness of the

priest, the diseased reason in the priest, rejects--that economy in the law of

life which finds an advantage even in the disgusting species of the prigs, the

priests, the virtuous. What advantage? But we ourselves, we immoralists, are

the answer.

                            THE FOUR GREAT ERRORS

  1 The error of confusing cause and effect. There is no more dangerous

error  than  that  of  mistaking  the  effect  for  the  cause:  I  call  it  the  real

corruption  of  reason.  Yet  this  error  belongs  among  the  most  ancient  and

recent habits of mankind: it is even hallowed among us and goes by the name

of "religion" or "morality." Every single sentence which religion and morality

formulate contains it; priests and legislators of moral codes are the originators

of this corruption of reason. I give an example. Everybody knows the book of

the famous Cornaro in which he recommends his slender diet as a recipe for a

long and happy life--a virtuous one too. Few books have been read so much;

even now thousands of copies are sold in England every year. I do not doubt

that scarcely any book (except the Bible, as is meet) has done as much harm,

has shortened as many lives, as this well-intentioned curiosum. The reason:

the mistaking of the effect for the cause. The worthy Italian thought his diet

was the cause of his long life, whereas the precondition for a long life, the

extraordinary slowness of his metabolism, the consumption of so little, wasthe  cause  of  his  slender  diet.  He  was  not  free  to  eat  little  or  much;  his

frugality was not a matter of "free will": he became sick when he ate more.

But whoever is no carp not only does well to eat properly, but needs to. A

scholar in our time, with his rapid consumption of nervous energy, would

simply destroy himself with Cornaro's diet. Crede experto. [Believe him who

has tried.] 2 The most general formula on which every religion and morality

is founded is: "Do this and that, refrain from this and that--then you will be

happy! Otherwise..." Every morality, every religion, is this imperative; I call

it the great original sin of reason, the immortal unreason. In my mouth, this

formula is changed into its opposite--first example of my "revaluation of all

values": a well-turned-out human being, a "happy one," must perform certain

actions  and  shrinks  instinctively  from  other  actions;  he  carries  the  order,

which  he  represents  physiologically,  into  his  relations  with  other  human

beings and things. In a formula: his virtue is the effect of his happiness. A

long life, many descendants--these are not the wages of virtue: rather virtue

itself  is  that  slowing  down  of  the  metabolism  which  leads,  among  other

things, also to a long life, many descendants--in short, to Cornarism. The

church and morality say: "A generation, a people, are destroyed by license

and  luxury."  My  recovered  reason  says:  when  a  people  approaches

destruction,  when  it  degenerates  physiologically,  then  license  and  luxury

follow from this (namely, the craving for ever stronger and more frequent

stimulation, as every exhausted nature knows it). This young man turns pale

early and wilts; his friends say: that is due to this or that disease. I say: that he

became diseased, that he did not resist the disease, was already the effect of

an impoverished life or hereditary exhaustion. The newspaper reader says:

this party destroys itself by making such a mistake. My higher politics says: a

party which makes such mistakes has reached its end; it has lost its sureness

of instinct. Every mistake in every sense is the effect of the degeneration of

instinct, of the disintegration of the will: one could almost define what is bad

in  this  way.  All  that  is  good  is  instinct--and  hence  easy,  necessary,  free.

Laboriousness is an objection: the god is typically different from the hero. (In

my language: light feet are the first attribute of divinity.) 3 The error of a

false causality. People have believed at all times that they knew what a cause

is; but whence did we take our knowledge--or more precisely, our faith--that

we had such knowledge? From the realm of the famous "inner facts," of

which not a single one has so far proved to be factual. We believed ourselves

to be causal in the act of willing: we thought that here at least we caughtcausality in the act. Nor did one doubt that all the antecedents of an act, its

causes, were to be sought in consciousness and would be found there once

sought--as "motives": else one would not have been free and responsible for

it. Finally, who would have denied that a thought is caused? that the ego

causes the thought? Of these three "inward facts" which seem to guarantee

causality,  the  first  and  most  persuasive  is  that  of  the  will  as  cause.  The

conception of a consciousness ("spirit") as a cause, and later also that of the

ego as cause (the "subject"), are only afterbirths: first the causality of the will

was  firmly  accepted  as  given,  as  empirical.  Meanwhile  we  have  thought

better of it. Today we no longer believe a word of all this. The "inner world"

is full of phantoms and will-o'-the-wisps: the will is one of them. The will no

longer  moves  anything,  hence  does  not  explain  anything  either--it  merely

accompanies  events;  it  can  also  be  absent.  The  so-called  motive:  another

error. Merely a surface phenomenon of consciousness, something alongside

the deed that is more likely to cover up the antecedents of the deeds than to

represent them. And as for the ego! That has become a fable, a fiction, a play

on words: it has altogether ceased to think, feel, or will! What follows from

this? There are no mental causes at all. The whole of the allegedly empirical

evidence for that has gone to the devil. That is what follows! And what a fine

abuse  we  had  perpetrated  with  this  "empirical  evidence";  we  created  the

world on this basis as a world of causes, a world of will, a world of spirits.

The most ancient and enduring psychology was at work here and did not do

anything else: all that happened was considered a doing, all doing the effect

of a will; the world became to it a multiplicity of doers; a doer (a "subject")

was slipped under all that happened. It was out of himself that man projected

his three "inner facts"--that in which he believed most firmly: the will, the

spirit, the ego. He even took the concept of being from the concept of the

ego; he posited "things" as "being," in his image, in accordance with his

concept of the ego as a cause. Small wonder that later he always found in

things only that which he gad put into them. The thing itself, to say it once

more, the concept of thing is a mere reflex of the faith in the ego as cause.

And even your atom, my dear mechanists and physicists--how much error,

how  much  rudimentary  psychology  is  still  residual  in  your  atom!  Not  to

mention  the  "thing-in-itself,"  the  horrendum  pudendum  of  the

metaphysicians! The error of the spirit as cause mistaken for reality! And

made the very measure of reality! And called God! 4 The error of imaginary

causes.  To  begin  with  dreams:  ex  post  facto,  a  cause  is  slipped  under  aparticular sensation (for example, one following a far-off cannon shot)--often

a whole little novel in which the dreamer turns up as the protagonist. The

sensation endures meanwhile in a kind of resonance: it waits, as it were, until

the causal instinct permits it to step into the foreground--now no longer as a

chance occurrence, but as "meaning." The cannon shot appears in a causal

mode, in an apparent reversal of time. What is really later, the motivation, is

experienced first--often with a hundred details which pass like lightning and

the  shot  follows.  What  has  happened?  The  representations  which  were

produced by a certain state have been misunderstood as its causes. In fact, we

do the same thing when awake. Most of our general feelings--every kind of

inhibition, pressure, tension, and explosion in the play and counterplay of our

organs, and particularly the state of the nervus sympaticus--excite our causal

instinct: we want to have a reason for feeling this way or that--for feeling bad

or for feeling good. We are never satisfied merely to state the fact that we feel

this way or that: we admit this fact only--become conscious of it only--when

we  have  furnished  some  kind  of  motivation.  Memory,  which  swings  into

action in such cases, unknown to us, brings up earlier states of the same kind,

together with the causal interpretations associated with them--not their real

causes. The faith, to be sure, that such representations, such accompanying

conscious processes are the causes is also brought forth by memory. Thus

originates a habitual acceptance of a particular causal interpretation, which,

as  a  matter  of  fact,  inhibits  any  investigation  into  the  real  cause--even

precludes it. 5 The psychological explanation of this. To derive something

unknown from something familiar relieves, comforts, and satisfies, besides

giving a feeling of power. With the unknown, one is confronted with danger,

discomfort, and care; the first instinct is to abolish these painful states. First

principle: any explanation is better than none. Since at bottom it is merely a

matter  of  wishing  to  be  rid  of  oppressive  representations,  one  is  not  too

particular about the means of getting rid of them: the first representation that

explains the unknown as familiar feels so good that one "considers it true."

The  proof  of  pleasure  ("of  strength")  as  a  criterion  of  truth.  The  causal

instinct is thus conditional upon, and excited by, the feeling of fear. The

"why?" shall, if at all possible, not give the cause for its own sake so much as

for  a  particular  kind  of  cause--a  cause  that  is  comforting,  liberating,  and

relieving. That it is something already familiar, experienced, and inscribed in

the memory, which is posited as a cause, that is the first consequence of this

need. That which is new and strange and has not been experienced before, isexcluded as a cause. Thus one searches not only for some kind of explanation

to  serve  as  a  cause,  but  for  a  particularly  selected  and  preferred  kind  of

explanation--that which has most quickly and most frequently abolished the

feeling of the strange, new, and hitherto unexperienced: the most habitual

explanations.  Consequence:  one  kind  of  positing  of  causes  predominates

more  and  more,  is  concentrated  into  a  system  and  finally  emerges  as

dominant, that is, as simply precluding other causes and explanations. The

banker immediately thinks of "business," the Christian of "sin," and the girl

of her love. 6 The whole realm of morality and religion belongs under this

concept  of  imaginary  causes.  The  "explanation"  of  disagreeable  general

feelings. They are produced by beings that are hostile to us (evil spirits: the

most famous case--the misunderstanding of the hysterical as witches). They

are  produced  by  acts  which  cannot  be  approved  (the  feeling  of  "sin,"  of

"sinfulness," is slipped under a physiological discomfort; one always finds

reasons  for  being  dissatisfied  with  oneself).  They  are  produced  as

punishments, as payment for something we should not have done, for what

we should not have been (impudently generalized by Schopenhauer into a

principle in which morality appears as what it really is--as the very poisoner

and  slanderer  of  life:  "Every  great  pain,  whether  physical  or  spiritual,

declares what we deserve; for it could not come to us if we did not deserve

it." World as Will and Representation II, 666). They are produced as effects

of ill-considered actions that turn out badly. (Here the affects, the senses, are

posited as causes, as "guilty"; and physiological calamities are interpreted

with  the  help  of  other  calamities  as  "deserved.")  The  "explanation"  of

agreeable  general  feelings.  They  are  produced  by  trust  in  God.  They  are

produced  by  the  consciousness  of  good  deeds  (the  so-called  "good

conscience"--a physiological state which at times looks so much like good

digestion  that  it  is  hard  to  tell  them  apart).  They  are  produced  by  the

successful  termination  of  some  enterprise  (a  naive  fallacy:  the  successful

termination of some enterprise does not by any means give a hypochondriac

or a Pascal agreeable general feelings). They are produced by faith, charity,

and hope--the Christian virtues. In truth, all these supposed explanations are

resultant states and, as it were, translations of pleasurable or unpleasurable

feelings  into  a  false  dialect:  one  is  in  a  state  of  hope  because  the  basic

physiological feeling is once again strong and rich; one trusts in God because

the feeling of fullness and strength gives a sense of rest. Morality and religion

belong altogether to the psychology of error: in every single case, cause andeffect  are  confused;  or  truth  is  confused  with  the  effects  of  believing

something to be true; or a state of consciousness is confused with its causes. 7

The error of free will. Today we no longer have any pity for the concept of

"free  will":  we  know  only  too  well  what  it  really  is--the  foulest  of  all

theologians' artifices aimed at making mankind "responsible" in their sense,

that is, dependent upon them. Here I simply supply the psychology of all

"making responsible." Wherever responsibilities are sought, it is usually the

instinct of wanting to judge and punish which is at work. Becoming has been

deprived of its innocence when any being-such-and-such is traced back to

will, to purposes, to acts of responsibility: the doctrine of the will has been

invented  essentially  for  the  purpose  of  punishment,  that  is,  because  one

wanted to impute guilt. The entire old psychology, the psychology of will,

was conditioned by the fact that its originators, the priests at the head of

ancient communities, wanted to create for themselves the right to punish--or

wanted to create this right for God. Men were considered "free" so that they

might  be  judged  and  punished--so  that  they  might  become  guilty:

consequently, every act had to be considered as willed, and the origin of

every act had to be considered as lying within the consciousness (and thus the

most  fundamental  counterfeit  in  psychologicis  was  made  the  principle  of

psychology itself). Today, as we have entered into the reverse movement and

we immoralists are trying with all our strength to take the concept of guilt

and  the  concept  of  punishment  out  of  the  world  again,  and  to  cleanse

psychology,  history,  nature,  and  social  institutions  and  sanctions  of  them,

there is in our eyes no more radical opposition than that of the theologians,

who  continue  with  the  concept  of  a  "moral  world-order"  to  infect  the

innocence of becoming by means of "punishment" and "guilt." Christianity is

a metaphysics of the hangman. 8 What alone can be our doctrine? That no

one gives man his qualities--neither God, nor society, nor his parents and

ancestors,  nor  he  himself.  (The  nonsense  of  the  last  idea  was  taught  as

"intelligible  freedom"  by  Kant--perhaps  by  Plato  already.)  No  one  is

responsible for man's being there at all, for his being such-and-such, or for his

being  in  these  circumstances  or  in  this  environment.  The  fatality  of  his

essence is not to be disentangled from the fatality of all that has been and will

be. Man is not the effect of some special purpose, of a will, an end; nor is he

the  object  of  an  attempt  to  attain  an  "ideal  of  humanity"  or  an  "ideal  of

happiness" or an "ideal of morality." It is absurd to wish to devolve one's

essence on some end or other. We have invented the concept of "end": inreality there is no end. One is necessary, one is a piece of fatefulness, one

belongs to the whole, one is in the whole; there is nothing which could judge,

measure,  compare,  or  sentence  our  being,  for  that  would  mean  judging,

measuring, comparing, or sentencing the whole. But there is nothing besides

the whole. That nobody is held responsible any longer, that the mode of being

may not be traced back to a causa prima, that the world does not form a unity

either as a sensorium or as "spirit"--that alone is the great liberation; with this

alone is the innocence of becoming restored. The concept of "God" was until

now  the  greatest  objection  to  existence.  We  deny  God,  we  deny  the

responsibility in God: only thereby do we redeem the world.

                        THE "IMPROVERS" OF MANKIND

  1  My  demand  upon  the  philosopher  is  known,  that  he  take  his  stand

beyond  good  and  evil  and  leave  the  illusion  of  moral  judgment  beneath

himself.  This  demand  follows  from  an  insight  which  I  was  the  first  to

formulate: that there are altogether no moral facts. Moral judgments agree

with religious ones in believing in realities which are no realities. Morality is

merely  an  interpretation  of  certain  phenomena--more  precisely,  a

misinterpretation. Moral judgments, like religious ones, belong to a stage of

ignorance at which the very concept of the real, and the distinction between

what  is  real  and  imaginary,  are  still  lacking;  thus  "truth,"  at  this  stage,

designates  all  sorts  of  things  which  we  today  call  "imaginings."  Moral

judgments  are  therefore  never  to  be  taken  literally:  so  understood,  they

always  contain  mere  absurdity.  Semeiotically,  however,  they  remain

invaluable:  they  reveal,  at  least  for  those  who  know,  the  most  valuable

realities  of  cultures  and  inwardnesses  which  did  not  know  enough  to

"understand"  themselves.  Morality  is  mere  sign  language,  mere

symptomatology: one must know what it is all about to be able to profit from

it. 2 A first example, quite provisional. At all times they have wanted to

"improve" men: this above all was called morality. Under the same word,

however, the most divergent tendencies are concealed. Both the taming of the

beast, man, and the breeding of a particular kind of man have been called

"improvement." Such zoological terms are required to express the realities--

realities, to be sure, of which the typical "improver," the priest, neither knows

anything nor wants to know anything. To call the taming of an animal its

"improvement" sounds almost like a joke to our ears. Whoever knows what

goes on in menageries doubts that the beasts are "improved" there. They are

weakened, they are made less harmful, and through the depressive effect offear, through pain, through wounds, and through hunger, they become sickly

beasts. It is no different with the tamed man whom the priest has "improved."

In  the  early  Middle  Ages,  when  the  church  was  indeed,  above  all,  a

menagerie, the most beautiful specimens of the "blond beast" were hunted

down everywhere; and the noble Teutons, for example, were "improved." But

how did such an "improved" Teuton who had been seduced into a monastery

look afterward? Like a caricature of man, like a miscarriage: he had become a

"sinner,"  he  was  stuck  in  a  cage,  imprisoned  among  all  sorts  of  terrible

concepts. And there he lay, sick, miserable, malevolent against himself, full

of hatred against the springs of life, full of suspicion against all that was still

strong and happy. In short, a "Christian." Physiologically speaking: in the

struggle with beasts, to make them sick may be the only means for making

them weak. This the church understood: it ruined man, it weakened him--but

it claimed to have "improved" him. 3 Let us consider the other case of so-

called morality, the case of breeding, a particular race and kind. The most

magnificent example of this is furnished by Indian morality, sanctioned as

religion in the form of "the law of Manu." Here the task set is to breed no less

than  four  races  at  once:  one  priestly,  one  warlike,  one  for  trade  and

agriculture, and finally a race of servants, the Sudras. Obviously, we are here

no longer among animal tamers: a kind of man that is a hundred times milder

and  more  reasonable  is  the  condition  for  even  conceiving  such  a  plan  of

breeding. One heaves a sigh of relief at leaving the Christian atmosphere of

disease  and  dungeons  for  this  healthier,  higher,  and  wider  world.  How

wretched is the New Testament compared to Manu, how foul it smells! Yet

this organization too found it necessary to be terrible--this time not in the

struggle  with  beasts,  but  with  their  counter-concept,  the  unbred  man,  the

mishmash man, the chandala. And again it had no other means for keeping

him from being dangerous, for making him weak, than to make him sick--it

was  the  fight  with  the  "great  number."  Perhaps  there  is  nothing  that

contradicts  our  feeling  more  than  these  protective  measures  of  Indian

morality.  The  third  edict,  for  example  (Avadana-Sastra  I),  "on  impure

vegetables," ordains that the only nourishment permitted to the chandala shall

be garlic and onions, seeing that the holy scripture prohibits giving them

grain or fruit with grains, or water or fire. The same edict orders that the

water they need may not be taken from rivers or wells, nor from ponds, but

only from the approaches to swamps and from holes made by the footsteps of

animals.  They  are  also  prohibited  from  washing  their  laundry  and  fromwashing themselves, since the water they are conceded as an act of grace may

be used only to quench thirst. Finally, a prohibition that Sudra women may

not assist chandala women in childbirth, and a prohibition that the latter may

not assist each other in this condition. The success of such sanitary police

measures  was  inevitable:  murderous  epidemics,  ghastly  venereal  diseases,

and thereupon again "the law of the knife," ordaining circumcision for male

children  and  the  removal  of  the  internal  labia  for  female  children.  Manu

himself  says:  "The  chandalas  are  the  fruit  of  adultery,  incest,  and  crime

(these, the necessary consequences of the concept of breeding). For clothing

they  shall  have  only  rags  from  corpses;  for  dishes,  broken  pots;  for

adornment, old iron; for divine services, only evil spirits. They shall wander

without rest from place to place. They are prohibited from writing from left to

right, and from using the right hand in writing: the use of the right hand and

of from-left-to-right is reserved for the virtuous, for the people of race." 4

These regulations are instructive enough: here we encounter for once Aryan

humanity, quite pure, quite primordial--we learn that the concept of "pure

blood" is the opposite of a harmless concept. On the other hand, it becomes

clear  in  which  people  the  hatred,  the  chandala  hatred,  against  this

"humaneness" has eternalized itself, where it has become religion, where it

has  become  genius.  Seen  in  this  perspective,  the  Gospels  represent  a

document of prime importance; even more, the Book of Enoch. Christianity,

sprung from Jewish roots and comprehensible only as a growth on this soil,

represents  the  counter-movement  to  any  morality  of  breeding,  of  race,

privilege:  it  is  the  anti-Aryan  religion  par  excellence.  Christianity--the

revaluation of all Aryan values, the victory of chandala values, the gospel

preached to the poor and base, the general revolt of all the downtrodden, the

wretched, the failures, the less favored, against "race": the undying chandala

hatred as the religion of love. 5 The morality of breeding, and the morality of

taming, are, in the means they use, entirely worthy of each other: we may

proclaim it as the supreme principle that, to make morality, one must have the

unconditional will to its opposite. This is the great, the uncanny problem

which I have been pursuing the longest: the psychology of the "improvers" of

mankind. A small, and at bottom modest, fact--that of the so-called pia fraus

[holy lie]--offered me the first approach to this problem: the pia fraus, the

heirloom of all philosophers and priests who "improved" mankind. Neither

Manu nor Plato nor Confucius nor the Jewish and Christian teachers have

ever doubted their right to lie. They have not doubted that they had verydifferent rights too. Expressed in a formula, one might say: all the means by

which one has so far attempted to make mankind moral were through and

through immoral.

                            WHAT THE GERMANS LACK

  1 Among Germans today it is not enough to have spirit: one must arrogate

it, one must have the arrogance to have spirit. Perhaps I know the Germans,

perhaps I may even tell them some truths. The new Germany represents a

large quantum of fitness, both inherited and acquired by training, so that for a

time it may expend its accumulated store of strength, even squander it. It is

not a high culture that has thus become the master, and even less a delicate

taste, a noble "beauty" of the instincts; but more virile virtues than any other

country  in  Europe  can  show.  Much  cheerfulness  and  self-respect,  much

assurance  in  social  relations  and  in  the  reciprocality  of  duties,  much

industriousness,  much  perseverance--and  an  inherited  moderation  which

needs the spur rather than the brake. I add that here one still obeys without

feeling that obedience humiliates. And nobody despises his opponent. One

will notice that I wish to be just to the Germans: I do not want to break faith

with myself here. I must therefore also state my objections to them. One pays

heavily for coming to power: power makes stupid. The Germans--once they

were called the people of thinkers: do they think at all today? The Germans

are now bored with the spirit, the Germans now mistrust the spirit; politics

swallows  up  all  serious  concern  for  really  spiritual  matters.  Deutschland,

Deutschland uber alles--I fear that was the end of German philosophy. "Are

there any German philosophers? Are there German poets? Are there good

German books?" they ask me abroad. I blush; but with the courage which I

maintain even in desperate situations I reply: "Well, Bismarck." Would it be

permissible for me to confess what books are read today? Accursed instinct

of  mediocrity!  2  What  the  German  spirit  might  be--who  has  not  had  his

melancholy  ideas  about  that!  But  this  people  has  deliberately  made  itself

stupid,  for  nearly  a  millennium:  nowhere  have  the  two  great  European

narcotics, alcohol and Christianity, been abused more dissolutely. Recently

even a third has been added--one that alone would be suffficient to dispatch

all fine and bold fiexibility of the spirit--music, our constipated, constipating

German  music.  How  much  disgruntled  heaviness,  lameness,  dampness,

dressing gown--how much beer there is in the German intelligence! How is it

at all possible that young men who dedicate their lives to the most spiritual

goals do not feel the first instinct of spirituality, the spirit's instinct of self-preservation--and drink beer? The alcoholism of young scholars is perhaps no

question mark concerning their scholarliness--without spirit one can still be a

great scholar--but in every other respect it remains a problem. Where would

one not find the gentle degeneration which beer produces in the spirit? Once,

in  a  case  that  has  almost  become  famous,  I  put  my  finger  on  such  a

degeneration--the  degeneration  of  our  number-one  German  free  spirit,  the

clever David Strauss, into the author of a beer-bench gospel and "new faith."

It was not for nothing that he had made his vow to the "fair brunette" [dark

beer] in verse--loyalty unto death. 3 I was speaking of the German spirit: it is

becoming cruder, it is becoming shallower. Is that enough? At bottom, it is

something quite different that alarms me: how German seriousness, German

depth, German passion in spiritual matters are declining more and more. The

verve has changed, not just the intellectuality. Here and there I come into

contact with German universities: what an atmosphere prevails among their

scholars, what desolate spirituality--and how contented and lukewarm it has

become! It would be a profound misunderstanding if one wanted to adduce

German science against me-it would also be proof that one has not read a

word  I  have  written.  For  seventeen  years  I  have  never  tired  of  calling

attention to the despiritualizing influence of our current science-industry. The

hard helotism to which the tremendous range of the sciences condemns every

scholar today is a main reason why those with a fuller, richer, profounder

disposition no longer find a congenial education and congenial educators.

There  is  nothing  of  which  our  culture  suffers  more  than  of  the

superabundance  of  pretentious  jobbers  and  fragments  of  humanity;  our

universities  are,  against  their  will,  the  real  hothouses  for  this  kind  of

withering of the instincts of the spirit. And the whole of Europe already has

some idea of this--power politics deceives nobody. Germany is considered

more and more as Europe's flatland. I am still looking for a German with

whom I might be able to be serious in my own way--and how much more for

one with whom I might be cheerful! Twilight of the Idols: who today would

comprehend from what seriousness a philosopher seeks recreation here? Our

cheerfulness  is  what  is  most  incomprehensible  about  us.  4  Even  a  rapid

estimate shows that it is not only obvious that German culture is declining but

that there is sufficient reason for that. In the end, no one can spend more than

he has: that is true of an individual, it is true of a people. If one spends

oneself  for  power,  for  power  politics,  for  economics,  world  trade,

parliamentarianism, and military interests--if one spends in the direction thequantum of understanding, seriousness, will, and self- overcoming which one

represents, then it will be lacking for the other direction. Culture and the

state--one should not deceive one-self about this--are antagonists: "Kultur-

Staat" is merely a modern idea. One lives off the other, one thrives at the

expense of the other. All great ages of culture are ages of political decline:

what  is  great  culturally  has  always  been  unpolitical,  even  anti-political.

Goethe's heart opened at the phenomenon of Napoleon--it closed at the "Wars

of Liberation." At the same moment when Germany comes up as a great

power, France gains a new importance as a cultural power. Even today much

new seriousness, much new passion of the spirit, have migrated to Paris; the

question of pessimism, for example, the question of Wagner, and almost all

psychological and artistic questions are there weighed incomparably more

delicately  and  thoroughly  than  in  Germany--the  Germans  are  altogether

incapable of this kind of seriousness. In the history of European culture the

rise of the "Reich" means one thing above all: a displacement of the center of

gravity.  It  is  already  known  everywhere:  in  what  matters  most--and  that

always remains culture--the Germans are no longer worthy of consideration.

One asks: Can you point to even a single spirit who counts from a European

point  of  view,  as  your  Goethe,  your  Hegel,  your  Heinrich  Heine,  your

Schopenhauer counted? That there is no longer a single German philosopher-

-about that there is no end of astonishment. 5 The entire system of higher

education in Germany has lost what matters most: the end as well as the

means to the end. That education, that Bildung, is itself an end--and not "the

Reich"--and that educators are needed to that end, and not secondary-school

teachers  and  university  scholars--that  has  been  forgotten.  Educators  are

needed who have themselves been educated, superior, noble spirits, proved at

every moment, proved by words and silence, representing culture which has

grown ripe and sweet--not the learned louts whom secondary schools and

universities  today  offer  our  youth  as  "higher  wet  nurses."  Educators  are

lacking,  not  counting  the  most  exceptional  of  exceptions,  the  very  first

condition of education: hence the decline of German culture. One of this

rarest of exceptions is my venerable friend, Jacob Burckhardt in Basel: it is

primarily to him that Basel owes its pre-eminence in humaneness. What the

"higher schools" in Germany really achieve is a brutal training, designed to

prepare huge numbers of young men, with as little loss of time as possible, to

become  usable,  abusable,  in  government  service.  "Higher  education"  and

huge  numbers--that  is  a  contradiction  to  start  with.  All  higher  educationbelongs only to the exception: one must be privileged to have a right to so

high  a  privilege.  All  great,  all  beautiful  things  can  never  be  common

property: pulchrum est paucorum hominum. What contributes to the decline

of  German  culture?  That  "higher  education"  is  no  longer  a  privilege--the

democratism of Bildung, which has become "common"--too common. Let it

not  be  forgotten  that  military  privileges  really  compel  an  all-too-great

attendance  in  the  higher  schools,  and  thus  their  downfall.  In  present-day

Germany no one is any longer free to give his children a noble education: our

"higher schools" are all set up for the most ambiguous mediocrity, with their

teachers,  curricula,  and  teaching  aims.  And  everywhere  an  indecent  haste

prevails, as if something would be lost if the young man of twenty-three were

not  yet  "finished,"  or  if  he  did  not  yet  know  the  answer  to  the  "main

question": which calling? A higher kind of human being, if I may say so,

does not like "callings," precisely because he knows himself to be called. He

has time, he takes time, he does not even think of "finishing": at thirty one is,

in the sense of high culture, a beginner, a child. Our overcrowded secondary

schools, our overworked, stupefied secondary-school teachers, are a scandal:

for  one  to  defend  such  conditions,  as  the  professors  at  Heidelberg  did

recently, there may perhaps be causes--reasons there are none. 6 I put forward

at  once--lest  I  break  with  my  style,  which  is  affirmative  and  deals  with

contradiction  and  criticism  only  as  a  means,  only  involuntarily--the  three

tasks for which educators are required. One must learn to see, one must learn

to think, one must learn to speak and write: the goal in all three is a noble

culture. Learning to see--accustoming the eye to calmness, to patience, to

letting things come up to it; postponing judgment, learning to go around and

grasp  each  individual  case  from  all  sides.  That  is  the  first  preliminary

schooling  for  spirituality:  not  to  react  at  once  to  a  stimulus,  but  to  gain

control  of  all  the  inhibiting,  excluding  instincts.  Learning  to  see,  as  I

understand it, is almost what, unphilosophically speaking, is called a strong

will: the essential feature is precisely not to "will"--to be able to suspend

decision. All unspirituality, all vulgar commonness, depend on the inability to

resist a stimulus: one must react, one follows every impulse. In many cases,

such a compulsion is already pathology, decline, a symptom of exhaustion--

almost  everything  that  unphilosophical  crudity  designates  with  the  word

"vice"  is  merely  this  physiological  inability  not  to  react.  A  practical

application  of  having  learned  to  see:  as  a  learner,  one  will  have  become

altogether slow, mistrustful, recalcitrant. One will let strange, new things ofevery  kind  come  up  to  oneself,  inspecting  them  with  hostile  calm  and

withdrawing one's hand. To have all doors standing open, to lie servilely on

one's stomach before every little fact, always to be prepared for the leap of

putting oneself into the place of, or of plunging into, others and other things--

in  short,  the  famous  modern  "objectivity"--is  bad  taste,  is  ignoble  par

excellence. 7 Learning to think: in our schools one no longer has any idea of

this. Even in the universities, even among the real scholars of philosophy,

logic as a theory, as a practice, as a craft, is beginning to die out. One need

only read German books: there is no longer the remotest recollection that

thinking requires a technique, a teaching curriculum, a will to mastery--that

thinking wants to be learned like dancing, as a kind of dancing. Who among

Germans still knows from experience the delicate shudder which light feet in

spiritual matters send into every muscle? The stiff clumsiness of the spiritual

gesture, the bungling hand at grasping--that is German to such a degree that

abroad one mistakes it for the German character as such. The German has no

fingers  for  nuances.  That  the  Germans  have  been  able  to  stand  their

philosophers at all, especially that most deformed concept-cripple of all time,

the great Kant, provides not a bad notion of German grace. For one cannot

subtract dancing in every form from a noble education--to be able to dance

with one's feet, with concepts, with words: need I still add that one must be

able to dance with the pen too--that one must learn to write? But at this point

I should become completely enigmatic for German readers.

                      SKIRMISHES OF AN UNTIMELY MAN

  1 My impossible ones. -- Seneca: or the toreador of virtue. Rousseau: or

the return to nature in impuris naturalibus [in natural filth]. Schiller: or the

Moral-Trumpeter of S�ckingen. Dante: or the hyena who writes poetry in

tombs. Kant: or cant as an intelligible character. Victor Hugo: or the pharos at

the sea of nonsense. Liszt: or the school of smoothness--with women. George

Sand:  or  lactea  ubertas--in  translation,  the  milk  cow  with  "a  beautiful

style."Michelet:  or  the  enthusiasm  which  takes  off  its  coat.  Carlyle:  or

pessimism as a poorly digested dinner. John Stuart Mill: or insulting clarity.

Les fr�res de Goncourt: or the two Ajaxes in battle with Homer--music by

Offenbach. Zola: or "the delight in stinking." 2 Renan. -- Theology: or the

corruption  of  reason  by  'original  sin"  (Christianity).  Witness  Renan  who,

whenever he risks a Yes or No of a more general nature scores a miss with

painful regularity. He wants for example, to weld together la science and la

noblesse:  but  la  science  belongs  with  democracy;  what  could  be  plainer?With no little ambition, he wishes to represent an aristocracy of the spirit: yet

at  the  same  time  he  is  on  his  knees  before  its  very  counter-doctrine,  the

evangile des humbles--and not only on his knees. To what avail is all free-

spiritedness, modernity, mockery, and wry-neck suppleness, if in one's guts

one is still a Christian, a Catholic--in fact, a priest! Renan is most inventive,

just  like  a  Jesuit  and  father  confessor,  when  it  comes  to  seduction;  his

spirituality does not even lack the broad fat popish smile--like all priests, he

becomes  dangerous  only  when  he  loves.  Nobody  can  equal  him  when  it

comes to adoring in a manner endangering life itself. This spirit of Renan's, a

spirit  which  is  enervated,  is  one  more  calamity  for  poor,  sick,  will-sick

France. 3 Sainte Beuve. -- Nothing of virility, full of petty wrath against all

virile spirits. Wanders around, cowardly, curious, bored, eavesdropping--a

female at bottom, with a female's lust for revenge and a female's sensuality.

As  a  psychologist,  a  genius  of  medisance  [slander],  inexhaustibly  rich  in

means  to  that  end;  no  one  knows  better  how  to  mix  praise  with  poison.

Plebeian in the lowest instincts and related to the ressentiment of Rousseau:

consequently, a romantic--for underneath all romantisme lie the grunting and

greed of Rousseau's instinct for revenge. A revolutionary, but still pretty well

harnessed by fear. Without freedom when confronted with anything strong

(public  opinion,  the  Academy,  the  court,  even  Port  Royal).  Embittered

against  everything  great  in  men  and  things,  against  whatever  believes  in

itself. Poet and half-female enough to sense the great as a power; always

writhing like the famous worm because he always feels stepped upon. As a

critic, without any standard, steadiness, and backbone, with the cosmopolitan

libertine's tongue for a medley of things, but without the courage even to

confess his libertinage. As a historian, without philosophy, without the power

of the philosophical eye--hence declining the task of judging in all significant

matters,  hiding  behind  the  mask  of  "objectivity."  It  is  different  with  his

attitude to all things in which a fine, well-worn taste is the highest tribunal:

there he really has the courage to stand by himself and delight in himself--

there he is a master. In some respects, a preliminary version of Baudelaire. 4

De imitatione Christi is one of those books which I cannot hold in my hand

without a physiological reaction: it exudes a perfume of the Eternal-Feminine

which  is  strictly  for  Frenchmen--or  Wagnerians.  This  saint  has  a  way  of

talking about love which arouses even Parisian women to curiosity. I am told

that  that  cleverest  of  Jesuits,  Auguste  Comte,  who  wanted  to  lead  his

Frenchmen to Rome via the detour of science, found his inspiration in thisbook. I believe it: "the religion of the heart." 5 G. Eliot. -- They are rid of the

Christian God and now believe all the more firmly that they must cling to

Christian morality. That is an English consistency; we do not wish to hold it

against little moralistic females � la Eliot. In England one must rehabilitate

oneself  after  every  little  emancipation  from  theology  by  showing  in  a

veritably  awe-inspiring  manner  what  a  moral  fanatic  one  is.  That  is  the

penance they pay there. We others hold otherwise. When one gives up the

Christian faith, one pulls the right to Christian morality out from under one's

feet. This morality is by no means self-evident: this point has to be exhibited

again and again, despite the English flatheads. Christianity is a system, a

whole view of things thought out together. By breaking one main concept out

of it, the faith in God, one breaks the whole: nothing necessary remains in

one's hands. Christianity presupposes that man does not know, cannot know,

what is good for him, what evil: he believes in God, who alone knows it.

Christian morality is a command; its origin is transcendent; it is beyond all

criticism, all right to criticism; it has truth only if God is the truth--it stands

and falls with faith in God. When the English actually believe that they know

"intuitively" what is good and evil, when they therefore suppose that they no

longer require Christianity as the guarantee of morality, we merely witness

the effects of the dominion of the Christian value judgment and an expression

of the strength and depth of this dominion: such that the origin of English

morality has been forgotten, such that the very conditional character of its

right to existence is no longer felt. For the English, morality is not yet a

problem.  6  George  Sand.  --  I  read  the  first  Lettres  d'un  voyageur:  like

everything  that  is  descended  from  Rousseau,  false,  fabricated,  bellows,

exaggerated. I cannot stand this motley wallpaper style any more than the

mob aspiration for generous feelings. The worst feature, to be sure, is the

female's coquetry with male attributes, with the manners of naughty boys.

How cold she must have been throughout, this insufferable artist! She wound

herself up like a clock--and wrote. Cold, like Hugo, like Balzac, like all the

romantics as soon as they took up poetic invention. And how self-satisfied

she may have lain there all the while, this fertile writing-cow who had in her

something German in the bad sense, like Rousseau himself, her master, and

who in any case was possible only during the decline of French taste! But

Renan reveres her. 7 Moral for psychologists. -- Not to go in for backstairs

psychology.  Never  to  observe  in  order  to  observe!  That  gives  a  false

perspective,  leads  to  squinting  and  something  forced  and  exaggerated.Experience as the wish to experience does not succeed. One must not eye

oneself while having an experience; else the eye becomes "an evil eye." A

born psychologist guards instinctively against seeing in order to see; the same

is true of the born painter. He never works "from nature"; he leaves it to his

instinct,  to  his  camera  obscura,  to  sift  through  and  express  the  "case,"

"nature,"  that  which  is  "experienced."  He  is  conscious  only  of  what  is

general, of the conclusion, the result: he does not know arbitrary abstractions

from an individual case. What happens when one proceeds differently? For

example, if, in the manner of the Parisian novelists, one goes in for backstairs

psychology and deals in gossip, wholesale and retail? Then one lies in wait

for  reality,  as  it  were,  and  every  evening  one  brings  home  a  handful  of

curiosities. But note what finally comes of all this: a heap of splotches, a

mosaic at best, but in any case something added together, something restless,

a mess of screaming colors. The worst in this respect is accomplished by the

Goncourts; they do not put three sentences together without really hurting the

eye,  the  psychologist's  eye.  Nature,  estimated  artistically,  is  no  model.  It

exaggerates,  it  distorts,  it  leaves  gaps.  Nature  is  chance.  To  study  "from

nature"  seems  to  me  to  be  a  bad  sign:  it  betrays  submission,  weakness,

fatalism; this lying in the dust before petit faits [little facts] is unworthy of a

whole artist. To see what is--that is the mark of another kind of spirit, the

anti-artistic, the factual. One must know who one is. 8 Toward a psychology

of the artist. -- If there is to be art, if there is to be any aesthetic doing and

seeing, one physiological condition is indispensable: frenzy. Frenzy must first

have enhanced the excitability of the whole machine; else there is no art. All

kinds  of  frenzy,  however  diversely  conditioned,  have  the  strength  to

accomplish this: above all, the frenzy of sexual excitement, this most ancient

and original form of frenzy. Also the frenzy that follows all great cravings, all

strong  affects;  the  frenzy  of  feasts,  contests,  feats  of  daring,  victory,  all

extreme movement; the frenzy of cruelty; the frenzy in destruction, the frenzy

under certain meteorological influences, as for example the frenzy of spring;

or under the influence of narcotics; and finally the frenzy of will, the frenzy

of an overcharged and swollen will. What is essential in such frenzy is the

feeling of increased strength and fullness. Out of this feeling one lends to

things, one forces them to accept from us, one violates them--this process is

called  idealizing.  Let  us  get  rid  of  a  prejudice  here:  idealizing  does  not

consist,  as  is  commonly  held,  in  subtracting  or  discounting  the  petty  and

inconsequential. What is decisive is rather a tremendous drive to bring out themain features so that the others disappear in the process. 9 In this state one

enriches everything out of one's own fullness: whatever one sees, whatever

one wills, is seen swelled, taut, strong, overloaded with strength. A man in

this  state  transforms  things  until  they  mirror  his  power--until  they  are

reflections of his perfection. This having to transform into perfection is--art.

Even everything that he is not yet, becomes for him an occasion of joy in

himself; in art man enjoys himself as perfection. It would be permissible to

imagine an opposite state, a specific anti-artistry by instinct--a mode of being

which would impoverish all things, making them thin and consumptive. And,

as a matter of fact, history is rich in such anti-artists, in such people who are

starved by life and must of necessity grab things, eat them out, and make

them more meager. This is, for example, the case of the genuine Christian--of

Pascal, for example: a Christian who would at the same time be an artist

simply does not occur. One should not be childish and object by naming

Raphael or some homeopathic Christian of the nineteenth century: Raphael

said Yes, Raphael did Yes; consequently, Raphael was no Christian. 10 What

is  the  meaning  of  the  conceptual  opposites  which  I  have  introduced  into

aesthetics, Apollinian and Dionysian, both conceived as kinds of frenzy? The

Apollinian frenzy excites the eye above all, so that it gains the power of

vision. The painter, the sculptor, the epic poet are visionaries par excellence.

In  the  Dionysian  state,  on  the  other  hand,  the  whole  affective  system  is

excited and enhanced: so that it discharges all its means of expression at once

and  drives  forth  simultaneously  the  power  of  representation,  imitation,

transfiguration, transformation, and every kind of mimicking and acting. The

essential feature here remains the ease of metamorphosis, the inability not to

react (similar to certain hysterical types who also, upon any suggestion, enter

into any role). It is impossible for the Dionysian type not to understand any

suggestion;  he  does  not  overlook  any  sign  of  an  affect;  he  possesses  the

instinct  of  understanding  and  guessing  in  the  highest  degree,  just  as  he

commands the art of communication in the highest degree. He enters into any

skin,  into  any  affect:  he  constantly  transforms  himself.  Music,  as  we

understand it today, is also a total excitement and a total discharge of the

affects, but even so only the remnant of a much fuller world of expression of

the affects, a mere residue of the Dionysian histrionicism. To make music

possible as a separate art, a number of senses, especially the muscle sense,

have been immobilized (at least relatively, for to a certain degree all rhythm

still  appeals  to  our  muscles);  so  that  man  no  longer  bodily  imitates  andrepresents  everything  he  feels.  Nevertheless,  that  is  really  the  normal

Dionysian state, at least the original state. Music is the specialization of this

state attained slowly at the expense of those faculties which are most closely

related to it. 11 The actor, the mime, the dancer, the musician, and the lyric

poet are basically related in their instincts and, at bottom, one--but gradually

they have become specialized and separated from each other, even to the

point of mutual opposition. The lyric poet remained united with the musician

for  the  longest  time;  the  actor,  with  the  dancer.  The  architect  represents

neither a Dionysian nor an Apollinian state: here it is the great act of will, the

will that moves mountains, the frenzy of the great will which aspires to art.

The  most  powerful  human  beings  have  always  inspired  architects;  the

architect  has  always  been  under  the  spell  of  power.  His  buildings  are

supposed to render pride visible, and the victory over gravity, the will to

power.  Architecture  is  a  kind  of  eloquence  of  power  in  forms--now

persuading, even flattering, now only commanding. The highest feeling of

power and sureness finds expression in a grand style. The power which no

longer  needs  any  proof,  which  spurns  pleasing,  which  does  not  answer

lightly, which feels no witness near, which lives oblivious of all opposition to

it, which reposes within itself, fatalistically, a law among laws--that speaks of

itself as a grand style. 12 I have been reading the life of Thomas Carlyle, this

unconscious  and  involuntary  farce,  this  heroic-moralistic  interpretation  of

dyspeptic states. Carlyle: a man of strong words and attitudes, a rhetor from

need, constantly lured by the craving for a strong faith and the feeling of his

incapacity for it (in this respect, a typical romantic!). The craving for a strong

faith is no proof of a strong faith, but quite the contrary. If one has such a

faith,  then  one  can  afford  the  beautiful  luxury  of  skepticism:  one  is  sure

enough, firm enough, has ties enough for that. Carlyle drugs something in

himself with the fortissimo of his veneration of men of strong faith and with

his  rage  against  the  less  simple-minded:  he  requires  noise.  A  constant

passionate dishonesty against himself-that is his proprium; in this respect he

is and remains interesting. Of course, in England he is admired precisely for

his honesty. Well, that is English; and in view of the fact that the English are

the  people  of  consummate  cant,  it  is  even  as  it  should  be,  and  not  only

comprehensible.  At  bottom,  Carlyle  is  an  English  atheist  who  makes  it  a

point of honor not to be one. 13 Emerson. -- Much more enlightened, more

roving, more manifold, subtler than Carlyle; above all, happier. One who

instinctively  nourishes  himself  only  on  ambrosia,  leaving  behind  what  isindigestible in things. Compared with Carlyle, a man of taste. Carlyle, who

loved him very much, nevertheless said of him: "He does not give us enough

to chew on"--which may be true, but is no reflection on Emerson. Emerson

has that gracious and clever cheerfulness which discourages all seriousness;

he simply does not know how old he is already and how young he is still

going to be; he could say of himself, quoting Lope de Vega, "Yo me sucedo a

mi mismo" [I am my own heir]. His spirit always finds reasons for being

satisfied  and  even  grateful;  and  at  times  he  touches  on  the  cheerful

transcendency  of  the  worthy  gentleman  who  returned  from  an  amorous

rendezvous, tamquiam re bene gesta [as if he had accomplished his mission].

"Ut desint vires," he said gratefully, "tamen est laudanda voluptas" [Though

the power is lacking, the lust is nevertheless praiseworthy]. 14 Anti-Darwin. -

- As for the famous "struggle for existence," so far it seems to me to be

asserted  rather  than  proved.  It  occurs,  but  as  an  exception;  the  total

appearance  of  life  is  not  the  extremity,  not  starvation,  but  rather  riches,

profusion,  even  absurd  squandering--and  where  there  is  struggle,  it  is  a

struggle for power. One should not mistake Malthus for nature. Assuming,

however, that there is such a struggle for existence--and, indeed, it occurs--its

result is unfortunately the opposite of what Darwin's school desires, and of

what one might perhaps desire with them--namely, in favor of the strong, the

privileged, the fortunate exceptions. The species do not grow in perfection:

the  weak  prevail  over  the  strong  again  and  again,  for  they  are  the  great

majority--and they are also more intelligent. Darwin forgot the spirit (that is

English!); the weak have more spirit. One must need spirit to acquire spirit;

one loses it when one no longer needs it. Whoever has strength dispenses

with the spirit ("Let it go!" they think in Germany today; "the Reich must still

remain to us"). It will be noted that by "spirit" I mean care, patience, cunning,

simulation,  great  self-control,  and  everything  that  is  mimicry  (the  latter

includes a great deal of so-called virtue). 15 Casuistry of Psychologists. --

This man knows human nature; why does he really study people? He wants to

seize  little  advantages  over  them--or  big  ones,  for  that  matter--he  is  a

politician. That one over there also knows human nature, and you say that he

seeks no profit for himself, that he is thoroughly "impersonal." Look more

closely! Perhaps he even wants a worse advantage to feel superior to other

human beings, to be able to look down on them, and no longer to mistake

himself  for  one  of  them.  This  "impersonal"  type  as  a  despiser  of  human

beings,  while  the  first  type  is  the  more  humane  species,  appearancesnotwithstanding.  At  least  he  places  himself  on  the  same  plane,  he  places

himself among them. 16 The psychological tact of the Germans seems very

questionable  to  me,  in  view  of  quite  a  number  of  cases  which  modesty

prevents me from enumerating. In one case I shall not lack a great occasion to

substantiate my thesis: I bear the Germans a grudge for having made such a

mistake about Kant and his "backdoor philosophy," as I call it--for that was

not the type of intellectual integrity. The other thing I do not like to hear is a

notorious "and": the Germans say "Goethe and Schiller"--I am afraid they say

"Schiller and Goethe." Don't they know this Schiller yet? And there are even

worse  "ands";  with  my  own  ears  I  have  heard,  if  only  among  university

professors,  "Schopenhauer  and  Hartmann."  17  The  most  spiritual  human

beings, if we assume that they are the most courageous, also experience by

far the most painful tragedies: but just for that reason they honor life because

it  pits  its  greatest  opposition  against  them.  18  On  the  "intellectual

conscience." -- Nothing seems rarer to me today than genuine hypocrisy. I

greatly suspect that the soft air of our culture is insalubrious for this plant.

Hypocrisy belongs in the ages of strong faith when, even though constrained

to display another faith, one did not abandon one's own faith. Today one does

abandon it; or, even more commonly, one adds a second faith--and in either

case one remains honest. Without a doubt, a very much greater number of

convictions is possible today than formerly: "possible" means permissible,

which  means  harmless.  This  begets  tolerance  toward  oneself.  Tolerance

toward  oneself  permits  several  convictions  and  they  get  along  with  each

other:  they  are  careful,  like  all  the  rest  of  the  world,  not  to  compromise

themselves. How does one compromise oneself today? If one is consistent. If

one proceeds in a straight line. If one is not ambiguous enough to permit five

conflicting interpretations. If one is genuine. I fear greatly that modern man is

simply too comfortable for some vices, so that they die out by default. All

evil that is a function of a strong will--and perhaps there is no evil without

strength of will--degenerates into virtue in our tepid air. The few hypocrites

whom I have met imitated hypocrisy: like almost every tenth person today,

they were actors. 19 Beautiful and ugly ["fair and foul"]. -- Nothing is more

conditional--or, let us say, narrower--than our feeling for beauty. Whoever

would think of it apart from man's joy in man would immediately lose any

foothold. "Beautiful in itself" is a mere phrase, not even a concept. In the

beautiful, man posits himself as the measure of perfection; in special cases he

worships himself in it. A species cannot do otherwise but thus affirm itselfalone. Its lowest instinct, that of self-preservation and self-expansion, still

radiates in such sublimities. Man believes the world itself to be overloaded

with  beauty--and  he  forgets  himself  as  the  cause  of  this.  He  alone  has

presented  the  world  with  beauty--alas!  only  with  a  very  human,  all-too-

human  beauty.  At  bottom,  man  mirrors  himself  in  things;  he  considers

everything beautiful that reflects his own image: the judgment "beautiful" is

the vanity of his species. For a little suspicion may whisper this question into

the skeptic's ear: Is the world really beautified by the fact that man thinks it

beautiful? He has humanized it, that is all. But nothing, absolutely nothing,

guarantees that man should be the model of beauty. Who knows what he

looks like in the eyes of a higher judge of beauty? Daring perhaps? Perhaps

even amusing? Perhaps a little arbitrary? "O Dionysus, divine one, why do

you pull me by my ears?" Ariadne once asked her philosophic lover during

one of those famous dialogues on Naxos. "I find a kind of humor in your ears,

Ariadne: why are they not even longer?" 20 Nothing is beautiful, except man

alone: all aesthetics rests upon this na�vete, which is its first truth. Let us

immediately add the second: nothing is ugly except the degenerating man--

and  with  this  the  realm  of  aesthetic  judgment  is  circumscribed.

Physiologically, everything ugly weakens and saddens man. It reminds him

of decay, danger, impotence; it actually deprives him of strength. One can

measure  the  effect  of  the  ugly  with  a  dynamometer.  Wherever  man  is

depressed at all, he senses the proximity of something "ugly." His feeling of

power, his will to power, his courage, his pride--all fall with the ugly and rise

with the beautiful. In both cases we draw an inference: the premises for it are

piled up in the greatest abundance in instinct. The ugly is understood as a

sign  and  symptom  of  degeneration:  whatever  reminds  us  in  the  least  of

degeneration  causes  in  us  the  judgment  of  "ugly."  Every  suggestion  of

exhaustion, of heaviness, of age, of weariness; every kind of lack of freedom,

such as cramps, such as paralysis; and above all, the smell, the color, the

form of dissolution, of decomposition--even in the ultimate attenuation into a

symbol--all evoke the same reaction, the value judgment, "ugly." A hatred is

aroused--but whom does man hate then? There is no doubt: the decline of his

type. Here he hates out of the deepest instinct of the species; in this hatred

there  is  a  shudder,  caution,  depth,  farsightedness--it  is  the  deepest  hatred

there  is.  It  is  because  of  this  that  art  is  deep.  21  Schopenhauer.  --

Schopenhauer, the last German worthy of consideration (who represents a

European event like Goethe, like Hegel, like Heinrich Heine, and not merelya  local  event,  a  "national"  one),  is  for  a  psychologist  a  first-  rate  case:

namely, as a maliciously ingenious attempt to adduce in favor of a nihilistic

total  depreciation  of  life  precisely  the  counter-instances,  the  great  self-

affirmations  of  the  "will  to  life,"  life's  forms  of  exuberance.  He  has

interpreted art, heroism, genius, beauty, great sympathy, knowledge, the will

to truth, and tragedy, in turn, as consequences of "negation" or of the "will's"

need  to  negate--the  greatest  psychological  counterfeit  in  all  history,  not

counting Christianity. On closer inspection, he is at this point merely the heir

of  the  Christian  interpretation:  only  he  knew  how  to  approve  that  which

Christianity had repudiated, the great cultural facts of humanity--albeit in a

Christian, that is, nihilistic, manner (namely, as ways of "redemption," as

anticipations of "redemption," as stimuli of the need for "redemption"). 22 I

take a single case. Schopenhauer speaks of beauty with a melancholy fervor.

Why? Because he sees in it a bridge on which one will go farther, or develop

a thirst to go farther. Beauty is for him a momentary redemption from the

"will"--a lure to eternal redemption. Particularly, he praises beauty as the

redeemer from "the focal point of the will," from sexuality--in beauty he sees

the negation of the drive toward procreation. Queer saint! Somebody seems

to be contradicting you; I fear it is nature. To what end is there any such thing

as beauty in tone, color, fragrance, or rhythmic movement in nature? What is

it  that  beauty  evokes?  Fortunately,  a  philosopher  contradicts  him  too.  No

lesser authority than that of the divine Plato (so Schopenhauer himself calls

him) maintains a different proposition: that all beauty incites procreation, that

just this is the proprium of its effect, from the most sensual up to the most

spiritual. 23 Plato goes further. He says with an innocence possible only for a

Greek, not a "Christian," that there would be no Platonic philosophy at all if

there were not such beautiful youths in Athens: it is only their sight that

transposes the philosopher's soul into an erotic trance, leaving it no peace

until it lowers the seed of all exalted things into such beautiful soil. Another

queer saint! One does not trust one's ears, even if one should trust Plato. At

least one guesses that they philosophized differently in Athens, especially in

public. Nothing is less Greek than the conceptual web-spinning of a hermit--

amor intellectualis dei [intellectual love of God] after the fashion of Spinoza.

Philosophy after the fashion of Plato might rather be defined as an erotic

contest, as a further development and turning inward of the ancient agonistic

gymnastics  and  of  its  presuppositions.  What  ultimately  grew  out  of  this

philosophic eroticism of Plato? A new art form of the Greek agon: dialectics.Finally, I recall--against Schopenhauer and in honor of Plato--that the whole

higher culture and literature of classical France too grew on the soil of sexual

interest.  Everywhere  in  it  one  may  look  for  the  amatory,  the  senses,  the

sexual contest, "the woman"--one will never look in vain. 24 L'art pour l'art. -

- The fight against purpose in art is always a fight against the moralizing

tendency in art, against its subordination to morality. L'art pour l'art means,

"The  devil  take  morality!"  But  even  this  hostility  still  betrays  the

overpowering force of the prejudice. When the purpose of moral preaching

and of improving man has been excluded from art, it still does not follow by

any means that art is altogether purposeless, aimless, senseless--in short, l'art

pour l'art, a worm chewing its own tail. "Rather no purpose at all than a moral

purpose!"--that is the talk of mere passion. A psychologist, on the other hand,

asks: what does all art do? does it not praise? glorify? choose? prefer? With

all  this  it  strengthens  or  weakens  certain  valuations.  Is  this  merely  a

"moreover"?  an  accident?  something  in  which  the  artist's  instinct  had  no

share? Or is it not the very presupposition of the artist's ability? Does his

basic instinct aim at art, or rather at the sense of art, at life? at a desirability of

life?  Art  is  the  great  stimulus  to  life:  how  could  one  understand  it  as

purposeless, as aimless, as l'art pour l'art? One question remains: art also

makes apparent much that is ugly, hard, and questionable in life; does it not

thereby  spoil  life  for  us?  And  indeed  there  have  been  philosophers  who

attributed this sense to it: "liberation from the will" was what Schopenhauer

taught as the overall end of art; and with admiration he found the great utility

of tragedy in its "evoking resignation." But this, as I have already suggested,

is the pessimist's perspective and "evil eye." We must appeal to the artists

themselves. What does the tragic artist communicate of himself? Is it not

precisely the state without fear in the face of the fearful and questionable that

he is showing? This state itself is a great desideratum, whoever knows it,

honors it with the greatest honors. He communicates it--must communicate it,

provided he is an artist, a genius of communication. Courage and freedom of

feeling  before  a  powerful  enemy,  before  a  sublime  calamity,  before  a

problem  that  arouses  dread--this  triumphant  state  is  what  the  tragic  artist

chooses,  what  he  glorifies.  Before  tragedy,  what  is  warlike  in  our  soul

celebrates its Saturnalia; whoever is used to suffering, whoever seeks out

suffering,  the  heroic  man  praises  his  own  being  through  tragedy--to  him

alone the tragedian presents this drink of sweetest cruelty. 25 To put up with

people, to keep open house with one's heart--that is liberal, but that is merelyliberal. One recognizes those hearts which are capable of noble hospitality by

the many draped windows and closed shutters: they keep their best rooms

empty. Why? Because they expect guests with whom one does not "put up."

26  We  no  longer  have  sufficiently  high  esteem  for  ourselves  when  we

communicate. Our true experiences are not at all garrulous. They could not

communicate themselves even if they tried: they lack the right words. We

have already gone beyond whatever we have words for. In all talk there is a

grain  of  contempt.  Language,  it  seems,  was  invented  only  for  what  is

average,  medium,  communicable.  By  speaking  the  speaker  immediately

vulgarizes  himself.  --  Out  of  a  morality  for  deaf-mutes  and  other

philosophers.  27  "This  picture  is  enchantingly  beautiful...!"  The  literary

female: unsatisfied, excited, her heart and entrails void, ever listening, full of

painful curiosity, to the imperative which whispers from the depths of her

organism, aut liberi aut libri [either children or books]--the literary female:

educated enough to understand the voice of nature even when it speaks Latin,

and  yet  vain  enough  and  goose  enough  to  speak  secretly  with  herself  in

French: 'je me verrai, je me lirai, je m'extasierai et je dirai: possible, que j'aie

eu tant d'esprit?' ["I shall see myself, I shall read myself, I shall go into

ecstasies, and I shall say: is it possible that I should have had so much wit?"]

28 The "impersonal" get a word in. -- "Nothing is easier for us than to be

wise, patient, and superior. We drip with the oil of forgiveness and sympathy,

we are absurdly just, we pardon everything. For that very reason we ought to

be a little more strict with ourselves; for that very reason we ought to breed a

little affect in ourselves from time to time, a little vice of an affect. It may be

hard on us; and among ourselves we may even laugh at the sight we thus

offer. But what can be done about it? No other way of self-overcoming is left

to us any more: this is our asceticism, our penance." Developing personal

traits:  the  virtue  of  the  "impersonal."  29  From  a  doctoral  examination.  --

"What is the task of all higher education?" To turn men into machines. "What

are the means?" Man must learn to be bored. "How is that accomplished?" By

means of the concept of duty. "Who serves as the model?" The philologist: he

teaches  grinding.  "Who  is  the  perfect  man?"  The  civil  servant.  "Which

philosophy offers the highest formula for the civil servant?" Kant's: the civil

servant as a thing-in-itself, raised up to be judge over the civil servant as

phenomenon. 30 The right to stupidity. -- The weary laborer who breathes

slowly,  looks  genial,  and  lets  things  go  as  they  may--this  typical  figure,

encountered today, in the age of labor (and of the "Reich"!), in all classes ofsociety, claims art, no less, as his proper sphere, including books and, above

all, magazines--and even more the beauties of nature, Italy. The man of the

evening,  with  his  "savage  drives  gone  to  sleep"  (as  Faust  says),  needs  a

summer resort, the seashore, glaciers, Bayreuths. In such ages art has a right

to pure foolishness--as a kind of vacation for spirit, wit, and feeling. Wagner

understood that. Pure foolishness restores. 31 Another problem of diet. -- The

means  by  which  Julius  Caesar  defended  himself  against  sickliness  and

headaches: tremendous marches, the most frugal way of life, uninterrupted

sojourn  in  the  open  air,  continuous  exertion--these  are,  in  general,  the

universal  rules  of  preservation  and  protection  against  the  extreme

vulnerability  of  that  subtle  machine,  working  under  the  highest  pressure,

which  we  call  genius.  32  The  immoralist  speaks.  --  Nothing  offends  the

philosopher's taste more than man, insofar as man desires. If he sees man in

action, even if he sees this most courageous, most cunning, most enduring

animal lost in labyrinthian distress--how admirable man appears to him! He

still  likes  him.  But  the  philosopher  despises  the  desiring  man,  also  the

"desirable"  man--and  altogether  all  desirabilities,  all  ideals  of  man.  If  a

philosopher could be a nihilist, he would be one because he finds nothing

behind all the ideals of man. Or not even nothing--but only what is abject,

absurd, sick, cowardly, and weary, all kinds of dregs out of the emptied cup

of his life. Man being so venerable in his reality, how is it that he deserves no

respect insofar as he desires? Must he atone for being so capable in reality?

Must he balance his activity, the strain on head and will in all his activity, by

stretching his limbs in the realm of the imaginary and the absurd? The history

of his desirabilities has so far been the partie honteuse of man: one should

beware of reading in it too long. What justifies man is his reality--it will

eternally  justify  him.  How  much  greater  is  the  worth  of  the  real  man,

compared with any merely desired, dreamed-up, foully fabricated man? with

any ideal man? And it is only the ideal man who offends the philosopher's

taste. 33 The natural value of egoism. -- Self-interest is worth as much as the

person who has it: it can be worth a great deal, and it can be unworthy and

contemptible.  Every  individual  may  be  scrutinized  to  see  whether  he

represents the ascending or the descending line of life. Having made that

decision, one has a canon for the worth of his self-interest. If he represents

the ascending line, then his worth is indeed extraordinary--and for the sake of

life  as  a  whole,  which  takes  a  step  farther  through  him,  the  care  for  his

preservation and for the creation of the best conditions for him may even beextreme.  The  single  one,  the  "individual,"  as  hitherto  understood  by  the

people  and  the  philosophers  alike,  is  an  error  after  all:  he  is  nothing  by

himself,  no  atom,  no  "link  in  the  chain,"  nothing  merely  inherited  from

former times; he is the whole single line of humanity up to himself. If he

represents  the  descending  development,  decay,  chronic  degeneration,  and

sickness  (sicknesses  are,  in  general,  the  consequences  of  decay,  not  its

causes), then he has small worth, and the minimum of decency requires that

he take away as little as possible from those who have turned out well. He is

merely their parasite. 34 Christian and anarchist. -- When the anarchist, as the

mouthpiece of the declining strata of society, demands with a fine indignation

what is "right," "justice," and "equal rights," he is merely under the pressure

of his own uncultured state, which cannot comprehend the real reason for his

suffering--what it is that he is poor in: life. A causal instinct asserts itself in

him: it must be somebody's fault that he is in a bad way. Also, the "fine

indignation" itself soothes him; it is a pleasure for all wretched devils to

scold: it gives a slight but intoxicating sense of power. Even plaintiveness

and complaining can give life a charm for the sake of which one endures it:

there is a fine dose of revenge in every complaint; one charges one's own bad

situation, and under certain circumstances even one's own badness, to those

who are different, as if that were an injustice, a forbidden privilege. "If I am

canaille,  you  ought  to  be  too"--on  such  logic  are  revolutions  made.

Complaining  is  never  any  good:  it  stems  from  weakness.  Whether  one

charges one's misfortune to others or to oneself--the socialist does the former;

the  Christian,  for  example,  the  latter--really  makes  no  difference.  The

common  and,  let  us  add,  the  unworthy  thing  is  that  it  is  supposed  to  be

somebody's fault that one is suffering; in short, that the sufferer prescribes the

honey of revenge for himself against his suffering. The objects of this need

for  revenge,  as  a  need  for  pleasure,  are  mere  occasions:  everywhere  the

sufferer finds occasions for satisfying his little revenge. If he is a Christian--

to  repeat  it  once  more--he  finds  them  in  himself.  The  Christian  and  the

anarchist are both decadents. When the Christian condemns, slanders, and

besmirches "the world," his instinct is the same as that which prompts the

socialist  worker  to  condemn,  slander,  and  besmirch  society.  The  "last

judgment" is the sweet comfort of revenge--the revolution, which the socialist

worker also awaits, but conceived as a little farther off. The "beyond"--why a

beyond, if not as a means for besmirching this world? 35 Critique of the

morality of decadence. -- An "altruistic" morality--a morality in which self-interest wilts away--remains a bad sign under all circumstances. This is true

of individuals; it is particularly true of nations. The best is lacking when self-

interest  begins  to  be  lacking.  Instinctively  to  choose  what  is  harmful  for

oneself,  to  feel  attracted  by  "disinterested"  motives,  that  is  virtually  the

formula of decadence. "Not to seek one's own advantage"--that is merely the

moral fig leaf for quite a different, namely, a physiological, state of affairs: "I

no  longer  know  how  to  find  my  own  advantage."  Disintegration  of  the

instincts!  Man  is  finished  when  he  becomes  altruistic.  Instead  of  saying

naively, "I am no longer worth anything," the moral lie in the mouth of the

decadent says, "Nothing is worth anything, life is not worth anything." Such a

judgment always remains very dangerous, it is contagious: throughout the

morbid  soil  of  society  it  soon  proliferates  into  a  tropical  vegetation  of

concepts--now  as  a  religion  (Christianity),  now  as  a  philosophy

(Schopenhauerism). Sometimes the poisonous vegetation which has grown

out of such decomposition poisons life itself for millennia with its fumes. 36

Morality for physicians. -- The sick man is a parasite of society. In a certain

state  it  is  indecent  to  live  longer.  To  go  on  vegetating  in  cowardly

dependence on physicians and machinations, after the meaning of life, the

right  to  life,  has  been  lost,  that  ought  to  prompt  a  profound  contempt  in

society.  The  physicians,  in  turn,  would  have  to  be  the  mediators  of  this

contempt--not prescriptions, but every day a new dose of nausea with their

patients. To create a new responsibility, that of the physician, for all cases in

which  the  highest  interest  of  life,  of  ascending  life,  demands  the  most

inconsiderate pushing down and aside of degenerating life--for example, for

the right of procreation, for the right to be born, for the right to live. To die

proudly when it is no longer possible to live proudly. Death freely chosen,

death at the right time, brightly and cheerfully accomplished amid children

and witnesses: then a real farewell is still possible, as the one who is taking

leave is still there; also a real estimate of what one has achieved and what one

has wished, drawing the sum of one's life--all in opposition to the wretched

and revolting comedy that Christianity has made of the hour of death. One

should never forget that Christianity has exploited the weakness of the dying

for  a  rape  of  the  conscience;  and  the  manner  of  death  itself,  for  value

judgments  about  man  and  the  past.  Here  it  is  important  to  defy  all  the

cowardices  of  prejudice  and  to  establish,  above  all,  the  real,  that  is,  the

physiological, appreciation of so-called natural death--which is in the end

also "unnatural," a kind of suicide. One never perishes through anybody butoneself. But usually it is death under the most contemptible conditions, an

unfree death, death not at the right time, a coward's death. From love of life,

one should desire a different death: free, conscious, without accident, without

ambush. Finally, some advice for our dear pessimists and other decadents. It

is not in our hands to prevent our birth; but we can correct this mistake--for in

some cases it is a mistake. When one does away with oneself, one does the

most estimable thing possible: one almost earns the right to live. Society--

what am I saying?--life itself derives more advantage from this than from any

"life" of renunciation, anemia, and other virtues: one has liberated the others

from one's sight; one has liberated life from an objection. Pessimism, pur,

vert, is proved only by the self-refutation of our dear pessimists: one must

advance a step further in its logic and not only negate life with "will and

representation,"  as  Schopenhauer  did--one  must  first  of  all  negate

Schopenhauer. Incidentally, however contagious pessimism is, it still does

not increase the sickliness of an age, of a generation as a whole: it is an

expression  of  this  sickliness.  One  falls  victim  to  it  as  one  falls  victim  to

cholera:  one  has  to  be  morbid  enough  in  one's  whole  predisposition.

Pessimism itself does not create a single decadent more; I recall the statistics

which show that the years in which cholera rages do not differ from other

years in the total number of deaths. 37 Whether we have become more moral.

-- Against my conception of "beyond good and evil"--as was to be expected--

the  whole  ferocity  of  moral  hebetation,  mistaken  for  morality  itself  in

Germany, as is well known, has gone into action: I could tell fine stories

about that. Above all I was asked to consider the "undeniable superiority" of

our age in moral judgment, the real progress we have made here: compared

with us, a Cesare Borgia is by no means to be represented after any manner

as a "higher man," a kind of overman. A Swiss editor of the Bund went so far

that he "understood" the meaning of my work--not without expressing his

respect for my courage and daring--to be a demand for the abolition of all

decent feelings. Thank you! In reply, I take the liberty of raising the question

whether we have really become more moral. That all the world believes this

to be the case merely constitutes an objection. We modern men, very tender,

very  easily  hurt,  and  offering  as  well  as  receiving  consideration  a

hundredfold,  really  have  the  conceit  that  this  tender  humanity  which  we

represent, this attained unanimity in sympathetic regard, in readiness to help,

in mutual trust, represents positive progress; and that in this respect we are

far above the men of the Renaissance. But that is how every age thinks, howit  must  think.  What  is  certain  is  that  we  may  not  place  ourselves  in

renaissance conditions, not even by an act of thought: our nerves would not

endure that reality, not to speak of our muscles. But such incapacity does not

prove progress, only another, later constitution, one which is weaker, frailer,

more  easily  hurt,  and  which  necessarily  generates  a  morality  rich  in

consideration.  Were  we  to  think  away  our  frailty  and  lateness,  our

physiological  senescence,  then  our  morality  of  "humanization"  would

immediately lose its value too (in itself, no morality has any value)--it would

even arouse disdain. On the other hand, let us not doubt that we moderns,

with our thickly padded humanity, which at all costs wants to avoid bumping

into a stone, would have provided Cesare Borgia's contemporaries with a

comedy at which they could have laughed themselves to death. Indeed, we

are unwittingly funny beyond all measure with our modern "virtues." The

decrease in instincts which are hostile and arouse mistrust--and that is all our

"progress" amounts to--represents but one of the consequences attending the

general decrease in vitality: it requires a hundred times more trouble and

caution to make so conditional and late an existence prevail. Hence each

helps the other; hence everyone is to a certain extent sick, and everyone is a

nurse for the sick. And that is called "virtue." Among men who still knew life

differently--fuller, more squandering, more overflowing--it would have been

called by another name: "cowardice" perhaps, "wretchedness," "old ladies'

morality." Our softening of manners--that is my proposition; that is, if you

will,  my  innovation--is  a  consequence  of  decline;  the  hardness  and

terribleness of morals, conversely, can be a consequence of an excess of life.

For  in  that  case  much  may  also  be  dared,  much  challenged,  and  much

squandered. What was once the spice of life would be poison for us. To be

indifferent--that too is a form of strength--for that we are likewise too old, too

late.  Our  morality  of  sympathy,  against  which  I  was  the  first  to  issue  a

warning--that which one might call l'impressionisme morale--is just another

expression  of  that  physiological  overexcitability  which  is  characteristic  of

everything  decadent.  That  movement  which  tried  to  introduce  itself

scientifically  with  Schopenhauer's  morality  of  pity--a  very  unfortunate

attempt!--is  the  real  movement  of  decadence  in  morality;  as  such,  it  is

profoundly  related  to  Christian  morality.  Strong  ages,  noble  cultures,  all

consider  pity,  "neighbor-love,"  and  the  lack  of  self  and  self-assurance  as

something contemptible. Ages must be measured by their positive strength--

and then that lavishly squandering and fatal age of the Renaissance appearsas the last great age; and we moderns, with our anxious self-solicitude and

neighbor-love, with our virtues of work, modesty, legality, and scientism--

accumulating, economic, machinelike--appear as a weak age. Our virtues are

conditional  on,  are  provoked  by,  our  weaknesses.  "Equality"  as  a  certain

factual increase in similarity, which merely finds expression in the theory of

"equal rights," is an essential feature of decline. The cleavage between man

and man, status and status, the plurality of types, the will to be oneself, to

stand out--what I call the pathos of distance, that is characteristic of every

strong  age.  The  strength  to  withstand  tension,  the  width  of  the  tensions

between  extremes,  becomes  ever  smaller  today;  finally,  the  extremes

themselves become blurred to the point of similarity. All our political theories

and constitutions--and the "German Reich" is by no means an exception--are

consequences, necessary consequences, of decline; the unconscious effect of

decadence has assumed mastery even over the ideals of some of the sciences.

My objection against the whole of sociology in England and France remains

that  it  knows  from  experience  only  the  forms  of  social  decay,  and  with

perfect  innocence  accepts  its  own  instincts  of  decay  as  the  norm  of

sociological value-judgments. The decline of life, the decrease in the power

to  organize--that  is,  to  separate,  tear  open  clefts,  subordinate  and

superordinate--all  this  has  been  formulated  as  the  ideal  in  contemporary

sociology.  Our  socialists  are  decadents,  but  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  is  a

decadent  too:  he  considers  the  triumph  of  altruism  desirable.  38  My

conception of freedom. -- The value of a thing sometimes does not lie in that

which one attains by it, but in what one pays for it--what it costs us. I shall

give an example. Liberal institutions cease to be liberal as soon as they are

attained:  later  on,  there  are  no  worse  and  no  more  thorough  injurers  of

freedom than liberal institutions. Their effects are known well enough: they

undermine the will to power; they level mountain and valley, and call that

morality; they make men small, cowardly, and hedonistic--every time it is the

herd  animal  that  triumphs  with  them.  Liberalism:  in  other  words,  herd-

animalization. These same institutions produce quite different effects while

they are still being fought for; then they really promote freedom in a powerful

way. On closer inspection it is war that produces these effects, the war for

liberal institutions, which, as a war, permits illiberal instincts to continue.

And war educates for freedom. For what is freedom? That one has the will to

assume  responsibility  for  oneself.  That  one  maintains  the  distance  which

separates us. That one becomes more indifferent to difficulties, hardships,privation, even to life itself. That one is prepared to sacrifice human beings

for  one's  cause,  not  excluding  oneself.  Freedom  means  that  the  manly

instincts which delight in war and victory dominate over other instincts, for

example, over those of "pleasure." The human being who has become free--

and  how  much  more  the  spirit  who  has  become  free--spits  on  the

contemptible  type  of  well-being  dreamed  of  by  shopkeepers,  Christians,

cows, females, Englishmen, and other democrats. The free man is a warrior.

How  is  freedom  measured  in  individuals  and  peoples?  According  to  the

resistance which must be overcome, according to the exertion required, to

remain on top. The highest type of free men should be sought where the

highest resistance is constantly overcome: five steps from tyranny, close to

the threshold of the danger of servitude. This is true psychologically if by

"tyrants"  are  meant  inexorable  and  fearful  instincts  that  provoke  the

maximum of authority and discipline against themselves; most beautiful type:

Julius Caesar. This is true politically too; one need only go through history.

The  peoples  who  had  some  value,  attained  some  value,  never  attained  it

under liberal institutions: it was great danger that made something of them

that merits respect. Danger alone acquaints us with our own resources, our

virtues, our armor and weapons, our spirit, and forces us to be strong. First

principle:  one  must  need  to  be  strong--otherwise  one  will  never  become

strong. Those large hothouses for the strong--for the strongest kind of human

being that has so far been known--the aristocratic commonwealths of the type

of  Rome  or  Venice,  understood  freedom  exactly  in  the  sense  in  which  I

understand it: as something one has or does not have, something one wants,

something one conquers. 39 Critique of modernity. -- Our institutions are no

good any more: on that there is universal agreement. However, it is not their

fault but ours. Once we have lost all the instincts out of which institutions

grow, we lose institutions altogether because we are no longer good for them.

Democracy  has  ever  been  the  form  of  decline  in  organizing  power:  in

Human, All-Too-Human (I, 472) I already characterized modern democracy,

together with its hybrids such as the "German Reich," as the form of decline

of the state. In order that there may be institutions, there must be a kind of

will, instinct, or imperative, which is anti-liberal to the point of malice: the

will to tradition, to authority, to responsibility for centuries to come, to the

solidarity of chains of generations, forward and backward ad infinitum. When

this will is present, something like the imperium Romanum is founded; or

like  Russia,  the  only  power  today  which  has  endurance,  which  can  wait,which  can  still  promise  something--Russia,  the  concept  that  suggests  the

opposite of the wretched European nervousness and system of small states,

which has entered a critical phase with the founding of the German Reich.

The  whole  of  the  West  no  longer  possesses  the  instincts  out  of  which

institutions grow, out of which a future grows: perhaps nothing antagonizes

its "modern spirit" so much. One lives for the day, one lives very fast, one

lives very irresponsibly: precisely this is called "freedom." That which makes

an  institution  an  institution  is  despised,  hated,  repudiated:  one  fears  the

danger of a new slavery the moment the word "authority" is even spoken out

loud. That is how far decadence has advanced in the value-instincts of our

politicians,  of  our  political  parties:  instinctively  they  prefer  what

disintegrates, what hastens the end. Witness modern marriage. All rationality

has  clearly  vanished  from  modern  marriage;  yet  that  is  no  objection  to

marriage,  but  to  modernity.  The  rationality  of  marriage--that  lay  in  the

husband's  sole  juridical  responsibility,  which  gave  marriage  a  center  of

gravity, while today it limps on both legs. The rationality of marriage--that

lay in its indissolubility in principle, which lent it an accent that could be

heard above the accident of feeling, passion, and what is merely momentary.

It also lay in the family's responsibility for the choice of a spouse. With the

growing indulgence of love matches, the very foundation of marriage has

been  eliminated,  that  which  alone  makes  an  institution  of  it.  Never,

absolutely  never,  can  an  institution  be  founded  on  an  idiosyncrasy;  one

cannot, as I have said, found marriage on "love"--it can be founded on the sex

drive, on the property drive (wife and child as property), on the drive to

dominate,  which  continually  organizes  for  itself  the  smallest  structure  of

domination, the family, and which needs children and heirs to hold fast--

physiologically too--to an attained measure of power, influence, and wealth,

in order to prepare for long-range tasks, for a solidarity of instinct between

the centuries. Marriage as an institution involves the affirmation of the largest

and most enduring form of organization: when society cannot affirm itself as

a whole, down to the most distant generations, then marriage has altogether

no  meaning.  Modern  marriage  has  lost  its  meaning--consequently  one

abolishes  it.  40  The  Labor  question.  --  The  stupidity--at  bottom,  the

degeneration of instinct, which is today the cause of all stupidities--is that

there is a labor question at all. Certain things one does not question: that is

the first imperative of instinct. I simply cannot see what one proposes to do

with the European worker now that one has made a question of him. He is far