Causality
1.0 The basics
Events cause other events to occur. Smith pulls the trigger, causing the gun to fire. Jones throws the vase against the wall, causing the vase to break. There are causes and there are effects.
Astonishingly, some philosophers have denied the existence of causation. Why? Because many philosophers are empiricists, and given an empiricist outlook, it is hard to accommodate the presumption that events make events happen. According to empiricism, all knowledge is strictly observation based. Thus, if you know it, one of two conditions is met: (a) you observed it (in other words, you saw it, heard it, felt it, etc.); or (b) you inferred it from what you observed, provided that you used no inference rules other than those of whose legitimacy direct observation apprised you. (See Chapter 13.) According to many empiricists, we cannot see or otherwise observe causal ties. We see events, but not forces. We see rocks strike windows, and we see windows shatter upon being thus struck. But we don’t see anything that, given such a collision, compels the window in question to shatter. Since we don’t observe causal connections, we don’t have good reason to believe them to exist.
But this argument involves a major non-sequitur. We don’t observe electrons or quarks, but we have good reason to believe them to exist. How are causal ties different? Given that it’s methodologically permissible to posit unobservable viruses and particles, why isn’t it equally permissible to posit unobservable causal ties?
“Because,” we are told, “the concept of a causal tie, unlike that of a proton or a virus, is an incoherent one. For that reason, it wouldn’t do any good to posit causal ties. Causal ties, if they exist, are occupants of space-time, like rocks and vases and chairs; and they are therefore just as incapable as chairs and rocks of being the “glue” that, supposedly, keeps the universe from powdering into so many renegade events.” But notice that the second argument, unlike the first, isn’t an empirical argument at all. It’s a strictly logical one. It is to the effect that forces are in the same category as square circles and therefore couldn’t possibly exist and, therefore, couldn’t possibly be observed. Thus, the first empirical argument against the existence of causal ties is parasitic on a non-empirical, purely a priori argument, and is therefore only as good as the latter. (An a priori argument is one that has its basis, not in observational data, but entirely in considerations of coherence and logic.) And the latter argument isn’t a good one. The concept of persistence is itself a causal notion, and anything that persists is, for that very reason, a causal sequence. Thus, we observe causal sequences whenever we observe anything. And we knowingly observe them. That is, we don’t observe them only in the
attenuated sense in which we are observing H2O molecules when we look with the naked eye at bodies of water. This line of thought will be developed in Section 5.3.
Much of this chapter will be spent evaluating the contention that we don’t see or otherwise observe causal ties. Although it has been enormously influential, it’s of doubtful accuracy, it’s of questionable coherence, as we’ve just seen. And the more it’s scrutinized, the more incoherent it proves to be. For example, the very notion of spatial occupancy is a causal notion, since a given thing’s occupying a given region R ipso facto alters the trajectories and velocities of other would-be and soon-to-be occupants of that region.
These points generalize. A “steel” object that lacked the requisite degree of malleability or thermal conductivity would ipso facto not be steel. Malleability and conductivity are causal properties. x is more malleable than y if, other things being equal, less force is needed to cause x’s shape to change than is needed to cause y’s shape to change. x has a higher degree of thermal conductivity than y if, other things being equal, less energy is needed to raise x’s temperature by a given amount than is needed to raise y’s temperature by that 
same amount. Thus, to describe a given object as being of made of steel is to say that, other things being equal, it will react to situations in ways in which it wouldn’t otherwise react.
In describing something as “self-identical” or as “being such that 1 + 1 = 2,” one is not making a causally loaded claim. But those characterizations say nothing about anything. In being told that x is “self-identical,” one isn’t being told how x is different from, or similar to, water or steel or the planet  or anything else. The same is true of all causally sterile characterizations. For that reason, anything that says anything about anything in the spatiotemporal world has causal content.Neptune
2.0 Causation a relation between events, not objects
But before we enter these stormy and controversial waters, let us make some non-controversial points about the logic of the concept of causality.
First of all, it is only events that can be causes. Objects are not causes. The rock is not a cause. The rock didn’t cause the window to break. What did so was some event involving the rock (e.g., the rock’s striking the window at a certain time).
Sometimes the way we speak suggests that, in our view, it is objects, not events, that are causes. For example, people say “Carter was the cause of the recession in the late ‘70s,” “Hitler was the cause of World War II.” But these statements are elliptical for “such and such events involving Carter (Hitler) were responsible for the recession in the late ‘70s (World War II).
In connection with this, we must distinguish between something’s being a cause, on the one hand, and its having causal properties, on the other. Non-causes may have causal properties. The rock isn’t a cause, as we discussed, but it has causal properties. The rock’s having a certain mass is among its causal properties, meaning that its having that mass is, or can be, a (partial) cause. (Not every property of the rock is a cause. The rock is such that it either is or is not identical with the number. But the rock’s having that property doesn’t cause anything to occur.)
We must also distinguish conditions from events. A condition is a relatively persistent state (e.g., the room’s having a certain temperature). An event is a change in conditions. But conditions themselves seem to be causes. For example, the water’s having a certain temperature is what caused the spaghetti in it to soften. At the same time, conditions appear not to be events. An event is, by definition, a change, whereas a condition is, it would seem, the absence of change. So if conditions are non-events and are also causes, then, contrary to what we earlier said, it isn’t events alone that are causes.
This argument overlooks the fact that conditions consist of events. The water’s having a given temperature consists in its containing particles that have certain kinetic properties. There is no heat where there are no events. A person’s being healthy (i.e., being in a condition of health) consists in that person’s body doing what it should. There is no life, and therefore no health, where there are no metabolic events. And although events do necessarily constitute changes, those changes may be, and often are, internal to conditions of changelessness. For the water’s temperature to remain at 101° for 5 minutes is for the changes undergone by its constituent molecules to remain within certain limits; it is for their mean kinetic energy to stay within certain bounds. For the water’s temperature to change is for their behavior to exceed those limits. What we call “conditions” are patterns of constant change (i.e., of change that occurs in a uniform manner). What we call “events” are changes in the manner of change. When the water’s temperature increases, the way its constituent molecules move about changes. When the water’s temperature stays the same, they still move about—they still undergo change—but the way they do so doesn’t undergo change: those changes fall within certain limits. So conditions can be causes. But since conditions, far from being the absence of events, consist of them, this is in no way inconsistent with our contention that it is events, and events alone, that are causes.
Nothing non-spatiotemporal can be a cause. There are causes only where there are changes, and changes happen in time. So universals, if they exist, are causally impotent. Many have concluded that, for this reason, they cannot be known and, therefore, that there is no legitimate reason to grant their existence. The idea is that there must be some kind of a causal connection between two things if one of them is to know of the 
other. For me to see the rock, it is necessary that light rays bouncing off it affecting certain sensory surfaces of mine. For me to know of Socrates’ existence, I must be on the receiving end of testimony, the vehicle for which is always some causal process (noises, light rays bouncing off of ink marks), that can be traced back to some state of affairs involving Socrates. One obvious way to generalize this line of reasoning is to say that there is never awareness where there isn’t a causal nexus.
For reasons given in Chapters 8 and 9, this conception of conception is erroneous; under no circumstances does a causal connection between two things by itself mediate the one’s having an awareness of the other. There is always a non-causal component to awareness, even to sense-perception, which, of all the many forms of awareness, is the one in which a causal connection between subject and object is most obvious. Further, for reasons given in Chapter 2, we do have good reasons to countenance the existence of universals, and no good reasons not to.
3.0 Causes as INUS-conditions
The things we describe as “causes” are really partial causes. Supposing it correct, the sentence “Smith’s drunkenness is what caused the accident” must really be elliptical for “Smith’s drunkenness is a part of what caused the accident.” Had he been driving a car with new tires on an open country road, instead of a car with bald tires on a busy city street, Smith might not have crashed even if he’d been drunker than he actually was. So it wasn’t Smith’s drunkenness or any other one thing that caused the crash, and was instead a confluence of circumstances. In some contexts—for example, those of a legal or ethical or psychological nature—the relevant partial cause might well be Smith’s drunkenness; and that seems to be what we mean when we say that it was the cause.
The complete cause of anything is very hard to identify. It is a matter of philosophical and scientific debate whether, given an event E happening at t, anything other than the entire state of the universe just prior to t can be the complete cause of E. So for all intents and purposes, the expression “the cause of occurrence E” never refers to a sufficient condition for E.
“Even though Smith’s being drunk wasn’t sufficient for his crashing the car,” it will be thought, “it was necessary for it. Had he not been drunk, he wouldn’t have crashed.” This is false. Smith’s being drunk wasn’t necessary for his crashing. If he had been sober, but had been driving too fast on an icy road, he might well have crashed.
J.L. Mackie (1917–1981) made it clear what is meant by “the cause of E,” as this expression is typically used. Smith’s being drunk wasn’t a necessary condition for his crashing. He could have crashed if sober. But his being drunk was a necessary condition for his crashing under the circumstances. Given that he wasn’t driving a high-performance car on a country road during a clear day, and given that he was driving a low-performance car on a rainy night on a busy street, Smith’s being drunk was, we may suppose, a necessary condition for his crashing. For it could be that, had he been sober, Smith would have narrowly avoided crashing, despite the rain, darkness, and faulty steering mechanism, and that it was only these things plus Smith’s drunkenness that led to the crash. So, if it is to be correct, the statement “Smith’s drunkenness was the cause of the crash” must be taken to mean Smith’s being drunk was under the operative circumstances necessary for his crashing.
There are just a few more points to make. First, given that Smith did crash the car, it follows trivially that a sufficient condition for his doing so was fulfilled. Second, whatever that sufficient condition was, it wasn’t necessary. Suppose that what led to the crash was Smith’s driving a low-performance vehicle on a dark, rainy night, while drunk. Even though, by hypothesis, that confluence of circumstance was sufficient for his crashing, it wasn’t necessary. Smith might have crashed even while, stone cold sober, he’d been driving a high-performance vehicle in broad daylight.
Thus, Smith’s being drunk was an insufficient but non-redundant part of an unnecessary but sufficient condition for his crashing. Smith’s being drunk was thus an “INUS-condition” for his crashing. For this reason, Mackie says that, if it is to express a true statement, “E was the cause of event E*” must be taken to mean that E is an INUS-condition for E*. In a word, “the cause” of an event is an INUS-condition for that event.
4.0 Aristotle on causality
Aristotle (384–322 B.C.) distinguished between four different kinds of causality: efficient, final, material, and formal.
x is the efficient cause of y if x makes y happen.
x is the final cause of y if y is an action on the part of some creature and x is that creature’s objective in performing y. Final causes are goals or objectives.
x is the material cause of y if x is the material that y is made of.
x is the formal cause of y if x is y’s form. (To expedite discussion, we’ll henceforth omit the obvious qualifications relating to the fact that Aristotle didn’t use English words.) Sometimes Aristotle uses the word “form” to refer to shape. But sometimes he uses it to refer to what he elsewhere refers to as “essences.” Those properties that are essential to a given thing jointly constitute its essence; and a property is essential to a given thing if that thing could not lose that property without for that very reason ceasing to exist. The italicized phrase is intended to indicate that the dependence-relation in question is not of a causal nature, and is instead of a logical or constitutive nature. In other words, that relation is comparable to the dependence that triangles have on being three sided, not to the dependence that mammals have on air.
Aristotle’s belief that things have essences is an incoherent one, and it’s a special case of an incoherence that pervades Aristotle’s conception of causality. It is essential to a thing’s being triangle-shaped that it have three sides. But a given triangle-shaped object’s continued existence needn’t depend on its continuing to have three sides. Things change shape. It is essential to a thing’s being water that it consist of H2O molecules. But a given puddle’s continuing to exist needn’t depend on its consisting of such molecules. Things undergo chemical changes without ceasing to exist.
Contrary to what Aristotle thought, dependence-relations don’t hold between objects. They hold between events or between statements, depending on whether they’re of a causal or a logical nature. To say that x’s having three sides is essential to x’s being a triangle is to say that “x is a triangle” entails that “x has three sides.” To say that x’s consisting of H2O molecules is essential to its being water is to say that “x consists of water” and “x doesn’t consist of H2O molecules” are incompatible statements. To say that treating children with kindness is essential to their becoming sane adults is to say that treating a child unkindly prevents them from becoming sane adults.
So-called formal causes don’t hold between events (or states of affairs) or statements; they hold between things. Thus, the concept of a formal cause is an incoherent one. So, for the same reason, is the concept of a material cause.
The concept of efficient causality clearly is a coherent one. There is such a thing as efficient causality. We’ll see in the next section that it isn’t the only bona fide form of causality. But it’s the most fundamental one.
What about (so-called) final causes? If, as Aristotle seems to think, final causes are goals per se, he’s wrong to describe them as causes. Goals per se do nothing. Goals are abstract objects and therefore do no causal work. What does do causal work is a given person’s having a given goal. My having the goal that
(*) I, JMK, get in shape
obviously does causal work; it causes me to jog around the block for hours on end. But (*) per se does nothing. Like all other goals, (*) is a proposition. My having that goal is my intending to make that proposition come true. But my having a goal is a garden-variety efficient cause. In general, goals per se, being propositions, aren’t causes at all. A given person’s (or creature’s) having a given goal is a cause. But it’s a garden-variety efficient cause. So in saying there are such things as “final” causes, Aristotle is either making the trivial point that a person’s having a goal can have effects or he is making the deeply confused point that goals per se can have effects.
4.1 The importance of the expression “in virtue of” in causal discourse
The expression “in virtue of” has an important place in philosophical discourse. (I will use “in virtue of” and “by virtue of” interchangeably.) Without this expression, or some equivalent, it would be very hard to say anything meaningful about causal explanation—or about non-causal explanation, for that matter. The meaning of this term is to be understood in terms of two parallel points, namely:
(i) it is states of affairs (or events), not objects, that have effects;
and
(ii) it is propositions, not objects, that stand in dependence-relations. 
For reasons that will become apparent, (i) and (ii) can be condensed into: 
(iii) dependence-relations hold between propositions, as opposed to objects.
A story will help us explain what (i)–(iii) mean. Despite being intellectually mediocre, Smith never loses an argument. He wins arguments, not by addressing points with counterpoints, but by bullying his opponent into submission. In this way, Smith recently won an argument with Jones, who is Smith’s superior intellectually. Thus:
(A) even though Smith won his argument with Jones, he did so not by virtue of making good points, but by virtue of bullying Jones.
What (A) means is that the cause of Smith’s winning was his being a bully, and not his being smart. (Cause: Smith’s being a bully. Effect: Smith’s winning. Smith wasn’t the cause of anything.) Thus, the occurrence of “by virtue of” in (A) is a way of encrypting a statement about states of affairs—of making them seem about objects, when in fact they are about states of affairs.
Even if Smith did make good points in the course of the argument, it doesn’t follow that he won by virtue of making good points. It could be that his making good points had nothing to do with his winning and that it was his bullyism that was responsible for it. In that case,
(A*) even though Smith won his argument with Jones, and even though he made good points in the course of that argument, Smith won by virtue of his being a bully, and not by virtue of his making good points.
Importantly, Smith could have won both by virtue of being a bully and by virtue of winning good points. In other words, his bullyism and his making good points could have been co-factors.
Let us now discuss (ii). Suppose that there are only three triangular objects in the world, x being one of them, and also that these three objects are the only green objects in existence. In that case, although “every triangle is green” is true, “x is green by virtue of its being triangle” is false. The right statement is:
(B) “x is a triangle by virtue of its having three co-planar sides, each of them straight, such that any two of them intersect and such that not all of three of them intersect.”
What (B) means is:
(C) The proposition that x is a triangle entails, and is entailed by, the proposition that x has three co-planar sides, each of them straight, such that any two of them intersect and such that not all of three of them intersect.
In what follows, I will use the term “fact” to mean “spatiotemporal state of affairs.” So a “fact,” as I’ll be using this word, is a distribution of mass-energy.
Suppose that, for reasons of physical law, nothing could be triangular without being green, and nothing could be green without being triangular. In that case, given some green/triangular object x, the fact in virtue of which x is green—in other words, the distribution of mass-energy in virtue of which x was green—would be spatially and causally indistinguishable from the fact in virtue of which x was triangular. Nonetheless, it wouldn’t be in virtue of its being a closed three-sided (etc.) figure that x was green—it would be in virtue of its having certain reflective properties. And it wouldn’t be in virtue of its having those reflective properties that x was triangular—it would be in virtue of its being a three-sided, straight-edged (etc.) figure. This shows that the meaning of (B) is (C). When occurring in statements affirming logical (as opposed to causal) dependencies, “in virtue of” denotes a relationship holding, not between things or even facts, but between propositions.
Given that the occurrence in (A) of “by virtue of” does denote a relationship holding between states of affairs, what are we to say? One response, of course, is to say that it’s ambiguous. But, in addition to appearing very wrong, this response is unnecessary. (A) doesn’t express an entailment. But it does express a dependence-relation holding between statements. The truth of Smith won the argument is, in this context, dependent on the truth of Smith bullied his opponent. In general, “in virtue of,” when occurring in causal contexts, can be interpreted as denoting a form of interpropositional dependence; and we may therefore condense (i) and (ii) into
(iii) Dependence-relations hold between propositions, as opposed to things.
4.2 Functionalism, content-externalism
According to a doctrine known as “functionalism,” it is wholly in virtue of what its causes and effects are that a given brain-state (or physical entity of any kind) falls into a given mental category. Anything that has certain causes and certain effects is ipso facto a belief that snow is white or a desire for a world peace or a vitriolic dislike of a certain piece of music.
Functionalism has no plausibility when it comes to sensations or, more generally, anything that has phenomenal content. But it’s widely taken to be correct when it comes to so-called “dispositional” mental entities such as beliefs and objectives. (I put the word “dispositional” in quotes because, for reasons that I’ll now give, I reject this way of characterizing the mental entities in question.)
Thus restricted, functionalism may initially sound plausible. But it has some grisly problems that a story will help to expose. While standing right in front of you, Jones, a demented acquaintance of yours, puts what is clearly arsenic in a glass of water. He then tries to make you drink the water. Jones is very strong and is also a trained martial artist; so while holding the glass in one hand, without spilling any of it, he puts in you a joint-lock and tries to pour the contents of said glass down your throat. You shut your mouth, and you twist and squirm. Miraculously, you break free and run out the door.
What caused all of this behavior? A good part of it was your belief that Smith was trying to make you drink arsenic. Another part of it was your belief that, were Smith to succeed in making you drink arsenic, you’d suffer some adverse consequence. Yet another part was your wish to not die. And, of course, other propositional attitudes of yours were determinative of your behavior. Supposing that x is the part of your brain that comprises the various physical structures and events that mediate these different propositional attitudes, it isn’t just x that makes you squirm and fight, and so on. Rather, it’s x’s being a belief that Jones is about to make you drink arsenic.
But functionalism cannot accommodate this obvious fact. According to functionalism, it is in virtue of what x causes and what causes it that x is a belief that Jones is about to do that. The causal relations fix the content, not the other way around. This means that, if functionalism is right, x’s being a belief that Jones is about to make you drink arsenic does nothing. In general, given any entity O that mediates mental state M,

O’s being an instance of M without effects. But this means that, if functionalism is correct, then the mental does nothing; it has no causal powers at all. Of course, functionalism is consistent with, and in fact depends on, the presumption that the brain-states that mediate mental states have causal powers. But since functionalism is inconsistent with the fact that in virtue of being mental states, brain-states are powerless, functionalism amounts to the denial that the mental (qua mental) has any causal powers at all. Given the fact that anything spatiotemporal ipso facto has causal powers, the reason being that occupancy of a time or a place is a form of causality, it follows that functionalism denies the very existence of minds.
According to a doctrine known as “content-externalism,” two people, Smith and Twin-Smith, who are exactly the same, leaving aside the remote causes of their current conditions, can have thoughts with different contents. So, because Smith’s current visual perception was caused by light that bounced of Mary, whereas Twin-Smith’s current visual perception was caused by light that bounced off of Twin-Mary, otherwise identical Smith and Twin-Smith are now having thoughts with different truth-conditions and, therefore, different contents. (Smith is thinking that person—viz. Sally—is tall. Twin-Smith is thinking that person—viz. Twin-Sally—is tall.)
To appreciate just what the content-externalist says, we must distinguish causal from constitutive necessity. Obviously people have different thoughts. And obviously differences in people’s personal pasts create many of the cognitive divergences between them. But the content-externalist is saying that, given two people who, like Smith and Twin-Smith, are now atom-for-atom duplicates of each other, and whose respective pasts haven’t so much as made a dent in the one person that they haven’t made in the other, those two people will think different things. They’ll have thoughts with different contents. One of them will think about Sally (gold, water, etc.), while the other thinks about Twin-Sally (fool’s Gold, etc.)
This view is incoherent. If Smith and Twin-Smith were to switch places, but everything else were held constant, neither would behave or think differently from how he would otherwise do so. Thus, to the extent that Smith’s mental content is fixed by factors that aren’t operative in Twin-Smith’s case, Smith’s thinking isn’t at all different from Twin-Smith’s. Any differences between Smith’s and Twin-Smith’s thoughts have some basis other than the differences in their distal causes. So to the extent that mental content is to be understood along content-externalist lines, it is without any causal powers at all, and therefore doesn’t exist.
As for the content-externalist’s contention that Smith is thinking that Sally is tall, whereas Twin-Smith is thinking Twin-Sally is tall, that is a non-starter. What Smith’s eyes tell him isn’t that Sally is tall. They tell him that a person who has certain features is tall. Given only what his eyes are telling him, Smith doesn’t know whether he’s seeing Sally or some Sally look-alike. To be sure, he may well know that he’s looking at Sally. But that knowledge won’t be based strictly on the content of visual perception. It will be based also on background knowledge that he brings to the present context.
Content-externalism embodies a failure to appreciate the concept meant by the phrase “in virtue of.” True-Smith and Twin-Smith aren’t doing the same things. Smith is one place; Twin-Smith is in another. Smith is looking at one person; Twin-Smith is looking at anther. But it isn’t in virtue of any differences in their respective mental content that Smith and Twin-Smith diverge in these respects. Since, therefore, no differences between Smith and Twin-Smith, or by obvious extensions of this argument, between any two people, are to be understood along content-externalist lines, mental content is causally important, and therefore non-existent, to the extent content-externalism is the right theory about it.
Tyler Burge (1946–), a leading exponent of content-externalism, deals with this by arguing that the notion of causality should be revised, so as to accommodate content-externalism. Were two qualitatively identical objects x and y to switch places but everything were held constant, this switch would be experimentally undetectable. But Burge says that x and y nonetheless have different causal properties. By thus reanalyzing the concept of causality, he safeguards content-externalism from the objection to it just considered.
This position borders on incoherence. It’s brazenly ad hoc. And it’s unnecessary, since the data is easily modeled without it. (See Chapters 6, 8, 9, and 18.) A thorough discussion of content-externalism is found on pages 207–507 of my book (2007) Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind.
4.3 Program-causality
We obviously know of many cases of one event’s causing another. We are inclined to think that, in each such case, the one event is the efficient cause of the other. Working jointly, Frank Jackson (1943–) and Philip Pettit (1945–) have shown this to be false. Given almost any known instance of one event’s causing another to occur, the one event is the program-cause, not the efficient cause, of the other.
What does the term “program cause” mean? Some scenarios will help us answer this question. There is a kettle on the stove. You turn on the gas. The resulting flame flames underneath the kettle to heat up and thus causes the water to boil. Let F be the flame. We’re inclined to think that F caused the kettle to heat up.
(i) F (or, in any case, F’s having a certain temperature) caused the kettle to heat up.
But only a tiny part of F’s surface was in contact with the underside of the kettle. Had the events at those contact points been present, the effect on the kettle would have been the same.
Another example: statements such as:
(ii) high-inflation led to crime, which, coupled with xenophobia on the part of the populace, gave the government a powerful incentive to scapegoat a foreign nation and go to war with them.
But causes are much more specific than (ii) suggests. Crime doesn’t do anything, and neither does xenophobia. Things are caused by specific people, performing specific criminal or xenophobic acts.
Last example:
(iii) The impact of the rock on the window caused the window to shatter.
This case is similar to the first. Only a small part of the surface of the rock came into contact with the window—and, in fact, those parts of the rock’s surface came into contact with specific parts of one of the window’s two surfaces. Had the events at those contact points happened, the effect on the window would have been the same, even if no rock had struck the window.
But if we say that (i)–(iii) are just wrong, our grounds being that a “cause” of an event E can only be an event that is directly responsible for E’s occurrence, then just about every single causal statement anyone makes will be wrong. But statements like (i)–(iii) obviously convey valuable information. So rather than say that they’re all just wrong, we should look for an interpretation of the word “cause” that validates those statements.
 and Petit have done just that. The form of causality mentioned in (i)–(iii) is program-causality. x is a program-cause of y if x consists of events that, in their turn, are directly responsible for y. A country’s being poor consists of various specific states of affairs—various specific people being without funds in various specific situations. The specific situations that constitute a condition of wide-spread poverty will directly cause crimes. And so on. F heats up the pan in the sense that among the events constitutive of F are those that heat up the pan; and it is in the same sense mutatis mutandis that the impact of the rock shattered the window. Thus, Jackson and Pettit have successfully validated ordinarily causal statements.
They make other important points. One would think that high-resolution causal information is better than low-resolution causal information. But this isn’t always so. What caused the house to burn down?
(SA) Arson on Smith’s part was the cause. He threw several Molotov cocktails at the house and up in flames it went.
SA obviously doesn’t give us the micro-story. For argument’s sake suppose that some long sentence MS does give us the micro-story. MS will be worthless in terms of giving us information about Smith’s character, and it will be equally worthless in other, comparables respects. There are many principled regularities of which this particular incident is an instance, and we blind ourselves to all but a few of them if we reject any story that
isn’t the micro-story. So the macro-story—or, rather, the various different macro-stories—aren’t inferior versions of the micro-story; they aren’t precursors to it that we’ll chuck when we have it. They expose regularities, structures, and counterfactual truths omitted by the micro-story. This shows that biology isn’t just bad physics, that psychology isn’t just bad physiology—it shows that different disciplines are dealing with different program-causes, and therefore distinct and very possibly sui generis nomic connections—that happen at least sometimes to be instantiated by the same efficient (micro) causes.
Predictions are almost always made on the basis of a knowledge of program-causes. To predict what’s going to happen, one must know of structures that can be depended on to yield certain outputs, given certain inputs. So far as one lacks such knowledge, one must make predictions on an ad hoc basis, and there are two reasons why this is a problem. First, sub-structural facts tend to be small—literally small. (Something is a structure only to the extent that it’s a cohesive aggregate of events. Something fails to be a structure only to the extent that it’s an isolated event. Thus, lone events tend to be smaller than structures by orders of magnitude.) And when they can be known, the process of learning about them tends to disrupt them in prediction-foiling ways. (See Chapter 14.) Also, structures comprise back-up mechanisms that ensure a certain outcome even if, because of some hidden variable, some rogue, structure-unfriendly event makes it through the gauntlet. If a salesperson working for megacorporation X unexpectedly quits, another takes his place. If one police officer doesn’t report for duty, another steps into the breach. It’s of the essence of structures that a certan amount of causal redundancy be incorporated into them. Where there isn’t such redundancy, predictions are easily foiled, since there is nothing to absorb the ripple-effects created by some rogue occurrence.
Given the dependence of predictive knowledge on structures and, therefore, on program-causes, it follows that knowledge of explanations is comparably dependent. The reason is that explanation is reverse-prediction. One predicts X when one identifies current conditions that, given known mechanisms, make X’s occurrence likely. One explains X when one identifies past conditions that, given known mechanisms, resulted in X’s occurrence. The concept of a program-cause, which was, so far as I know, first clearly analyzed by Pettit and Jackson, is therefore central to the concepts of prediction and explanation and, thus, to the theory of knowledge.
5.0 Hume’s first analysis of causality: causality = regularity
According to David Hume, nothing makes anything happen. There are no forces or structures underlying the various events that occur. There are just the events.
Why does Hume think this? Because he accepts a very strict form of empiricism, this being the doctrine that what is known is either (i) directly observed to be the case or (ii) is inferred from what is directly observed in accordance with inference-rules of whose legitimacy direct observation has apprised one.
Do we observe connections between events, Hume asks? No—we only observe the events. Thus, Hume believes, so far as you have empirical grounds for saying that the collision of billiard balls B1 and B2 caused previously stationary B2 to start moving, it’s because you know the following three conditions to be fulfilled (let E1 be the collision and let E2 be the subsequent displacement of B2): (1) E1 immediately preceded E2; (2) E1 and E2 are adjacent; and (3) any event similar to E1 immediately precedes, and is adjacent with, some event similar to E3.
Conditions (1) and (2) explained: If there were a spatial or temporal gap between the two events, we’d be unjustified in believing the first to be a direct cause of the second. Hence conditions (1) and (2). Condition (2) explained: If events similar to E1 weren’t typically adjacent with, and immediately followed by, events similar to E2, we’d have no reason to think that E1’s occurring had anything to do with E2’s occurring.
Hume thus proposes the following analysis of causation:
(HC1) E1 causes E2 to occur if E1 immediately precedes and is adjacent with E2, and any event similar to E1 immediately precedes and is adjacent with some event similar to E2.
5.1 Problem #1 with Hume’s analysis: It doesn’t distinguish between actual causation and pseudo-causation
This analysis is untenable. A story will help us identify one of the reasons why. Your dog Fido is an infallible earthquake detector. Whenever an earthquake is about to strike, he senses it, and barks hysterically and runs around in circles. One day, Fido starts barking hysterically and running around in circles. Sure enough, an earthquake strikes right then and there.
Hume’s analysis entails that Fido’s antics causes the earthquake to strike. Fido’s antics immediately precede the earthquake. (So condition (1) is satisfied.) Fido’s antics are adjacent with it. (So condition (2) is satisfied.) And such antics on Fido’s part are always adjacent to an immediately ensuing earthquake. (So condition (3) is satisfied.) Given that Fido’s antics obviously didn’t cause the earthquake, Hume’s analysis is wrong.
The real cause of the earthquake presumably created some disturbance that Fido detected, that being why he engaged in his antics. Thus, some one thing was responsible both for Fido’s antics and for the earthquake. The two effects fulfilled the conditions described by Hume. For this reason, the sequence they formed mimicked a bona fide causal connection.
When some one thing E1 has two effects E2 and E3 that appear to be related as cause and effect, respectively, we say that the sequence consisting of E2 and E3 is a “pseudo-causal process” or, alternately, a case of “epiphenomenal causation.” Hume’s analysis cannot distinguish epiphenomenal causation from actual causation.
5.2 Problem #2: Hume’s analysis entails that events can’t be space-time neighbors without one of them causing the other to occur
If E1 and E2 are any two spatiotemporally adjacent events, it’s easy to find categories K1 and K2 such that E1 and E2 belong to K1 and K2, respectively, and such that any instance of K1 immediately precedes, and is adjacent with, some instance of . Though he doesn’t know it, Bob is due for a heart attack. Right before the heart attack, Sally gently hugs him. Given the almost certainly correct supposition that nobody who is exactly Sally’s height has ever hugged anyone who is exactly Bob’s height, it follows that any hug involving people with heights m (Sally’s height) and n (Bob’s height) immediately precedes and is adjacent with a case of somebody of height n having a heart attack. (So if K1 is the category of hugs involving people with heights m and n, and K2 is the category of people with heights n having heart attacks, any event E1 that belongs to K1 immediately precedes and is adjacent with some event E2 that is a member of .) So Hume’s analysis has the false consequence that the hug caused the heart attack. Given any two spatiotemporally adjacent events x and y, a similar argument shows that, if Hume’s analysis is right, x caused y. Since not all such pairs of events are related as cause and effect, Hume’s analysis is false.K2K2
In response to this it will be said that:
The categories in question must be relevant ones. K1 and  won’t do. They’re the wrong ones. All you’ve shown is that Hume’s analysis must be modified. Instead of:K2
(HC1) E1 causes E2 to occur if E1 immediately precedes and is adjacent with E2, and any event similar to E1 immediately precedes and is adjacent with some event similar to E2,
Hume should have said:
(HCI#) E1 causes E2 to occur if E1 immediately precedes and is adjacent with E2, and any event relevantly similar to E1 immediately precedes and is adjacent with some event relevantly similar to E2.
This proposal doesn’t work. Given any two spatiotemporally adjacent events, each of those two events will belong to many different categories. Hume’s analysis is powerless to tell us whether the one caused the other

until we select the relevant categories. But we can’t select the relevant categories until we have the very knowledge that Hume’s analysis is supposed to give us. It is only because we already know that the hug isn’t what caused the heart attack that we know that K1 and  aren’t relevant categories.K2
A related point is that HC1# is viciously circular. Supposing that E1 directly causes E2, for K1 and K2 to be the “relevant” categories is for it to be the case that it’s because E1 and E2 belong to them that those events are related as cause and effect. Thus, HCI# collapses into the viciously circular statement that:
(HC1+) E1 causes E2 to occur if E1 immediately precedes and is adjacent with E2, and anything like E1 causes something like E2 to occur.
5.3 Problem #3: Hume’s analysis is viciously circular
According to Hume, x is a cause of y only if x and y are space-time neighbors. Thus, Hume analyzes the concept of causality in terms of the concepts of space and time. Were it to turn out that the concepts of space and time are themselves to be understood in terms of the concept of causality, Hume’s analyses would be viciously circular. He’d be analyzing causality and in terms of itself and thus not analyzing it at all.
In fact, the concepts of space and time are to be understood in terms of the concept of causality, and Hume’s analysis is viciously circular for this reason. According to modern physics, E1 precedes E2 iff it’s possible for a signal beginning with E1 to be sent to E2. E1 and E2 are simultaneous iff it isn’t possible for a signal beginning with either to be sent to the other. Order in time is thus to be understood in causal terms.
So is order in space. Events happen in different places if, and only if, something can affect the one that cannot affect the other. If x and y are in coincident places, nothing can affect the one without affecting the other. If x and y are not in coincident places, something can affect the one without affecting the other. Thus, x and y are in different places exactly if something affecting the one may fail to affect the other. So if one says that x and y occupy distinct but adjacent places, or that they occupy some one place, one is ipso facto making a causal statement. Thus, Hume’s analysis of causality is circular, given that it analyzes ‹x causes y to occur› in terms of ‹x is spatiotemporally adjacent with y.›
Here is a similar line of thought. It would be meaningless to say that object x moved but that its causal liaisons to other object didn’t change for that very reason. If I approach you, my causal relations to you change, and so do your causal relations to me. But after those changes are set aside, there is nothing left. There is no “pure” change in position underlying all the causal changes.
Also, the concept of spatial occupancy is a causal concept. What is it for me to be occupying this place? It is for it to be harder than it would otherwise be for you to enter this place. It makes no sense to say: “x is occupying spatial region R, but x’s occupancy of R has no effect on what things besides x must do to occupy R.” To occupy a place is to make it harder, other things equal, than it would otherwise be for other things to enter that place.
Hume analyzes causality in terms of the concept of spatial occupancy. E1 causes E2 only if they occupy adjacent, or coincident, spaces. But since E1’s (or E2’s) occupancy of a place is itself to be understood in causal terms, Hume’s analysis analyzes causality in terms of itself and therefore doesn’t analyze it at all.
A corollary of the fact that spatiotemporal relations are causal relations is that, contrary to what Hume alleges, we do see causal processes and, moreover, we see them as causal processes. We see nothing instantaneous. Everything we see persists, if only for a short while. Anything that persists is, for that very reason, a causal process; and anything that is seen as persisting, which is everything that is seen, is, for that very reason, seen as a causal process.
There are two views as to what space and time are. According to the one view, space and time are not empty containers. Spatiotemporal positions are relations between events, and there thus couldn’t be a space-time empty of events. If this view is right, it’s meaningless to say some object just approaches some other. For x to precede y isn’t for x’s position to bear a certain relation to y’s position. Given any spatiotemporal relation R, for x to bear R to y is not for x’s position to bear R to y’s position. There are no event-independent positions. Relations between positions are mediated between relations between events, not vice versa. It thus

makes no sense to suppose that there could be bare spatiotemporal interrelations or, therefore, bare changes in such interrelations.
According to the other view, space and time exist independently of events. A consequence is that spatiotemporal positions exist independently of the events that might (or might not) occupy them. Spatiotemporal relations holding among events are to be understood in terms of spatiotemporal relations holding among positions in space-time. This means that there are absolute positions in space-time. If this view is right, it does make sense to say that one event just precedes some other event, or that one event just happens to be equidistant between two other events, and so on. 
Bearing these points in mind, consider the statement that:
(IP) x immediately precedes and is adjacent with y,
and suppose IP to be true. If the first view is the right one, there are no event-independent positions. In that case, x’s being adjacent with y is a relation that holds directly between x and y, and to say that some position bears a certain relation to another position is to say that some event bears a certain relation to some other event.
If the second view is the right one, the fact described by IP consists in x’s occupying some position that bears a certain relation to a position that is, in turn, occupied by y. In other words, it is only because the positions they occupy are adjacent that x and y are adjacent. Thus, the second view presupposes that there are event-independent, and thus absolute, spatiotemporal positions.
Since Hume’s analysis presupposes the correctness of the second view, Hume’s analysis is refuted by the very empirical and philosophical arguments that show the concept of absolute position to be an untenable one.
5.4 Hume’s denial of causality based on a pseudo-empirical, crypto-a priori argument
Hume says that we don’t observe forces. But this seems false. When you are trying to lift a heavy suitcase or trying to arm wrestle a much stronger person, you are, so it would seem, observationally aware of a force.
Hume considers this very point. In response to it, he says that what you are aware of is a mere sequence of events. You have various perceptions. Some are visual—you see your opponent’s sweaty, determined face. Some are tactile—you feel your opponent’s increasingly sweaty hand. Some are kinesthetic—you feel your arm moving the wrong way. But, Hume says, you don’t perceive any force in all this—even though, because you are in the grips of some wrong theories, you think you do.
But this seems very wrong. It’s a datum that you feel your arm being forced to move in a way you don’t want it to be. That doesn’t meant that this feeling is accurate. Maybe it’s an hallucination, like one’s visual perception of a pink elephant. But it’s a datum that you have such a feeling, even though it isn’t a datum that it’s accurate. Plus, this response of Hume’s is decidedly contrived. If, in describing your arm-wrestling experience, you left out the part about how you felt as though your arm was being moved the wrong way, you’d be seriously underdescribing your experience.
Thus, if the observational evidence is taken at face value, there are forces. This doesn’t mean that the observational evidence should be taken at face value. But it means that Hume’s denial of causality cannot, if legitimate, be based on strictly empirical grounds. And this means that his empirical argument against causation is only as good as some other, purely a priori argument.
That other argument, it will be recalled, is as follows. (What follows is not a quotation.) “The very concept of a force is an incoherent one. Were they to exist, forces would just be more constituents of the physical world. They would thus be no more capable than vases and rocks and so forth of constituting the ‘cement’ of the universe. The idea of a force that wasn’t that sort of cement—that didn’t glue events together—is a contradiction in terms. Therefore the concept of force is an incoherent one.” We saw that vases and rocks are such cement. Any given physical object is a series of events any two of which are “cemented” together. Therefore, this argument of Hume’s is no good. Therefore Hume’s analysis of causality is no good.
6.0 Hume’s second analysis of causality: the counterfactual analysis
Hume gives two analyses of causation. We’ve just discussed the first. According to the second, for E1 to cause E2 to occur is for it to be the case that E2 wouldn’t have occurred unless E1 had occurred. This is known as the counterfactual analysis of causality (CF).
The motivation for CF is clear. The elevator comes because somebody pushed the button. If the button hadn’t been pushed, the elevator wouldn’t have come. The gun went off because somebody pulled the trigger. If the trigger hadn’t been pulled, the gun wouldn’t have gone off. No cause, no effect. Thus, ‹E1 caused E2 to occur› seems to be equivalent with if ‹E1 hadn’t happened, E2 wouldn’t have happened.›
CF must be distinguished from the related, but weaker claim that:
(CF*) Given any two events E1 and E2, such that E1 precedes E2, E1 caused E2 to occur just in case E2 wouldn’t have occurred unless E1 had occurred.
What is the difference between CF and CF*? For argument’s sake, let’s suppose that, given any mathematical truth T, Smith knows T, and that given any non-mathematical truth T*, Smith does not know T*. In that case,
(SM*) T is a mathematical truth iff Smith knows T.
But it isn’t true that:
(SM) For T to be a mathematical truth is for Smith to know T.
Similarly, given only that CF* is true, it doesn’t follow that CF is true. But if CF is true, it does follow that CF* is true.
CF and CF*, though different statements, are extensionally equivalent. In other words, given any two events x and y, if CF entails that x caused y, so does CF*, and vice versa. If CF is to be correct, it must be extensionally correct—that is, it must entail that x caused y just in case x did cause y. Given that CF and CF* are extensionally equivalent, the one is extensionally correct iff the other is as well.
6.1 Why, even if it’s extensionally correct, CF is false
Jones drinks poison and dies (at time t) as a result. (From now on, we’ll leave the “at t” implicit.) It may well be true that:
(SB) Jones wouldn’t have died if he hadn’t drunk poison.
SB obviously entails:
(WB) In W, Smith didn’t die,
where W is any possible world in which Smith didn’t drink the poison but is otherwise just like ours (or, in any case, is as much like ours as Smith’s not drinking poison allows it to be).
Question: Why doesn’t Smith die in W? Answer: because nothing causes him to. No cause, no effect. In our world, the cause is present. In W, it isn’t. WB’s truth is to be understood in terms of the fact that, in our world, Smith’s drinking the poison is what killed him. So SB no more constitutes an analysis of the statement “Jones died because he drank the poison” than “Smith believes that 3 + 3 = 6” constitutes an analysis of any fact about arithmetic. And just as Smith’s believing that 3 + 3 = 6 is to be understood in terms of the truth of

that statement, so WB is to be understood in terms of the truth of SB and thus in terms of the fact that Smith’s drinking poison is what killed him. In general, “E2 wouldn’t have occurred where E1 did not,” when true, is to be understood in terms of the fact that E1’s occurring is what caused E2. So even if CF is extensionally correct, it’s no analysis of the concept of causality.
6.1.2 The vicious circularity of CF, and an outline of a positive analysis of counterfactual truth
CF assumes that the concept of counterfactual truth is not itself to be explained in terms of the concept of causality. But that may well be false. The statement:
(SB) If Smith hadn’t fallen off the building, he wouldn’t have died
seems to be equivalent, or nearly so, with:
(SB*) Falling off the building caused an otherwise unthreatened Smith to die.
Not all counterfactuals register causal facts. For example:
(SH) If 6-feet tall Smith were half his current height, he’d be 3-feet tall,
is equivalent, or nearly so, with
(SH*) Smith is 6-feet tall entails anything that is 3-feet tall is half Smith’s height.
Notice that SH is analytically true, whereas SB is non-analytically true. It thus seems to me that counterfactuals are just disguised causal or logical assertions and that, consequently, alternative worlds have no place in any decent analysis of them. In any case, these cases provide us with evidence that counterfactual truth is itself to be understood in terms of causality and, therefore, that CF is guilty of vicious circularity.
6.2 Why CF isn’t extensionally correct
CF assumes that that there’s no causal redundancy in the world—that, were a given mechanism to fail, nothing would step into the breech. But sometimes there are back-up mechanisms. If, for some strange reason, electrocuting condemned criminal Smith didn’t kill him, the state would have found some other way to do so. Thus, the statement “the cause of Smith’s death was electrocution” isn’t equivalent with “if Smith hadn’t been electrocuted, he would not have died.” And this seems to show that CF is wrong.
Admittedly, CF has little trouble dealing with this case, and with many others of its ilk. Smith didn’t just die; he died in a very specific way. And he wouldn’t have died that way if, instead of being electrocuted, he’d been shot. This suggests that it’s only when events are seriously underdescribed that there appear to be counterexamples to CF.
But this maneuver doesn’t always work. A and B are both trying to push the same doorbell button. Since neither is aware of the other’s presence, each acts exactly as he would have in the other man’s absence. The button only has room for one finger. Both fingers get there at the same time, but A’s finger, being the bigger one, crowds out B’s. The requisite electrical signal is sent at time t. Had A been absent, B’s would have struck the same doorbell; and, given the rapidity with which B’s arm was moving, the electrical signal would have been sent at precisely t.
It may be that, were it not for A’s presence, B wouldn’t have pushed the doorbell in exactly the same way as A. (Our story may even require this.) But the signal is sent at the right time. And that’s all that matters. It doesn’t matter how exactly B pushed the doorbell. Doorbells are binary systems. The signal is either sent or it isn’t.
“But maybe the laws of physics don’t validate your point,” one might protest. “Maybe it’s a matter of physical law that nothing happens in quite the same way in a world where its actual cause is absent and some standin has to take its place.” (Let’s refer to this point as “LF”—short for “laws of physics.”) If correct, LF is a complete disaster for CF. First of all, LF is an empirical point. Empirical investigation might or might not bear it out. But even if it did bear it out, the mere fact that empirical research was needed to verify LF is enough to show that LF has no place in a philosophical analysis of counterfactuals. Such an analysis is supposed to identify what, as a matter of logic, is meant by statements like SB. It’s obviously an interesting question what the correct physical analysis of SB is. But here we’re doing logical, not physical, analysis; we’re making it clear what SB means. And surely what SB means doesn’t include some as-of-yet undiscovered laws of physics.
We may conclude that the counterfactual analysis of causation is a failure.
6.3 David Lewis’ analysis of counterfactual truth and his concomitant defense of the counterfactual analysis
Should it turn out that the concept of counterfactual truth has no logical integrity, it would follow that CF had no logical integrity. But we can’t know whether that concept has any integrity until we have an answer to the question: what does it mean to say that, if P had been the case, Q would have been the case?
The most famous analysis of counterfactual truth is due to David Lewis (1941–2001). His analysis is beautifully clear and straightforward. According to Lewis, the meaning of:
(KN) “if kangaroos didn’t have tails, they would fall over”
is this: “given any world W where kangaroos don’t have tails, kangaroos fall over, provided that W is as much like our world as is permitted by the fact that, in it, kangaroos don’t have tails.”
In general, the right analysis of counterfactual truth, according to Lewis, is this:
(LA) “given any world W where P is the case, Q is the case, provided that W is as much like our world as is permitted by the fact that, in it, P is the case.”
6.3.1 The role of other worlds in Lewis’ analysis
Lewis’ analysis obviously assumes that other “worlds” exist. This raises the question: what does Lewis mean by the term “world”? There are two options. Option 1: Like our world, these other worlds are space-time manifolds that are populated by objects and events. Option 2: These other “worlds” are representations of some kind or other (sets of statements, presumably). Let’s consider each option.
For argument’s sake, assume that these worlds are sets of statements. In that case, if LA is correct, counterfactuals merely register interpropositional relations. In other words, KN merely registers the fact that the statement “kangaroos don’t have tails” bears some sort of relation (presumably, one of confirmation) to the statement “kangaroos fall over.” But if that’s the right analysis, then until this relation is identified, LA fails to say what counterfactuals are. And once it does identify that relation, it won’t be necessary to talk about other worlds at all.
Lewis sees this and, for this very reason, he holds that the worlds in question are real worlds—space-time manifolds populated by events and objects. Lewis is thus a realist about other worlds.
6.3.2 Some consequences of modal realism
As you might predict, the standard objection to Lewis’ analysis is that:
We don’t know if there are other worlds. What we do know is that, even if there are other worlds, we don’t know anything about them. So nothing happening in these other worlds, if they even exist, justifies these beliefs or, therefore, provides the basis for our counterfactual knowledge.
That may be true. But let’s start out by granting Lewis’ assumption that counterfactuals, when true, hold in virtue of states of affairs that obtain in veritable alternative worlds. If we show that given this assumption, LA fails, then we’ve shown that it fails relative to its own terms and that there is thus no hope for it.
Let W be our world—the real world. In W, Smith intentionally shoots Jones, killing him. There were no other threats to Jones’ life; therefore:
(SK) If Smith had not shot Jones, Jones would be alive.
If LA is right, SK means the following:
(LASK): Let W* be a world where Smith doesn’t shoot Jones but that is as much like our world as that fact lets it be: in W*, Jones is alive.
In W, Smith doesn’t just shoot Jones. That event has a cause. (It actually has a plurality of causes. But for the sake of simplicity, we’ll just speak of “the cause” of that event.) Let E be that cause. Presumably E has as at least one of its ingredients Smith’s intention to kill Jones. But whatever E is, it can’t occur in W*, at least not in its entirety. So, in W*, either Smith doesn’t intend to kill Jones and therefore doesn’t shoot Jones; or he does shoot Jones, but Jones is wearing a bulletproof vest. It could be anything. To fix our ideas, let’s suppose that, in W* Smith’s hand seizes up just before he pulls the trigger; the gun drops; Jones gets away. Let E* be the event that, in W*, makes Smith’s hand seize up.
What we said about E is true of E*. E* didn’t just come out of nowhere; it itself had a cause. Let E*2 be that cause. And E*2 had a cause—and E*2’s cause had a cause, and so on. So, in W*, we have a long chain of events (E*1....E*n) not a single one of which occurs in W. Depending on how far back this chain has to go, it could make W* very different from W. In fact, W* might be so different that it might not be able to contain a Smith or Jones to begin with; and even if it did, there’s no guarantee that Smith would shoot Jones or that, if he did, Jones wouldn’t be wearing a bulletproof vest, etc.
Events have causal roots. Two worlds cannot differ with respect to a single event unless they differ with respect to all of the causal antecedents of those events. But, given that those go back to the beginning of time, that means that they’ll differ a lot—so much the one world becomes unable to validate the counterfactuals of the other.
It may be that some events are completely and entirely uncaused. But, in W, that happens only where micro-events are concerned. Smith’s shooting Jones (in W) is an extremely complex event, involving innumerably causally cohesive parts and having deep roots in the past. So even if some events in our world are uncaused, Smith’s shooting Jones isn’t one of them.
And even if it is one of them, it’s useless as far as LA is concerned. A logical analysis of LASK can’t assume the results of empirical facts not in evidence and, therefore, cannot assume that Smith’s shooting Jones is totally uncaused. In fact, such an analysis, being of a logical as opposed to an empirical kind, can’t make any empirical assumptions.
6.3.3 Some consequences of modal realism
But even if it could assume this, LA would still be in trouble. First of all, we can’t say that, in W*, Smith’s not shooting Jones is just as uncaused as uncaused as the event his doing so in W. In other words, we can’t say that,
in W*, Smith’s hand just seized up—that, in other words, there was no causal basis for it. For, to the extent that this event was uncaused, any other event could have happened instead of it. We could, of course, just stipulate that, in W*, Smith’s hand seizes up. But that won’t help. If, in W*, Smith’s hand just seizes up, then there will be at least one other world—call it W#—such that W# is just like W* except that, in W#, Smith’s hand didn’t seize up or, if it did, something else happened that led to Jones being killed. In which case, LASK will be false. For, contrary to what LASK says, there would be a world satisfying the relevant conditions in which Jones dies. It’s not a good idea, in general, to posit causal slack in the worlds we want to validate our counterfactuals, since that same policy makes those very worlds unreliable in the way of validating our counterfactuals.
Lewis’ own way of dealing with the problem is different from those just considered. In his view, some miracle happens in W* that prevents E from occurring there. So even though the natural laws in W* demand that E happen there (or, at any rate, demand it no less than the laws of our world demand it here), a “miracle” suspends these laws, and Jones lives.
Lewis is saying that, if a world validates LASK, there is some miracle in it (at a certain time, in a certain place). So W*, by virtue of being able to validate LASK, also validates the following counterfactual:
(MLASK) If Smith had not shot Jones, then a miracle would have happened.
W* is, by hypothesis, a world where Smith doesn’t shoot Jones but is otherwise maximally like our world. In W*, there’s a miracle (at a certain time and a certain place). So W* makes MLASK true if it makes LASK true. But MLASK isn’t a true counterfactual. And, of course, if a miracle is needed to validate MLASK, then a miracle will be needed to validate any counterfactual. What we just said about MLASK is true of “if Jones hadn’t driven drunk, he wouldn’t have crashed his car,” “if Brown hadn’t been so diligent in college, he wouldn’t have gotten into a reputable graduate program,” and so on. So assuming these counterfactuals were true, the same would hold of (e.g.): “if Brown hadn’t been so diligent, a miracle would have happened,” which is obviously a preposterous counterfactual.
Also, Smith’s (actually) shooting Jones is an enormously complex event, involving trillions upon trillions of mass-energy displacements. In W*, those events can’t happen. Which means that, in W*, it isn’t just one miracle that has to happen: it’s trillions upon trillions of them. Which, in its turn, makes W*’s relevance in this context extremely questionable. We’re finding that, in order to get W* to validate LASK, we have to doctor it—to mutilate it. But the very fact that we have to tamper with it—that we must employ such artifices to find a world that, in keeping with LA, can validate LASK—practically proves that LA is wrong. A theory that only doctored data supports is a bad theory, and Lewis’ analysis of counterfactuals is untenable or, at the absolute least, grossly undersupported.
6.4 How Lewis’ realism about possible worlds almost saves the day for the Humean
If we’re right, counterfactuals are identical with causal statements. According to David Hume, nothing makes anything happen. If Hume is right, it’s hard to see how anything could, in any real sense, cause anything to happen. But this seems a little strange.
David Lewis accepts Hume’s analysis. This is because, like Hume, Lewis is a hardcore empiricist and, for the same reasons as Hume, rejects the idea that there are forces. But Lewis rightly thinks that denying the existence of causality is going too far. He sees that, given a realistic attitude towards other worlds along with an acceptance of the counterfactual analysis of causality, the presumption that events cause other events to occur can be reconciled with Humeanism. (By “Humeanism” I mean the view that nothing makes anything happen.) For these reasons, Lewis says that:
(LC) In our world, event x causes y to occur if, given any world W where x doesn’t happen but is otherwise as much like our world as that fact permits, y doesn’t occur.
But we’ve already seen why this stratagem fails. Given that x occurs in our world, a world W in which x doesn’t occur will bear so little resemblance to our world that it won’t be able to validate the target-counterfactual (viz. “if x hadn’t happened, y wouldn’t have happened”).
6.5 The basic problem with Lewis’ analysis (LA)
We obviously can’t see or otherwise sense-perceive what is going on in other worlds; nor can we can sense-perceive evidence of what is going on in such worlds. Any knowledge that we have of what is going on in them is parasitic on our knowledge of counterfactual truths. So even if
(i) had x not happened, y wouldn’t have either
is true just in case
(ii) given an x-free world W that is otherwise just like ours, y doesn’t happen in W,
our knowledge of (i) has nothing to do with other worlds. This shows that we know (i) to be true because we know of some fact in our world that coincides with the fact registered by (i). Which, in its turn, shows that other worlds have nothing to do with counterfactual truth. Which shows that LA is false.
7.0 Humeanism and probability statements
In keeping with common sense, I believe that statements about the past confirm statements about the future and, more generally, that statements about the known confirm statements about the unknown.
It is hard to reconcile this belief with Humeanism. David Lewis is the only Humean who has even come close to succeeding in showing Humeanism to be compatible with the presumption that statements about the known can confirm statements about the known. To understand his argument, we must make a few preliminary points about probability.
Let’s suppose that:
(BU) At time t, there are 10 balls in the urn. Nine are white. The other one is black. And, at t, there’s nothing in the urn besides these 10 balls. You know all this. But this is all you know that’s relevant to the probability of your pulling a white as opposed to black ball out of the urn.
Even though BU isn’t analytic, and neither are the statements composing it, it does seem to be analytic that (“BB” stands for “black ball”):
(BB) given a single chance to pull a single ball out of the urn, the probability that you’ll remove a black ball from the urn is 1 in 10.
That said, it seems obvious that, given BU, it is analytic that BB holds.
But it isn’t analytic; it isn’t even true. Given only BU, you are no more entitled to think that you’ll withdraw a white ball than you are entitled to think that you’ll withdraw a black ball or a green ball or an iguana.
It may be that, given BU along with some reasonable assumptions (e.g., that it isn’t a law of physics that white objects cannot be displaced or that, at time t, all white balls in urns turn into black balls or green balls or iguanas), BB is analytic.
But if any one of the parenthetical assumptions is false, you have no chance, given BU, of pulling a white ball out of the urn. Since these assumptions, though perhaps obvious, aren’t analytic, BB doesn’t analytically follow from BU. For reasons analogous to those just given:
(WB) Given BU, it’s analytic that if only one ball is selected (not physically removed from the urn—just selected) there’s a 90% chance that it’s white
is false if the word “selected” refers to anything that takes any time at all (e.g., a psychological act or a physical process). It is only if that word is taken in some totally atemporal sense that WB comes out true. But, thus taken, WB says only that nine out of 10 balls in the urn are white if nine out of them are white.
In general, when words like “probable” (and “probability,” etc.) refer to statistical probability, they must be taken in a strictly non-temporal sense. The statement:
(*) given that, at time t, there are 10 apples in the barrel and only three oranges (and no other objects), your chances at time t* of selecting an orange are 3 in 13
is false. What is true is:
(*1) given that, at time t, there are 10 apples in the barrel and only three oranges (and no other objects), you’re chances at time t of selecting an orange are 3 in 13,
but only if the term “selecting” is used metaphorically. More precisely, (*1) is true only if it coincides with the trivial claim that, if 3 out of the 13 objects in the barrel is an orange, the ratio at that time of oranges to non-oranges is 3 to 13.
Of course, even a Humean can grant the truth of trivial probability statements, such as (*). So if, by some remote chance, it could be shown that non-trivial probability statements (e.g., given that, in the past, all metal has expanded when heated, it will probably continue to do so) could be identified with trivial ones, the Humean would be able to accommodate the presumption, so crucial to thought and scientific explanation, that non-trivial probability statements are correct. David Lewis makes a noble effort to do just this.
7.1 Why, for this reason, Humeanism can’t explain explanation
Let’s start by describing the viewpoint of common sense. In saying that Smith will probably disgrace himself at his job interview, given that he drank an entire bottle of gin right before, you are saying that he all but guaranteed an unacceptable performance at the interview. In saying that Brown’s victory is probable, given that he drugged his opponent’s water, you’re saying that he all but necessitated his opponent’s defeat. In these contexts, the word “probably” doesn’t have the emptily statistical meaning borne by its homonym in statements like:
(NC) Given that better than nine out of 10 people don’t own a pogo stick, a person chosen at random probably won’t own one.
If common sense is right, statistical probability isn’t explanatory probability (even though statistical probability is sometimes a consequence of explanatory probability: other things being equal, explanatory probabilities are expressed by statistical probabilities; and it’s from this fact that the Humean conception of probability derives what little credibility it has).
The Humean denies all this, since he thinks that nothing makes anything happen. But this means that he has trouble accommodating the fact that anything can ever be explained. A world where nothing makes anything happen is one where nothing has any roots—where, no matter what the conditions are any outcome is just as likely as any other.
The Humean has three choices: (i) reject the presumption that some things can be explained; (ii) stop being a Humean, since Humeanism is inconsistent with this presumption; or (iii) try to reconcile Humeanism with this presumption. Obviously Humeans choose (iii).
They defend this choice by saying that, contrary to what we said a moment ago, the concepts expressed by words like “cause” and “probable” are of a strictly statistical kind. “Given E1, E2 is probable” means “most events of the same kind as E1 are accompanied by events of the same kind as E2.” And, as previously discussed, “E1 causes E2 to occur” means “given any event of the same kind as E1, there occurs an adjacent, subsequent event the same kind as E2.”
The latter claim is a complete failure. As we saw in Section 5.2, there is no way to say what it is for events to be “of the same kind” as E1 or E2 that doesn’t render Hume’s theory of causality viciously circular. The very same argument mutatis mutandis holds in connection with the Humean theory of probability. But Lewis chooses to argue for this theory; and he does so very cleverly. So let’s hear him out.
7.1.1 Lewis’ argument
We’ve just seen that, even within a Humean framework, probability judgments are rational when they merely redescribe statistics—that, for example, (#) may be rationally accepted if it’s just a way of saying that, at a given time, one person out of two weighs more than 50 pounds. Probability judgments are irrational, given a Humean framework, when they involve extrapolations. Lewis’ metaphysical apparatus gives him a way of sidestepping this problem.
Bearing all of this in mind, let’s suppose that, up until time t, whenever a rock with a mass of m or more, moving with a velocity of v or more, that has collided with a window of thickness t or less, the window shattered upon impact. In that case, presumably, it’s reasonable to judge that, the next time such a rock strikes such a window, the window will shatter. The non-Lewisian Humean is stuck; he has no way to validate this presumption. The Lewisian isn’t stuck. Here’s what he says:
(LA): Let C1 be the class of worlds where, before time t, such windows shatter when struck by such rocks and where, after time t, such windows continued to shatter when struck by such rocks; and let C2 be the class of worlds where, before time t, such windows shatter when struck by such rocks and where, after time t, such windows didn’t shatter when struck by such rocks. C1 has more members than C2.
For the non-Lewisian Humean, judgments about what is likely to happen next time are great leaps into the unknown. For the Lewisian Humean, such judgments merely redescribe what is already there. To say that next time such a collision occurs the window is likely to break is to say that there are more worlds where it does break than where it doesn’t. If it’s given that exactly one of the cards in the deck is a King of Spades, it follows trivially that, given an arbitrary card, it has a 1 in 52 chance of being a King of Spades. Our judgments about what will happen to windows in future collisions are equally trivial.
7.1.2 Why this analysis fails
LA is obviously a clever analysis. But it’s false, and it’s clear why. Any knowledge we have of what happens in other worlds after t will be at least as uncertain as our knowledge of what happens in our own world after t. There are two reasons for this. Any knowledge that we might have about anything in other worlds will be at least as uncertain as any knowledge that we have about anything in our own world. Moreover, any knowledge that we have of what happens after t in other worlds will be based on our knowledge, so far as we have any, of what happens after t in our world. So LA goes through only if it’s assumed, question-beggingly, that we know what will happen in our own world’s future.
But there are deeper problems with LA. Here we must remember what Hume said about inductive inference:
(HA): Given only that such and such has happened, it can’t be assumed that such and such will continue to happen—unless it’s assumed, question-beggingly, that what has happened will continue to happen.
In general, given only that such and such is true of the known, it can’t be assumed that it also holds of the unknown—unless it’s assumed, question-beggingly, that the unknown resembles the known.
An analogue of what HA shows concerning inductive knowledge holds with respect to knowledge of other worlds. Given only that, in other worlds, such and such happens after time t, it can’t be assumed that such and such happens after t in this world—unless it’s assumed, question-beggingly, that what holds in circumstances already known to us also holds in circumstances not yet known to us. So LA goes through only if it’s assumed, question-beggingly, that inductive inference works.
One might object that
You (JMK) are missing the very point of LA. Supposing that there are 10 balls in the urn, and only one of them is white, the statement (“WB” is short for “white ball”):
(WB) the probability of an arbitrary one of them being white is 1 in 10
holds as a matter of definition and, therefore, can be affirmed without begging the question against HA. The beauty of LA is that it assimilates apparently non-innocuous probability judgments into the class of trivially true, totally innocuous probability judgments, such as WB. LA shows that:
(UB) the probability that future unsupported objects will fall is extremely high, given that all such objects (apart from helium balloons, etc.) have fallen so far,
which is non-trivial and (in this context) objectionable, is in the same category as WB, which is trivial and unobjectionable.
This point exposes a confusion that has vitiated the efforts of epistemologists and philosophers of science for centuries. This confusion is of such importance that it deserves a section unto itself.
7.2 Statistical vs. explanatory probability and the solution to the lottery paradox
The second word in WB is nothing more than a homonym of the second word in UB. In WB, the word “probability” has a purely statistical meaning. In UB, it has an explanatory meaning. Philosophers have tried to assimilate explanatory probability to statistical probability. And, while this may initially seem like good sense, it’s as misguided as trying to show that a bank (financial institution) is a certain kind of bank (river’s edge). This is made clear by the following paradox, commonly referred to as the “lottery paradox” (“LP,” for short):
(LP) There’s a lottery. One million tickets are sold. There’s one winner. So given any one ticket, the probability of its losing are 999,999 in 1,000,000. You buy a ticket. Let x be this ticket. You know that (“LT” is short for “losing ticket”):
(LT) the probability of ticket x’s losing are 999,999 in 1,000,000.
But do you know that it’ll lose? No. It may even have been rational for you to buy the ticket. Given what you stand to lose by buying the ticket and given what you stand to gain in the remote chance that you win, it may have been in your interest to buy it, even after you take into account that the chances of your losing is 999,999 in 1,000,000. But this decision couldn’t possibly have been rational if you knew that your ticket would lose.
In general, there’s no knowledge where there isn’t certainty. If, given the information at your disposal, there is any chance, no matter how small, that P isn’t the case, then you don’t know P. We all know (or so let us suppose) that:
(UB) the probability that future unsupported objects will fall is extremely high, given that such objects have fallen so far.
Is there any chance that, all of a sudden, unsupported objects will no longer fall? Yes. (The statement “all of a sudden, unsupported objects will no longer fall” isn’t ruled out by the laws of logic. So it could, theoretically, be true.) Therefore, you don’t know that they won’t fall; and, by obvious extensions of this arguments, you don’t know anything about the future (apart from sterile trivialities; e.g., “whatever happens, happens”). The very concept of “probable” knowledge is incoherent. The merely probable is ipso facto not known. To know it to be 99.9999% likely that unsupported objects will continue to fall is to not know that they’ll fall.
The problem with LP is that it uses the word “probability” in an equivocal manner. All LT says is that there are one million tickets but only one winner. UB doesn’t say anything of the sort. UB doesn’t make a statistical point. It doesn’t say: “nine times out of ten, unsupported objects fall.” It doesn’t say anything at all like that. UB makes a point about the relative merits of two competing hypotheses, these being:
(H1) unsupported objects will continue to fall
and
(H2) unsupported objects will not continue to fall.
UB is true if, given the data that we have, H1’ s being true would undermine the integrity of our belief system to a lesser degree than H2’ s being true. Given the information that we have right now (“SB” is short for “stilts beanie”):
(SB) there is only an extremely low probability that walking on stilts for an hour while wearing a beanie with a propeller on it is a foolproof cure for cancer.
Does SB say that better than nine cases of cancer out of 10 aren’t cured in this way? No. It doesn’t make any sort of statistical claim. SB is a claim, not about statistics, but about explanatory integrity. It says that more damage will be done to our belief system if it turns out that cancer can be cured in that way than if it turns out that it cannot. If, by some remote chance, cancer can be cured in that way, everything we “know” about medicine and pathology is false. But the damage wouldn’t end there. Our medical beliefs are rooted in general assumptions about the causal structure of the world. (For example, given the information that Smith has gone into anaphylactic shock whenever he’s eaten peanuts or anything with peanuts in it, even cutting-edge medical researchers will assume that Smith will go into anaphylactic shock if he eats peanuts that have been painted green. This assumption is rooted in generally held causal beliefs. No inside information is involved.) Were it found out that SB was false, many of the commonsense-based underpinnings of our medical beliefs would have to be reconsidered. But all of those beliefs remain intact if cancer cannot be cured in that way. It is improbable that walking on stilts (etc.) cures cancer to the extent that our current beliefs depend on its not being a cure. And it’s probable that walking on stilts (etc.) isn’t a cancer cure to the extent our beliefs depend on it.
In general, P is probable to the extent that our beliefs depend on it, and improbable to the extent that they depend on its negation.
7.2.1 Two kinds of probability
Explanatory and statistical probability are different things. Counterstatistical events are innocuous, but counter-explanatory events are not. Smith rolls double-sixes five times in a row. Statistically unlikely—yes. Important—no. Must we change our belief system because of it? No. Need we reconsider our assumptions about the basic structure of the world? No. And it makes no difference whether it’s five double-sixes in a row or a billion. The improbable sometimes happens, and that’s the end of it. When it happens, we have a nice anecdote for cocktail parties; we don’t have a situation worthy of scientific scrutiny. But we do have such a situation if it turns out that Smith is using telekinetic powers to make the dice come up sixes. For, in that case, some deeply held convictions of ours have to be revised.
In describing Smith’s rolling double-sixes five times in a row as “improbable,” what one is saying is very different from what one would be saying in describing Smith’s having telekinetic powers as “improbable.” In the first case, one is affirming a mere statistical improbability. One is saying only that such things don’t often happen. In the second case, one isn’t saying anything of the sort. One is saying Smith’s having such powers is inconsistent with some fundamental beliefs of ours—with beliefs that, if jettisoned, would take a lot of other, obviously (or at least presumably) correct beliefs with them.
Given any event, there is a way of describing it that makes it improbable in the statistical sense. In fact, any given event, described at all precisely, has a statistical probability of vanishingly close to zero. I flip a coin. Nothing improbable about this. But it’s a safe bet that no coin has ever moved in exactly the way this one did after I flipped it. Described as a case of my flipping a coin, the event isn’t improbable at all. But that same event is extremely improbable if described as a case of an object’s moving in manner M, where M is the exact way that it did move. But even though nothing apart from that coin has ever moved in manner M, that coin’s doing so isn’t a matter that deserves the slightest scientific scrutiny. Its moving in that way is consistent with everything we know about the world, and there is therefore nothing to be explained. But there is something to be explained if Smith turns out to have telekinetic powers, since his having such powers is improbable in the explanatory sense. It’s irrelevant that it is also improbable in the statistical sense. Every event is improbable in the statistical sense.
My winning the lottery is improbable in the statistical sense, but not in the explanatory sense. And that’s why, before the winner is announced, we can’t say that we know it won’t win: my winning is consistent with everything we know about the world. My sprouting wings in the next 5 minutes is improbable in the explanatory sense. And that’s why we can say that we know it won’t happen. It’s inconsistent with everything (or much, at any rate) that we know about the world.
7.3 Grue: the problem of counterinduction
A puzzle devised by Nelson Goodman will clarify, as well as support, what we’ve said (“GA” is short for “Goodman’s argument”):
(GA): Let’s invent a new word: “grue,” to be defined as follows. Something is grue if it is green before Jan. 1, 2010, or blue thereafter. So a shirt that’s green on Oct. 12, 2007, is grue, as is a shirt that’s blue on Nov. 11, 2012. Let’s assume that, before Jan. 1. 2010, all emeralds have been green. (From now on, we’ll abbreviate “Jan. 1, 2010,” as “2010.”) In that case, all emeralds have been grue prior to 2010. Anything that is green-and-examined-before-2010 is also grue. So the fact that all emeralds examined before 2010 are green means that all emeralds examined before 2010 are grue. We are assuming for argument’s sake that, given the fact that all emeralds examined before 2010 were green, we are inductively warranted in believing that all emeralds examined after 2010 are green. By that logic, it follows that, given the fact that all emeralds examined before 2010 were grue, we are inductively warranted in believing that all emeralds examined after 2010 are grue. But anything examined after 2010 that is grue is blue, not green. So, given that all emeralds before 2010 were green, our inductive grounds for believing they’ll be blue after 2010 are as strong as our grounds that they’ll be green.
The degree to which a given fact is statistically improbable depends on how it is described. Given some emerald x that was examined before 2010 and found to be green, “x is grue after 2010” is, from a strictly statistical viewpoint, equiprobable with “x is green after 2010” and also with “x is blue after 2010.” But that’s no cause for alarm. Statistical improbability is innocuous. It’s explanatory improbability that you have to worry about. But the explanatory probability of “x is green after 2010” dwarfs that of “x is grue after 2010” and, therefore, “x is blue after 2010.” The supposition that objects don’t change color (except under conditions that emeralds don’t satisfy, at least not in virtue of making it to 2010) is deeply embedded in scientific theory and also in the commonsense underpinning of scientific theory. If it’s wrong, then science is in serious trouble, and so is human knowledge in general.
In response to this, it will be said that:
If GA is right, emeralds that “turn blue” at the beginning of 2010 don’t change color. They stay the same color—grue. And emeralds that “stay green” do change color, since they go from being grue to having some other color. (Or, to be more precise, emeralds do change color at the beginning of 2010—but only relative to what one set of color-terms, these being green, red, etc. But emeralds stay the same color relative to different color terms—grue, bleen, etc.)
This isn’t true. Pictures of green emeralds (taken before 2010) show them not to have the same color as blue things after 2010. Grueness and greenness are different properties. But they’re not different colors. Grueness isn’t a color at all—it’s a color-related property. Let’s say that x is a “squiangle” (rhymes with “triangle”) if it’s square-shaped before 2010 and triangle-shaped thereafter. If, for some reason, some object that was square before 2010 suddenly becomes a triangle, it’s obviously changed shape. It used to have four sides. Now it has three. And a “squiangular” object that is square-shaped after 2010 has started—in other words, an object that had four straight sides, etc., before 2010, and continued to have that shape—hasn’t changed shape; it hasn’t gone from being a “squiangle” to being a square. It’s stayed the same shape. The same goes for “grue.”
7.4 Scientific explanation: Hempel’s theory
Let us now turn our attention to Carl Hempel’s important theory as to the nature of scientific explanation. Hempel’s theory is important because it is the clearest, purest expression of the Humean conviction that all probability is statistical probability and also because of the consequent fact that, given the enormously powerful hold of Humean ideas on methodological thought, all theories of explanation can be understood in terms of Hempel’s theory—either as versions of it or as reactions to it. Hempel’s theory is known as the “deductive nomological” account of explanation:
(DN) To explain an event E is to show that its occurrence is a logical consequence of the statement formed by conjoining statements describing known natural laws with statements describing the conditions under which E occurred.
I drop an otherwise unsupported object. The laws of physics being what they are, the object must fall, given the circumstances. And to explain that event is to identify known natural laws that, when conjoined with a correct description of the circumstances, entail that the object will fall.
7.4.1 Hempel’s analysis evaluated
What is meant by the term “law”? The most obvious answer is that a law is what is described by any true universal generalization—that is, by any statement of the form “all phi’s are psi’s.” (As we’ll see in a moment, this is not the answer that Hempel gives. But the problems with the answer that Hempel does give are to be understood in terms of the problems with this answer.) If the word “law” is taken in this way, DN has the consequence that the following counts as an “explanation” of the fact that the pencil on my desk is yellow (“NE” is short for “non-explanation”):
Premise #1 (description of the relevant natural law): Everything is such that it’s either yellow or it isn’t a pencil on JMK’s desk.
Premise #2 (description of initial conditions): x is a pencil on JMK’s desk.
Conclusion (thing being explained): x is yellow.
But NE isn’t an explanation of the fact that my pencil is yellow. The problem, of course, is that:
(YP) everything is such that it’s either yellow or it isn’t a pencil on JMK’s desk
doesn’t express a natural law. But why not?
Because, says Hempel, it doesn’t support counterfactuals. The statement:
(ME) metal expands when heated
expresses a law of nature because a piece of metal that isn’t being heated would expand if it were heated. Nothing comparable holds of YP. Given an arbitrary pencil, YP doesn’t entail that it would be yellow if it were on my desk. In general, says Hempel, laws are expressed by universal generalizations that support counterfactuals.
Hempel is surely right that a statement must support counterfactuals if it is to express a natural law. But DN collapses if laws are understood in this way. Let m be some unheated metal object. Why is it that m would expand if it were heated? Because, the laws of nature being what they are, heating m would cause it to expand. So the fact that m would expand if heated is to be understood in terms of the fact that ME expresses a natural law.
Remember what we said earlier about counterfactuals: they are thinly veiled causal statements. “Smith would be alive if he hadn’t jumped” means: “jumping is what caused the death of an otherwise unthreatened Smith.” So far as that causal claim is warranted, it is because there is known to be a law that, given the circumstances, demanded Smith’s death. The counterfactual claim is to be understood in terms of a causal claim, and the causal claim is to be understood in terms of a statement describing a natural law. DN thus becomes viciously circular if “law” is defined as “what is expressed by a counterfactual-supporting universal generalization.” 
Causal claims are themselves explanations. In being told that lung cancer is what led to Smith’s death, I’m being given an explanation, albeit an incomplete one, as to why he died. Counterfactuals, as we know, are identical with causal claims. It is only where explanations are already available that counterfactual claims are warranted.
By the same token, if we don’t know that it was arsenic consumption that killed Smith—or, if not Smith, then somebody else—we have no basis for affirming the counterfactual that Jones, who isn’t consuming arsenic, would die were he to do so.
Thus, we are warranted in affirming counterfactuals only where we already have explanations. So to understand the concept of law in terms of the concept of counterfactual truth is to understand the law in terms of the concept of explanation. Thus, if laws are understood in this way, DN is analyzing the concept of explanation in terms of itself.
So long as the concept of law is understood in terms of the concept of explanation, DN is viciously circular. Is there some other way to understand the concept of law? This question exposes a serious problem with DN. Hume tried to show that laws are mere concomitances. He denied the existence of causal ties; so he couldn’t take laws to be descriptions of such ties. And he therefore couldn’t take “metal expands when heated” to describe the connection that we presume to hold between x’s being heated metal and x’s expanding. He had only one option: the law isn’t some structure or metaphysical glue underlying the fact that the property of being heated metal is always found in conjunction with the property of expanding; the law is that regularity. Laws are the regularities that non-Humeans typically regard as their expressions.
The advocate of DN is forced to take this position. So long as he thinks of laws as being given by statements that describe structures of some kind—the structures that are manifested by regularities—the advocate of DN is analyzing the explanation in terms of itself. For it isn’t until there are explanations that there can be any good reason to posit such structures. The structure is posited to validate preexisting explanations. Which makes it viciously circular to understand laws in terms of causality. Which, in turn, makes it viciously circular to understand laws in terms of counterfactual truth, given that counterfactual truths are to be understood in terms of causality. If his position is to be free of such circularity, the advocate of DN must take laws to be mere concomitances. In his view, the law that all metal expands when heated is the regularity that, in the eyes of a non-Humean, merely expresses that law. In general, for the advocate of DN, laws are regularities—nothing more.
But in that case, any true universal generalization expresses a law. YP (“everything is such that it’s either yellow or it isn’t a pencil on JMK’s desk”) describes a regularity. It correctly states that nothing has the property of being a pencil on JMK’s desk on March 11, 2009, unless it also has the property of being yellow. But it doesn’t express a law.
If laws are identified with regularities, as opposed to the structures that (so non-Humeans think) underlie them, then DN ends up having the same problems as Hume’s analysis of causation. People often know what caused what, even though they couldn’t for the life of them identify the relevant generalizations. It often happens that, in order to identify the relevant generalization, one must know what caused and what—that one must already have an explanation of the event in question, if only a crude one, if one is to identify the relevant generalization. Jones wants to know why the car blew up. He thinks about the sequence of events that he just witnessed. Smith got into his car and turned the key in the ignition; the engine turned over; a moment later the car exploded. If Smith falsely believes that Brown used his telekinetic powers to blow up the car, Smith’s search for covering laws will be futile. It is only if Smith does have a correct explanation, if only an extremely low-resolution one, that he can even begin to search in a meaningful way for the relevant law.
Laws are hyper-explanations. (In this context, “law” and “statement that expresses a law” are used interchangeably.) They are explanations of the explanations. First there are the anomic explanations. (“Nomic” means “involving or having to do with natural law.” “Anomic” means “not involving natural law.”) The explanations that we come up with in everyday life are anomic—”heating it caused it to expand,” “falling caused him to break his leg,” “drinking arsenic caused him to die,” “being made of pinewood caused it to float when placed in water.” The laws explain these explanations. “There is an underlying structure that guarantees that a thing will expand if it’s made of metal that is being heated/that a person will break his leg as a result of such and such a fall/that a person dies if he consumes arsenic/that a thing floats if it’s pinewood in water.” Hume and Hempel believe that the event is to be explained in terms of the law; they believe that laws are logically prior to events. The events are to be understood in terms of the laws. But it’s the other way around. To be sure, once the law is in place, new and better explanations are possible. But those higher-level explanations stand on the shoulders of lower-level ones that model the data without the help of statements describing laws. Hume and Hempel believe that it is on the basis of their knowledge of laws that people explain events. It’s the other way around. People already have explanations—albeit low-level, low-resolution ones—of the phenomena; and on that basis they posit the existence of laws. Hypotheses concerning laws are distillations of existing, low-level explanations.
In conclusion, DN is viciously circular and is therefore a failure.
7.5 Explaining explanation
One principle always underlies the search for answers (here I am referring exclusively to attempts to answer empirical questions—questions concerning the spatiotemporal):
(MC) causal anomalies must be minimized.
Everything will be explained when and only when it is known, for any given state of affairs, what caused that state of affairs to obtain. If you know all the causes, you know all the explanations.
“But surely that isn’t true,” it will be said. “I can know what killed Tim (he ate fish), but not know how it did so. (Was the fish rotten? Was it poisoned? Was Tim allergic to fish?)” Yes, but knowledge of the how is knowledge of the what. How-knowledge is high-resolution what-knowledge. If all you know about the cause of Tim’s death was that it was brought on by his eating fish, then you don’t really know what caused his death. Your not knowing the “how” consists in your not knowing the specific mechanisms involved; and your not knowing those mechanisms consists in your not knowing the “what.”
That having been settled, let us turn to the question: how are causal anomalies minimized? The answer:
(ED) the elimination of causal anomalies consists in the elimination of discontinuities.
You see a red ball roll in one end of a tunnel with opaque walls A moment later, you see a similar ball roll out the other end. Given this information, it is natural to suppose that
(H1) the ball you saw entering the tunnel rolled from one end of it to the other and then exited it.
It’s a theoretical possibility that H1 isn’t the right explanation. Maybe what you saw is part of a magic-trick. But other things being equal, H1 is almost certainly correct. And even if it isn’t correct, it’s obviously a very reasonable hypothesis. The reason is that it eliminates the discontinuities in the events that you observed by supplementing them with events that you did not observe. Your observations tell you that some ball was instantaneously annihilated and that some other ball instantaneously popped into existence a few feet away. But if H1 is correct, none of these apparent discontinuities is an actual discontinuity. At least part of what makes H1 a good hypothesis is that, to the extent that it’s correct, reality is continuous. This suggests that to explain is to eliminate discontinuities. Explanation is discontinuity-elimination.
In response to this, it will be said that:
(OH) We can use your own example to prove that, contrary to what you are alleging, explanation is not the same thing as discontinuity-elimination. A ball rolls into one end of a tunnel and a similar ball rolls out the other. But the second ball isn’t identical with the first. The first was obliterated the moment it was completely inside the tunnel. At that instant, an iguana suddenly materialized in the place previously occupied by the ball. That iguana ran from one end of the tunnel. But just before it would have emerged from the other end of the tunnel, the iguana hit a force field. Because of that collision, the iguana turned into a ball just like the one that entered the tunnel and, in addition, that ball rolled out of the tunnel.
Let H2 be this hypothesis. H2 eliminates each of the discontinuities eliminated by H1. But whereas H1 is a good hypothesis, H2 is rubbish. So you’re wrong: to explain is not to eliminate discontinuities.
OH is misguided. Supposing that H2 is correct, a red ball suddenly vanishes and is replaced with an iguana that, although continuous with the ball in respect of its position, is discontinuous with it in respect of its morphological, chromatic, and chemical properties; and, a moment later, that iguana suddenly vanishes and is replaced with a ball that, although continuous with the iguana in respect of its position, is discontinuous with it in respect of its shape, color, and chemical properties. Thus, merely H2 replaces observed discontinuities unobserved discontinuities. H1 doesn’t posit any of the discontinuities posited by H2. So contrary to what OH says, there are many discontinuities that H1 eliminates that H2 fails to eliminate. Moreover, there discontinuities that H2 creates that H1 does not create. These facts are not only consistent with, but strongly support, our thesis that explanation is discontinuity-elimination.
That said, there is a gap in our defense of that thesis:
(OH*) Clearly erroneous hypotheses can do just as good a job as correct ones of eliminating discontinuities. Here is an example. You see a ball roll into an opaque tunnel. Immediately upon entering the tunnel, the ball quickly but continuously turns into an iguana. The iguana runs to the other end

of the tunnel. Once at the other end, the iguana quickly but continuously turns back into a ball; and that ball rolls out the other end of the tunnel.
Let H3 be this hypothesis. Even though it’s obviously unacceptable, H3 does as good a job of eliminating discontinuities as H1. Thus, contrary to what you are saying, discontinuity-elimination cannot be the essence of explanation.
Contrary to what OH* alleges, H3 does not do as good a job as H1 of eliminating discontinuities. First of all, even though it seems, at least initially, to do as good a job as H1 of eliminating spatiotemporal discontinuities, H3 creates a number of theoretical discontinuities that H1 does not create. There is no independent evidence that balls turn into iguanas or vice versa. So, in supposing that H3 is correct, we’re supposing either (i) that the physical laws governing this one situation are very different from those governing other situations or (ii) that the observational data that we’ve had thus far, which strongly suggests that iguanas don’t turn into balls or vice versa, is very misleading as to the nature of reality. If (i) is the case, the laws of nature, and therefore the very structure of reality, had to undergo an abrupt and unprecedented change in order for the changes described by H3 to be possible. (And given the reasonable, though debatable (not to mention vague), supposition that the laws of nature are veritable spatiotemporal structures, it follows that H3 fails to eliminate discontinuities in a particularly egregious way.) If (ii) is the case, there is so little conformity between the data of observation and the structure of reality that we have no good reason to expect any of our observation-based beliefs, including our belief in (ii) itself, to be correct. Given obvious extensions of these points, it’s clear that H2 creates similar theoretical discontinuities.
But H1 doesn’t have any of these problems. It doesn’t create any of the theoretical (or spatiotemporal) discontinuities that either H2 or H3 creates, and it eliminates each of the discontinuities eliminated by either. All of which suggests that, just as we proposed, discontinuity-elimination is the essence of explanation.
8.0 Probability an epistemic concept
At time t, a prominent medical researcher says:
(S1) “it’s probable, but not certain, that Socrates had four kidneys.”
Given all of the data available up until time t, S1 is the rational thing to say.
More data becomes available. The researcher considers it. And, at time t*, that same researcher says:
(S	2) “Socrates only had two kidneys.”
Given all of the data available up until time t*, S2 is the rational thing to say.
Question: Given that S2 is true, does it follow that S1 was false? No. Given the data available to the researcher at t, it was probable that Socrates had four kidneys. Like all probability statements, S1 describes a relationship (one of bearing) that holds between some body of data and some hypothesis. S1 does not describe some state of affairs. If it did, it would be to the effect that Socrates had two kidneys to a certain degree, in which case it would be meaningless.
8.1 Probability a property of statements
Probability is a property of statements, not of states of affairs. It’s a property of statements to the effect that a certain hypothesis is given a certain amount of support by a certain body of data. So it’s a property of statements that describe bearing-relations. True probability statements correctly describe such relations; false ones incorrectly describe them.
An illustration: Smith tells his friend Brown that he’s going on a tour of . But he’s vague about where he’s going to go, and when. But he’s not completely vague; he gives Brown some relevant information. A month after Smith leaves, Brown tells a friend of his that:Europe
(PS1) It’s probable that Smith is in  right now.
PS1 is correct. It’s correct because, given the data available to Brown, it’s far more reasonable to believe that Brown is in  than it is to believe that he isn’t. And PS1 is correct even if, at the time, Brown is . It doesn’t matter whether Brown is in  or not. What matters is that, given the available data, it’s more reasonable to believe that he is than it is to believe that he isn’t.
PS1 says that, given such and such data, it’s probable that Smith is in . It’s irrelevant that, from a phonetic viewpoint, there’s no expression of the form “given such and such data.” From a logical standpoint, there is such an expression (unless PS1 is completely meaningless).
In general, probability is inherently relational. For this reason, the words “P is probably the case” may be correct when they come out of one person’s mouth and false when they come out of some other person’s mouth. This will happen if the data available to the one person makes P more belief-worthy than not-P and the data available to the other makes not-P more belief-worthy than P.
A complete description of the universe would contain no probability statements. Given any statement S (that isn’t a probability statement), such a description would contain either S or not-S. Thus, probability is but “a measure of ignorance,” as  put it. Somebody who knew everything could never correctly describe a proposition as probable but not certain.Laplace
8.2 Probability not subjective
Probability is a mind-independent logical relationship holding among statements. The degree to which a given body of data D confirms a given statement S has nothing to do with anyone’s opinion about anything: D confirms S to that degree whether or not anyone knows it—whether or not anyone exists. Probability statements are useful only to the ignorant. (An omniscient being wouldn’t have to bother with them.) But that doesn’t mean it’s only insofar as people are ignorant that they’re true. It means the opposite. They’re useful to the ignorant because, when correct, they describe relations that actually hold between what (little) they know and what they’d like to know.
Given a certain body of data, it’s more reasonable to believe P than it is to believe not-P, even though, given that same data, it is not reasonable to believe P. To believe P is to be certain that P is correct. The data one has may make P more worthy of belief than not-P without making P worthy of belief. Given the data available to me, it’s more reasonable to believe that my friend Sally is in  than it is to believe that she isn’t. But since, given that data, it’s only marginally more likely than not that she’s in , it would be irrational of me to believe that she he is.
8.3 Is there such a thing as non-epistemic probability?
According to some, probability is sometimes a property of events, as opposed to statements. Here’s the idea. At time t, electron e jumps to a higher orbit. Though the laws of nature didn’t require it to jump, or not to jump, at that time, they did dispose it to jump. Here, it is said, we are dealing with a case of intrinsic, as opposed to evidential, probability. Supposing that one knew everything there was to know other than the fact that e jumped orbit at t, one could not on that basis predict with any certainty that e would jump at that time. Under these circumstances, it might be said, it would be correct to say that, for reasons having nothing to do with ignorance on anyone’s part, the statement “it is more probable than not that e will jump at t” is correct.
For argument’s sake, we’ll suppose that there are indeed undetermined events—events that don’t have to happen but do.
One could argue on the following grounds that intrinsic probability is a kind of evidential probability. Let S be a true statement alleging the occurrence of event E. S has an “intrinsic” probability of greater than 50% iff S1. . . . Sn make it more likely than not that S, where S1 . . . Sn is a list of every true statement that doesn’t logically entail S. The idea is that, if you knew everything there was to know other than the fact that E jumps orbit at t, you could not learn more that was relevant to whether E would jump without actually learning whether E would jump. But, it will be said, the story is very different with statements that, as a matter of natural law either must happen or cannot happen. Let S* be a true statement falling into this category. No matter how small the likelihood that S* is false, there are true statements that, if conjoined with the truths already known, will shrink that likelihood even further without eliminating it. (It may be that, because of interference effects, it’s impossible to acquire more information that is relevant to whether S* is correct or not without actually learning whether S* is correct or not. But that would only be because those interference effects made it impossible to learn the truths that would enable you to shrink your margin of doubt.) Thus, intrinsic probability is a kind of evidential probability. One is dealing with intrinsic probability when, setting aside problems relating to interference effects, there is a limit to how much, short of learning whether the target statement is true or not, one’s margin of error can be reduced, and one has non-intrinsic evidential probability if there is no such limit.
Nonetheless, I’m not convinced that intrinsic probability is, in fact, a form of evidential probability. As before, let S be a true statement alleging the occurrence of some event E that has an intrinsic probability of greater than 50% but less than 100%, and let S1 . . . Sn be a list that contains every true statement other than those that entail S. The statement “given S1 . . . Sn, S is more probable than not” does not say that, given S1 . . . Sn, we’re stuck with more questions than answers if we deny S. Were it supposed true that Hamlet was written by a levitating cat that, despite being incapable of self-consciousness, was deeply neurotic, all manner of beliefs concerning physics, biology, and psychology would have to be revised. But, assuming the truth of S1. . . Sn, it doesn’t much matter whether S is accepted or rejected. It is, by hypothesis, a free wheel. I must therefore conclude that intrinsic probability, if it exists, is not evidential probability.
I leave it to the reader as an exercise to say why intrinsic probability is not, contrary to what some might hold, identical with statistical probability; and I also leave it to the reader to say what exactly intrinsic probability is.
8.4 What is it for one statement to confirm another?
In this section, we’ll put forth some more reasons to think that explanatory (evidential) probability is not statistical probability. It will help if we start with a summary of our findings thus far.
Other things being equal, a hypothesis is to be preferred to its negation if and only if more causal anomalousness is created by rejecting it than by accepting it. The degree to which a hypothesis is to be preferred to its negation is directly proportional to the degree to which it does a better job than the other of minimizing the net amount of causal anomalousness in the world.
Probability is not a statistical notion. The word “probability” has a statistical meaning. This is the meaning that it has in the statement: “the chances of a person who’s picked at random having red hair are one in eight.” All this means is that one person in eight has red hair.
But this isn’t the sort of probability that is relevant to explanations. When you say (“SNS” is short for “Smith no show”):
(SNS) “given that Smith hasn’t shown up yet, he’s probably not going to show up at all,”
you are not making a statistical statement; you are not saying that in more than 50% of situations like the present one Smith doesn’t show up. SNS could be true even if Smith has never failed to show up to anything in his life. And it could be false even if, in the past, he’s failed to show up to 90% of his appointments.
Statements affirming the probability of hypotheses seldom even appear capable of statistical interpretations. You can know that x is likely to do y in circumstances z without ever having seen x, or anything much like it, do y, or anything much like, in circumstances z, or anything much like them. For example, we have a pretty
good idea of what at least some of the consequences of detonating a hydrogen bomb over the South Pole would be, even though nothing much like that has ever occurred.
“But that’s where you’re wrong,” contemporary Humeans say. “You see, it’s only if it’s interpreted in an absurdly narrow way that that the statistical conception of explanation has any of these problems.” And they defend this position by saying that (“SE” stands for “statistical explanation”):
(SE) If a hydrogen bomb were detonated over the South Pole, it would by no means be unprecedented. True, we haven’t detonated hydrogen bombs over the South Pole. In fact, we haven’t detonated hydrogen bombs anywhere. But we’ve detonated weapons similar to hydrogen bombs over places similar to the South Pole. Given this information, we have a pretty good idea of what the consequences would be of detonating a hydrogen bomb over the South Pole.
And while you’re right that SNS may be correct even if Smith has never missed an appointment in his life, you’re wrong to conclude that explanation is not to be understood in statistical terms. If one is to be justified in accepting SNS, one doesn’t need to know that Smith ever failed to show up to anything; and one doesn’t need to know that what the relevant individuals, whoever they might be, failed to do was to show up. One need only know that people similar (in some respect relevant in the present context) to Smith failed to do something similar (same qualification) to showing up. One need only know that people like Smith (e.g., people who have serious drug problems) failed in some way that would be comparable to Smith’s failing to show up (e.g., those people did keep their promises).
It’s easy to ridicule the statistical conception of explanation by showing that events exactly like the one being explained haven’t occurred. But the situation being explained needn’t be a perfect replication of any past situation. It need only be like past situations in some very abstract respect.
The problem with this response is that there is no way to understand the concept of “relevant similarity” in statistical terms; and in deciding what is relevantly similar to what, the advocate of SE is drawing on hypotheses that can’t possibly have received any confirmation of a purely statistical kind.
Any two things are similar in some respects and dissimilar in others. Some of these similarities are explanatorily significant, and others are not. It often happens that, despite our not having first conducted context-specific research, we can distinguish the relevant from the irrelevant forms of similarity. For example, it’s obvious that, when trying to figure out what the consequences would be of detonating a given bomb over the South Pole, it doesn’t matter whether that bomb is green as opposed to red, but it does matter whether it’s a nuclear as opposed to a non-nuclear bomb. So it’s obvious that a red hydrogen bomb would be much more similar, in the respects relevant in this context, to a green hydrogen bomb than it would be to a red non-nuclear bomb.
But this wouldn’t be obvious at all if our evidence for it were strictly statistical. Given that, for any two things, one can contrive some respect in which they are similar, it follows that, with a few trivial qualifications, anything can confirm anything to any degree.
This is what Nelson Goodman’s argument shows. (See Section 7.3). Find a respect in which green emeralds are similar to blue emeralds, and the fact that, thus far, all emeralds have been green confirms that, after this point, they’ll all be blue. (All green emeralds examined before the present are similar to blue emeralds examined in the future in that they’re all “grue.”)
Another example: Find a respect in which herbivorous brontosauruses resemble cars that aren’t affected in any adverse way by high-speed collisions, and the fact that all brontosauruses were herbivorous confirms that a speed collision won’t damage your car. (Herbivorous brontosauruses are similar to cases of your crashing your new, as of yet unscathed, car in that they are both “carbivorous.” Something is “carbivorous” if it’s either an herbivorous brontosaurus or a car driven by you after the present time that’s involved in a high-speed collision and isn’t damaged by it.”)
We know that terms like “grue” and “carbivore” pick out explanatorily hollow properties, and that’s why we don’t base our driving habits on our beliefs about the dietary habits of dinosaurs. We know what to infer and what not to infer only insofar as we know what kinds of similarity count. A precondition for making the right inferences is knowing what the relevant kinds of similarity are. Thus, there’s no way that judgments as
to what the relevant forms of similarity are could have a strictly statistical basis. (That said, they obviously can and do have a partly statistical basis. But that’s not enough to make a go of the statistical model.) The concept of probability is to be understood in terms of the concept of explanatory integrity, not that of statistical frequency. The concept of explanatory integrity is to be understood in terms of the concept of causal integrity. The concept of causal integrity is to be understood in terms of the concept of continuity of change. One very important kind of change is change of position (motion). But not all change is change of position. Changes in temperature aren’t changes in position. Nor are changes in color, shape, or structure. That said, at least some of these forms of change are to be understood in terms of the concept of change of position. But the same can’t be said of other explanatorily important kinds of change. It can’t be said of higher-order changes (changes in the manner of change), since higher-order changes aren’t spatiotemporal changes at all. (A second-order change is a change in a spatiotemporal change; it is not itself a spatiotemporal change, and the same is obviously true of all other higher-order changes.) Earlier we considered some clearly erroneous hypotheses that seemed at first to do just as good a job of preserving continuities as some clearly worthy hypotheses. Had these initial impressions been correct, our analysis of explanation would have been in trouble. But they weren’t correct. When we took a second look, we found that the clearly wrong hypotheses did a much worse job than their meritorious counterparts of dealing with higher-order continuities. And the continuities in question were ones that we already knew to be explanatorily important; they weren’t contrived ad hoc to buttress our theory.
9.0 The raven paradox
(This section is hard. Skip on a first reading.)
Because they don’t grant the existence of causality, except of a degraded and useless kind, Humeans are categorically incapable of producing viable theories of confirmation. One sign of this is that Humean theories of confirmation always have paradoxical consequences.
The most famous of these famous paradoxes is the so-called Raven paradox. This was discovered by C.G. Hempel, who was himself a hardcore Humean. We’ve already considered Hempel’s unsuccessful, Humean analysis of explanation, and we’ll soon consider Hempel’s equally unsuccessful, Humean attempt to solve the raven paradox.
In any case, here is that paradox:
(RP) Logically equivalent sentences are confirmationally equivalent. This means that, if P and Q are logically equivalent, then not only does evidence E confirm P just in case it confirms Q, but E confirms P to degree n just in case it confirms Q to that same degree.
The sentence:
(1) “All ravens are black” is logically equivalent with:
(2) “All non-black things are non-ravens.”
The existence of non-ravens (e.g., pianos, pants, carpet fibers) that are pink or green confirms (2), but does not, unless our intuitions are very wrong, confirm (1). So, impossible though it must be, (1) and (2) are logically, but not confirmationally, equivalent.
An analogous paradox is associated with each of many others pairs of logically equivalent sentences. For example:
(i) “if it’s made of metal and is being heated, then it’s expanding.”
is logically equivalent with:
(ii) “if it isn’t expanding, then it isn’t both made of metal and being heated.”
(ii) is confirmed by the fact that the non-expanding Tupperware in my freezer is not made of metal (or a fortiori of metal that is being heated). But, unless our intuitions are very wrong, that fact provides no support for (i).
Some, including Hempel himself, have argued that, our intuitions notwithstanding, the existence of pink pianos does confirm (1) to degree n exactly if it confirms (2) to that same degree and that the existence of non-expanding Tupperware in freezers does confirm (i) exactly as much as it confirms (ii). Others have argued that the paradox should be solved by advocating non-standard logics, relative to which logical equivalence doesn’t guarantee confirmational equivalence.
We’ll evaluate these solutions after we put forth our own. It’s clear that, whatever merits these solutions have, they are counterintuitive. And the very idea of logical equivalence not guaranteeing confirmational equivalence is of questionable coherence. But even if it can be shown that an internally consistent logic could be invented relative to which logical and confirmational equivalence pull apart, it seems excessive to throw out classical logic to solve this one problem. Fortunately, the paradox can, I will argue, be solved without going to such lengths.
9.1 Inductions by enumeration identical with crypto-inferences to the best explanation
In this context, (i) may be treated as saying the same thing as:
(MH) For any x, if x is made of metal and x is being heated, then x is expanding.
And (ii) may be treated as saying the same thing as:
(HM) For any x, if x isn’t expanding, then x isn’t made of metal that is being heated.
MH can be taken either to express an “accidental generalization” or to express a principled relationship. Taken in the first way, it does nothing more than affirm a purely de facto concomitance of two properties (viz. the property of being heated metal and the property of being something that expands). Taken in the second way, MH seems to say that all heated metal expands, the reason being that a thing’s being heated metal provides some kind of nomic basis for its expanding. In this section, we will focus on the first, strictly extensional, reading. In the next, we will focus on the second, nomically committed reading.
Let us paraphrase MH, when it is taken as a purely de facto generalization, as follows:
(MHA) For any x, if x is made of metal and is being heated, then, by happenstance, x is expanding.
So, in this context, take the operator “by happenstance” to be short for “not because x’s having the first property provides a causal or nomic basis for its having the second.” (By “the first property,” I mean the property mentioned before the “then,” viz. the property of being made of metal that is being heated; and by “the second property,” I mean the property referred to after the “then,” viz. the property of expanding.) We don’t need to worry about whether this corresponds to the usual meaning of “as a matter of happenstance,” since we are using this expression in a stipulative manner.
If we take MH in this way—if we take it to mean the same thing as MHA—does Hempel’s paradox arise? No. Let phi and psi be any two properties such that x has psi isn’t an analytic consequence of x has phi, or vice versa. If I know that there is no causal or, more generally, nomic connection between x’s being a phi, on the one hand, and x’s being a psi, on the other, then I have no reason to infer, from x’s being a phi, that x is also a psi. Even if, thus far, every ball withdrawn from the urn has been black, unless I have reason to believe that this concomitance has some basis in natural law or in some causal mechanism (e.g., the presence of a force field surrounding the urn that allows entry only to black balls, or some person’s resolute intention to allow no non-black balls into the urn), I must ipso facto regard it as nothing but coincidence that, thus far, every ball withdrawn has been black; and I must therefore not think it more likely than not that the next ball withdrawn will be black—for to think otherwise would be to commit the Monte Carlo fallacy. Thus, supposing that, in fact, this concomitance is mere coincidence, the generalization all the balls in the urn are black fails to receive any positive confirmation from its instances. For the same reason mutatis mutandis, the statement all non-black things are not balls in the urn, unless read as having nomic force, fails to receive support from its instances.
And, of course, it also follows that HM, if read as doing nothing more than affirming a de facto concomitance, doesn’t receive support from its instances. Thus
(HMA) For any x, if x isn’t expanding, then, by happenstance, x isn’t made of metal that is being heated,
doesn’t receive support from the fact that the non-expanding Tupperware in my freezer isn’t made of metal that is being heated.
So, if MH and HM are read as having no nomic content—if they are read as doing nothing but expressing de facto concomitances—then, once it is seen that de facto generalizations don’t receive support from their instances, HM doesn’t even appear to receive support from the fact the non-expanding Tupperware in my freezer isn’t made of heated metal, and MH doesn’t even appear to receive support from the fact that the metal pan I put in the oven is expanding. A fortiori the former fact doesn’t even appear to confirm HM more than it does MH, and the latter fact doesn’t even appear to confirm MH more than it does HM.
And we therefore don’t get the kind of (apparent) confirmational non-equivalence that gives rise to Hempel’s paradox. For that paradox depends precisely on its being the case that, despite the (alleged) fact that HM and MH are logically equivalent, they are not, or at least appear not to be, confirmationally equivalent. And they appear to be confirmationally non-equivalent only in so far as (e.g.) the existence of a heated, expanding metal objects confirms MH but not HM, and only in so far as (e.g.) the existence of non-expanding, non-heated, non-metal objects confirms HM but not MH. But once it is made clear that de facto generalizations don’t receive support from their instances, it follows that, if MH and HM are read as free of nomic content, nothing even appears to give more support to the one than to the other. And the paradox fails to arise.
9.2 Inductions by enumeration identical with crypto-inferences to the best explanation (continued)
So, if Hempel’s paradox is to arise, at least one of MH and NH must be taken as doing more than affirming a de facto concomitance. And it seems that, thus taken, MH is to the effect that all heated metal expands for the reason that a thing’s being metal that is being heated provides some kind of nomic or causal basis for its expanding. Let us paraphrase MH, when it is taken in this way, as follows:
(MHN) For any x, if x is made of metal and is being heated, then, as a matter of principle, x is expanding.
So, in this context, take the operator “as a matter of principle” to be short for: “because x’s having the first property provides a causal or nomic basis for its having the second.” Echoing what we said earlier, it is irrelevant this may not correspond very well to the usual meaning of “as a matter of principle,” since we are here using this expression in a stipulative manner.
At this point, we have a choice. We can take HM as having no nomic content—as taking it to have the same import HMA. Or we can take it to have nomic content. Let’s consider both options, starting with the first.
Given that MH is taken to do more than affirm a de facto concomitance, if NH is taken to affirm nothing but a de facto concomitance, the two will, quite trivially, not be equivalent. For obviously MHN is not equivalent with HMA. The first is committed to its being the case that inter alia a thing’s being made of heated metal provides some kind of nomic basis for—or, in any case, is nomically or causally connected in some way with—that thing’s expanding. The second isn’t committed to there being any kind of nomic, or otherwise not purely extensional, connection between the property of non-expanding and the property of being made of heated metal. MHN is true only if certain nomic connections hold; HMA can be true in the absence of those connections. So there is no equivalence, or even the appearance of equivalence for that matter.
We’ve just seen that, if we take MH to have nomic force (which we must—see above—if Hempel’s paradox is to arise), Hempel’s paradox doesn’t arise if we don’t take HM to have nomic content. In other words, if we take HM to do nothing more than affirm a de facto concomitance, then it won’t, as we’ve just seen, even appear to be equivalent with MHN, and nothing even resembling Hempel’s paradox arises. So if that paradox is to arise, then we must take HM to have nomic content.
In light of this, consider the sentence:
(HMN) For any x, if x isn’t expanding, then, as a matter of principle, x isn’t made of metal that is being heated,
HMN says that a thing’s not being an expander provides some kind of (partial) nomic basis for its not being heated metal. Of course, the relationship that HMN bears to HM is analogous to the relationship that MHN bears to MH. But what is most important here is that HMN would be the right way—or, in any case, the (or, at least, a) natural way—to take HM if the latter were taken to do more than affirm a de facto concomitance between two properties.
To clarify this last point, suppose that you are speaking to a friend who is about to drink a large quantity of arsenic but who doesn’t realize that consuming arsenic in large quantities leads to death. You tell him, warningly, “people who consume large quantities of arsenic die soon thereafter.” Here you are obviously not affirming a purely extensional connection between, on the one hand, the property of being a person who drinks large quantities of arsenic at a given time and, on the other hand, the property of being something that dies soon thereafter. What you are saying is that a person x’s drinking large quantities of arsenic at a given time leads to, or in any case provides some kind of nomic foundation for, x’s dying soon thereafter, that being why there is a concomitance between the property of being a person who drinks arsenic, on the one hand, and the property of being dead soon thereafter, on the other. That this is the right interpretation is made clear by the fact that you would be failing to warn your friend not to drink the arsenic if you had instead said: “all people who have drunk arsenic died soon thereafter. But that had nothing to do with their drinking arsenic. You see, it turns out that the only people who’ve ever drunk arsenic belong to religious sect X; moreover, all of those people were about to be executed. One of the precepts of X is that, if you are about to be executed, you must drink arsenic in order to get into heaven. And that’s why, thus far, each person who’s consumed arsenic died soon thereafter.
“Just as the most natural way to take “people who drink arsenic die”/”heated metal expands” to do more than affirm a de facto concomitance is to take it to mean that a person’s drinking arsenic/being heated metal provides some kind of causal or nomic basis for that person’s dying/expanding, so the most natural way to take HM to have nomic force is to take it to mean that a thing’s being a non-expander provides some kind of causal or nomic basis for its not being heated metal. And that is precisely the reading of HM that is embodied in HMN.
HMN is clearly not equivalent with MHN. Suppose, if only for argument’s sake, that a thing’s being made of heated metal causes it to expand. So suppose that:
(MHC) “as a matter of natural law, x’s being heated metal causes x to expand.”
That would certainly be sufficient for the truth of MHN. In light of this, consider the statement that:
(HMC) “as a matter of natural law, x’s not expanding causes x to not be metal that is being heated.”
Of course, MHC, if true, would be sufficient for the truth of HMN. But MHC is not equivalent with HMC. Suppose it is a law that x’s being a human who drinks arsenic at t causes x to be dead at some later time t*.
This very reasonable and (if refurbished a bit) approximately correct statement obviously doesn’t entail, and therefore isn’t equivalent with, the false and practically incoherent statement that x’s not being dead t* causes x to be a human who doesn’t drink arsenic at earlier time t.
For similar reasons, MHC is not equivalent with HMC. So, since MHC and HMC are sufficient for the truth of, respectively, MHN and HMN, it follows that MHN and HMN are not equivalent: they don’t hold in the same models, the same possible worlds. In fact, whereas MHN, or something similar to it, does hold in our world, the same doesn’t go for HMN or anything at all like it.
9.3 Inductions by enumeration identical with crypto-inferences to the best explanation (continued)
We’ve seen, first, that MH must be read as having some kind of nomic content if Hempel’s paradox is to arise (i.e., if there is to even be the appearance that MH is logically, but not confirmationally, equivalent with HM). And we’ve also asserted that, if MH read as having nomic force, its meaning is given by MHN, and we made the same assumption mutatis mutandis about HM.
But, it must be admitted, we have provided no argumentative basis for this assertion, our grounds for it being purely intuitive. Which brings us to our next point, namely, that there is another possible nomic reading of MH:
(MHW) “thanks to the existence of some kind of nomic (or causal) connection between the two properties about to be mentioned [viz. the property of being heated metal, on the one hand, and the property of expanding, on the other], for all x, if x is heated metal, then x is expanding.”
How is MHN different from MHW? MHN says pretty much the same thing as:
(*) for all x, if x is heated metal, then x is expanding, and this is because x’s being heated metal provides a nomic basis for x’s expanding.
By contrast, MHW says that:
(^) for all x, if x is heated metal, then x is expanding, and this is because either x’s being heated metal provides a nomic basis for x’s expanding or x’s expanding provides a nomic basis for x’s being heated metal.
To be sure, the expression “provides a nomic basis for” is an obscure one, which I’ve done little or nothing to clarify; and it might therefore seem that there is no difference between (*) and (^). But, obscure though that expression may be, (*) and (^) are demonstrably different, and non-equivalent, statements.
It’s true (or so let us suppose, for argument’s sake) that all people who consume large quantities of arsenic die soon thereafter. And this is not an accident: human biology being what it is, the chemical properties of arsenic being what they are, there’s a nomic connection between consuming arsenic and dying. Vague as the expression “provides a nomic basis for” is, would it be correct to say that being a dead human at 3:10 P.M. “provides a nomic basis for” being a person who drinks arsenic at 3:00 P.M.? More generally, supposing that x’s having psi at t* is an effect of x’s having phi at earlier time t, does it make sense to say that x’s having psi at t* provides a nomic basis for x’s having phi at t? No. My being obese provides a nomic basis for my having a heart-attack. But surely my having a heart attack doesn’t provide a nomic basis for my being obese. And that’s
all we need to know in this context about what it means to say that one thing provides a “nomic basis” for another. So let us proceed.
Suppose that, in possible world W, all things made of heated metal expand. Further suppose that, in W, x’s being something that is expanding causes x to turn into something that is metal whose temperature is continuously rising and whose volume is constantly increasing. And, to make things simple, suppose that, in W, all things made of heated metal got that way by, at some point in their histories, being things that were expanding. In that case, MHW would be correct in W: for there would, in that world, be a nomic connection between a thing’s being heated metal, on the one hand, and its being something that expands, on the other; moreover, the fact that, in W, all heated metal expands would have a basis in this nomic connection. But it would not, at least not on that account, be correct to say that, in W, a thing’s being made of heated metal provides a nomic basis for its expanding. In W, things expand before they become expanding heated metal. So, in W, a thing’s being heated metal obviously cannot cause it to expand.
But there is a further point: in W, a thing’s expanding is not to be understood in terms of its being heated metal. It is the other way around. In W, a thing’s expanding is causally and explanatorily more basic than its being heated metal. In any case, just as (see above) it would be wrong, or at least very odd, to say that being dead at t* provided a nomic basis for drinking arsenic at earlier time t, it would, for parallel reasons, be wrong to say that, in W, being heated metal provided a nomic basis for being a thing that expands. And this entails that, however vague the expression “provides a nomic basis for” is, * and ^ are, very clearly, not equivalent.
9.4 This argument concluded
First of all, MHW obviously isn’t logically equivalent with HMA: the former does, whereas the latter does not, allege the existence of certain nomic dependencies. More importantly, MHW isn’t equivalent with:
(HMW) “thanks to the existence of some kind of nomic (or causal) connection between the two properties about to be mentioned [viz. the property of not expanding, on the one hand, and the property of not being heated metal, on the other], for all x, if x is not expanding, then x is not heated metal.”
Given only that there is a nomic connection between a thing’s having phi and its having psi, it doesn’t follow that there is a nomic connection between a thing’s not having psi and its not having phi. There is a causal, and therefore a nomic, connection between Smith’s falling off of tall building X at t, on the one hand, and his being dead at later time t*, on the other. Smith’s falling off of X is an event. It is something that makes things happen (e.g., various bones of Smith’s being shattered); and, what is probably a more general notion, it is something in terms of which things can be explained.
Compare Smith’s situation with Brown’s. Brown does not fall off X, or any other building, at t; and Brown is alive and well at t*. Obviously Brown’s not falling off X at t doesn’t cause Brown to be alive at t*. More generally, Brown’s being alive at t* is not, except perhaps in some extremely derivative sense, to be explained in terms of Brown’s not falling off of X. Whereas Smith’s falling off of X is an event, Brown’s not falling off of X is not an event, and it doesn’t consist of events. A chair consists of events (various miniscule displacements of mass-energy), and does a corporation (various actions on the part of sentient beings); so, indeed, does any enduring entity—any structure, any “object,” any non-instantaneous event. But Brown’s not falling off X isn’t identical with an event and isn’t constituted by events.
Of course, since it’s a truth, and therefore a “fact,” that Brown did not fall off of X, we might say that the (negative) “fact” of his not falling off of X exists no less than the (positive) fact of Smith’s falling off of X. But that doesn’t undermine our point that Brown’s not falling off of X isn’t identical with, or constituted by, events.
While it is a matter of intense debate what nomic relations are, it is pretty clear they hold only among occupants of the space-time manifold. They clearly hold among events (my pounding the table causes it to break). Maybe they hold among things other than events. Maybe, for example, they hold among conditions. And maybe they hold among objects. But while it is unclear whether al spatiotemporal entities stand in nomic relations, it is clear that nothing non-spatiotemporal stands in them. My pounding the table is nomically
connected to the table’s breaking. But my not destroying Jupiter isn’t nomically related to anything. My pounding the table is an event; it makes things happen; things can be explained in terms of it; it has a place in the tapestry that constitutes the spatiotemporal world. My not destroying Jupiter is nowhere in that tapestry, and therefore isn’t fit to stand in nomic relations to anything. There is no event of my not destroying Jupiter. There is thus no condition or object that is constituted to any degree by that non-event. Therefore, it isn’t identical with, or constitutive of, anything that falls within the scope of natural law. It isn’t, therefore, nomically connected to anything.
A thing’s being composed of metal that is of a certain temperature is, in the relevant respects, like my pounding the table. Things are to be explained in terms of it. And, though not itself an “event,” it is constituted by various interacting events, all of which occupy space-time. So the skillet’s having a certain temperature, at a given time, is something that can, and indeed obviously must, stand in nomic relations. And the same is true of the skillet’s expanding during a given interval.
But a thing’s not expanding is, in the relevant respects, like my not destroying Jupiter, and so is a thing’s not being heated metal. So, whereas a thing’s being heated metal is, or at least could be, nomically related to its expanding, it doesn’t follow, and it isn’t the case, that a thing’s not expanding could be nomically related to its not being heated metal.
These points make it clear why MHW isn’t logically equivalent with HMW. A thing’s being heated metal can (and, in fact, must) be nomically related to other things, and the same is true of a thing’s expanding. But a thing’s not expanding, like my not destroying Jupiter, isn’t nomically related to anything, and neither is a thing’s not being heated metal. And that’s why, even though, when read as merely affirming de facto concomitances, MH and HM are equivalent, they cannot always be intersubstituted salva veritate. In particular, they cannot be so intersubstituted in contexts governed by the operator that begins each of MHW and HMW (viz. “‘thanks to the existence of some kind of nomic (or causal) connection between the two properties about to be mentioned”). There is nothing mysterious about this. Many operators don’t permit intersubstitutions of logically equivalent expressions. Logically equivalent sentences can be truth-preservingly intersubstituted in contexts governed by (e.g.) “it is true that,” but not, at least not categorically, in contexts governed by “Timmy believes that.” The operator “there is a nomic connection between the facts expressed by the antecedent and consequent of the following statement” doesn’t tolerate intersubstitutions of logically equivalent sentences. For, even if:
(T1) “there is a nomic connection between the facts expressed by the antecedent and consequent of the following statement: if x is heated metal, then x is expanding”
is true, it doesn’t follow that
(T2) “there is a nomic connection between the facts expressed by the antecedent and consequent of the following statement: if x isn’t expanding, then x isn’t heated metal”
is also true. In fact, T1 is, for the reasons just given, quite plainly false.
9.5 Hume-internal solutions to the raven paradox
Quine’s (1977) solution is to say that that logical equivalence doesn’t guarantee confirmational equivalence. This idea is totally incoherent. P and Q are equivalent if they are true in exactly the same worlds. Thus, supposing that P and Q are equivalent, it immediately follows that, given any proposition R, the likelihood of R’s being true in a world where P is true is identical with the likelihood of R’s being true in a world where Q is true. Quine’s proposed solution is thus a non-starter.
Hempel proposes a different solution. It obviously seems as though the existence of a pink piano provides less support for:
(1) “All ravens are black”
than does the existence of a black raven. And it obviously seems as though the existence of pink pianos pro-vides more support for:
(2) “All non-black things are non-ravens’
than it does for (1). But, says Hempel, these intuitions are misleading. Under ordinary circumstances, if we know that something is a piano, we almost certainly already know that it isn’t a raven.
But imagine the following. You have bet your friend Smith a $1,000,000 that all ravens are black. There is some object x such that, although you and Smith don’t yet know it, x is a piano. All you know about x is that it’s pink. In that case, when you discover that x is a piano, and thus a non-raven, you (but not Smith) will breathe a sigh of relief; and your confidence in (1) will surge, and so, of course, will your confidence in (2).
Now imagine a different scenario. You have bet your friend Smith a $1,000,000 that all non-black things are non-ravens. There is some object y such that, although you and Smith don’t yet know it, y is black. All you know about y is that it’s a raven. When you discover that y is black, you will breathe a sigh of relief; and your confidence in (2) will surge, and so, of course, will your confidence in (1).
Thus, to Hempel, the confirmational disparities between (1) and (2) are illusory. When we imagine ourselves trying to confirm (2), we assume that we are looking at things that we already know to be non-ravens, but we don’t make the same assumption mutatis mutandis when we imagine ourselves to be trying to confirm.
Hempel’s solution is better than Quine’s, but it’s still no good. The problem is that, if it’s known that there is no nomic or causal relationship between a thing’s being a raven, on the one hand, and its being black, on the other, then there is ipso facto no reason to believe that the next raven you see will be black. Maybe you’ve seen a million ravens, all of them black. It’s doesn’t matter. Unless you have reason to believe that a thing’s being a raven is connected somehow to its being black, you’re guilty of the gambler’s fallacy if, on the basis of that data, you believe that the next raven you see is (likely to be) black. But if you do believe that a thing’s being a raven is connected in some way to its being black, then your confidence in (1) is derivative of your confidence in:
(1*) a thing’s being a raven provides a basis of some kind for its being black.
(1*) isn’t equivalent with (2*). We’ve already seen why. And we’ve already see why (1*) isn’t equivalent with:
(2*) a thing’s being non-black provides some kind of a basis for its being a non-raven.
If the existence of a black is raven is to provide any legitimate support for (1), there must be a causal or nomic connection between ravenhood and blackness. Once this is realized, two things immediately become obvious. First, Hempel’s solution is spurious, since it presupposes that black ravens can confirm (1) without there being any connection of the sort just described. Second, (1) must be read as having nomic force. Since, thus read, it is no longer equivalent with (2), the paradox vanishes.
9.6 These points summed up
If read as doing nothing more than affirming de facto concomitances: 
(MH) if x is made of heated metal, x expands
and
(HM) if x isn’t expanding, x isn’t made of heated metal
don’t receive support—and, to anyone who isn’t guilty of the gambler’s fallacy, don’t even appear to receive support—from their instances and are therefore vacuously confirmationally identical. So, thus read, they are logically and, quite clearly, confirmationally identical; and Hempel’s paradox doesn’t arise. If they are read as doing more than affirming de facto concomitances, they must be read as alleging, or at least being committed to there being, some kind of nomic connection between the properties in question. But, no matter what nomic readings we give these sentences, they don’t even appear logically equivalent. (This is, to put it very crudely, because logically equivalent sentences cannot, at least not in general, be intersubstituted salva veritate in contexts governed by nomic operators; e.g. “there is a nomic connection between the following statements.”) Bottom line: once it is realized that accidental generalizations don’t receive support from their instances, this being the prerogative of principled generalizations, it isn’t possible for Hempel’s paradox even to arise.
ENDNOTES

Name:_________________________________________________ Date: _____________________________
Exercises
Questions 1–7 are to be based on the following passage, which we’ll call “SE” (short for “Smith elevator”):
(SE): Smith pushed the button for the elevator. His doing so caused the elevator to come. Ten other people wanted the elevator to come, but Smith happened to be the first to push the button. (The other people were able-bodied, capable of pushing the button, etc.)
1.	True or false? The following statement is definitely correct: ($) If Smith hadn’t pushed the button, then the elevator wouldn’t have come.
2.	True or false? The following statement is correct or, at the very least, is a much better approximation to the truth than ($):
($$) If Smith hadn’t pushed the button, then, other things being equal, the elevator wouldn’t have come.
3.	True or false? According to one of Hume’s two analyses of causation, even if Smith’s pushing the button caused the elevator to come, it did not make the elevator come.
4.	True or false? If one of Hume’s two analyses of causation is correct, then ($) (in question 1) is correct.
5.	True or false? Supposing that ($) is false, then the so-called counterfactual analysis of causality is incorrect.
6.	True or false? Whether or not ($) is correct is irrelevant to whether the counterfactual analysis of causality is correct.
7.	True or false? If Goodman’s “grue” argument goes through, then given the fact that, in the past, I’ve gotten drunk whenever I’ve had more than five beers, it’s no less reasonable of me to infer that, the next time I drink that much, I’ll turn into a soap-bubble than it is to infer that I’ll get drunk.
8.	True or false? If Hume’s argument concerning induction goes through, then the following argument fails to go through (assuming that the premises are correct): Premise #1: All cases of knowledge are cases of belief. Premise #2: All cases of belief result from mental activity. Conclusion: Assuming that Smith knows something, his knowing it is the result of mental activity.
9.	Which of the following is an example of a counterfactual statement (not necessarily a true one)?
	a.	If George W. Bush is in  right now, then he’s in the .Texas
	b.	There are people over one-hundred-feet tall in this classroom.
c.	If George W. Bush had legalized cocaine, crime would have gone down in the  during the Bush administration.
d.	Because George W. Bush did not legalize cocaine, crime did not go down in the  during the Bush administration.
e.	Either 1 + 1 = 2 or 1 + 1 = 3.
10.	Which of the following statements is correct?
a.	According to the counterfactual analysis of causation, for event E1 to cause event E2 is for it to be the case that E2 would have occurred regardless of whether E1 occurred or not.
b.	Suppose, if only for argument’s sake, that the counterfactual analysis of causation is correct. In that case, if the cause of the doorbell’s ringing is the button’s being pushed, then the doorbell wouldn’t have rung if the button hadn’t been pushed.
c.	If the counterfactual analysis of causation is wrong, then there’s nothing more to E1’s causing E2 than its being the case that, if E1 hadn’t happened, E2 wouldn’t have happened either.
11.	Which of the following statements is true?
a.	Since Socrates either did, or did not, have two kidneys, the statement “Socrates might have had more than two kidneys” is false.
b.	The statement “Socrates might have had more than two kidneys” is true, and the reason it’s true is that, until we know for sure whether or not he had exactly two kidneys, the statement “Socrates had more than two kidneys” is neither true nor false.
c.	Even though Socrates either did, or did not, have two kidneys, the statement “Socrates might have had more than two kidneys” is true; and the reason it’s true is that it’s to the effect that the information at our disposal is consistent with Socrates’ having had more than two kidneys. 
d.	None of the above.
Questions 12–14 are to be answered on the basis of the following passage, which is an exact quotation:
(AC)1 “Suppose two objects to be presented to us, of which the one is the cause and the other the effect; ‘tis plain, that from the simple consideration of one, or both these objects we never shall perceive the tie, by which they are united, or be able certainly to pronounce, that there is a connection between them. ‘Tis not, therefore, from any one instance that we arrive at the idea of cause and effect, of a necessary connection of power, or force, of energy, and of efficacy. Did we never see any but particular conjunctions of objects, entirely different from each other, we should never be able to form any such ideas.”
12.	Who wrote AC?
a.	
b.	David Hume
c.	John Locke
13.	Which of the following statements is correct?
a.	If AC is right, then we can literally see causal connections.
b.	If AC is right, then causal connections are not to be known empirically, and must instead be known in same way we know (e.g.) that circles are figures of uniform curvature—that is, strictly through logical analysis.
c.	Neither of the above.
14.	Which of the following statements is false?
a.	If AC is right, then we can’t see, or otherwise sense-perceive, causal connections.
b.	The only way to know that E1 caused E2 is to know of some general regularity of which the sequence of events consisting of E1 and E2 is an instance.
c.	According to AC, the concept of energy has a very different observational basis from the concept of force.
d.	AC embodies a decidedly empiricist understanding of what causal relations are.
Questions 15–17 are to be answered on the basis of the following passage:2
(BB) Billiard balls A and B are on a pool table. A is moving. B is at rest. A collides with B; and upon being struck, B starts moving, and A stops moving. You see all of this. As far as you can tell, the situation is a perfectly normal one. But you haven’t thoroughly examined the pool table—so you don’t know for sure that there isn’t somebody underneath the pool table, manipulating the movements of the balls with magnets (or some such).
AU: Numbers correct?
15.	True or false? According to Hume, given only the observational data available to you, it is clear that the collision is what caused B to move.
15.	True or false? Setting aside what Hume does or does not believe, it really is the case that, given only the observational data available to you, the collision is clearly what caused B to move.
16.	True or false? According to Hume, if the collision is in fact what caused B to move, it is only because the sequence of events described in BB is an instance of a general regularity.
17.	True or false? According to Hume, E1 can be the direct cause of E2 even if they are not spatiotemporally adjacent.
18.	True or false? According to Hume, for E1 to be the direct cause of E2, it is necessary but not sufficient that the following conditions obtain: (i) E1 and E2 be contiguous; (ii) E111 immediately precede E2; (iii) events similar to E1 always be contiguous with, and immediately precede, events similar to E2.
19.	True or false? Causation is typically, but not always, a relation between events. Sometimes it is a relation between things and events.
20.	True or false? Hume puts forth two analyses of causality, one of which is: “event x caused event y to happen if y wouldn’t have happened if x had not happened.”
21.	True or false? Hume puts forth two analyses of causality, one of which is: “event x caused event y to happen if x immediately precedes y and is adjacent with y and, further, the sequence consisting of those events instantiates a general regularity.”
22.	True or false? These two analyses of causality (the ones described in questions 7 and 8) are two different ways of saying the same thing.
23.	True or false? One problem, or at least apparent problem, with the analysis of causality described in question 7 is that, because there is a certain amount of causal redundancy in the world, there are cases where a given event would have occurred even if the event that in fact caused it had not happened.
24.	True or false? ($) is false and the reason is that neither Smith, nor any of the people waiting for the elevator, can see whether or not it was Smith’s pushing the button that the caused the elevator to come. That may have been the cause. But it may not have been. Maybe, by coincidence, the elevator was going to that floor anyway.
25.	True or false? Empiricists are less likely to grant the existence of non-spatiotemporal entities than rationalists.
Question 26 is to be answered in terms of the following argument:
We don’t see (or hear or touch, etc.) things that don’t actually happen. So, since counterfactuals talk about things that don’t happen, it cannot be through sight, hearing, etc., that we know that they’re true. Therefore, if we know any counterfactual truths, it isn’t in a way that empiricism can recognize.
26.	True or false? If that argument goes through, then Hume, who was a hardcore empiricist, wasn’t being true to his empiricism when he put forth the counterfactual analysis of causality.
ENDNOTES
1.	“AC” is short for “analysis of causation.”
2.	“BB” is short for “billiard ball.”
