A Dialogue
Concerning
OCD

 

Dr. J.-M. Kuczynski
                                A Dialogue concerning OCD

 

                                    J.-M. Kuczynski, PhD

 

 

  Max: Dr. K, People with OCD suffer from both obsessions and compulsions. How are such a

person’s obsessions related to his compulsions?

 

  Dr. K: Good question, Max. Obsessive beliefs  are pseudo-beliefs, and compulsive acts are

pseudo-acts.

 

  Max: Please explain, Sir.

 

  Dr. K: If a given person obsesses about his hatred of so and so, that is because he is not yet

done with so and so. He is still attached to that person. But since he will not admit that fact to

himself, this lingering attachment is represented in his consciousness as obsessive hatred.

If someone obsesses about the idea that someone is listening in on his phone calls, it is

because he fears that no one cares about him.

If someone is obsessed with such and such, it is because what he really believes is the

opposite of such and such.

In general, if someone obsessionally believes that such and such, it is because what he

actually believes is the opposite of such and such. Thus, obsessional believe is pseudo-belief:

 

  Max: In what sense is compulsive action pseudo-action?

 

  Dr. K: If one compulsively does such and such, it is because one’s real intention is to do the

opposite of such and such. If a given person compulsively avoids his ex-girlfriend, it is because

he wants to see her. He is afraid that if he runs into her, he will succumb to temptation and

reactivate the relationship.

  Or, to take another example, consider the son who compulsively dotes on his mother. This

person actually hates his mother. If he wholeheartedly loved her, he would be able to tend to her

without feeling compelled to do so. But since he does not wholeheartedly love---since, in fact, a

part of him utterly hates her---he must be compulsively loving.

 

  Max: As opposed to actually loving.

   Dr. K: Exactly.  He must dote on her, instead of simply being an appropriately attentive son.

 

  Max: I think I am beginning to understand, Dr. K. Compulsive love is actually hatred.

 

  Dr. K: Yes, but it is unconscious hatred.

 

  Max: What happens when it becomes conscious?

 

  Dr. K: What happens is that any associated compulsions vanish.

 

  Max: I see.

 

  Dr. K: You see, Max, the essence of OCD is ambivalence. The compulsively doting son both

loves and hates his mother. He loves her, and therefore feels obliged to have lunch with her on

Sunday. But he also hates her and, if given half a chance, will find a way to avoid lunching with

her.

  Because he loves his mother, his desire not to have lunch with her must express itself

circuitously. Perhaps he shows up late for his lunch date. Or perhaps he shows up two hours

early, so as to hedge against the possibility of his not showing up at all.

 

  Max: I see. He may be compulsively on time—hyper on time, as it were—as a way of

insulating himself against his wish not to show up at all.

 

  Dr. K: Precisely. And it is because of this emotional polarity within him that the obsessional

engages in what Freud refers to as ‘doing and undoing.’ He does a given thing. Then he undoes

it. And then undoes his undoing of it.  He starts driving to his mother’s house for his obligatory

weekly lunch date. When he is halfway there, he realizes that he left his wallet at home. So he

goes back and gets his wallet. But when he is walking back to his car, he wonder whether he left

the sink running. So he goes back inside. And so on and so forth.

 

  Max: Or perhaps he fears that he left the stove on, and that is what compels him to put off his

drive to mother’s house.

 

  Dr. K: That is a good example. A very realistic example, actually. What made you think of it?

 

  Max: It just seemed appropriate, given that the situation concerns libido. 

  Dr. K: Please clarify, Dr. K.

 

  Max: Suppose that this doting son actually has a girlfriend. And what he really wants is to

ditch mom, so that he can spend time with his girlfriend. In that case, his fear about the stove

represents his undischarged libido.

 

  Dr. K: Very good, Max! The stove represents undischarged libido.

 

  Max: Exactly. And that’s how his libido will remain if he spends the day with mother, instead

of with his girlfriend.

 

  Dr. K: And notice that his fear about the stove is actually a desire.

 

  Max: I don’t follow.

 

  Dr. K: What he wants is for the stove to explode. The stove represents his passionate desire

for his girlfriend. His ‘fear’ the stove will explode is really his desire that he---meaning his

genital region---will, so to speak, ‘explode.’

 

  Max: Very clever.

 

  Dr. K: And his doing and undoing----his on-again/off-again behavior—itself represents his

undischarged libido.

 

  Max: I vaguely understand, but some clarification would help.

 

  Dr. K: When he first heads out to mother’s, he is doing. When he turns around, he is

undoing. 

  The doing part of his behavior represents his love for his mother. The undoing represents his

antipathy towards.

 

  Max: I think I understand. The compulsiveness that characterizes his behavior represents a

stalemate between his love and his hatred. If he loved her more than he hated her, he would

simply ‘do’, that is, he would simply drive there, without having to double back. And he simply

hated her, he would simply not do, that is, he would simply not head out to be begin with. Butneither emotion has the upper hand, so he both does and undoes, thereby allowing each emotion

to express itself.

 

  Dr. K: Admirably well put, Max. But the strongest emotional force within this person is not

his love for his mother; nor is it his hatred. 

 

  Max: What is it then?

 

  Dr. K: His manly desires are far stronger than both his love and his hatred for his mother. So

far as his mother is still relevant to his emotional life, it is in the sense that she interferes with it.

And his doing and undoing---his heading out to mother’s house, then turning around, then

turning around again---mirrors the sexual act. The piston-like repetitiveness of his driving

behavior is a way of doing what he would really like to be doing but---thanks to mom—he is not

doing.

 

  Max: So his driving is an analogue of the sexual act.  

 

  Dr. K: Yes. And notice your choice of word: his driving behavior.

 

  Max: I see! His back and forth car-driving is a proxy for another kind of back and forth

driving.

 

  Dr. K: Exactly.

 

  Max: But you said that his back-and-forth driving had to do with his ambivalence about his

mother.

 

  Dr. K: It does. And it also has to do with his undischarged libido.

 

  Max: So it is ‘overdetermined’, to use another expression of Freud’s.

 

  Dr. K: Precisely.

 

  Max: But actually, sir, if you dig beneath the surface of this story, his behavior is not

overdetermined. I mean, it is overdetermined at one level. But at another, deeper level, it has

only one determinant. 

  Dr. K: I am intrigued, Max. Please explain your meaning.

 

  Max: As you yourself said, Dr. K. this hypothetical person’s passions cannot possibly burn

for his mother. But his mother can certainly drive a wedge between him and his girlfriend. And

assuming that his mother is a manipulator---as she obviously is, since she would not otherwise

have such an emotionally busy relationship with her grown son---it stands to reason that she does

everything she can to stymie her son’s relationship with his girlfriend.

 

  Dr. K: This is very interesting, Max. Please continue.

 

  Max: This old woman profiles as a jealous ex-beauty queen, rather like the mother in Snow

White. Assuming that this hypothetical we are discussing is at all true to life, this woman is

unfulfilled. You will notice that the father is conspicuously absent from the picture, either in the

sense that he is a weakling who is simply unable to give her what he wants or the sense that he is,

quite literally, absent.

 

  Dr. K: The picture you are describing is clinically accurate, Max. Please continue. This is

fascinating.

 

  Max: Because this woman is unfulfilled---because there is an emptiness inside where there

should have been a man’s love---she tried to turn her son into a little husband.

 

  Dr. K: Or tried to do so, but had only limited success.

 

  Max: That is exactly what I was just about to say.

 

  Dr. K: If this old woman had actually emasculated her son—if she had broken him---he

would not be conflicted. He would simply drive to mother’s house, like the good little boy she

wanted him to be. But he can barely get himself to go, that being why, when he does finally go,

he does so in such a conflict-ridden, compulsive manner.

 

  Max: I know we’re discussing a hypothetical, but this all rings so true.

 

  Dr. K: Because it is. Please continue, Max. Please explain to me the sense in which this

person’s behavior is ultimately not overdetermined. 

  Max: Right. What he really wants is to be with his girlfriend. His feelings concerning his

mother are secondary. To be sure, he is indeed conflicted about his mother, and that does indeed

have a hand in driving-related doing and undoing. But what he really wants to be doing is

‘doing’ his girlfriend, if you’ll forgive me the pun.

 

  Dr. K.: And it’s a good pun, because it isn’t really a pun. He wants to be doing and undoing

his girlfriend. As in, he wants to do—meaning, enter---and undo---meaning withdraw—and then

do again.

 

  Max: Right. But his mother, through her machinations, is preventing that. Assuming, as we

are, that this story is true to life, she has thrown all kinds of monkey wrenches in the relationship.

Perhaps she has turned his son’s girlfriend against him, making herself out to a kindly old

woman, who merely wants to spend a little time with her son, and making him out to be a self-

centered bastard, who will not so much as spend an hour or two with his dear old mother, if it

means foregoing gratification of his petty lusts.

 

  Dr. K: He is making the son out to be what the absent father was.

 

  Max: Either that, or she’s making out the son to be what she falsely made out the father to be.

 

  Dr. K: Touché.

 

  Max: Anyway, he really wants to be with his girlfriend. But his mother has prevented that, or

at least momentarily scuttled it. So he discharges his urges symbolically, with his car, by driving

back and forth.               As for his ambivalence towards his mother---yes, that is indeed

operative in his behavior. But it merely determines the exact form that his behavior takes. Given

that he is ambivalent towards his mother, his symbolic re-enactment of the sexual act is

expressed in terms of the doing and undoing that he is in connection with his weekly drive to

mother’s. But what his behavior is really about is the aforementioned sexual act---the one that he

is not being allowed to carry out, thanks to his mother’s meddling.

  At the same time, given that he is not having relations with his girlfriend, he is inevitably

going to displace his libido in some way or other, and, such displacements being what they are,

he is likely to discharge his urges through behavior that ‘shadows’ the sexual act.

  So at the end of the day, this is really about his sexual frustration, and it is only secondarily

about his ambivalence towards his mother. 

  Dr. K. Agreed, Max. But there isn’t really any disagreement between us.

 

  Max: How do you mean, Dr. K?

 

  Dr. K: What I mean is that the forces that you just described are constitutive of his

ambivalence towards his mother, and they are therefore determinative of his ambivalence-

mediated driving-related doing and undoing.

 

  Max: I do not follow.

 

  Dr. K: This young man obviously is not consciously aware of his mother’s treachery. But he

is aware of it. He probably does not quite see it for what it is, even at the level of

unconsciousness. But he is surely aware of it. How could he not be? How could he not find his

mother’s meddlesome behavior irritating? And how could not at some level see it for it what it

is? And how, therefore, can his doing and undoing on the road not be an expression of rage on

his part towards his mother---rage towards her for coming between him and the gratification of

his manly desires?

 

  Max: I think I understand. So even though I am right to say that, ultimately, his behavior has

only determinant, this being his sexual frustration, you are also right to say that his behavior is a

function of his ambivalence towards his mother. He is ambivalent towards his mother because

she is causing him to be sexually frustrated. So his ambivalence and his sexual frustration are, at

least in this context, operating as a single cause.

 

  Dr. K: Admirably well put, Max.

 

  Max: Earlier you said that obsessive actions are pseudo-actions.

 

  Dr. K: Yes. Compulsive acts are to normal acts what obsessive beliefs are to real beliefs.

 

  Max: You said that earlier, but I still do not entirely understand what you meant.

 

  Dr. K: The man in our story doted on his mother. He did so compulsively. The reason is that

he wanted to do the opposite. His actual motivation was the opposite of his supposed motivation.

So his behavior was counterfeit behavior. 

  Max: Sir, why don’t we give this fellow a name? Let’s call him “John,” just to simplify

exposition.

 

  Dr. K: Good idea. Proceed.

 

  Max: It seems to me that your position embodies a failure to distinguish between desires and

intentions. It may well John’s desire to harm his mother or, in any case, to not to be with her on

Sunday. But that does not mean that he did not intend to harm her or that he intended to not be

with her. He very clearly did intend to her, assuming that he does eventually make to her house

for Sunday brunch. And we may indeed make that assumption, given how often it is that people

comply with social obligations that they very much would like to spurn. In any case, a

counterfeit action cannot possibly be one that in some ways embodies a desire to do the opposite:

for by that measure, almost all actions carried out in social contexts, would qualify as pseudo-

actions. A counterfeit act would be one that was driven by an intention to do the opposite. But

the concept of such an action is of doubtful coherence, and in any case John’s actions do not, by

that measure, qualify as counterfeits.

 

  Dr. K: You are quite right to distinguish between desires and intentions. Intentions are

grounded one’s personality. Desires need not be so grounded. There are free floating desires:

desires that are in one, but not of one.

  That said, the concept of a counterfeit intention is a coherent one, and counterfeit intentions

very much do exist. And the intentions driving compulsive actions are indeed of this kind.

  We have been considering John’s actions in a rather abstract way. In actuality, the end-result

of a compulsively performed action is the opposite of the consciously intended result---and

therefore coincides with the unconsciously intended result. 

 

 

  Max: So supposing that John’s acts of kindness towards his mother are compulsive, they

don’t affect her in the same way as actual acts of kindness?

 

  Dr. K:  Correct. They affect her in the same way as acts of hostility. For that is what they are.

 

  Max: I think I understand. John is obsessively concerned with his mother’s health. So he

compulsively takes her to doctor after doctor. This demoralizes her and wears her down.   her

morale plummets, which depresses her immune system. 

  Dr. K: Spot on, Max. And perhaps John also puts her on such a strict diet that she ends up

being malnourished. And he is supposedly so concerned for her safety that he doesn’t let her go

to parties. Her morale plummets, and her immune system follows suit.

 

  Max: And it’s all because John unconsciously hates his mother.

 

  Dr. K: Right. And it should be made clear that John is not driven by sadism, at least not of the

conscious variety. John’s conscious intention really is to help his mother.

 

  Max: But his unconscious intention is to harm her.

 

  Dr. K: Exactly. And it is his unconscious intention that carries the day.

 

  Max: So it isn’t exactly that John’s compulsive acts of kindness are completely fraudulent. It

is rather that they are fraudulent relative to John’s conscious intentions authentic relative to his

unconscious intentions.

 

  Dr. K: That’s a good way of putting it. But there is still some sense in which those actions are

unqualifiedly fraudulent.

 

  Max: Explain.

 

  Dr. K: John’s conscious it not purely pretextual. It has fairly deep roots in John’s values, even

though it has shallow roots in his desires. By the same token, John’s unconscious intention has

relatively shallow roots in John’s values, even though it has deep roots in his desires. Do you

follow me thus far, Max?

 

  Max: I do, Dr. K, but I do not see where you are going with this.

 

  Dr. K: An ‘action’, for lack of a better word, that has no roots in values is not an action at all.

It is an instinctual re-action---a reflexive pseudo-action. Where there is desire without values,

there is passion---in both the contemporary and the etymological senses of the word---but not

action. True agency is about the fulfillment of ideals---not necessarily ethical ideals, but ideals of

some kind or other---and where there are no values there are ipso facto no ideals. Do you follow

Max? I realize that this not exactly easy material. 

  Max: I actually do follow you, Sir. In fact, it is actually ringing a few bells. Desire-driven acts

that do not embody values have the authenticity of veritable actions, but not the requisite

sublimity, and value-driven acts that do not embody desire have the requisite sublimity of

veritable actions.

 

  Dr. K: Well put. The former are real, but they aren’t actions. The latter are actions, but they

aren’t real.

 

 

  Max: So they aren’t actions.

 

  Dr. K: That’s right, Max. Now do you see why compulsive actions are pseudo-actions?

 

  Max: I almost see it, but I need you to nudge me in the right direction.

 

  Dr. K: Actual actions must embody beliefs as well as desire. But also necessary that the

values in question be in alignment with the desires in question. The second condition is not

satisfied in John’s case. John’s values want him to be good to his mother. John’s desires want

him to be evil to his mother. So his desires and his values are at odds with each other. As a result,

each of John’s compulsive acts of kindness consists of two distinct half-actions. One of those

half-actions is all about instinct. The other is all about values. To borrow your own turn of

phrase, Max, the former is real but is not an action, whereas the latter is an action but is not real. 

So these compulsive acts aren’t really anything.

 

  Max: I see. And even though those actions, for lack of a better word, do discharge Max’s

hatred of his mother, it isn’t Max who is doing the discharging. It is rather that his sadism is

leaking out of him.

 

  Dr. K: Well put.

 

  Max:  And although the beneficent side of Max’s behavior is entirely intentional, it so

completely lacks the support of his desires and of his emotional side that it almost fails to be his

behavior. It is almost more appropriate to describe it as behavior that he undergoes than it is to

describe it as behavior that he engages in.

   Dr. K: And given how deracinated his values are---how lacking in any instinctual basis---it is

less appropriate to describe them as values that he has than it is to describe them as values that

have him.

 

  Max: Very good, Sir!

 

  Dr. K: So now you see that John’s compulsive actions are counterfeit actions. To the extent

they are real, they aren’t actions, and to the extent that they are actions, they are not real.

 

  Max: The same being true of all compulsive actions.

 

  Dr. K: Correct.

 

                                            Fin