                        Aesthetic Relativism and Female Psychology

                                      Freud Institute

It is obvious that some composers are better than others and that some musical works are better

than others. It is obvious that there is an enormous amount of intelligence in a high-grade

musical work, such as Bach Fugue or a Mozart Piano Concerto.

And yet nothing is more common, even from musical people, to profess to accept aesthetic

relativism in connection with music.

Part of this---a precipitating or triggering cause of it---is obviously that, because there is no

obvious sense in which any musical work corresponds to some objective reality more closely

than does any other musical work, there is therefore no obvious sense in which one musical can

be objectively better than any other work. In other words, the concept of objectivity has clear

meaning only in connection with the concept of truth, and it is not obvious how to understand the

concept of aesthetic merit in terms of the concept of truth.

Be all of this as it may, it is patently disingenuous—and, ultimately, counter-empirical, as in,

contrary to the very data of experience, not to mention all of the personal and social practices

that arise out of experience---that, indeed, some musical works are better than others.

And given how deeply obvious—how obvious at a visceral, sub-intellectual level—it is that

some musical works are better than others, it seems that the philosophical difficulties involved in

understanding the concept of artistic beauty in terms of the concept of truth cannot be entirely

responsible for the intense popularity of aesthetic relativism.

And while aesthetic relativism obviously has immense support in cultural Marxism and other

nihilistically and relativistically inclined social movements, that does not explain why the

concept of aesthetic beauty was such an easy target for these relativisms and nihilism.

Then just a moment ago, it occurred to me exactly why, despite being at odds with such deeply

rooted experiential data, aesthetic relativism is so popular. Women are intensely concerned with

their physical beauty. Nothing is more important to them than their aesthetic properties. There is

no woman to whom it is not mortally wounding to be sincerely described as “ugly” or to whom it

is not equally flattering to be sincerely described as “beautiful.”

At the same time, it is inherent in what femininity is that women cannot openly admit that they

are so sensitive to characterizations of their appearance. It is inherent in what psychological

womanhood is that a woman’s concern with her appearance is to be lived but not spoken—that

this dependence is to be an open secret. Obvious--and thus open. But never directly

acknowledged---and thus a secret.

And men—even boorish and brutal men---are aware of, and also respectful of, a woman’s need

to be cherished for her physical beauty while also having to be silent, or at least extremely

oblique, about this need of hers.

And if a man says, in a direct and unequivocal manner, that some “musical works”—quote on

quote—are “objectively beautiful”, whereas others are “objectively ugly”—that some musical

works are “objectively better” than others---this immediately registers to a woman as his saying

that some women are just “objectively more beautiful” than others. And he knows that it soregisters. So if a given person says this, he is violating the tacit agreement that people have not to

openly discuss the just-mentioned open secret; and if a given person agrees with it, that person

too is violating that agreement.

And that is the real psychological basis of the intense and yet obviously hypocritical fervor with

which people espouse aesthetic relativism.

And there is independent proof of this. The same person who claims to be a relativist about

musical beauty—who claims that all musical works are equally ‘valid’ and beautiful---adores

certain musical works while detesting others. And the same person who claims to be a relativist

about personal beauty—who claims that all people are beautiful, if only ‘on the inside’---finds

certain people intensely attractive and finds others equally intensely repellant. And the same

person who is guilty of the one hypocrisy is almost always guilty of the other. So we are dealing

with two hypocrisies---two ‘open secrets’, each of which has a social justification while lacking

an alethic or logical justification---that parallel each other. And that is because the one hypocrisy

is really just a proxy for the other: relativism about musical beauty—which is just an absurd

purely philosophical position---is really just a proxy for relativism about female beauty—which

is not an absurd philosophical position, but a deeply important social protocol that is rooted in

the depths of female psychology. And the intense popularity of the otherwise obviously

contraindicated doctrine of musical relativism is surely to be explained in terms of the fact

denials of musical relativism register psychologically as violations of the previously mentioned

tacit agreement relating to the previously mentioned ‘open secret.’

Please visit us at: www.ocdandphilosophy.com and also at www.philosophypedia.com

 

 