Explain d’Holbach’s argument for determinism. Pick a compatibilist (Hume or Frankfurt) and explain their disagreement with d’Holbach. Who do you agree with and why?

D’Holbach is a determinist. Determinism is the doctrine that whatever happens has to happen. So D’Holbach believes that, the laws of nature being what they are and the state of the universe being what it is, there is only way the future of the universe could be. 
Moreover, believes determinism to be incompatible with human freedom. So D’Holbach is an incompatibilist or hard-determinist. 
D’Holbach’s argument for determinism is straightforward. The universe is governed by deterministic laws; therefore, whatever happens has to happen---given the state of the universe a given time, the laws of nature determine what the state of the universe at any given later time will be. 
D’Holbach’s argument for incompatibilism is also straightforward. People are free to the extent that they do not have to do what they do. But given that human beings are material entities and that, since material entities are governed by deterministic laws, people are forced by the laws of nature to do whatever they do and therefore are no free. 
David Hume is a compatibilist, meaning that, in his view, freedom is compatible with determinism. According to Hume, a person is free to the extent that he is able to do what he wants to do. Since people are able to do what they want to do (to varying degrees) people are free (to varying degrees). Hume’s position is that one is free to the extent that one’s choices determine one’s situation. It is irrelevant, in Hume’s view, how those choices in their turn came about: what matters is the extent to which, once they exist, they determine one’s situation. And since, to varying degrees, people’s choices do have a hand in their life-situations, people are, to varying degrees, free. 
I agree with Hume. For someone to be free is for them to be able to choose how they live. This is just a definitional truth. For someone to be free is not for them to choose how their choices come into existence. The very idea of being able to make such a choice is absurd. To be free is for one’s choices to make a difference; it is not for one’s choices not to be caused to come into existence. Obviously choices are caused to come into existence. They didn’t, they wouldn’t come out of nowhere, which is absurd and, even if not absurd, wouldn’t exactly redound to human freedom: a being whose choices came out of nowhere would not be more free than one whose choices were rooted in its personality. 
In any case, freedom is not about being outside the web of causal law; it is about one’s choices making a difference within that causal law. I must therefore agree with Hume and disagree with D’Holbach. 
