              Goldman, Rousseau and von Hayek on the Ideal State

 

 

        What kind of state would exist in a free and just society, and why?

Goldman and Rousseau give similar answers to this question; Hayek gives a

very different answer.

   Goldman’s answer is---none. A free and just society is one in which

there is no government and therefore no state. Goldman’s position is that

government is inherently unjust--a bully that exploits and coerces and does

no good: “Just as religion has fettered the human mind, and as property, or

the monopoly of things, has subdued and stifled man’s needs, so has the State

enslaved his spirit, dictating every phase of conduct.” (Anarchism: What it

Really Stands For, p. 4)

      Of course, the question arises: If there is no government (no state),

then what will keep order? Goldman’s answer is that the very crime that it is

supposedly the state’s purpose to prevent is itself a product of the state: “The

most absurd apology for authority and law is that they serve to diminish

crime...So long as every institution of today, economic, political, social, and

moral, conspires to misdirect human energy into wrong channels; so long as

most people are out of place doing the things they hate to do, living a life

they loathe to live, crime will be inevitable, and all the laws on the statutes

can only increase, but never do away with, crime.” (Anarchism: What it

Really Stands For, p. 4)             

      The idea here seems to be that human beings are inherently

cooperative and, left to their own devices, engage in constructive rather than

mutually antagonistic activity.

      Rousseau’s views are similar to Goldman’s. According to Rousseau,

people are not naturally antagonistic towards one another: “So long as men

remained content with their rustic huts.....they lived free, healthy, honest and

happy lives, so long as their nature allowed, and as they continued to enjoy

the pleasures of mutual and independent intercourse.” (Discourse on

Inequality, p. 9)

 People became antagonistic, according to Rousseau, with the advent of

civilization. Civilization made it possible for people to have more than they

needed. When this happened, people became status-driven and, in order to

maximize their wealth and status, took to mutual exploitation: “ [F]rom the

moment it appeared advantageous to any one man to have enough provisionsfor two, equality disappeared, property was introduced, work became

indispensable, and vast forests became smiling fields, which man had to

water with the sweat of his brow, and where slavery and misery were soon

seen to germinate and grow up with the crops.” (Discourse on Inequality, p.

8) In other words, human beings are best off living in tribes, tribalism being

intermediate between anarchy and civilization.

        There is a serious problem with Rousseau’s position. While there may

be some advantages to a tribal (or pre-civilizational) mode of existence, there

are some serious disadvantages: lack of choices in regards to profession and

lifestyle, lack of medical care, lack of education, confinement to a small

geographical area, lack of technology, and the need to work for every single

meal that one consumes. Also, it is unlikely that tribal life is as placid and

carefree as Rousseau suggests. Tribes attacked one another and were

certainly capable of behaving cruelly towards their own members. In any

case, if tribal life is so idyllic, why don’t people opt for it today?

      Goldman’s thinking is similarly flawed. Goldman may be right that the

state is responsible for some of the crime that it claims exist to prevent, and

she is surely right that states often behave very unjustly. But without the

state, contracts wouldn’t be enforced and there would be no economies of

scale, and the state is therefore necessary for all of the consequent

improvements to life.

      Taking it for granted that the state is necessary for crime-prevention

and contract enforcement, Hayek advocates what he refers to as ‘liberalism’,

this being the view that the state should protect people and give people

freedom but should otherwise not interfere with people’s lives: “Liberalism is

opposed, however, to supplanting competition by inferior methods of guiding

economic activity. And it regards competition as superior not only because in

most circumstances it is the most efficient method known but because it is the

only method which does not require the coercive or arbitrary intervention of

authority. It dispenses with the need for ‘conscious social control’ and gives

individuals a chance to decide whether the prospects of a particular

occupation are sufficient to compensate for the disadvantages connected with

it.” (Road to Serfdom, pp. 45-46)

      Is Hayek right that good government is minimal government? There

is certainly considerable evidence for that claim: over-regulated economies

(e.g. the Soviet Union) tend to fail and minimally regulated ones (e.g. the US

in its early days) tend to flourish. More importantly, people should withinreason be allowed to live the way they want to live, and overly invasive

governments prevent that. This does not mean that Hayek is right, but it

suggests that his position is likely to be at least approximately correct.

By contrast, the views of Goldman and Rousseau are not realistic, since, as

previously explained, anarchy and tribalism fail to avail people of the

freedoms and amenities that they want.
 