I find TikTok to be an extremely intuitive and easy-to-use app. 

Can you think of product or interface that does a good (or bad) job eliciting your emotions at visceral, behavioral, or reflective level?

Self-Actualization - Example(s) (Group 36)

For examples - State the example with a description of why it is a good or bad example. Try to come up with an example not in the lecture or reading. Including images is helpful!



Yes, it does. It should be pointed out that, where many species are concerned, individual psychology is clearly subordinate to individual psychology. As human beings, we fancy ourselves individuals---beings that think of themselves and are therefore the opposite of ants or other obviously collectivist species. And there is some truth in that, but it is overstated; and a great deal of psychological research, including the present paper, supports this. But I feel that the data from evolutionary psychology--specifically, research on ants, bees, naked mole rat--is particularly telling. Also, in the most primitive human societies---from 100,000 years ago---there is clear evidence of hierarchy, showing that, even then, people conceived of themselves as members of a group.


This intuitively makes sense. Human beings know how to walk; this is a "skill", as opposed to a domain-specific ability, and there is nothing inherently social about it. By contrast, my knowledge of trigonometry presupposes, and only makes sense in relation to, a rather vast scientific and social infrastructure. Trigonometry is studied because it helps people design bridges and airplanes and, in general, helps with the physical infrastructure involved in making cooperation between possible. That said, some skills (e.g. someone's ability to play piano or ability to speak a given language) also presuppose the existence of cooperative human collectives; and I therefore wouldn't go so far as to say that that human skills can be categorically understood in non-social terms. But the author is clearly right that domain-specific bodies of information certainly do tend to make sense only in terms of pre-existing social arrangements and are therefore inherently "situated."

This is true Levi-Strauss, the anthropologist, held that much of the mind's firmware is dedicated to social reasoning. In his view, all peoples throughout histories have developed relatively similar kinship structures, relatively similar systems of marriage and exogamy, and relatively similar understandings of tribal or social hierarchy. In Levi-Strauss's view, this shows that human beings naturally think in social terms. In other words, people are social because they instinctively think socially, not the other way around. Also, many economists (e.g. Veblen and Heinrich) hold that decision-making is inherently social: even the most selfish person, when making a decision as to how to improve his own situation, has to take social institutions into account--and, in fact, the most narcissistic people are the most desperate to be given social recognition (awards, titles, and the like). 

Yes, this is a very good point. In a situation where only one person is involved, that person obviously knows what he has or has not done. The same is true, though to a lesser extent, of situations that involve cooperation between a few people (e.g. a group of ten people who are fixing a roof). But when the group in question consists of hundreds, thousands, or even millions of people--as it often does in modern society--it can become very unclear who is responsible for what; and this will, as you say, often lead to substandard performance. 

