How IS

Rationalization
Possible?

Philosophy Shorts
Volume 34

J.-M. Kuczynski

 
                          How Is Rationalization Possible?

                              John-Michael Kuczynski, PhD

 

1.0 Two kinds of repression

2.0 How is repression possible?

2.1 How is repression possible? (Continued)

2.2 How is repression possible? (Continued)

2.3 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression

2.3.1 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression
                                                          1

2.3.2 One reason why repression often fails
                                      1

2.3.3 The concept of anxiety in relation to repression
                                                              1

3.0 Repression
                2

3.1 A necessary condition for repression
                                              2

3.2 A repression-conducive factor
                  2

3.2.1 A related point

3.2.2 Freud's Principle Claims

3.2.2.1 Opposition to these claims

3.3 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression: Some preliminaries
                                                        2

(Continued)

3.4 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression: Some final preliminaries
                                                        2

3.5 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression: A conjecture as to what it
                                                        2

involves

3.6 Why repression is never a complete success

3.7 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression: Conclusion
                                                        2

3.8 Summing up

3.9 Rationalizing rationalization

4.0 Sartre on repression and the unconscious   1.0 Two kinds of repression

 

 People routinely deceive themselves. It would be hard to exaggerate how

often people deceive themselves or how discrepant with the truth are the lies

that self-deceivers tell themselves. But some hold that the concept of self-

deception  is  an  incoherent  one,  and  therefore  that  people  never  deceive

themselves about anything. This viewpoint, in addition to being a case of self-

deception itself, is demonstrably false, as we will now see.

  But how exactly is self-deception possible? And what exactly does it involve?

The  concepts  of  self-deception  and  repression  are  easily  made  to  seem

incoherent:

 

 
  (OR)To  repress  an  idea---that  is,  to  drive  a  conscious  idea  into  the

    unconscious---you have to know what it is that you’re repressing and you

  thus  have  to  be  conscious  of  it;  but  if  you  know  what  it  is  that  you’re

  repressing, you’re conscious of it and it therefore isn’t repressed. Moreover,

  to keep an idea repressed---that is, to block that idea’s attempts to re-enter

    consciousness---you have to be conscious of it; for if you are not conscious of

  it, it will slip back into consciousness unnoticed. But if you are conscious of it,

  it isn’t repressed. So the concepts of repression, and therefore self-deception,

  are incoherent ones.

 

 I  will  now  try  to  show  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  self-deception.  For

reasons that will become clear, this is a corollary of the fact that there are two

 
kinds of repression.In other words, there are two ways in which one can inhibit

the entry into consciousness that one has and that, in some way and at some

level, one knows that one has. One form of repression involves inaction. That

form of repression involves a deliberate, and conscious, intention not to followup on suggestive leads. One suspects; but doesn't know. And that's how one

wants  to  keep  it.  So  one  doesn't  exercise  due  diligence  in  the  way  of

interpreting existing evidence or generating new evidence. Let’s refer to this

kind of repression as “repression.”
                                    1

 So repression doesn’t involve driving some already formed belief into the
                  1

unconscious. It involves abstaining from doing the things that, so one strongly

suspects, would generate the sort of evidence that make acceptance of that

belief de rigueur.

 The other kind of repression, which we’ll refer to as “repression," does
                                                                                  2

involve  already  formed  beliefs.  The  essence  of  repression is dissociation.
                                                                      2

When trying to determine how to act, one tries to give due weight to each of

the decision-relevant beliefs. So, in effect, each decision-relevant idea ‘gets a

vote.’ To repress an idea is to take its vote away; it is to decide to give it no
                  2

weight.

 Both repression and repression involve conflict between, on the one
                      12

hand, forces within oneself of which one is aware and, on the other hand,

forces  within  oneself  of  which  one  is  unaware.  But  the  natures  of  the

unconscious forces, and also of the conscious forces, involved in the one case

of the one sort of repression are different from those involved in cases of the

other sort.

 Both forms of repression involve the construction and operationalization of

a narrative alternative to the one that, supposing the repressed idea to be

correct (which it typically is), describes reality as it really is. In other words,

both forms of repression involve rationalization. Without rationalization, it is

hard, if not impossible, to repress an idea and also to keep it repressed. (That

said,  rationalization-construction  is  more  heavily  involved  in  ensuring  that

already repressed ideas stay repressed than it is in initially repressing them.)

 Right now we’ll talk about “self-deception," since references to “repression”would resonate in a confusion-engendering way with the points just made. In

due course, we’ll map what we say about self-deception onto repression and
                                                                                    1

repression.
          2

   2.0 How is repression possible?

 

 The possibility of self-deception, and therefore of both repression and
                                                                                    1

repression, is a consequence of the following three facts.
          2

 

  (1) The mind is not a perfectly unified entity; it consists of various parts that

  communicate with each other only very imperfectly. The right hand doesn’t

  always know what the left is doing.

 

  (2). There are two very different ways in which one can be aware of a given

  thing. One can either have “knowledge by acquaintance” of that thing or

  one can have “knowledge by description” of it.

 

  (3) There are two very different senses in which a given mental content can

  be ‘conscious.’ On the one hand, it can be conscious in the sense that it is a

  constituent of consciousness. (Sense-perceptions are such constituents; so

  are  itches,  tickles,  and  other  sensations.)  On  the  other  hand,  it  can  be

  conscious in the sense that it is a mental entity of which one is conscious.

  Your  belief  that  1  +  1  =  2  is  not  a  constituent  of  consciousness.  It  is

  "conscious" in the sense that you are, or can readily become, conscious of it.

  Of course, we are conscious of rocks, trees, and stars, but don’t describe

  such things as ‘conscious.’ But that, I think, is because they are not mental

  entities  and  we  thus  have  no  tendency  to  co-categorize  them  with

  constituents of consciousness or with mental entities of any other kind. But

  since  constituents  of  consciousness  are  the  most  obvious  examples  of

  mentality, and since we describe them as ‘conscious’, we have an inclination

  to  describe  mental  entities  that  are  not  themselves  constituents  of

  consciousness but that we are (non-inferentially) aware of as ‘conscious.’ We  thus, without knowing it, use the word ‘conscious’ equivocally: sometimes it

  means ‘mental entity that is a constituent of consciousness’ and sometimes

  it means ‘mental entity that we are directly conscious of.’

   2.1 How is repression possible? (Continued)

 

 Given (3), it immediately follows that there is a sense in which all mental

entities  that  aren’t  constituents  of  consciousness  are  unconscious.  Your

knowledge that 1 + 1 = 2 is not a constituent of consciousness. So far as it is

conscious, it is only in the sense that you can readily become conscious of it.

And most of the time you are not conscious of it. But it exists, and is operative,

even when you are not conscious of it. If you didn’t know that 1 + 1 = 2, then

the way in which you dealt with the world---the way in which you transacted

with  others,  as  well  as  the  way  you  dealt  with  problems  not  having  an

interpersonal dimension---- would differ radically from the way in which, even

when you’re not consciously thinking that 1 + 1 = 2 or a fortiori thinking about

your knowledge that 1 + 1 = 2, you in fact deal with the world. The way in

which you reason is not only consistent with, but expressive of, a knowledge

that 1 + 1 = 2, the same being true of the way in which you interact with people

and also of the way in which you manage matters that don’t involve others. But

it is only during, at most, a tiny few of the occasions when one’s thoughts and

overt acts are guided by a conscious awareness of the fact that 1 + 1 = 2. It is

only  rarely  that  one  consciously  thinks  about  the  fact  that  1  +  1  =  2  or,

therefore, that one thinks about one’s belief that 1 + 1 = 2.

 Bearing  this  in  mind,  suppose,  if  only  for  argument’s  sake,  that  your

knowledge  that  1  +  1  =  2  is  identical  with  some  physiological  structure.  It

follows from what we’ve said that, even when you are not conscious of the fact

1 + 1 = 2, or therefore of your knowledge of that fact, this belief of yours is

psychologically operative. Of course, given that it’s a physiological structure, it’s

inevitably operative in the same, thought-free way as an involuntary muscle-

spasm.  But,  even  when  not  the  object  of  consciousness,  that  physiological

structure is also psychologically active; it’s active, in other words, as a belief,and not just as a heap of molecules. Your knowledge that 1 + 1 = 2 informs the

way  in  which  you  deal  with  the  world  even  when  you  aren’t  consciously

thinking that 1 + 1 = 2; and, were this belief of yours inoperative whenever it

was blazing a trail across your consciousness, your way of dealing with the

world would bear little resemblance to your actual way of dealing with it.

 Given (2), it follows that you may not recognize a given mental content of

yours for what it is. You can have thoughts about Charlemagne and you thus

have a concept of him. But if you met him, you wouldn't recognize him; and so

long as you didn't figure out who he was, you would, without knowing it, have

two distinct concepts of him (one based on personal encounters with him, the

other  based  on  statements  of  historians).  Given  anything  that  isn't  itself  a

constituent of consciousness, one can fail to recognize it for what it is and,

consequently, one can unwittingly have two distinct concepts of that thing.

Propositional attitudes are not constituents of consciousness. So one could,

without  knowing  it,  have  two  distinct  concepts  of  one  of  one's  own

propositional attitudes.

   2.2 How is repression possible? (Continued)

 

 A story will clarify these points. You live next to the “Springfield Strangler”:

a prolific serial killer who, in the town of Springfield, has killed many children by

strangling them. His identity is unknown to everyone (except, of course, the

Springfield Strangler himself). You know this person as “Ted Jones.” Since you

watch the news, you know of the Springfield Killer. But you don’t know that Ted

Jones is the Springfield Strangler. You find Ted’s company agreeable and you

play tennis with him.

 In this situation just described, there is some one individual x such that:

 

  (i) You are acquainted with x,

  (ii) You have knowledge by description of x, and

  (iii) You know that, in virtue of these facts, you have two distinct conceptions

of some one individual.

 

 But this changes. For, at time t, you find out that Ted Jones is the Springfield

Strangler. You see him being arrested. You hear the subsequent news reports.

You consider various facts directly known to you about Ted Jones: his sudden

nightly disappearances, which typically involved Ted’s dragging large trunks to

his pick-up truck; the stench emanating from his house, which he implausibly

explained by saying that he had a clogged sink; etc. You thus realize that Ted

Jones is indeed the Springfield Killer.

 Just as one can, without knowing it, be acquainted with a given individual

while also having descriptive knowledge of it, so one can be acquainted with a

given  one  of  one’s  own  mental  contents while  also having  descriptive

knowledge of it. A corollary is that, given some mental entity E that belongs to

one, one can discover that one actually has some attitude towards E that onedid not previously know oneself to have. You can discover that the gnawing

feeling of unpleasantness you experience whenever somebody mentions Smith

is your detestation of Smith. Emotions are distinct from their manifestations in

consciousness. Your love of your mother (supposing for argument’s sake that

she’s alive and that you do love her) is an enduring psychological structure; it is

not an ephemeral event. But it gives  rise to ephemeral conscious events (to

pangs of remorse when you inadvertently hurt her feelings, to surges of joy

when, after not hearing from her for three months, she calls you, etc.). But

your love for her is not itself a conscious event. It is "conscious" only in the

Pickwickian  sense  that  you  are  conscious  of  it.  Beliefs,  like  emotions,  are

enduring  structures  and  are  to  be  distinguished  from  the  constituents  of

consciousness  to  which  they  may  give  rise. All propositional  attitudes  are

enduring structures and are thus to be distinguished from any constituents of

consciousness for whose existence they’re responsible. And a given emotion,

e.g., your hatred of Smith, can give rise to conscious events of very different

kinds. It can give rise to gnawing feelings of unpleasantness (as when you hear

that he’s coming over), to intense feelings of satisfaction (as when you hear

that he flunked his economics exam), etc. And given two qualitatively distinct

conscious  events,  both  of  them  expressions  in  consciousness  of  some  one

propositional  attitude x and both of them, consequently, ways in which that

emotion presents itself to consciousness, there isn’t necessarily any reason

why you should recognize x in both of those conscious events. To sum up, given

only that x and y are both conscious derivatives of some propositional attitude

z, it doesn’t follow that any one part of one’s mind has the information needed

to recognize z in both x and y. For this reason, it follows that one can have two

divergent attitudes towards z.

 Given (1), therefore, it follows that one can have very different attitudes

towards a given one of one’s own propositional attitudes. And it also followsthat, without knowing it, one can view a given one of one’s own propositional

attitudes  as  despicable and as laudatory, as deserving to be cultivated and

expressed in action and as deserving to be annihilated. 

  2.3 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression

 

 But self-deception is not mere ignorance of what one is feeling. In fact, self-

deception seems to presuppose that, at some level, one has knowledge of the

thing of which one lacks conscious knowledge. So given only that one can fail to

recognize  some o n e propositional  attitude  in  two  different  conscious

expressions of it, all that follows is that one is not completely transparent to

oneself; it doesn’t follow that one can self-deceive; it doesn’t follow that there

can be some sort of internal conflict---between what one knows and what one

wants to know, between what is unconscious (because repressed) and what is

conscious (because countenanced). A few additions to the three points made

thus far will make it clear how self-deception is possible.

 First of all, one must distinguish having a given propositional attitude (or,

more generally, mental content) from knowing that one has it. Setting aside

anything that has to do with repression, one can feel a certain way towards so

and so but not know it. Knowing that one feels that way involves making a

judgment about one’s mental state.

 Also, propositional attitudes never make an appearance in consciousness in

propria persona, except in the indirect sense in which rocks and trees do. What

is in consciousness, i.e., what is constitutive of consciousness, is at most a

representative or derivative of a propositional attitude. On Monday, Smith feels

a surge of anger towards his dad. On Tuesday, he feels another surge of anger.

These surges of anger, let us suppose, are expressions of hatred. But the hatred

per se isn’t what entered his consciousness. What Smith is directly given are

various indications that he hates his father. These indications are strong. (In any

case, we can imagine developing the story in such a way that, supposing Smith

sane, they left no room for reasonable doubt on his part as to whether hehated his father.) But he still has to “synthesize” them; he still has to make a

judgment to the effect that they express some enduring attitude. In most cases,

this is done so automatically, that he is unaware that any judgment has been

made.

 Those judgments are often quite wrong. We like the person towards whom

we have constant surges of rage. We dislike the person who repeatedly makes

us feel good. (He makes you feel good because he wants to disarm you. And he

knows that by “pushing the right buttons”---buying you chocolates, taking you

to the zoo, etc.---he’ll generate feelings that, when not the result of this sort of

chicanery, tend to express genuine affection. You’ll know in your bones that

there is something very wrong about the situation. But you won’t able to say

what it is. Assuming that your views about others are mainstream and are thus

hewed to the glib, emotionally-driven narratives in terms of which all but the

most penetrating thinkers understand others, you won’t have developed the

ability to articulate your gut feelings or, therefore, to give them a form in which

you or others are likely to give them the credence they deserve. Given that fact,

along with the red-herrings that this manipulator is pouring into evidence-

repository on the basis of which you make your conscious judgments, your

verdict will be that he is a good person.

 In any case, supposing that one has a given propositional attitude, what one

is given is not that attitude per se, but various evidences thereof, and those

evidences may be dispersed over time and may occur in multifarious contexts.

When  the  propositional  attitude  is  an  emotionally  sterile  one---when  it

concerns a belief about number-theory or epistemology---we have no trouble

making the needed judgments.

   2.3.1 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression
                                                              1

 

 It’s one thing to suspect that something is the case; it’s quite another to

know it. The police suspect that Smith is the murderer. The evidence points to

him (the bloody footprints leading to his front door step, the hair samples, the

smudged fingerprints which are consistent with Smith’s being the killer even

though they don’t prove it). But the police don’t yet know that Smith is their

man. For there are gaps in the evidence they have on him, as a result of which

there are semi-reasonable ways of modeling the scenario that, if correct, would

entail that Smith was not the murderer.

 Bearing  these  facts  in  mind,  suppose  the  following.  Smith  is  your  best

friend. You owe him your life many times over. The police strongly suspect that

he’s the murderer. You're the detective who is assigned the case. Like your

colleagues, you strongly suspect that he's guilty. But you aren't sure. And you

don't want to be sure. So you choose not to exercise due diligence.

 What we call “repression” involves failure to exercise due diligence. We

suspect, but we don’t know, which is how we want to it to keep it.

 So the customary conception of repression is erroneous. The customary

conception  is  given  by  assertion  that  (“CCR”  is  short  for  conventional

conception of repression”):

 

  (CCR) the person in question has some propositional attitude P such that (a)

  he knowingly chooses to cease to be aware of it, i.e., he knowingly drives it

  into his unconscious; and such that (b) P is constantly struggling to break

  into consciousness, failing to do so only because the patient keeps it out.

 

 Part (b) of CCR is indeed paradoxical. For, presumably, to keep P out of his

consciousness, the patient must know what P is: otherwise he won’t knowwhat it is he’s trying to keep out. But if he knows what it is he’s trying to keep

out, then he’s conscious of it and it is ipso facto unrepressed.

 But CCR doesn’t correctly describe the nature of repression. It’s one thing

to know that your best friend is the Springfield Killer. It’s another thing to

suspect it but choose not to follow the relevant trail of evidence. Repression---

or, rather, repression (the subscript has again become relevant)---is a failure to
                      1

do  something;  it  is  a  failure  to  perform  the  operations  by  which  one

customarily generates one’s beliefs; it isn’t an operation performed on existing

beliefs (or propositional attitudes of any other kind). So repression involves
                                                                                1

choosing not to learn something that, if learned and therefore known, one

would wish that one had never learned, but only after it was too late.

 While your parents are on vacation, let us suppose, you look through their

bedroom and come across your mother’s private journal. On the basis of its

external appearance, along with the information that you’ve gleaned from a

cursory  glance  at  its  interior,  you  know  enough  to  know  that  the  journal

provides detailed information about your mother’s sexual exploits over the last

few years. You thus know that, were you to read on, you’d learn things about

your mother that you know you don’t want to know. So you choose not to read

on. Your wish not to be traumatized overpowers your curiosity.

 Repression is  to  be  understood  along  these  lines.  When  we  speak,
                1

inaccurately, of “repressed knowledge," we’re referring (in at least some cases,

viz., those that aren’t cases of repression) to suspicions that we have chosen
                                              2

not to verify, since we suspect that, were we to do so, we’d be stuck with

knowledge that we wish we didn’t have.

 Every case of repression does, as CCR says, involve intrapsychic conflict.
                                1

But,  contrary  to  what  CCR  says,  the  conflict  is  not  between  unconscious

knowledge of some truth T on the one hand, and conscious ignorance of T on

the other. The conflict is between a wish to know the truth and a wish to notknow the truth.2.3.2 One reason why repression often fails
                                      1

 

 One’s agency only goes so far; there is much within one’s mind that falls

outside its scope. Among the various mental entities that lie beyond the reach

of what it is for one to choose to occur are the aforementioned judgment-

producing processes. So it is not within my power to completely suspend those

processes.

 And so far as it is within my power to do so, it is not in the direct, robust

sense in which one can choose to move one’s arm, but in the indirect and

attenuated sense in which one can choose to become obese. One doesn’t

really choose to become obese; one chooses to do things that will redirect

automatic processes in such a way that obesity is the inevitable result. Similarly,

one can no more choose to stop making judgments than one choose to stop

digesting food. One can choose courses of action that will have the effect of

redirecting the automatically occurring stream of mental activity that yields

judgments (e.g., one can choose activities that will flood that judgment-making

faculty with information concerning the judgments that one wants to avoid

making); and one can also choose to do things that will deplete that faculty of

the energy it needs to function (e.g., one can do intense exercise for hours on

end).  One  can  also  choose  to  paralyze  or  even  permanently  damage  the

physiological  underpinnings  of  those  judgments  (e.g.,  one  can  get  drunk,

thereby paralyzing them, or one can get a lobotomy, thereby destroying them).

But, unless one goes so far as to damage one’s brain, that stream of activity will

eventually start yielding the very judgments that you don’t want it to.2.3.3 The concept of anxiety in relation to repression
                                                              1

 

 The anxiety that the subject feels when the forces of repression break
                                                                                  1

down  isn’t  the  result  of  some  hitherto  unconscious  knowledge  entering

consciousness.  It  is  the  result  one’s  own  thought-processes,  despite  one’s

attempt to stymie them, following up on clues that it had good reason to

believe would lead to a belief that one doesn’t want to have.

 “But if you already know that you don’t want to have that belief, then you

must already know what that belief is and must already have it.” This is false.

Suspicion isn’t knowledge; and there’s nothing paradoxical about not wanting

to pursue suspicions that one suspects would, if pursued, lead to knowledge

one would rather not have.

 Also, one can know what sort of thing something is without knowing which

thing it is. If I ask you to find a unique number n such that the square root of n

is over 10 and such that two people whose middle names are “Robert” each

      1/3
own n acres of land, and I prove to you, without identifying the number in

question, that there is indeed exactly one such number, you know what sort of

thing you’re looking for without as of yet being able to identify any number

that fits the description.

 A story will make this clear. You are acquainted with Sally. You know that

exactly one person has been stealing money from your wallet---but you don’t

know who it is. So, by virtue of knowing the description “person who has been

stealing money from my wallet” to be uniquely satisfied, you have descriptive

knowledge of Sally. But you don’t know that Sally satisfies that description.3.0 Repression
                2

 

 Whereas repression involves failing to form a belief, repressioninvolves
                          12 

blinding oneself to an existing belief that one has already formed.

 How  is  repression possible?  How  does  one  repress  a  belief  that  has
                        2

already been formed? And how does one keep such a belief repressed? To

clarify the second question, how does one keep a belief that one doesn’t want

to enter consciousness from doing so? For one must be conscious of the enemy

hammering at the walls of one’s fortress if one is to take measures to keep him

out. But, in this context, one cannot be conscious of the enemy, since what one

is conscious of ipso facto isn’t repressed.3.1 A necessary condition for repression
                                              2

 

 For a propositional attitude to be a candidate for repression, it must be a
                                                                          2

source of conflict within one’s own psyche. It isn’t enough that it be a source of

pain. One  often  fails  to  repress one’s  most  painful  memories.  (Holocaust
                                      2

survivors remember what they’ve been through.) People typically choose to

suppress painful memories. In other words, they choose not to think about

them. But suppression isn’t repression.
                                          2

 One represses knowledge that one has about one’s husband, because
                    2

one’s life is so structured that it would be severely disrupted were the truths

thereby known to be admitted. One likes many aspects of one’s life; it may well

be that, despite the ugly truths in question about one’s husband, one believes

(perhaps  rightly)  that  being  married  to  him  really  is  better  than  not  being

married  to  him.  But,  since  one  couldn’t  stomach  marriage  to  him  if  one

admitted to oneself that he was a child-molesting ghoul, one represses that
                                                                                    2

knowledge.

 And one may be right to. Repression isn’t always a bad thing. In many
                                                2

contexts,  it’s  the  optimal  thing.  It  may  be  that  Sally's  quality  of  life  would

plummet if she left her child-molesting husband; it may be that, were she to

leave him, her children would be in danger. Since she couldn’t be with him if

she consciously knew that he was child-molester, she’s well advised to repress
                                                                                          2

that knowledge, at least for the time being.

 A  person  who  never  repressed anything  would  quickly  go  mad.
                                            2

Repressions are  necessary.  So  how  is  repression bad?  First  of  all,
            22

repressionsoutlive their usefulness. The circumstances that prompts one to
            2 

repress a given belief may well be replaced by circumstances in which one’s
      2

consciously having that belief is vital to one’s wellbeing. (In this context, take“belief” to stand for any propositional attitude.) But, repression being what it
                                                                          2

is, one will have no idea what it is that one is supposed to be aware of. In fact,

one is unlikely to know that one has represssed anything important to one’s
                                                        2

welfare.

 Also, repression isn’t a one-off affair; it is an on-going process. Whenever
                    2

one comes across information that confirms the repressed belief, one must
                                                                    2

either repress one’s knowledge of that information or one must convince
              2

oneself of the cogency of some spurious interpretation of that information.

Since these cover-ups must themselves be covered up, more knowledge ends

up being repressed and more spurious rationalizations are accepted. Each
                      2

instance of repression creates a hole in one’s body of knowledge that one
                        2

must explain away. Since these explanations cannot be genuine, and since each

one incentivizes the creation of more bogus, anomaly-creating explanations,

the need to plug up these holes disposes one to devalue truth and to hyper-

value  the  methods  of  reasoning  whose  legitimacy  these  faux-explanations

falsely assume. The result is a loss of both ratiocinative and ethical integrity.

 So, while repressions are not necessarily bad things, sometimes being
                            2

indispensable to one’s well-being, they tend to stick around long after they’ve

served any legitimate purpose; and during that time, they tend to spread and,

as a result, to eat away at one’s psychological architecture.3.2 A repression-conducive factor
                  2

 

 One can know something without that thing’s being obvious to one. I

know that there is a war in Iraq. But it’s not obvious to me the way that it

would be if I were there witnessing it. It’s harder to repress knowledge of
                                                                        2

the obvious than of the non-obvious. If your knowledge that your husband is

a serial killer is based on inferences, even air-tight ones, it will be easier to

repress it than it would be if it were based on personal observations of him
      2

killing people.

 That said, people can repress knowledge of truths that are as obvious as
                                      2

truths can be. But one cannot repress such knowledge without, in effect,
                                              2

telling oneself that one isn’t capable of knowing the truth. Since the purpose of

repression is the elimination of conflict within oneself, and since a complete
          2

loss of faith in one’s ratiocinative ability usually, but not always, creates more

such conflict than it eliminates, repression tends to target knowledge of what
                                                2

is not totally obvious. In most cases of repression, there must be what lawyers
                                                        2

refer to as “plausible deniability.”3.2.1 A related point

 

 The things that one represses tend to be things that, although one knows
                                      2

them to be true, involve one’s making judgment-calls. Until your husband’s

psychopathy assumes some particularly brazen form, any knowledge that you

have of it involves your putting together various bits of data (e.g., various odd

comments he’s made, various murders that you hear about on the news, his

unexplained absences during the times that when the murders occurred, his

fitting the descriptions given to the police of the murderer). But, having as it

does a basis in some many pieces of data, your subsequent knowledge that

your husband is the murderer is shaky and is thus vulnerable to repression, in
                                                                                      2

a way that strictly sense-based knowledge is not.

 “But if one’s ‘knowledge’ of some truth is shaky," it will be said, “then one

isn’t convinced of that truth. And if one isn’t convinced of it, one doesn’t have

knowledge of it. One only has suspicions.”

 There are different reasons why one may lack confidence in one of one’s

beliefs. It may be that one has not, as of yet, encountered adequate evidence

for that belief. Or it may be that, even though one has encountered adequate

evidence and even though, consequently, that belief would ordinarily be firm,

one wants that belief to be false. If a belief concerns something personal, one’s

standard of proof tends to be ridiculously high. What it would take to convince

you that somebody you’re not married to is cheating on his wife is miniscule to

what it would take to convince you that your husband is cheating on you.

 To take a different example: the amount of evidence that favors the theory

of evolution is simply enormous. But because that theory says, in effect, that

we’re orangutans whose lives have no meaning, we won’t judge it worthy of

acceptance until it’s met absurdly high standards of evidence. I have no doubt

that people have always known that we evolved from other life forms. Giventhe anatomical, behavioral, and psychological similarities between us, on the

one  hand,  and  members  of  other  mammalian  species,  on  the  other,  it’s

inconceivable that we aren’t related to them. Denying that orangutans are our

biological kin is like denying that the one person in the room with grape jelly

and crumbs around his mouth is the one who ate your jelly-doughnut.

 Of course, religious people say that God created us. But, if so, why did he

choose to make us look so much like apes, and why did he choose to stock our

minds  with  ignominious  urges  that  constantly  show  us  that  those  external

similarities are but representations of internal ones?

 This brings us to another illustration of the principle in question: it’s often

said that Freud’s theories aren’t warranted by the empirical data. If you actually

read what he says and then, bearing what you read in mind, study a single

person’s behavior for a period of around 10 minutes, it becomes clear that

Freud’s theories are theoretically extraordinarily conservative; it also becomes

clear that he was simply making explicit the principles that we ordinarily use

when making intuitive judgments about other people. People don’t want to be

told that they lie to themselves. People don’t want to part with rationalizations;

they don’t want to face ugly realities. They’d rather be a king in their dreams

than a janitor in reality. So it’s not hard to see why it is often dismissed, despite

its staggering explanatory power and despite the extraordinarily high degree to

which his claims accord with the principles that underlie our judgments. We'll

state Freud's principle claims right now.3.2.2 Freud's Principle Claims

 

 In order to move forward, we must take into account the principles tenets

of Freud’s psychology. Here is a one a summary:

 

  Nobody  is  perfectly  transparent  to  himself.  Nobody  is  conscious  of

everything that goes on in his mind. There are different reasons why one may

not be conscious of given constituent of one's own mind. In some cases, one can

readily become conscious of a constituent of one's mind of which one was

previously  unconscious.  For  example,  let's  suppose  that,  since  the  time  you

woke up this morning, you haven't been conscious of your belief that 2+2=4.

You just became conscious of it. Given how effortless this transition was, it

didn't  involve  your  resisting  any  forces  within  yourself.  It  was  unconscious

because,  until  just  a  moment  ago,  you  lacked  a  positive  incentive  to  pay

attention to it----not because you had a positive incentive to turn a blind eye to

it.

 But in other cases, a given person may be unaware of a given constituent of

his mind for the reason that he doesn't want to be aware of it. He finds it so

distressing that he chooses to turn a blind eye to it---to repress it, in other

words. In repressing that entity, the subject didn't destroy it; he merely blinded

himself to it. The subject wouldn't have found that entity important enough to

repress if he hadn't known it to have a profound bearing on how he should live

and, therefore, on what he should aspire to do. Consequently, the desires to

which it gives rise are necessarily especially intense ones, and the subject will

experience intolerable frustration until they are discharged.

 Such a desire cannot be discharged unless it employs a subterfuge of some

kind, given that it cannot possibly be the subject's conscious intention to gratify

it. Such subterfuges are always of one of two types. 

  Type #1: The desire in question can disguise itself as a desire that the subject

  consciously does wish to act on. An example: the subject detests his ailing

  mother. But he refuses to believe that he has anything but love for her. His

  detestation  for  her  presents  itself  to  his  consciousness  as  a  fanatical

  devotion to her being safe from both microbial and human predators. So he

  bathes her in scalding hot water and refuses to let her leave the house. In

  this way, his repressed hatred of her is discharged in the form of behavior

  that the subject believes to be motivated entirely by unalloyed concern for

  her well-being.

 

  Type #2: It can be expressed as a symptom. An example: Having repressed

  her  complete  detestation  of  her  husband,  a  young  woman  finds  herself

  gripped by a compulsive desire to do housework whenever her betrothed

  wishes to engage her in acts of physical intimacy.3.2.2.1 Opposition to these claims

 

 So far as the opposition to these contentions has been given an argumentative

foundation,  the  arguments  in  question  are  pitifully  weak  and  involve

regressions  to  extremely  crude  and,  in  some  cases,  demonstrably  false

positions. “We’re computers” (Fodor). “There is no consciousness” (Dennett).

“There are no minds” (Quine). “The mind is completely transparent to itself”

(Searle). Nobody believes or doubts or hopes for anything; terms referring to

propositional  attitudes  (e.g.  "hope,"  "believe,"  "intend")  belong  to  ‘folk-

psychology’, which is no more accurate than folk-physics” (Paul and Patricia

Churchland). “We’re better off trying to understand Baryshnikov's skill as a

dancer in terms of fluid levels in his ears than his ability to upload, process, and

distribute  information  in  ways  that  ensure  that  his  movements  are

appropriately coordinated.” (Searle).

 These  willful  denials  of  the  obvious  are  often  embedded  in  larger

philosophical projects that are nothing short of risible, e.g. the Dretske-Fodor

view that, details aside, there is no difference between my concept of a given a

person and a photograph of a given person.

 And  yet  all  of  these  flights  into  inanity  are  touted  as  “scientific”  and

“rigorous.”  Why?  “Because”,  we  are  told,  “in  denying  the  existence  of  the

mental, we’re simply completing the process of ceasing to understand nature in

animistic terms and we’re thereby completing the victory of science over non-

science.”

 But this argument is no good, and it's clear why. While it's certainly a good

idea not to impute minds to stones, it's obviously not such a good idea not to

impute them to people. So while it’s a good idea not to understand the world

projectively,  we  must  remember  that  the  projector  itself  cannot  be  a

projection.3.3 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression: Some preliminaries
                                                        2

(Continued)

 

 A story, based on the remarks made in Sections 3.0-3.2.1., will help us

clarify and develop the points we’ve made about self-deception and

repression. You discover that your husband’s a psychopath. You don’t see him
          2

killing anyone. But within the limits set by that fact, you are as sure of it as a

rational person could be. Since this knowledge (or near-knowledge) cannot be

reconciled with your life, at least not in its current form, and thus creates

intolerable conflict within your psyche, you choose to repress it.

 Here is what repressing this knowledge involves. First of all, when taken
                              2

with other propositions whose truth we may reasonably assume you to accept,

the proposition:

 

  (1) My husband is a psychopathic ghoul all of whose protestations of love

  were fraudulent, as was everything else about him; which, given what it is to

  be a psychopath along with the well-known (to people interested in the

  subject) symptoms of psychopathy (glibness, specific lack of insight, etc.)

 

entails the much more generic proposition:

 

  (2) There is some property P such that my husband has P and such that, by

  virtue of having P, my husband is a worse person than he would otherwise

  be; and a person’s having P involves his doing the sorts of things that my

  husband does that trouble me (e.g. it involves his smoothly lying, his

  vacillating between inexplicable rage and glib charm, the contrast between

  how he acts and who he claims to be, his inability to authentic his claim that

  he was an admiral in the Navy). 

 By virtue of knowing (1), therefore, you also know (2). So, during the

fleeting moment when you consciously know (1), you also know (2). Let’s

henceforth refer to that fleeting moment as “FM.”

 (2), unlike (1), is something that you can keep in consciousness without

having to overhaul your entire life. For (2), unlike (1), is sufficiently vague that

your knowledge of it won’t make you want to retch at the mere sight of your

husband. During FM, you realize that you wish you hadn’t discovered (1). But,

as you know, if you simply decide not to think about (1)---if you suppress, but

do not repress, that knowledge---you won’t be able to live with yourself. You

know that you must bury your knowledge of (1). But you also know that you’ll

be confronted with the same facts---the strange behaviors, the news reports,

etc.---that led you to know (1) in the first place; and you know that, unless you

make some drastic change, those same facts will lead you right back to the

same ugly place.

 So you make a decision. You know (2). And you know that you know it. With

this knowledge in mind, you resolve that, henceforth, when confronted with

the sort of datum that that led you to believe (1), you’ll model it in a way that is

consistent with (2) but that doesn’t coincide with (1) or with anything else that

would be equally disruptive to your current situation.

 Before we can move forward, we must recall some facts that we’ve already

discussed about propositional attitudes, and we must point out a couple of

new ones. First of all, propositional attitudes are not, as we’ve made clear,

constituents of consciousness. For a propositional attitude to be “conscious” is

either for one to be conscious of it or for it to be such that one can readily

become conscious of it. Your knowledge that 7 + 3 = 10 is conscious in the

sense that you can readily become conscious of it. You weren’t conscious of it a

few seconds ago, however. But, even then, it was “conscious” because it wasreadily made into an object of consciousness. (Freud (1915, 1921) describes

such propositional attitudes as “pre-conscious.”) So for your knowledge of (1)

to be “conscious” is for it to be a ready object of consciousness.3.4 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression: Some final preliminaries
                                                        2

 

 There are some other relevant facts. Beliefs are inert except to the extent

that one draws consequences from them and, more generally, that they are

allowed to beget or otherwise engage other beliefs. The making of inferences

at least sometimes involves a deliberate, conscious effort on one’s part. But

some inferences are made involuntarily. Insights often just occur to one; but

those insights are based on rational consideration of the relevant evidence.

But, even though (so I believe) many an inference is made involuntarily, one has

at least some control over what sorts of inferences one’s mind makes. So, given

some belief B that one has, one can so structure one’s life that it is very unlikely

that one will (consciously) make inferences from B that one would otherwise

make. Thus, one can so structure one’s life that a belief, though still conscious,

is isolated---prevented from engaging the bodies of belief that it would

otherwise engage and prevented from begetting the beliefs that it would

otherwise beget. Such a belief is conscious in some formal sense; but, at the

level of consciousness, it has become inert, like one’s knowledge of some

random, uninteresting fact.

 By de-operationalizing one's acceptance of a given fact, one can cease to

have anything more than an abstract, formal understanding of what that fact

amounts to. I know that there are people who are being tortured. But, because

I have not witnessed a torture session, I don’t know what the proposition there

are people who are being tortured amounts to as well as I would if ceteris

paribus I had witnessed a torture session. So even though I am in some

technical sense no less aware of that truth than somebody who has first-hand

knowledge of what torture-sessions involve, my awareness of that fact doesn't

mean very much to me, whereas his awareness of it means a great deal to him.

 There is one last preliminary fact. Your knowledge of (1) is not derived fromsome one sense-perception; (1) isn’t the sort of truth that can be known in

such a direct way. It embodies a case of inference to the best explanation. That

doesn’t mean that it isn’t knowledge. (Unless knowledge can be acquired

through inferences to the best explanation, then what we actually know is only

an infinitesimally small part of what we think we know.) But it does mean that

it embodies an attempt on your part (a successful one, in fact) to model various

pieces of information.

 There are different ways to model that body of data. (This is not a

peculiarity of the data involved in this particular case. Given a body of data, it is

more likely than not than there is more than one reasonable, or at least semi-

reasonable, way to model it.) In this case, so we will suppose, (1) is the best

such model. But it isn’t, so we will also suppose, the only one that isn’t totally

implausible. The following proposition constitutes an alternative way of

modeling that data:

 

  (3) Given that mental activity is governed by brain-activity, it follows that

  there are (possible, if not actual) physiological conditions whose symptoms

  include behavior similar to my husbands, accompanied by bouts of

    forgetfulness. (Not being a physician, I don’t know the specifics.) And his

  having such a condition would explain how it is that, without being

  intentionally dishonest, he often says things that are false, and otherwise

  behaves in substandard ways.

 

  (3) is not an optimal model of the data. But it’s far from being obviously

false. And this, for reasons that we’ll now discuss, is enough to repress your

knowledge of (1).3.5 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression: A conjecture as to what it
                                                        2

involves

 

 In light of these points, I put forth the following conjecture. During FM (the

fleeting moment when your knowledge of (1) was conscious), you resolve that,

on the occasions that you become conscious (not pre-conscious, but actively

conscious; i.e., conscious in the sense in which you are now conscious of

reading these very words) of your acceptance of (1), you will take the following

steps. First, you’ll isolate that belief. You will, to the best of your ability, refrain

from drawing inferences from it (or from conjunctive propositions of which it is

one of the conjuncts). You won’t voluntarily make any inferences from it; and if

you find yourself having made one involuntarily, you’ll do your best to refrain

from pursuing it. You’ll encapsulate this knowledge.

 This will neutralize your belief in (1). First, for reasons given a moment ago,

it will blind you to corollaries of (1) of which you'd otherwise be aware, and (1)

will start to seem relatively innocuous as a result. A story will help us develop

this point.

 You discover that your husband has done X, Y, and Z. (Some jewelry is

missing from your drawer. Your husband is wearing new clothes, even though

he has no money. And so forth.) Since you’ve decided not to draw inferences

from (1), you’ll be more likely than you would otherwise be to take these on a

case-by-case basis. Inevitably, you’ll sometimes connect these curious

phenomena to your knowledge of (1). But, just as inevitably, bits of knowledge

that you have that would otherwise congregate will remain isolated from one

another. As a result, your appreciation of just what it is that (1) entails will

remain superficial; you’ll be slow to recognize its consequences for your own

welfare, and to recognize the extent to which your husband’s condition is

impoverishing your life. Having decided to isolate (1), you’ll resolve that, whenever you encounter

data that clearly confirms (1), you’ll try to look at it from the viewpoint of

somebody who believes that (3) is correct. Of course, since you are not such a

person, this will, at first, be a kind of intellectual exercise for you: you’ll still

know that (1), not (3), is the right way to model the data. But by engaging in

this exercise, you are ensuring that energy and thought that would otherwise

deepen your understanding of the consequences of (1) don’t have that effect at

all: Those energies are now on a fool’s errand. Also, this way of responding to

such data will soon become automatic, for reasons similar to those for which, if

an actor rehearses his lines often enough, it becomes automatic, even though

it wasn’t before, for him to say Y if he just said X.

 This response-mechanism will further isolate your knowledge of (1). That

knowledge will, at least at the level of consciousness, become more and more

inconsequential. One cannot in any direct way choose what to believe. (One

can choose what to believe only in the sense in which one can choose to gain

weight. One can choose to do things that one knows will add mass to one’s

body; one cannot choose to gain weight in the way in which one can choose to

move one’s arm.) But, within limits, one can choose which beliefs to make

operational and which ones to make non-operational; one can choose to do

things that will make a given belief impotent and irrelevant. I’m an actor; I’m

mediocre at it. I know that fact. I cannot directly choose to cease to have that

belief. But I can choose to make it irrelevant; for I can choose an occupation in

which my lack of acting ability is irrelevant. Similarly, you can, though to a lesser

extent, choose to adopt certain practices that make your knowledge of (1)

irrelevant or, in any case, make it less relevant than it would otherwise be.

 In this way, your acceptance of (1) becomes, at the conscious level, a mere

shadow of what it would otherwise have been and of what it once was. It

becomes like an old officer who, having become senile, is no longer allowed tocommand troops but who, because the higher-ups feel sorry for him, is allowed

to keep his title.3.6 Why repression is never a complete success

 

 Most data-synthesis occurs below the threshold of consciousness. When

you walk into a room, you automatically upload a mass of information and you

automatically make many inferences from that data. The uploading and

synthesizing of information doesn’t need your conscious cooperation. If it did,

you’d know very little indeed. (In fact, it doesn’t involve your cooperation at all,

since most of it happens sub-personally. As we’ve seen, minds are more basic

than selves. Your self is an agency that regulates existing mental activity, most,

if not all, of which consists in the uploading and synthesizing of information. So,

speaking both logically and chronologically, the sub-personal gathering and

processing of information is more fundamental than the personal gathering

and uploading and processing of information.)

 It follows, and is clear on independent grounds, that your decisions as to

what goes on in your own mind are of limited scope. Those decisions affect

how well the conscious (and pre-conscious) strata of the mind communicate

with other strata. They don’t affect in any direct way affect what goes on in

other, deeper strata. So, even if you've sincerely resolved to make no effort to

interpret aberrant behaviors on your husband's part, that resolution fails to

shut off a great deal of the ratiocinative activity that such a discovery

automatically precipitates.

 Armed with this information, let us return to our story. You have turned

your knowledge of (1) into a dead husk, at least as far as its engagements with

other denizens of consciousness are concerned. You have deliberately

structured your life in a way that drains your knowledge of (1) of much of its

importance. So far as it was in your power to do so, you have chosen to refrain

from asking questions that you’d otherwise ask and, therefore, from making

inferences that you’d otherwise make. You have thus so eviscerated yourknowledge of (1), qua denizen of consciousness, that it might as well not even

be conscious. You have thus repressed it.

 But we have a problem. As we made clear in the second to last paragraph,

you weren’t able to shut off all of the processes that link that knowledge with

other beliefs of yours. You could redirect some of those processes and

contaminate others; and maybe you could altogether shut off some of them.

But you failed to shut off, or even adulterate, much of that activity. And you

didn’t really cease to accept (1); rather, you ceased to treat that belief’s

manifestations in consciousness in the way in which you treat those of other

beliefs. But, just as you cannot typically uninstall a computer program by

dragging the desktop icon for it into the desktop garbage can, you cannot

“uninstall” a belief by tinkering with its representations in consciousness.

Beliefs are enduring structures. Your belief that 1 + 1 = 2 has been around a

long time; it does a lot of work for you even when you’re not consciously

deploying it. If you really stopped knowing that 1 + 1 = 2, your way of dealing

with the world would suddenly change in a radical way; and the changes would

pervade practically every field of endeavor, not just those in which you are

required to consciously think that 1 + 1 = 2. That belief isn’t like a mood or any

of the other will-o-the-wisps that populate consciousness. And, like any other

enduring structure that is constitutive of one’s metabolism, one has, at most,

partial control over its fortunes; and, so far as one does have such control, it

tends to be of the indirect kind previously discussed. Given any other

propositional attitude, the same thing mutatis mutandis is true of it.

 Thus, the conscious representative of your belief in (1) is an innocuous

shell. It has been repressed. But it still lives on, and it “presses for discharge” to

use Freud’s term. Since, however, you no longer acknowledge its existence, it

cannot be discharged through intentional behavior on your part; it must,

without your knowing it, insinuate itself into your intentions (e.g., you displaceyour repressed rage at your father by being mean to your students) or it must

be expressed as a symptom (e.g., when you come into contact with situations

that remind of your rage towards him, you become crippled by anxiety).

 Whatever it is that you’ve repressed, in order to keep it repressed, you must

be able to identify it. But if you can identify it, then you’re conscious of it, and

it’s not repressed. So how can it be repressed? We’ll now answer that question.3.7 Intrapsychic conflict in relation to repression: Conclusion
                                                        2

 

 I submit that, if completed in the following way, our story describes one

way in which repression can occur.
                          2

 During FM, you learned that (2) is the case, and you consciously choose to

retain that knowledge. This enables you to have your cake and eat it too. (1)

and (2) hold in virtue of the same, ugly fact. But (1) is much more specific than

(2), and an acceptance of (1) is commensurately less likely than an acceptance

of (2) to upset an existing psychological integration. At the same time, by virtue

of knowing (2), you enable yourself to continue to be aware of an ugly an

undeniable fact, and you've thus spared yourself a constant, difficult struggle to

not see the obvious. (2) is enough like (1) that, by consciously accepting (2),

one's conscious disposition isn't completely antagonistic to the still rational side

of you that urges you to accept (1). So, by accepting (2), you're not locked into a

draining struggle with the forces of rationality and truthfulness within oneself.

At the same time, by accepting (2), you are neutralizing the message of which

those forces are trying to apprise you, and you are thus spared some painful

realizations as well as the labor-intensive changes to oneself that they demand.3.8 Summing up

 

 We can't choose to destroy the beliefs we don't want to have. But we can

partly de-operationalize them. We can choose not to make any conscious effort

to delineate their consequences. We can choose to immerse ourselves in

activities or lifestyle that don't permit us to pay attention to them. And, though

belief is no more voluntary than disbelief, we can also choose to look for

reasons to have beliefs that are opposed to those that we wish we didn't have.

We can look for such reasons without having much faith that we'll ever find

them, just as a lawyer can build a case for a client he knows to be guilty. And

the mere fact that we're looking for them means that the belief we wish to

destroy no longer fits smoothly into our psychological architecture, since it no

longer has the support of the psychological structures implicated in the search.

So even though we can't directly choose our beliefs, we can choose to do

things that make it harder to pay attention to a given belief than to withdraw

our attention from it. The result may be that it becomes so hard to attend to

that belief that it becomes one of which we becomes altogether unconscious.3.9 Rationalizing rationalization

 

 People sometimes repress their knowledge of ugly truths about

themselves, and they must rationalize in order to prevent the knowledge

they've repressed from re-entering consciousness. Unfortunately, the science

of psychology has itself become little more than a means by which people

rationalize ludicrous attempts to repress their knowledge of these obvious

facts.

 Many claim to believe that there is no unconscious mental activity and a

fortiori that self-deception, repression, etc. are all artifacts of dated

psychoanalytic theories; many claim that the concepts of repression, etc. are

internal to a discipline (psychoanalysis) that have been superseded by ‘rigorous’

studies of the physiological underpinnings of thought. The thoroughly

hypocritical and self-deceptive character of such pronouncements is evident

when one looks at the judgments and conduct of these naysayers. Not a single

one of those judgments concern the physiological underpinnings of a person’s

psychology; they concern that person’s psychology. And, though this could

technically be explained in terms of the fact that people can’t routinely subject

others to PET-scans, those PET-scans would be of no psychological interest---to

anyone---unless it were shown that the findings of those PET-scans correlated

with independently known facts about psychology. The giant discoloration on

Smith’s PET-scan would be of no interest to psychology were it not known

independently of the results of that PET-scan that Smith’s mentation was

aberrant---that Smith thought that he was E.T., or some such, and was

therefore mentally ill. Were it discovered that mental activity were mediated by

the gall-bladder, the results of PET-scans would immediately cease to be of any

psychological interest; for they would no longer be correlated with

independently known, and independently explained, psychological data. Whichshows that brain-science, to the extent that it’s of any relevance to psychology,

is parasitic on psychological knowledge.

 Most of those guilty of this hypocrisy provide no arguments for their view,

other than empty, boiler-plate repetitions of the slogan that “science” studies

brains and molecules, not intangibles such as emotions and thoughts.

 As for the idea that emotions, thoughts, etc. are too intangible to be worthy

of scientific study---that position is decidedly implausible. Whatever we know

about the external world—and, therefore, about brains, etc.---we know it

through perceptions and thoughts and thus through such alleged intangibles.

So while brains and neurons may be ontologically more basic than thoughts,

thoughts and perceptions are epistemologically more basic than neurons and

brains. Indeed, the term “brain” is, believe it or not, a theoretical term; in

characterizing something as a “brain," you are ascribing to it various functions

that, without engaging in a great deal of theory-soaked extrapolating, you

cannot know it to discharge. “Brain” is a theoretical term that is deeply

entrenched in a well-confirmed body of theory. (Hence the illusion that it is a

non-theoretical term.) So, speaking epistemologically, these psychological

“intangibles” are much more tangible, and their existence infinitely less

dubitable, than “tangible” things such as brains.

 But even though many rail against the inevitable encroachment on their

lives of psychodynamic truths that they’d very much like to stave off—even

though contemporary professional psychologists, having invested their lives in

the bankrupt and tautologously false idea that psychology ought to be studied

non-psychologically, are especially shrill in their antipathy towards any attitude

towards the psychodynamic approach that isn’t one of unalloyed,

unquestioning antipathy---very few people have tried to produce bona fide

reasons to reject the tenets of such an approach.

 I’ve heard more than one professor of psychology explicitly state that thestudy of emotions must be replaced by the study of neurons. Why? “Because,”

they say, “the study of emotions is itself an emotional enterprise.” This is like

saying that thoughts about plants are themselves plants. That anyone of even

minimal intelligence should commit such a crass and grievous ratiocinative

gaffe is incomprehensible. But it becomes comprehensible if we adopt the

hypothesis that, within the mind of a person who advocates this view, there is

something with which such discussions resonate uncomfortably and to which

that person wants to continue to remain blind. Thus, the denial of emotions is

itself a thoroughly emotional position, and the denial of repression is itself an

instance of repression.

 Those who deny the existence of emotions and repression say that, in so

doing, they’re being “scientific.” But it’s hard to see how such dishonesty and

obtuseness could deserve to be so characterized. People don’t see themselves

for what they are. Is it scientific to deny this? In some cases, lack of self-

knowledge has the same causes as other forms of ignorance: lack of

ratiocinative ability, lack of effort, lack of raw data. But given the empirical fact

that hyper-intelligent people are quite as prone to not seeing themselves for

who they are as their less gifted brethren, it is de rigueur, from the viewpoint of

scientific methodology, to suppose another factor to be operative. And it’s

pretty clear what this other fact is: People don’t want to see themselves for

who they are; so they don’t. Given the obvious and, outside of the discipline of

psychology, universally acknowledged fact that people deceive themselves,

there’s no coherent way to deny that repression is not only possible, but actual,

and not only actual, but integral to the human condition.4.0 Sartre on repression and the unconscious

 

 Jean-Paul Sartre held there is no such thing as unconscious mental activity

and a fortiori no such thing as repression. His position was that the mind is

completely and utterly transparent to itself, it being in the nature of mental

activity that a given mind should have immediate and complete access to all of

its own contents. But unlike the previously mentioned authors, Sartre argued

for his position. And his argument is initially persuasive:

 

 
  (SA)One must know, said Sartre, what it is that one is trying to keep out

  of consciousness if one is to succeed in doing so. But so far as one has that

  knowledge, he continued, one is conscious of the very thing that one is

  trying to keep out of consciousness; and so far as one is conscious of

  thing, it isn’t repressed.

 

 Given this argument, there are two positions one might take:

 

  (1) Sartre is right and his reasoning is cogent.

  (2) Sartre is wrong. So his argument must be fallacious and we must

pinpoint the fallacy in it.

 

 In my book Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind,

I try to identify an error in Sartre’s reasoning. In this chapter, I have

developed what I said in that book. But I must make it clear that, although I

have no doubt that people do deceive themselves, repress conflicting

engendering beliefs and sentiments, etc., I am not convinced that:

 

  (i) My attempts to show the concepts of self-deception (etc.) to becoherent were entirely successful.

 

And supposing for argument’s sake that I have shown those concepts to be

coherent, I am not convinced that:

 

 (ii) The specific forms I have shown them to be capable of taking are the

forms that they in fact take.

 

 I’ve identified one possible model (or, rather, two such models: one for

repressions and one for repression). But I don't know that I’ve identified
            12

models that correctly identify the forms that those phenomena do take. Still,

I am convinced that there are elements of truth in those models. And I think

it is a philosophical task of the utmost urgency to make it crystal clear what

is wrong with Sartre’s powerful argument and also to make it crystal clear

what exactly self-deception and repression involve. Unfortunately,

philosophers have neglected to do this; which, so far as it’s had any effect on

psychology, has encouraged it to go down the blind allies of scientism,

methodological incoherence, and (cf. the view, now widely endorsed by

theoretical psychologists) the obviously false views that constitute

contemporary theoretical psychology.

 