Intentionalism and Foundationalism

Abstract: Intentionalism is the doctrine that mental states cannot differ in phenomenal content unless they differ in respect of what they represent: phenomenology “supervenes” on representational content. Intentionalism is thus committed to the view – in fact, it is the view – that a given kind of phenomenal content intrinsically has a certain representational content: nothing must be added to that kind of phenomenology to  associate it with that kind of representational content; no contextualization, no back-ground knowledge, no ulterior factors are needed to secure that association. (Compare: given that the aesthetic properties of the statue supervene on its physical properties, it follows that nothing must be added to those physical properties to secure the connection between those physical properties and those aesthetic properties.) Wilfred Sellars argued compellingly that what makes a given bit of phenomenal content have a given kind of representational content is precisely the addition of such background knowledge – of such contextualizing information: to think otherwise, said Sellars, is to be guilty of “the myth of the given” – a spurious epistemic foundationalism. In this paper, I merely bring out the connection between intentionalism and the myth of the given. I argue that, unless Sellars is completely wrong, intentionalism must be completely wrong. 



    The purpose of this paper is to show that a doctrine known as intentionalism is guilty of what Wilfred Sellars called ‘the myth of the given’, and is therefore untenable.
    What is intentionalism? Some mental entities have both phenomenal content (phenomenology) and representational content. My perception represents the world as being a certain way; so it has representational content. And there is ‘something it is like’ to have that perception; so it has phenomenal content (it has ‘phenomenology’).  
    Intentionalism says that two experiences cannot have different phenomenal contents unless they have different representational contents. So phenomenal content ‘supervenes’ on representational content. 
    I submit that intentionalism is guilty of the ‘myth of the given’. Let me say what this means by way of a Sellarsian story. 
    You are in a tie shop in which the lighting conditions are a bit unusual. You are looking at a tie in a display case. The tie induces various visual sensations in you. On the basis of these sensations, you can’t quite tell whether the tie is orange or red or maroon. You take the tie outside to examine it in better lighting. You see that it is maroon. Now you know what a maroon tie looks like under the lighting conditions that obtain in the tie shop. So the next time you see what is in fact a maroon tie in the tie shop, you don’t have to take it outside to determine that it is maroon. 
   But if a tie is some color other than maroon– say, burgundy or maroon -- you cannot know that on the basis of the visual sensations you have in the tie shop – for the same reason that, earlier, you couldn’t tell that a tie was maroon on the basis of the sensations you had in the tie shop. Let me illustrate my meaning with a new story. You are again in the tie shop, and are looking at what is in fact a burgundy tie. You can’t tell what color it is. So you take it outside. There you see that it is burgundy. You take it back inside and attend to its appearance. You then know that that is what a burgundy neck-tie looks like in the conditions that obtain in the tie shop. 
    You repeat this process over and over again, until you can tell for any color C what an object with C looks like in the lighting conditions that obtain in the tie shop. The correspondence that obtains between objects’ colors in the tie shop and one’s visual sensations is different from the correspondence that obtains between objects’ colors and one’s sensations outside the tie-shop. By repeating the processing described a moment ago, you learn the former correspondence-rule. And you no longer have to go outside to know what color a tie is. After a while, if you manage to internalize this rule of correspondence, you will, while inside the tie-shop, be able to just see what color a tie is. No doubt somebody who has been working in the tie-shop a long time can see what colors the ties have; he doesn’t have to go through a laborious process of inference (or, at least not a conscious one). 
    What does this tell us? When you are in the tie shop, your visual sensations do not by themselves tell you what color a given object is. What tells you this is your visual sensation plus knowledge of various environmental conditions that obtain. By itself, your visual sensation is color-indeterminate. What is color-determinate is the visual sensation plus a great deal of background knowledge. 
    So, when you are in the tie-shop, your visual sensations (at least so far as they relate to color-facts) are not ‘foundational’; in order for them to tell you what colors objects are, they must rely on ulterior knowledge that you have: their ability to tell you anything presupposes knowledge, on your part, of various environmental conditions. 
   Let us sum up. In some contexts, your sensations do not by themselves tell you what colors objects are; only those sensations coupled with background knowledge about the conditions of perception tell you that.
     It is easy to generalize this argument – to make it apply to any perceivable property P. (By a ‘perceivable’ property, I mean one that we sense-perceive objects to have. We don’t sense-perceive that an object consists of atoms with three electrons. So that property is not perceivable. But we do sense-perceive that an object is more than ten feet away from us. So that is a perceivable property.) 
     Ordinarily we think that we can just see how distant an object is from us. But when I just see that a certain tree is less than a hundred feet from me, a lot of background information is at work. For example, you take it for granted that the tree is not 10,000 feet tall. If you thought that the tree was 10,000 feet tall, then a phenomenally identical perception would lead you to think that you were seeing a tree was miles away, as opposed to 80 ft away. Let us amplify and substantiate these remarks through a Sellars-type thought experiment.
       When you look through a microscope, small things appear big. When you look through a telescope, big things appear small. Imagine that, every morning, you woke up wearing a pair of goggles that either magnified or diminished the strength of your sight. On Monday, you wake up wearing a pair of microscope-goggles – so it would be as though you were looking through a microscope. Another day, you wake up wearing a pair of telescope goggles – so it would be as though you were looking through a telescope. And everyday it would be different; the magnifying power of the goggles would be different every day. (So one day it would be as though you were looking through a weak magnifying glass. Another day, it would as though you were looking through a moderately powerful telescope.) 
     Under these circumstances, your visual perceptions at the start of any given day would be distance-indeterminate and, therefore, size-indeterminate. You wouldn’t know whether you were seeing an object that was 100 feet tall and a light-year away or an object that was ten feet tall and was ten feet away. You would have to learn what correspondence obtained between the character of your visual perceptions, on the one hand, and the distances and sizes of objects. 
   One way you could do this is as follows. You look at a given object; you don’t know whether it is a ten foot object that is 100 ft off or a ten-thousand foot object that is ten miles off. You take off the goggles and you simply see how far off, and how tall, the object was; you see that it is a building that is approximately 100 ft tall that is 100 ft away. You then put the goggles back on and, now knowing the distance and size of the object, you look at it again: you know now that an object that, when you are wearing the goggles, looks like that is really an object of such and such dimensions and thus such distance away from you. You repeat this process, with objects of other sizes and distances. And eventually you learn the correspondence that obtains between, on the one hand, the character of the visual perceptions that you have while wearing the goggles and, on the one hand, the distances and sizes of the objects you are seeing. Eventually, you will, while wearing the goggles be able to simply see that the object your are looking at is (say) ten feet tall and a 100 ft away – just as somebody who works in the tie-shop can simply see that a given tie is burgundy, even though the lighting conditions are non-standard. But, of course, when you simply see (while wearing the goggles) that a given object is ten ft tall and a 100 ft away, it is not your visual sensations by themselves that apprise you of the object’s size and distance; what really does this is your visual sensations plus a great deal of back-ground knowledge about the conditions of perception. 
    It is important to note that, before you learn the just mentioned correspondence, your visual sensations are distance- and size-indeterminate. A given sensation could tell you either that an object is 10,000 ft tall and 100,000 ft away or that it is 20 ft tall and 10 ft. away. Until you acquire the relevant background knowledge, your visual sensations are simply indeterminate in these respects; your visual sensations don’t tell you either that the object is 10,000 ft tall and a 100,000 ft away or 20 ft tall and 10 ft away. In response to this, one might say: 

     Under these circumstances, your visual sensations would give you determinate messages, but these messages would be wrong. You wake up in the morning wearing goggles that, let us suppose, quadruple the strength of your vision. In that case, your visual sensations give you systematically false messages: you see objects as being four times larger than they are and, thus, four times closer than they actually. So it isn’t that your visual sensations are size- and distance-indeterminate; it is that they are size- and distance-determinate but that they are determinate in the wrong way. 

     
    At first this seems like a reasonable view. But really it is very arbitrary. As Tyler Burge said, a perception to the effect that P is necessarily prima facie evidence that P. If you see a red chair in front of you, that is necessarily prima facie evidence that there is a red chair in front of you. In the story we are telling, you wake up every morning with goggles of a different level of magnification attached to your eyes, and you never wake knowing what the level of magnification is. Under those circumstances, your initial sensations are not even prima facie evidence of facts relating to the sizes or distances of objects. Given only your initial sensations, you would be equally justified in believing that you were seeing 100 ft object 100 ft away or a ten thousand foot object 10,000 feet away. So your initial sensations wouldn’t be prima facie evidence of either state of affairs – or, by analogous reasoning, of any other state of affairs relating to the distance or size of the object in question. Thus your initial perceptions wouldn’t tell you that the object was this as opposed to that size or distance; you wouldn’t, veridically or non-veridically, see the object as being of this or that size or distance.
   The objector’s point can be confuted in another way. Again, suppose you wake up wearing goggles that strengthen your vision four-fold, but when you wake up you don’t know what magnification these goggles have. After you ‘acclimatize’ to your goggles, you will simply see objects as having the dimensions that they in fact. (We are leaving aside cases of objects that are extremely distance or extremely small. One doesn’t really see a star to a million light years away; one doesn’t see it, veridically or non-veridically, to be any determinate distance away from one. And of course one doesn’t see a proton, veridically or non-veridically, to have this or that size; for one doesn’t see protons at all.) After this acclimatization, when you look at an object that is ten ft tall and twenty ft away, you won’t first see it as forty ft tall and eighty ft away; you will see it for the size and distance that it actually has – just as the veteran of the tie-shop, even while in the tie-shop, will see ties for the colors they actually have: he won’t see a burgundy tie as being orange and then consciously figure out, on the basis of his background knowledge, that what he is seeing is in fact burgundy. He will see the tie for the color it has. 
    Let us refer to the person who has acclimatized to his goggles (with magnification × 4) as Post-Bob, and let us refer to that same person, after waking up but prior to that acclimatization, as pre-Bob. We’ve agreed that Post-Bob sees objects as having the sizes and distances that they actually have. (That is, Post-Bob has size-right and distance-right perceptions in so far as any one does. Whether we’re dealing with Post-Bob or with a ‘normal’ person of 20/20 vision, there will inevitably be perceptual vagueness and error, especially where extreme sizes or distances are concerned). Now the objector says that pre-Bob simply sees objects as being 4 times their actual size: so his perceptions are not size-indeterminate, but systematically size-wrong. But that puts the objector in an awkward position. Pre-Bob’s visual sensations don’t change as he metamorphoses into Post-Bob. But it is very hard to see how a determinately false perception could become a determinately correct perception simply as a result of a change in background knowledge. It seems that if, when you woke up, you had perceptions that were systematically false, as opposed to indeterminate, a change in background knowledge wouldn’t result in veridical perception: it would simply enable you to intellectually  correct for your non-veridical perceptions. But this isn’t what happens: Post-Bob sees things the right way; he doesn’t see things the wrong way and then make a mental note to himself along the lines of ‘I see that tree as being 80 ft tall, so it must really be 20 ft tall’. No – he sees the tree as being the height that it actually is. 
   So it is hard to see how systematically false perceptions could be turned into veridical ones through a change in background knowledge. But it is easy to see how indeterminate perceptions can be turned into determinately veridical ones once background knowledge is filled in. If one’s perceptions are indeterminate (in respect of, say, size or distance), then there is a kind of openness to correction built into them: there is a parameter in it that has yet to be set and that consequently can be set. But if a perception is determinately false, it is frozen; background knowledge won’t turn it into a veridical one; the perception will continue to give one its wrong message (though, armed with the right background knowledge, one will be able to intellectually superimpose the right message).  So it is very hard to see how a determinately wrong (or, to use Quine’ word, a falsidical) perceptions can become veridical through a change in background knowledge. But it is very easy to see how a change in background knowledge can turn indeterminate perceptions (for example, size- or distance-indeterminate perceptions) into determinate ones. We are taking the latter position. The objector is committed to the former. Therefore the objector is wrong. Pre-Bob’s perceptions are size- and distance-indeterminate, not size- and distance-false. 
     Let us sum up thus far. Under non-standard conditions of perception, one’s sensations do not by themselves apprise one of the sizes or, therefore, the distances of objects. What does this is those sensations operating in conjunction with a great deal of background knowledge. Absent this back-ground knowledge, one’s visual sensations are simply size- and distance-indeterminate. 
      Exactly similar reasoning shows that, under non-standard  conditions, our perceptions are mass-indeterminate, temperature-indeterminate, velocity-indeterminate, and so on. Given any perceivable property P, under non-standard conditions, our sensations do not by themselves tell us to what degree, if any, x has P; only our sensations operating in conjunction with background knowledge (about the conditions of perception) do that. Under non-standard conditions, our sensations, taken by themselves, are temperature-indeterminate, mass-indeterminate, and so on. They become temperature- and mass-determinate only in so far as they are put in the context of a great deal of back-ground knowledge. In general, under non-standard conditions, perceptions are indeterminate. For any kind of perceptible property P – P could be size, distance, color…-- it would be possible to create non-standard perceptual conditions such that, under those conditions, one’s perceptions were P-indeterminate. And, under such conditions, what makes one’s perceptions become P-determinate is the acquisition of background knowledge – knowledge of facts about the conditions of perception.
   Another way of putting this is to say: for any kind of perceptible property P, it would be possible to create circumstances in which one’s perceptions are P-determinate only with the help of background knowledge. Under such circumstances, when one saw an object O as having P (or as having P to degree n), a great deal of background knowledge would be implicated in that perception. Consequently one’s perception of O as having P would not be foundational; it would be built on top of, so to speak, a great deal of background knowledge about the conditions of perceptions. Under those circumstances, it would not be given to one that O was P; not even a false message to the effect that O was P would be given to one. One would be ‘given’ (if that is the right word) only a non-epistemic sensation; one’s background knowledge would be needed to assign that sensation a P-value. 
   So far we’ve spoken about non-standard perceptual conditions. But it is easy to show that what we’ve said applies equally to standard perceptual conditions. For standard conditions are just non-standard conditions that one has got used to; and the distinction between standard and non-standard conditions is quite arbitrary.  In fact, no conditions are quite standard; if we make conditions perfectly standard – the way they might be in a surgical theatre or in the kind of room where they make computer chips – the result is a situation where the perceptual conditions are so good that they are not standard any more. And one is always doing in a small way what, in the anecdote above, Bob was doing in a big way: one is always making allowances for background knowledge.
    Let us once again think about Bob. One morning Bob wakes up fitted with goggles of magnification ×2. But this time the goggles stay on for years and years. This time, since Bob wouldn’t be able to take off his goggles, it would not be an option for him to compare his goggle-produced perceptions with his non-goggle perceptions: so he couldn’t’ he would no longer have that way of figuring out what his visual modality was telling him. But he would still acclimatize. From his pre-goggle days, he obviously knows the sizes of objects – of stop signs and baseball bats, and so forth – and he could use these as benchmarks. Initially, he would consciously correct for his perceptions by using these benchmarks; he see an object, not know how big it was, compare it to a baseball bat, see that it was the same size, and then know how big it was. But eventually, no doubt, Bob would simply see objects for the sizes they were. (At least in so far as anybody does: nobody’s vision is without significant indeterminacy in many respects; one doesn’t see very distant or very large objects as being specifically this or that size or, derivatively, as moving with this or that speed.)
    Of course, in some ways, Bob’s vision will be much better than that of an ordinary person’s, and in other ways, it will be worse. (He will have superb far-sight, but terrible near-sight.) But this doesn’t matter to our discussion. What matters is this.  Bob’s ×2 vision will become standard for Bob – just as your vision, with its ×1 magnification, is standard for you. It is clear, given what we’ve so said so far, that Bob’s perceptions acquire determinate content (at least in respect of distance and size and related properties, like speed) only with the co-operation of background knowledge. Not only does Bob’s ability to acquire knowledge (of distance, size, and related properties) presuppose a great deal of background knowledge. So during this ×2 phase of Bob’s vision, sizes and distances (and related properties) would not be given to Bob; his perceptions would be size- and distance determinate only by courtesy of a great deal of background knowledge. So distances and sizes would be given to Bob in the sense that he could, within limits, see what sizes and distances objects had; they would be made known to him. But sizes and distances would not be given in the sense that his distance- and size-perceptions would be foundational; he would have size- and distance-perceptions only because there was a lot background knowledge at work. Of course, in so far as a hefty body of background knowledge must lend its help to make perceptions represent things as having determinate sizes and distances, to that extent sizes and distances are not given to one; one has to earn them, so to speak. So in a special, but by no means arbitrary, sense of ‘given’, distances of and sizes are given to Bob during this ×2 phase of his visual career. 
   But now suppose that, after all these years, Bob’s revision reverts back to how it used to be. So it is no longer ×2, it is ×1. His vision now would not be standard for him, even though it used to be. He would have to do now what he had to do before when he first shifted to ×2 vision. He would acquire new background information, and this new background information would be implicated in making his new perceptions be size- and distance-determinate. So, just as distances and sizes were not given to Bob in his ×2 phase, so they are not given to Bob in his new ×1 phase. Exactly similar considerations apply. 
   But what about Bob’s old ×1 phase? Maybe, it might be thought, sizes and distances were just given to him then. But it would be highly arbitrary to say that. There are two reasons for this. First, it is very hard to believe that Bob’s new ×1 perceptions function in a completely different way from his old ×1 perceptions. We know that his new ×1 perceptions are size- and distance-determinate only by courtesy of a great deal of background knowledge concerning the conditions of perception. But if, during Bob’s old ×1 phase, distances and sizes were just given in perception (in our special sense of ‘given’), then the epistemic liason between Bob and the world constituted by Bob’s old ×1 perceptions would very different from that constituted by his new ×1 perceptions. But there seems no reason to believe this. 
   There is a second reason to think it arbitrary to say that during Bob’s old ×1 phase distances and sizes were given to him (in our special sense of ‘given’), whereas during his ×2 phase they are not given. We’ve been discussing extreme changes in the conditions of perception. But one’s visual career is ordinarily characterized by much smaller, but still very genuine, changes perceptual conditions. And what we said in connection with artificially dramatic change in these conditions is just as true of the smaller versions of such changes that actually occur. One can scarcely walk ten feet, or even rotate one’s head, without the lighting conditions changing. But usually (though not always) one doesn’t have to make a conscious adjustment. One automatically makes the adjustments, and sees green objects as green and red objects as red. 
   The kind of sensation that mediates a perception of a particular shade of red is heavily dependent on highly variable conditions. One doesn’t realize this until one tries one’s hand at painting, and has to reckon with the setting of the sun or the uneven light cast by a lamp. To reproduce, in painting, two different objects that one sees to be of a single shade of red, one may have to use two very different shades of paint. When one looks at the painting, one sees the two objects as being of the same shade of red – just as the artist, when he was having the actual perception which he reproduced in the painting, saw the two objects as being the same shade. But when one looks at the paint – not the painting, not the things depicted by means of the paint – one sees two different shades of red. The differences in shade correspond to differences in quale, in sensation. The identity of color of the objects represented in the painting corresponds to the identity in representational content of the perceptions reproduced in the painting.
    Thus one makes innumerable adjustments to ever changing perceptual conditions. So one is perpetually adjusting to non-standard conditions. We can only assume, by arguments analogous to those given earlier, that one’s background knowledge is implicated in these perceptions. Colors (for example) are not given to one; what is given to one is a non-epistemic sensation – a sensation with no determinate color- (or distance- or size-…) content. What does constitute a color- (or size-…) determinate perception is that sensation in conjunction with a great deal of back-ground knowledge. 
   Or course, arguments exactly analogous to those that we’ve given in connection with size, distance, and color apply to mass, temperature, and any other kind of perceptible properties: perceptible properties are not given (at least not in our special sense of the word). Whenever one has a perception that is mass- or size- or temperature or color-determinate – that is, whenever one has a perception that even purports to tell one what color or temperature or mass… an object has – that is, in part, because one’s quale sensations are interacting with a great deal of background knowledge. The sensations by themselves are not color- or size- or temperature-determinate. The sensations themselves – the ‘raw feels’ or quale -- are not representational. The sensations plus the background knowledge is what is representational. 
   Of course, a perception is, by definition, representational; a perception necessarily is either size- or color-… or mass-determinate; a perception necessarily gives one some kind of message and is thus not wholly indeterminate. So what we have seen is not, obviously, that perceptions are not representational (that would be absurd) or that facts about the world are not given through perceptions (that too would absurd: there is no other way that facts about the external world are given to us). What we have seen is that the very existence of any single perception presupposes the co-operation of background empirical knowledge. (This raises the question how we can ever have a first perception: a question handles very delicately. There isn’t room to address this problem here. But I don’t think it constitutes any significant obstacle to the anti-foundationalism sketched here.)  
    The ‘myth of the given’ is that a given sensation by itself constitutes some kind of awareness of an external reality, and that no background knowledge is presupposed. Of course, if this were the case, then sensations would be epistemic rock-bottom: they would constitute the foundations of all knowledge. In sensation, certain bits of information would be given to us – in our special sense of ‘given’ – and all knowledge would be built on top of this given information. (And, in this context, to say that piece of information is ‘given’ to us in a sensation is to say that no background knowledge would be implicated in the acquisition of this information.) 
   Actually, what we’ve seen is not only that no knowledge is ‘given’ (in our special sense), but that nothing representational is given: background knowledge is implicated in the generation of anything that even purports to give information about the world. So not only is no knowledge given; nothing even representational is given. There are thus two myths of the given: one is that knowledge is given; the other is that there are perceptions in a vacuum of background knowledge – in other words, that in some cases one’s sensual experiences do not need the co-operation of background knowledge to constitute perceptions (or even misperceptions). I submit that intentionalism is guilty of the second ‘myth of the given’ and thus a fortiori is guilty of the first. 
   We’ve seen that the perception results when the quale interacts with background knowledge: before that happens, there is nothing representational – the quale is size- and color- and temperature--…indeterminate. So there is an extremely strong sense in which nothing is given: nothing that even purports to give true information about the world exists without the co-operation of background knowledge. A fortiori there is no actual awareness of what is going in the external world without the co-operation of background knowledge. Sensations by themselves are not just epistemically, but representationally, inert; they are, as we put it, ‘indeterminate’ until background knowledge sets the relevant parameters. And different bodies of background knowledge can ‘set’ these parameters differently. 
   All of this is very inconsistent with intentionalism. Intentionalism says that there cannot possibly be a difference in phenomenology unless there is a difference in representational content. Intentionalism thus assimilates the phenomenological to the representational. Given that there cannot possibly (in any possible world) be a difference in phenomenology without one in representational content, it follows phenomenology is realized or constituted by something have representational content. (Otherwise the supervenience of the phenomenology would be inexplicable.) And it also follows that, if any bit of phenomenology was non-representational, it would have to be the only kind of phenomenal content was non-representational. (For if there were two non-representational types of phenomenal content, then there would be a difference in phenomenal content that was, vacuously, not matched by a difference in representational content: obviously two bits of phenomenal content that represent noting don’t represent different things.) 
   But the picture we’ve sketched contradicts these contentions in a number of way. First, we’ve seen that phenomenology is not typically realized by (let alone identical with) something representational. Perception involves the co-operation of sensations (quale) and back-ground knowledge; in such cases, the sensation is not inherently representational, but becomes so only with the help of background knowledge. Thus at least some sensations are not by themselves representational. So this contradicts the contention that phenomenal content is always realized by something having representational content. 
   Also, it would seem that the inherently non-representational qualia that are involved in one perception can be dramatically different from those involved in another perception. So this contradicts the idea that there can be at most one kind of non-representational phenomenal content. Thus intentionalism is contradicted on two levels. 
   To sum up, the intentionalist maintains that a quale by itself typically constitutes a representation; for the intentionalist maintains that the thing having phenomenal content is identical with, or realized by, the thing having representational content. (Thus, for the intentionalist, the thing having phenomenal content cannot possibly fail to be representational– just as the statue cannot fail to be, say, wet if the clay that realizes the statue is wet.) But to say this is fall squarely into the myth of the given: the spurious belief that perceptual representations do not implicate background knowledge and sensations by themselves are epistemic. 
   In one place, Sellars himself writes: “Sensations are no more epistemic in character than are trees or tables…” My guess (though the context of that quotation makes it unclear whether this guess is correct or not) is that he had in mind points like the ones we’ve just stated. 
   We arrived at these points by doing a great deal of theory. But they are borne out by examples. Under certain lighting conditions, you see a tie – literally see it – as being burgundy. Under different lighting conditions, in having a phenomenologically identical perception,  you see – literally see that  tie as maroon (or, in any case, some color other than burgundy).  You see a tree as being moderately tall and being (about) twenty feet away. But, given different background knowledge, a phenomenologically identical perception could tell you that you were seeing a gigantic tree that was (about) a hundred feet away. 
   Suppose that Bob is in his × 1 phase, and that P is a bit of phenomenal content that mediates a perception of a small tree nearby. When Bob is in his ×2 phase, or his ×10 phase, a bit of phenomenal content qualitatively just like P will mediate a perception of a large but distant tree. The same bit of phenomenal content was associated with different representational contents.  This is inconsistent with intentionalism. 
    Intentionalists tend to defend their position by seizing on facts like the following. Suppose that in circumstance C1, some sensation is involved in seeing that a tie is burgundy. And suppose that in C2, some qualitatively different sensation is involved in seeing that a tie is burgundy. (This will happen if the lights are dimmed somewhat, or if the over head light is replaced with a  less pure, more yellow light: it could happen under any number of circumstances.) Of course, prima facie this seems to favor the anti-intentionalist: different representational contents, same phenomenal content. But the intentionalist always responds by saying: 

The two perceptions don’t have the same representational contents. In one case, part of what you are seeing is a light casting an impure yellowish light. In the other case, you may not be seeing that, and you may be seeing a light that is casting a very pure, white light. Or in the one case, the tie may be better illuminated than in the other case. So the two qualitatively identical perceptions are representing different things: in the one case a well illuminated patch of burgundy is represented; in the other, a poorly illuminated patch of burgundy is represented. And that is why there is a difference in phenomenal content: for there is a difference in representational content. 


   
   But this doesn’t apply to Bob. Depending on whether he is in his ×1 phase or his ×10 phase, a given a bit of phenomenal content may mediate perceptions with very different representational contents. So there is sameness of phenomenal content and a difference in representational content. The same bit of phenomenal content is deployed once in seeing a small nearby tree, and another time in seeing distant large tree. 
    These considerations help us identify the shortcoming in a well known argument for intentionalism due to (or at least stated by) Alex Byrne. Byrne gives the following argument for intentionalism. 
      
  Suppose you are looking at a blue chip. Your seeing the blue of the chip obviously involves your having some kind of phenomenal content. Now imagine a change in the phenomenal content that is involved in your seeing the blue of the chip. If there is such a change, then there is necessarily a change in the color that the chip is represented to as having; it goes from being represented as blue to being represented as (say) green. The same point (mutatis mutandis) applies to any perception. If you imagine a change in the phenomenal character of your gustatory perception of the honey, then the honey goes from being represented as sweet to being represented as (say) bitter. One last example: suppose you hear a certain pitch as a middle C (you have perfect pitch); if the phenomenal content involved in your hearing that pitch is changed, then ipso facto you no longer hear that sound as a middle C but as (say) a middle D. So: no difference in phenomenal content without a different in representational content. 


   But there are obvious counter-examples to this. You can feel the roundness of the ball and also see it (a bat could hear it, a mole could smell it). But these perceptions have no phenomenal overlap, despite considerable (though my no means total) representational overlap. You can see distances, and you can also learn distances kinesthetically. Obviously a visual perception has no phenomenal overlap with a series of kinesthetic sensations, despite a certain overlap in representational content. 
   Also non-occurrent memories have no phenomenal overlap with perceptions whose representations they store (or can store, in principle) in their entirety. Total overlap of representational content: no phenomenal overlap. (Of course intentionalism is defined as the position that two experiences cannot differ in phenomenal content without differing in representational content. So it may see that intentionalism doesn’t say anything about whether a non-occurrent memory can have the same representational content as, say, a perception without having any phenomenal overlap with it. But this is not the case. Consider a perception P with phenomenal content C and representational content R. Intentionalism says that having P has C wholly in virtue of having R. So, for intentionalism, having R is a sufficient condition for having P. So, if intentionalism, then nothing other than having R is needed to have C. So intentionalism is committed to the view that anything has P as long as it has R. But a non-occurrent memory has R but not P.) 
    Byrne’s argument proves at most that within a single sensory modality there cannot be phenomenal variation without representational variation. But this thesis is false, it turns out, if we consider different sensory modalities or memories. 
   But we’ve seen that Byrne’s thesis is false even within a single modality. At the same time, it is not an accidental fact, surely, that within a single modality, differences in phenomenal content tend to co-vary with differences in representational content. And, admittedly, the most obvious way to explain this is by advocating some kind of intentionalism. So we owe Byrne an non-intentionalist explanation of this co-variation. 
   What Byrne has shown is not that phenomenal content co-varies tout court with representational content, but that phenomenal content co-varies with representational content all other things being equal. And I submit that, in this case, the ‘other things’ consist of one’s background knowledge. 
    Obviously phenomenal content is involved, in an essential way, in our perceptions; and, obviously, perceptions are involved in an essential way, in our acquiring knowledge of the external world. Now if phenomenal contents are to be of assistance in our acquiring empirical knowledge, then presumably they must be paired off in a consistent with way their (proximal) causes. If a given kind of sensory disturbance (i.e. a given kind of disturbance of one’s retina or epidermis or eardrum…) result now in one kind of phenomenal content, and now in some totally different kind of phenomenal content, then one’s phenomenal contents wouldn’t be much use in helping us acquire knowledge of the external world. We would be lost. (We can tolerate occasional shifts of this kind. But these shifts cannot be the norm: they must occur against a background of stability.) So there must be a reasonably consistent relationship between our phenomenal contents and their (proximal) causes. There must be some rule R that pairs off tissue disturbances (of our sensory organs) with phenomenal contents (and does so in some not ridiculously Byzantine way). 
   But is there only one possible value of R? Do your perceptions have to be associated with their causes in exactly the way they are in fact associated with them to tell us what they do about the world? Under certain conditions, sound-wave oscillations of 440 Hz cause a certain kind of phenomenal content (call it P1); under those same conditions, sound-wave oscillations of 480 Hz cause a certain kind of phenomenal content (call it P2), and so on. Let R1 be the rule that pairs off phenomenal contents with disturbances of your eardrum in that particular way. Must R1 be the operative rule of projection? Would a being whose auditory system involved R2 (some rule other than R1) necessarily be mis-hearing everything? It seems that, if R2 is as consistent as R1, it can be as good a rule of projection, i.e. it can be involved in the generation of perceptions that are as accurate (if not more so) than those had by a being with R1. In fact, R2 might be better than R1 in this respect. R1 may assign the same phenomenal content to sound-wave oscillations of 440 Hz that it assigns to those of 445 Hz. (Human beings are not even remotely capable of registering such minute differences, though other creatures are. So R1 might the rule operative in human hearing.) If R2 is more sensitive to differences in sound-wave oscillations – and clearly non-human creatures are better able to hear differences in pitch than we are (and this presumably involves having different phenomenal contents in response to different pitches in cases where we would have the same phenomenal content in response to both pitches) – and R2 is just as consistent, then it seems extraordinarily arbitrary to say that creatures whose hearing-system uses R2 are just mis-hearing all the time. But that is just what the intentionalist is committed to. Obviously humans hear things the right way, at least some of the time. And obviously our hearing things involves having certain phenomenal contents in response to sound-wave oscillations. The intentionalist says that a creature that has a different phenomenal response to the same sound-wave oscillations. The intentionalist also says that a difference in phenomenology means a difference in representational content: so those other creatures are hearing things as being different and thus – since we are hearing things the right way and they are hearing things differently – as hearing them wrong. To clarify this: Suppose a human’s  hearing (under certain circumstances) a middle C involves having phenomenal content P, and that human a C correctly under those circumstances. For an intentionalist, a creature that has phenomenal content P* (different from P) under those same circumstances is not hearing a middle C; it is hearing some other pitch. So that creature is hearing the wrong thing. Thus if that human’s audition involves R1, then every other right-hearing creature’s hearing must involve R1 as well. No other correspondence rule, no matter how fine-grained (even if it is much more nuanced than ours) or consistent will do. 
  But again this seems deeply arbitrary. If another creature’s phenomenal responses to sound-wave oscillations are just as consistent as ours and just as fine-grained, then by any reasonable conception of information, it can acquire as much information about the world through hearing as we can; and it then seems arbitrary to say that it systematically mis-hears just because it is employing R2 and not R1. And if a creature’s hearing involves a more fine-grained, and more internally consistent rule than ours, then by any reasonable conception of information, it can acquire more information (through hearing) than we can about the world; and it then becomes all the more arbitrary to say that such a creatures is always hearing things the wrong way just because it uses R3 not R1. And there is no doubt that there are, in principle, rules other than the one operative in human hearing that are more fine-grained than ours and as consistent than ours. (to say that a rule R is more ‘fine grained’ than a rule R* is to say that, for some n, if sound-waves differ from each by less than n, but still differ, R will, whereas R* will not, pair off those sounds with different phenomenal contents. There can be no doubt that, by this definition, there are creatures whose hearing involves much more fine-grained rules of correspondence than ours – bats, dogs, rabbits.) So there seems no reason in principle to deny that creatures that hear better than us might have different phenomenal contents from us in response to a given sound-wave under a given circumstance. But intentionalism says no difference in phenomenal content without a difference in representational content. And the motivation for this view is that the phenomenal reduces, after a fashion, to the representational. But apparently it does not. 
         I would suggest that what Byrne has shown is that as long as a given rule of projection is operative, then the phenomenal ‘tracks’ the representational, i.e. if perceptions have different phenomenal content, then they have different representational contents. This is to be expected since an inconsistent rule of projection – one that assigned different phenomenal contents to the same sound (heard under the same circumstances) – would not be of much use (in learning about actual sound-phenomena). But what Byrne doesn’t register is that if the rule of projection is changed, then the representational value of a given phenomenal content can change. Suppose that Bob is a human being who has (by human standards) good hearing. Let R1 be the operative rule projection. Suppose that neurosurgeons change Bob’s auditory system. Now the rule of projection that is operative in his hearing is the one operative in a bat’s. Obviously Bob’s hearing a lot better than it used to be. But given what we said a moment ago, it seems highly likely that, in this new and improved version of Bob, a phenomenal content that used to be involved in hearing (say) a middle C is now involved in hearing a middle D. So when the rule of projection is changed, Byrne’s thesis no longer applies: phenomenology tracks differences in representational content only given a certain rule of projection. In any case, this seems plausible. 
   We’ve said a lot about the role of ‘rules of projection’ in the assigning of representational contents to phenomenal contents. What we’ve said on this matter is consistent with Sellars’ attack on the myth of the given. Sellars’ attack, we’ve seen, comes in two strengths. Weak version: it is not typically true that qualia, by themselves, constitute awarenesses (knowledge) of anything external – something extra is needed to make a quale be epistemic. Strong version: it is not typically true that qualia, by themselves, constitute representations – something extra is needed to give them representational content. 
   We’ve seen reason to hold that both versions are correct.  But we seem to have a problem. We’ve apparently given two different answers to the question ‘what is that extra something which makes a non-representational (or non-epistemic) quale be representational?’ One answer we gave is: background knowledge. The other answer is: a rule of projection. 
    To deal with this, we need only be clear on what we’ve said so far. The rule of projection doesn’t assign representational contents to disturbances of our sensory surfaces. The rule of projection assigns only phenomenal contents – qualia – to such disturbances. It is background knowledge that assigns representational contents those qualia. So the ‘rule of projections’ that we’ve been talking about have an altogether different function from background knowledge, though of course the two are part of a co-operative enterprise. 
    
   Conclusion 

      Intentionalism says that, typically, qualia by themselves have determinate representational content: background knowledge isn’t needed to endow qualia with representational content. And, of course, in so far as qualia have representational contents ab initio, background knowledge cannot affect what representational content they have. For if background knowledge did have a hand in endowing a quale with representational content, it could only be by way of some openness, some representational indeterminacy, on the part of the quale; and, by definition, a quale with a ‘fixed’ representational content has no such indeterminacy or openness. Thus the picture given to us by the intentionalist is that, typically, qualia don’t need background knowledge to fix what they represent, and they won’t let background knowledge fix what they represent. Qualia thus become foundational, performing their representational and epistemic roles in splendid isolation of any epistemic context. But it is just this kind of foundationalism that Sellars (and, after him, many others) have shown not to be tenable. Intentionalism is a strong form of foundationalism; it is guilty of the myth of the given, in both its forms. Therefore either intentionalism is to be rejected or the anti-foundationalism of Sellars and others – now so widely held – must be false. 



Burge, Tyler. 1993. “Content Preservation”. The Philosophical Review, Vol. 102, No. 4, (Oct., 1993) 457-488.

Byrne, Alex . 2001.  ‘Intentionalism Defended’. The Philosophical Review. Vol. 110, No. 2 . (April 2001). 

Sellars, Wilfred. 1963a.  “Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind”. In Science, Perception and Reality. New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
-- 1963b. “Some Reflections on Language Games”. In Science, Perception and Reality. New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 




