    Knowledge of Past, Possible, and Future  

 

                      A Dialogue 

 

                J.-M. Kuczynski PhD 

 

  MAX: Professor, can we have knowledge of 

the future? 

 

  Dr. K: Yes. If I know that X’s always cause 

Y’s, and I know that there currently exists an X, 

then I can deduce, and therefore know, that 

there will be a Y. 

 

  MAX: Can you give an example? 

 

  Dr. K: I know that Smith is extremely 

sensitive about his toupee and always attacks 

people who make fun of him for having it. I 

also know that Jerry is now making fun of 

Smith for having it. So I know that Smith will 

physically attack Jerry.  

 

  MAX: In the situation you described, you 

know that, the circumstances being what they 

are, it is highly probable that Smith is going to 

attack Jerry. But you don’t know that Smith is going to attack Jerry. After all, Smith might 

have a heart-attack before he can throw the 

first punch.  

 

  Dr. K: Your point is misconceived.  It’s one 

thing for me to know that Smith will attack 

Jerry. It’s a different thing for me to know that 

the conditions necessary for my knowing that 

Smith will attack Jerry are fulfilled. What you 

said shows that I lack the latter knowledge, not 

the former.  

 

  MAX: I don’t understand.  

 

  Dr. K: In order for five year old Timmy to 

know that it’s raining outside, he just needs to 

look outside his window. If he does that, then 

he knows that the condition necessary for it to 

be raining outside has been fulfilled.  

  But he has to cross many more bridges if he 

is to know that the conditions necessary for his 

having that knowledge have been fulfilled. He 

has to know that his nervous system is intact, 

and that the relevant physiological and 

cognitive structures are appropriatley 

coordinated with one another and also with 

the external world.   

  MAX: I am beginning to understand. It’s 

easy to know that it’s raining. It’s hard to know 

exactly what it is that one knows in knowing 

that it’s raining.  

 

  Dr. K: Well put.      

 

  MAX: And for Timmy to know that it’s 

raining, he has to be coordinated with the 

external world in a certain way. Timmy does 

not have to know about this mode of 

coordination; he just has to be in it.  

 

  Dr. K: That’s right.   

 

  MAX:  And your knowing that Smith is going 

to punch Jerry involves your being 

appropriately coordinated with the world. It 

involves your knowing of some robust, some 

reliable causal mechanism that lead to Smith’s 

punching a given person if that person makes 

fun of Smith’s toupee. You  need to know of 

that mechanism; and that mechanism needs to 

be doing its job. But you don’t need to know 

how it is doing its job.  

   Dr. K: Spot on. Please continue.  

 

  MAX: You don’t need to know exactly how 

that mechanism works, and you don’t need to 

know of possible threats to its integrity. Such 

knowledge is necessary if you want to have 

knowledge about your knowledge of Smith’s 

imminent behavior. But that is irrelevant, since 

the question at hand is ‘how do you know that 

Smith will punch Jerry?’, not ‘how do you know 

that you know that Smith will punch Jerry?’    

 

  Dr. K: Admirably well put, Max.  

 

  Max:  What about the past? Can we know 

it?  

 

  Dr. K.: There is memory, obviously: what 

you remember, you know, and the thing 

known is a truth about the past.  

 

  MAX: Is there any other way of knowing 

about the past? 

 

  Dr. K: Yes. You know that there was 

somebody on the beech, because you see 

footprints in the sand and you know that nothing other than a person walking in the 

sand could possibly have created them.  

 

  MAX: So knowledge of the past is just like 

knowledge of the future, except that in the 

one case we deduce effect from cause and in 

the other case we deduce cause from effect.  

 

  Dr. K: Exactly. Prediction starts with cause 

and ends with effect, and retrodiction starts 

with effect and ends with cause.  

 

  MAX:  Can we have knowledge of what 

might have been?  

 

  Dr. K:   You mean, can we have 

counterfactual knowledge? Can we know 

truths of the form if p had been then case, then 

q would have been the case.  

 

  MAX:  Exactly. Can it be known that if Smith 

had jumped off the ledge, he would have died?  

 

  Dr. K: You just answered your own 

question. Obviously we can have such 

knowledge. If we couldn’t, we wouldn’t live 

very long.   

  MAX: You mean, if I didn’t  know that I 

would be electrocuted if I stuck a metal fork in 

the socket, then I would do so----and therefore 

die a speedy death.  

 

  Dr. K: Exactly. If Smith hadn’t know that 

jumping off the ledge would lead to his death, 

he probaby would have jumped. 

 

  MAX: But how can it be known that if he 

had jumped, a giant albatross wouldn’t have 

swooped in and saved him? I know it sounds 

absurd, but unless we know that such a thing 

would not have happened, we don’t know that 

Smith would have died had he jumped.  

 

  Dr. K: The point you are making is an exact 

analogue of the point we discussed earlier.  

The skeptic says that Timmy doesn’t know that 

it’s raining unless Timmy (a) knows exactly 

what is involved in his having such knowledge 

and (b) knows that all of the relevant 

conditions have been satisfied.  

  Which is totally absurd, since it’s 

tantamount to saying that Timmy can’t know 

that it’s raining unless he knows about the various physical and physiological intricacies 

involved. 

  Which he can’t possibly know about unless 

he is already able to know basic things, like the 

state of the weather.   

 

  MAX: I see. It’s one thing for me to know 

that Smith would have died had he jumped. 

It’s a different thing for me to know that all of 

the conditions that had to be fulfilled for my 

knowing this have in fact been fulfilled. My 

knowing the second thing involves my knowing 

exactly what is involved in my knowing that 

Smith would have died had he jumped.  

 

  Dr. K: Which you couldn’t know unless you 

already had just the sort of counterfactual 

knowledge that the skeptic is claiming that you 

can’t have.  

 

  MAX:  You’ve established that we do have 

counterfactual knowledge. But the question is, 

how do we have it? 

 

  Dr. K:  Sticking forks in light sockets causes 

electrocution. Jumping off of ledges causes massive body trauma. Counterfactual 

knowledge is simply causal knowledge.  

 

  MAX:  I see. So having such knowledge 

doesn’t involve our having knowledge of 

alternate realities. It just invovles our knowing 

what causes what in this world.  

 

  Dr. K: Exactly. Counterfactual knowledge 

has the same structure as knowledge of the 

future and knowledge of the past.       

 

  MAX: You mean, each sort of knowledge 

involves knowing a truth of the form x’s cause 

y’s and then, depending on the circumstances, 

moving forwards y from x or backwards from y 

towards x.  

 

  Dr. K: Right. You know that jumping off 

ledges causes death, and depending on 

whether your starting point is Smith’s body on 

the pavement or Smith’s stepping off the 

ledge, you either know the past or the future.  

 

  MAX: Yes, but given that Smith didn’t jump, 

I have neither starting point. And that’s the 

problem.    

  Dr. K: Now I see what’s puzzling you. But 

there is no real puzzle. Causal laws map events 

onto events. Cause and effect are always 

events or conditions. They are always concrete 

realities. But deductions map propositions 

onto propositions.   

 

  MAX: What’s a proposition? 

 

  Dr. K: A truth or a falsehood. 

 

  MAX: I think I understand. The laws of 

nature convert events into events. Jones 

pushes the button. The elevator comes. Nature 

starts with an event, and ends with event. But 

when you see Jones pushing the button and 

infer that the elevator will come, you are 

starting with a proposition and you  ending 

with another proposition.  

 

  MAX: Right. The first proposition being 

Jones is pushing the button. And the second 

being the elevator will come.  

   MAX: And to know that there would be 

smoke if there were fire is simply to know that 

fire causes smoke.  

 

  Dr. K: Right.  

 

  MAX: So knowing the future involves 

knowing knowing that x’s causes y’s and also 

knowing that there is an x.  

 

  Dr. K: Right.  

 

  MAX: And knowing the past involves 

knowing that x’s cause y’s and also knowing 

that there is a y. 

 

  Dr. K: Right. 

 

  MAX: But knowing that there would be a y if 

there is an x only involves knowing that x’s 

cause y’s.  

 

  Dr. K: Exactly.  

 

  MAX: So it’s actually easier to have 

counterfactual knowlede than it is to have 

knowledge of either the past or the present.   

  Dr. K: Right. Also, knowledge of either the 

past or the future presupposes knowledge of 

the counterfactual.   

 

  MAX: Explain. 

 

  Dr. K: If I don’t know that Smith would die if 

he jumped, then, if I know that he is about to 

jump, I will not be in a position that he will die.  

 

  MAX: I see. And if I see his shattered body 

on the pavement, I won’t be in a position to 

infer that it was a fall that did him in.  

 

  Dr. K: Right.  

 

  MAX: So how do we acquire causal 

knowledge? How do we learn that things of 

one kind bring about things of other some 

kind? 

 

  Dr. K: That’s a question for another time, 

but I will outline the answer for you.  

 

  MAX: I appreciate it.  

   Dr. K: Causal knowledge is differential 

knowledge. Suppose you are overweight, not 

having a done lick of exercise in the last ten 

years. All of a sudden you decide to go jogging, 

and  you have a heart attack.  

  Under these circumstances, you know, or at 

least have very good reason to believe, that it 

was your jogging that caused the heart-attack. 

 

  MAX: Clearly.  

 

  Dr. K: But how? Do you know of some law 

to the effect that when overweight and out of 

shape people go jogging, they have heart-

attacks?  

 

  MAX: No. There obviously is no such law; 

and even if there is, people can obviously what 

causes what, at least within limits, withou 

knowing of causal laws.   

 

  Dr. K: That’s a very good point, Max. Please 

elaborate.  

 

  MAX: We have knowledge of specific 

instances of causation; buttons’ being pushed 

and bells’ ringing as a result; balls’ colliding with windows’ and windowss shattering as a 

result; and so on. And on the basis of our 

knowledge of tehse specific instances of 

causation, we acquire knowledge of causal 

laws. Which we can then use to refine our 

judments as to what causes what. But unless 

we have knowledge of specific instances of 

causation, we couldn’t acquire knowledge of 

causal laws or properly apply if per impossibile 

we did have to it.  

 

    

 

  Dr. K.: Cogent and well stated, Max. In any 

case, in answer to your question, one knows 

what caused what because effects tend to be 

proportional to causes.   

 

  MAX: Explain, Sir.  

 

  Dr. K: This person we were talking about---

he has a heart-attack, which is very unusual for 

him. And he went jogging before that heart-

attack---which is equally unusual. His going 

jogging in the first place upset a long-standing 

equilibrium; and his having a heart-attack 

restored that equilibrium, by being correspondingly disruptive, but in the other 

direction.  

 

 

  MAX: I think I understand, Sir, but this is 

very challenging material, I think I might just 

need a break.  

 

  Dr. K: Permission grant. Let’s adjourn till 

tomorrow.  