                Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916
                                                  www.elsevier.com/locate/pragma



      Does possible world semantics turn all

          propositions into necessary ones?

                  John-Michael Kuczynski*

              Department of Philosophy, University of California, 5631 South Hall,
                      Santa-Barbara, CA 931060-3090, USA
        Received 4 May 2003; received in revised form 30 June 2006; accepted 29 August 2006


Abstract

    A number of philosophical and semantic analyses make essential use of the concept of a possible
      world. Following tradition, we will refer to this family of analyses as ‘‘possible world semantics’’ (PWS).
      The present work argues that there is no interpretation of the term ‘‘world’’ that validates even a single
      one of the doctrines composing PWS. It is argued that, depending on what the word ‘‘world’’ is taken to
      mean, PWS entails either that all modal terms (words like ‘‘necessarily’’ and ‘‘possibly’’) are in nitely
      ambiguous or that all true propositions are necessarilytrue. It is also argued that David Lewis’ PWS-based
    analysis of counterfactuals can succeed only relative to decidedly retrograde conceptions of space
  and time. Most importantly, it is shown that PWS is false even if it  nds a way to neutralize
  the arguments just described. Given certain truisms about spatiotemporal existence, it is a
    substantive modal question whether the worlds needed to validate PWS are even possible. (As we
    will see, there is reason to believe that many of those worlds are in the same category as worlds
    that comprise light but not electromagnetic radiation.) The modal status of these worlds cannot be
      non-circularly resolved within a PWS-framework, and must be therefore resolved within some other
    modal framework, showing that PWS is parasitic on some more fundamental understanding of
modality.
# 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Possible-world semantics; David Lewis; Necessity; Modality; Modal knowledge; Modal realism;
Counterfactuals; Causality






        * Correspondence at: 5636 Western Avenue, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Tel.: +1 805 893 3122/301 565 1420.
E-mail addresses: rconaway@philosophy.ucsb.edu, jsbach@jps.net.

0378-2166/$ – see front matter # 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pragma.2006.08.008                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916873

1. Introduction

    A view known as ‘‘possible world semantics’’ (PWS) provides the basis for clear and rigorous
analyses of many important concepts. PWS is given by three contentions:

(1) A proposition is possibly true exactly if it is true in some world.
                                                  1
(2) A proposition is necessarily true exactly if it is true in every world.
    (3) A proposition is the set of worlds where it is true (or, equivalently, it is a function that assigns
truth to all and only the worlds in that set).

  The most obvious applications of PWS relate to the concepts of possibility, necessity, and
    meaning. But PWS has proven capable of shedding great light on the nature of counterfactuals,
                            2
mental content, and even moral obligation.
    Despite its virtues, PWS is bedeviled by a number of problems. The main purpose of this paper
    is to show that PWS is evenmoreproblematic than has hitherto been realized. In particular, it will
  be argued that PWS has the unwelcome consequence that all true propositions become
    necessarily true, and all false propositions become necessarily false. So George W. Bush is U.S.
    president in 2006 is in the same modal category as 2 + 2 = 4, the same being true of John Kerry is
U.S. president in 2006 and 2+2=5.
  Let us say a word on the basic structure of this paper. In Part I, we will discuss the motivations
    for PWS, and will delineate some of the applications of that doctrine. In Part II, we will argue that
    PWS is eviscerated unless the term ‘‘world’’ is taken literally. (Our arguments here will include,
    but will also go beyond, Lewis’ (1986) arguments for the same point.) In Part III, we will  nd
    that, given the realistic conception of other worlds demanded by PWS, that doctrine has a number
    of unpalatable consequences, among them the one previously noted. In Part IV, we will examine
  some of Hintikka’s applications of PWS to the analysis of substitution failures and of
    propositional attitudes. Finally, in Part V, we will examine Lewis’ analysis of counterfactuals.
    Our discussion of PWS will take into account, and  nd many applications for, some striking
insights due to Bealer (1998).

2. Part I. Some of the virtues of PWS

  Let us begin with a brief discussion of the merits of PWS. (1) and (2) reduce the problematic
    notions of possible and necessary truth to that of truth simpliciter. (3) reduces the problematic


1
Some expositions of PWS contain, not (1) and (2), but rather:
(1*) A proposition is possibly true exactly if it is true in some possible world.
(2*) A proposition is necessarily true exactly if it is true in every possible world.
      But, of course, (1*) and (2*) are viciously circular since, in each case, a modal term appears on each side of the
biconditional.
        (1*) and (2*) are perfectly correct statements. It is true – in fact, truistic – that P is possible (necessary) iff P is true in
        some (every) possible world. But not all true statements are analyses. If (1*) and (2*) are to constitute analyses of
          modality, they should be cleansed of vicious circularity (or, if you prefer, of tautological emptiness). This means that the
        modal terms must be removed from the right side of the biconditional. This is what I have done in the present paper.
        Throughout this paper, we will  nd that many of the contentions associated with PWS are correct and illuminating if
taken as statements about modality, but unacceptable if taken as analyses of it.
2
      I am thinking in particular of Hintikka’s paper ‘‘Deontic Logic and Its Philosophical Morals’’ (in Hintikka,
1969:184–214).                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916874

    notion of a proposition to the less problematic notion of a set. (1)–(3) thus reduce the intensional
to the extensional. (See Blackburn, 1984:214).
  PWS analyzes other concepts along similar lines. Let P be the proposition Smith is a tall
    person, and let C be the set of worlds where that proposition is true. P is true in world W exactly if
  W is a member of C. We may thus identify P’s being true in W with W’s being a member of a
    certain set. The obscure but pivotal notion of a proposition’s being true is elegantly articulated in
                                    3
terms of the transparent notion of membership in a set.
    PWS extensionalizes other important notions. According to that doctrine, for a proposition
  P1to entail a proposition P2is for the set of worlds identical with the  rst to be included in
  the set of worlds identical with the second. The concept of compatibility is also thereby
  explained, since P1is compatible with P2exactly if P1does not entail the negation of P2.
  Let us turn to another of PWS’s great (apparent) triumphs. The concept of a property is as
    problematic as it is fundamental. Instances of properties are spatio-temporal objects, but properties
    themselves are outside of space and time. The very notion of a non-spatiotemporal object is one that,
    almost by de nition, lacks empirical respectability and that has consequently been resisted by
                      4
  thinkers of an empiricist turn of mind.At the same time, the notion of a property is not easily
    dispensed with: statements like ‘‘Smith and Jones have many properties in common’’ are often true,
  and they seem to presuppose the existence not just of property-instances, but of properties
themselves.
                        5
  PWS gives us a way of amelioratingthis uncomfortable situation. Let F be a function that
  assigns truth to an object exactly if that object is tall. Smith is tall exactly if Smith is assigned
  truth by F. Given this, we might as well identify the property of tallness with F, and the fact of
    Smith’s being tall with his being assigned truth by F. In this way a clear and precise meaning is
    given to obscure and metaphysically loaded statements like ‘‘Bob and Fred both instantiate the
property of tallness.’’
    The great virtue of PWS is that, if successful, it reduces the intensional to the extensional. Sets
  take the place of mysterious entities like propositions and properties. Dark relations like
    necessitation are replaced by perspicuous facts about set-overlap. An important corollary – one
  that will play a large role in the present paper – is that PWS is threatened to the extent that
intensions cannot be eliminated in favor of extensions.

3
      It is probably not correct to say that this constitutes an analysis of the concept of truth. (Here I am drawing on an
argument made by Frege, 1956.) Let S be the set of worlds where grass is green, and let w be our world. Even if the
proposition grass is green is true exactly if w is a member of S, we have not (so one might argue) analyzed the notion of
truth in terms of set-membership. After all, the proposition w is a member of S is the same as, or at least equivalent with,
the proposition:
The proposition w is a member of S is true.
        So even if the proposition grass is green is true exactly if w is a member of S, the right side of the biconditional uses
the notion of truth and, consequently, there has been no analysis of that notion. (According to Frege, the concept of truth is
involved in any assertion, since to make an assertion is to ascribe truth to a proposition. So, since analyses are obviously
  given by asserted propositions, there can therefore be no analysis of the concept of truth.)
        This is not the place to analyze this argument. (Dummett, 1973 gives an excellent analysis.) But even if it is cogent, it
by no means vacates or trivializes what PWS says about the concept of truth. If PWS is right to regard the proposition:
The proposition grass is green is true
        as equivalent with w is a member of S, that equivalence is extremely illuminating, even if it does not provide a way of
eliminating the notion of truth in favor of that of set-membership.
4
        Many eminent philosophers are included on that list, among them Hume (2000), Berkeley (1982), Goodman (1977),
and Quine (1960).
5
        I say ‘‘ameliorating’’, as opposed to ‘‘solving’’, because the analysis about to be presented would seem to involve a
  certain Platonism: mathematical functions are, at least prima facie, Platonic objects.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916875

3. Part II. Why PWS must not identify worlds with sets of propositions

  Let us begin by making clear one of the commitments of PWS. What is a possible world?
  Trivially, it is either something concrete, like our world, or it is not. If it is not, then it is a
  description or representation of some kind. In that case, it is most plausibly seen as a set of
              6
propositions or sentences.
    In this section, we will consider the consequences for PWS of supposing that worlds are sets of
              7
    propositions or sentences.In section 4, we will consider the consequences of supposing that
worlds are not such things.

3.1. A world of propositions? General notions

    3.1.1 Let PWSEbe the doctrine that PWS is correct, with the quali cation that worlds are sets of
          propositions. (The ‘‘E’’ stands for Ersatz.) As is well known, if we accept PWSE, then the
          identi cation of propositions with sets of worlds collapses into the viciously circular thesis:
  a proposition is a set of propositions.
        But PWSEhas deeper problems. To see these, some background is needed. Not every set
        of propositions corresponds to a (possible) world. For example, no set containing the
      propositions 2+2=5or Socrates is not self-identical counts as a world. If a set of
          propositions quali es as a possible world (or, at any rate, as a description thereof), let us say
    that it is ‘‘admissible’’; otherwise, it is ‘‘inadmissible.’’
        What conditions must a set satisfy to be admissible? An obvious (partial) answer is this:
        a set is admissible only if each of the propositions in it can be true, i.e. only if each of those
                    8
        propositions is possibly true.But, of course, given that description of what an admissible
                                                            9
    set is, PWSEcircularly analyzes the concept of possibility in terms of itself.

    3.1.2 But, by itself, the argument just stated by no means warrants the rejection of PWSE, since
        the advocate of that doctrine has a powerful counter-argument at his disposal. He can say
        that there is a characterization of the concept admissible set – a way of singling out all and

6
        Strictly speaking, there are other options; so it isn’t necessary to say that other worlds are either concrete entities, like
          our own, or that they are sets of propositions. There are two points to make here. First, many of the arguments that we will
          direct against the identi cation of worlds with propositions are readily adapted to deal with the identi cation of worlds
      with non-propositional representations. (In most cases, it is fairly obvious what the needed adjustments are.)
        Second, Lewis (1986:136–191) has in my view conclusively shown that the remaining options are not feasible. So far
  as I know, no philosopher has seriously advocated any of these remaining positions.
        In any case, if I am wrong about these remaining options being non-starters, the present work can be seen as arguing that
          twoof the more plausible conceptions of what a possible world is (they are either maximal states of affairs, like our world, or
        are sets of propositions) are untenable and that, if PWS is to stand a chance, then one of the remaining options must be the
right one. That would not a trivial point.
        Later, in connection with our discussion of some of Hintikka’s insights into modality, we will discuss the view that
        possible worlds can be identi ed with state descriptions or with model sets. We will  nd, I believe, that these views are
ultimately versions of the view that other worlds are sets of propositions.
7
      I will choose to speak of propositions, as opposed to sentences. But obvious adaptations of our arguments
accommodate a decision to speak of sentences, as opposed to propositions.
8
        I am assuming that an admissible set contains the conjunction of each of its members. (So even though each of ‘‘x is
          red all over’’ and ‘‘x is green all over’’ can be true, the same is not true of their conjunction. Incidentally, quotation marks
          should be read as quasi-quotes wherever applicable.) A corollary is that if each member of an admissible set is a possible
          proposition, then that set is admissible. So, contrary to  rst appearances, a set is admissible if and only if any given one of
its members is possible.
9
    Lewis (1986:150–153) points this out. Also, see Lewis (1986:160–156) and Lewis (1973:85).                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916876

  only such sets – that doesn’t involve any modal terms, and is thus free of any circularity.
  The best known effort in this direction involves the concept of a state-description, where a
                                                        10
  ‘‘state-description’’ is de ned as a maximal consistent set of propositions.According to
      this line of thought, P is possible exactly if it belongs to some state description, and
necessary if it belongs to all of them.
        However, as Lewis (1986:150–153) points out, there is an obvious problem with this
  proposal. The concept of consistency is a modal concept (P and P* are consistent with each
  other exactly if they can jointly be true). Consequently, PWSEwould seem to be reduced to
          11
      vicious circularityif it identi es possible truth with truth in some world, and then
    identi es worlds with state descriptions (i.e. with maximal consistent sets of propositions).

    3.1.3 Nonetheless, the point made in the previous paragraph does not, by itself, require that we
  give up on the idea that modality can be understood in terms of state descriptions. For there
  is a well-known and plausible way of analyzing the concept of a maximal consistent set of
        propositions that does not presuppose any modal concepts and that, if viable, could
  therefore be used without vicious circularity in this context. The idea is as follows. S is a
        maximal consistent set of propositions exactly if S ful lls the following conditions:

  (i) For any atomic proposition p, S will contain either p or not-p.
    (ii) For no proposition p does S contain both p and not-p.
      (iii) S contains the closure set of its atomic propositions under the operations of
            conjunction, disjunction, and existential and universal generalization. (So if
        S contains p and S contains q, then S contains p and q. If S contains p, and
        S contains either q or not-q, then S contains porq. If S contains Fa, then
    S contains for some x, Fx. And so on.)
    (iv) For no object a does S contain a is not identical with a.

  (ii) and (iv) are meant to guarantee S’s consistency. (i) and (iii) are meant to guarantee S’s
maximality (i.e. completeness).

        Given these points, a certain analysis of modality is clearly suggested: a proposition is
        possibly (necessarily) true if it belongs to some (every) state description, and a state
        description is any set of propositions satisfying (i)–(iv). This analysis of possibility
    involves no circularity, since consistency is analyzed in non-modal terms.

    3.1.4 There are a number of reasons why the analysis just stated cannot be accepted. First of all,
                                                              12
      that analysis embodies an untenable conception of the nature of consistency.The
        proposition x is blue is not the negation of xisred. But surely x is blue is not consistent
        with xisred. So a set of propositions satisfying requirements (i)–(iv) might fail to be
consistent.
      We could try to deal with this by saying that xisredis really identical (or at least
  equivalent) with some conjunction like x is not blue and x is not green and x is not yellow
        ...But the problem we are considering would recur. x is blue is not consistent with xis


10
          SeeForbes (1985:75),Lewis (1986:152), andLewis (1973:85). To my knowledge, the term ‘‘state description’’ is  rst
  found in Carnap (1947). But the concept was used by Wittgenstein in the Tractatus.
11
        or – as Lewis (1986:150–153) points out – would, unpalatably, have to take the concept of possibility as a primitive.
12
    See Lewis (1986:151–153) for a similar, though distinct, argument.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916877

        yellow, even though neither is negation of the other. Suppose that we tried to deal with this
        by saying that x is bluewas identical (or equivalent) with some conjunction of the formxis
      not yellow and x is not green ...In that case, for well known reasons, we would only
                                                13
    embark on an in nite regress or be caught in a vicious circle.
      Where many other properties are concerned, a similar argument shows that
        consistency cannot be understood wholly in terms of the absence of a conjunction of the
        form Fx and not-Fx.Ift and t* are different times, then the proposition x’s occurrence
        began at t is inconsistent with the proposition x’s occurrence began at t*, even though
        neither proposition is the negation of the other. For analogues of the reasons given in
        the last paragraph, it would not be possible to represent xoccurredattas a conjunction
      of the form x’s occurrence did not begin at t1and x’s occurrence did not begin at t2
and ....
        Suppose that S is a maximal set of propositions (i.e. that, for any given proposition, S
          contains either that proposition or its negation). For the reasons just stated, given only that S
      does not contain both p and not-p, for some proposition p, it does not follow that S is
        consistent. To guarantee that S is consistent, and thus capable of corresponding to some
    possible world, we would have to add some proviso like the following:

      (*) For any proposition p1, if S includes p1, then S does not include any proposition
          p2such that the negation of p1, or of any consequence of p1, is a consequence
  of p2.

        But (*) is a modal proposition (since a consequence of p is a proposition that must be
          true, given that p is true) and thus cannot be used without vicious circularity in this context.

    3.1.5 There is another reason why we must reject the analysis of modality described a moment
                                      14
      ago. Some states of affairs supervene on others.The fact that your heart is beating
          supervenes on the fact that various micro-events are occurring. This means that there is no
          possible world identical with ours in respect of what occurs at the micro-level that does not
    also include the event of your heart beating. But, of course, the proposition

  (1)such and such sub-atomic events are occurring

      is distinct from the proposition

(2)so and so’s heart is beating.

        Let S be a state description that includes (1). A state description is, by de nition, a set of
        propositions (or sentences) that is complete (maximal) and consistent. In order to be


13
        Wittgenstein (1922) put forth the view that all inconsistency could ultimately be understood in terms of the absence
      of explicit contradictions, like John is tall and John is not tall. But in his post-Tractarian work, especially the
        Philosophical Remarks (Wittgenstein, 1975), he began to question this, citing considerations similar to those cited
          above. In fact, the argument just given here is virtually identical with one given in that work by Wittgenstein himself. Give
          many properties F1, there will be innumerable properties F2,F3, and so on, such that x has F1is inconsistent with, though
        the not the negation of, each of x has F2, x has F3, and so on. In Kuczynski (2003, 2004) I develop this line of thought,
arguing that what we just said is true of all properties.
14
        The argument about to be given borrows an important conceit from an argument given by Lewis (1986:153), but is
distinct from Lewis’ argument.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916878

  complete, S must include (2) and, in order to be consistent, S therefore cannot include the
  negation of (2). In general, if a state description includes some proposition p, then it must
      also include every proposition p* describing a state of affairs supervenient on that
  described by p and it must not include the negation of p*. So to guarantee S’s consistency
    and completeness, our description of it must include a statement like:

      (**)For any proposition p, if S contains p, then S contains all the propositions
          describing the states of affairs that supervene on that described by p, and
        it does not contain the negation of any such proposition.

      But here we run into a problem. The typical de nition of supervenience is this: E
  supervenes on E* iff E is the case in any world where E* is the case (see Kim, 1993). Given
  that de nition of supervenience, use of (**) would be viciously circular in this context,
since we are using (**) to say what worlds are.
        Another possible way of de ning supervenience is this: E supervenes on E* iff, given
  E*, it is necessary that E occur. It is obvious that, given that de nition of supervenience,
  use of (**) is viciously circular in this context, since we are using (**) to give an analysis of
necessity.

    3.1.6 One might respond to this last argument by saying the following (I will put this response in
the voice of an imaginary objector):

        I grant that the standard de nitions of supervenience involve the concept of a world
      or, perhaps, the concept of necessity, and thus cannot be non-circularly used in our
      efforts to identify the sets of propositions needed by PWSE. But suppose that we
        found some way of understanding supervenience that didn’t involve those off-limits
          concepts. In that case, the argument you just gave would be neutralized.

  Lewis (1986:151–153) has made it clear how we must respond to this sort of objection. It
  can safely be said that many questions relating to supervenience are not going to be solved
  any time soon. Consider the proposition:

(*)George is sad at time t.

  Let GS be the state of affairs described by (*). Do we now, or will we any time soon, know
  exactly which micro-physical, chemical, or biological propositions describe states of
  affairs on which GS supervenes? Obviously not. So if we accept the objector’s position,
  then the concept of a world becomes purely programmatic, as does the associated analysis
    of modality, pending our acquiring knowledge of the sort just described. But, as Lewis says,
  it intuitively seems that we should be able to develop at least some sort of non-program-
  matic conception of modality without having to know whether GS supervenes on the state
of affairs described by (for example):

    (**)sub-atomic mass-energy displacements E1...Enare occurring at t.

                                              15
        There is one other point to make in response to the objector.Since it is a point that will
  recur throughout this paper, I will merely outline it now. Suppose that, despite what was just

15
I don’t believe that this point is made by Lewis.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916879

        said, we give the objector everything he wants; we concede to him that there is a way of
          non-circularly using the concept of supervenience in his description of the worlds (i.e. sets
        of propositions) in terms of which PWSEanalyzes modality. At  rst, it sounds as though
          this would help PWSE. But the opposite is true. So far as the concept of an alternative world
        is not needed to explicate a modal concept like that of supervenience, the concept of an
          alternative world is not needed to explicate modality in general. To the extent that modality
        is not to be understood in terms of the concept of an alternative world, all forms of PWS,
        including PWSE, are in error. So PWSEis threatened to the extent that the advocate of
        PWSEcould  nd some way of analyzing supervenience that did not render viciously
        circular his conception of what a world is. I would now like to clarify and generalize this
point.

    3.1.7 PWSEanalyzes modality in terms of worlds, and identi es worlds with sets of propositions.
        As we saw a few pages ago (pp. xxx), PWSEhas great trouble identifying the relevant sets
      of propositions without circularly using the very notions it is meant to analyze.
        But for the sake of argument, suppose that PWSEfound a non-circular way of picking
      out the right sets of propositions. This would involve  nding some non-modal
      characterization of all and only those propositions that are possibly true. (A ‘‘non-
        modal’’ characterization would be one that didn’t use any terms like ‘‘necessary’’,
‘‘possible’’, and the like.)
      At  rst, the discovery of such a characterization would seem to help PWSE.Butin
          actuality, it would destroythe need for any form of PWS, including PWSE.Ananalysisof
      modality is to supposed to say (among other things) what it is for a proposition to be
        possibly true. That statement must be non-circular: the explanandum cannot be an
        ingredient of the explanans. It follows that an analysis of modality says what non-modal
        predicate is satis ed by all and only those propositions (or sentences) that are possibly
      true. (So it gives us a non-modal characterization of the notion of possibility.) A
          characterization of the kind we’ve been discussing would give us exactly that information
        and would amount to nothing less than an analysis of modality. So supposing we found
          some non-circular way of identifying the sets of propositions that count as possible worlds,
        we would ipso facto have an analysis of modality, and would therefore cease to have any
      need for any form of PWS, including PWSE. To sum up, if it is avoid circularly
        presupposing the very notions it is supposed to analyze, PWSEmust produce some non-
        modal characterization of all and only those setsthatareadmissible,i.e. of those sets that
                                    16
        contain only those propositions that could be true; but, given such a characterization, it is
        unclear why there would continue to be any need to understand the notion of possibility
    (or, therefore, of necessity) in terms of the notion of an alternative world.
        An illustration may be appropriate. Let S be arbitrary set of propositions satisfying
          requirements (i)–(iv). Of course, we saw a few pages ago that inconsistent propositions may
        belong to S (e.g. propositions of the form so and so’s heart is not beating and e1...enare
      occurring, where e1... enare the events on which the beating of so and so’s heart
          supervenes). But in this context, solely for the purposes of argument and illustration, let us
      suppose that a proposition P is possible P just in case P belongs to a set like S, i.e. a set
      satisfying (i)–(iv). Given that this is so, it seems that we no longer have any need to

16
        Importantly, the characterization in question wouldn’t use the concept of a world since, by hypothesis, possession of
    such a characterization would be a pre-requisite to saying what worlds, in the relevant sense, are.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916880

  understand modality in terms of other worlds, since we now have an analysis of modality
  that doesn’t involve the concept of a world, namely: a proposition is possibly true exactly if
  it belongs to a set satisfying (i)–(iv). Of course, we may referto such a set as a ‘‘world’’, but
        that would just be an abbreviated way of saying that it is a set of propositions meeting
requirements (i)–(iv).
        This brings us to another point. Solely for reasons of argument and illustration, let us
        continue to suppose (falsely) that a proposition P is possible exactly if it belongs to a set
  satisfying requirements (i)–(iv); and let us continue to suppose that S is such a set. Given
  these suppositions, S would describe a possible world, and each proposition P in S would
      therefore be true in some possible world. But this would be a mere consequence or
      symptom of the fact that P is necessary. There is no denying that a proposition P is
        possibly true just in case there is some possible world where P is true. This is a truism,
        and any analysis of modality must be consistent with it, regardless of whether of that
  analysis itself employs the concept of a possible or alternative world. So given only that,
        relative to the suppositions in question, S describes a possible world, it doesn’t follow
  that the concept of a possible or alternative world has any place within a proper analysis
      17
  of modality.What follows is merely the platitude that any tenable analysis of modality
      must be consistent with the truism that P is possibly true iff P is true in some possible
world.
        The upshot of these points is that, if we found some non-circular way of stating which
        sets of propositions qualify as ‘‘worlds’’, then we would ipso facto no longer need to
  analyze modality in terms of the concept of a world.

3.2. Hintikka and the role of state descriptions in modal analysis

    Here we must discuss one of Jaakko Hintikka’s many contributions to the study of modality.
    Four notions are central to Hintikka’s analysis of modality, namely: state description, model set,
model system, and satis ability.
  We have already de ned the term ‘‘state description’’, making it easy to de ne the terms
                                                                18
    corresponding to the remaining three notions (see Hintikka, 1969:24–26, 57–59). A formulaF
    is satis able iff there is some sentence s such that,  rst, s is what results when the variables in F
  are replaced with constants and such that, second, the proposition expressed by s is part of a
    state description. So the formula *x is tall* is satis able, whereas *x is round and square* is not.
    (The asterixes are meant to be quasi-quotes, and they will continue to be used in this way for the


17
        Another illustration may clarify my meaning. Suppose that, as some have suggested (e.g. Lewis, 1986:113 and
Kuczynski, 2005a), a proposition P is possibly true exactly if P has internal, structural properties s1...sn. In that case, the
fact that P* (an arbitrary proposition) has s1...snwill necessarily be re ected in the fact that P* is true in some possible
world. But P*’s being possible willconsist in its having s1...sn, not in its being true in some possible world. The statement
P is possibly true exactly if P is true in some possible world is a good (negative) touchstone for the truth of an analysis of
possibility. But it doesn’t follow that modality is necessarily correctly analyzed in terms of the notion of a possible or
alternative world.
18
        In this context, the term ‘‘formula’’ is to mean ‘‘open-sentence.’’ Consider the expression ‘‘x has F.’’ This is not an
actual sentence, since it has two variables in it, namely ‘‘x’’ and ‘‘F’’. (These are variables of different types. But that fact
isn’t central to what we are discussing, and we may safely omit further discussion of it.) When these variables are replaced
with constants of the appropriate type (e.g. ‘‘Smith’’ and ‘‘the property of tallness’’), what results is a sentence. In general,
an open sentence is an expression E such that E contains free variables and such that when those free variables are
replaced with constants (of the appropriate type), the result is a sentence.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916881

    rest of the paper.) A ‘‘model set’’ is a set of formulae such that the set of propositions expressed
    by some interpretation of those formulae constitutes a part of maximal consistent set. (By an
  ‘‘interpretation’’ of a set of formulae is meant a set of sentences resulting from a uniform
                                        19
    assignment of constants to the variables in those formulae.)Finally, a ‘‘model system’’ is a set
of state descriptions.
  On this basis, Hintikka says the following about the concepts of necessity and possibility.
  Possibly p is true in state description S, belonging to model set M, iff there is some state
    description S*, also a member of M, ful lling two conditions. First, p is true in S*. Second, S* is
    analternativeto S, meaning that the propositions in S* jointly describe how the worldmight have
    gone, supposing that the propositions in S jointly describe how the world actually is. Necessarily
    pis true in state description S iff, for every in state description S* in M that is an alternative to S, p
is true in S*.
  The system just described has provided the basis for a number of extremely fruitful insights
    into modality, and its value to manyresearch projects cannot be overstated. But it is not viable if
    takenas an analysisof modality. By de nition, one maximal consistent set is an ‘‘alternative’’ to
    another exactly if what is possible in the one is actual in the other. So taken as an analysis of the
    notion of possibility, the view of possibility stated in the previous paragraph is guilty of vicious
  circularity. The same point (mutatis mutandis) applies to the corresponding analysis of
necessity.
  The circularity is so obvious that Hintikka clearly did not mean it to be taken as an analysis of
    possibility, but rather as an elucidation of that notion. Thus taken, Hintikka’s view is beyond
    reproach. But in this context we are looking for an analysis of possibility, and we have not found
that in this particular quarter of Hintikka’s important work.
  Within the system just described, state descriptions are meant to be, or at least to represent,
    possible worlds. (See Hintikka, 1969:79–80.) Given this point, there is another problem with the
    analysis of Hintikka’s just considered. In order to identify this problem, we must brie y repeat
    some points made earlier. The expression ‘‘consistent’’ is a modal term. So if we de ne a ‘‘state
    description’’ as a maximal consistent set of propositions, then we condemn to vicious circularity
    any analysis of possible truth as truth in some state description. Thus, if the analysis of Hintikka’s
  that we just considered is to be free of vicious circularity, a ‘‘state description’’ must not be
    de ned as maximal consistent set. Presumably because he is aware of this very problem, Hintikka
  does not de ne the term ‘‘state description’’ in this way. Rather, Hintikka says that a ‘‘state
    description’’ is a set of propositions satisfying requirements (i)–(iv), as de ned a few pages ago
    (pp. xxx), and thus avoids the just mentioned vicious circularity. But as we saw, given only that a
    set of propositions satis es conditions (i)–(iv), it does not follow that it is consistent or, therefore,
that it is (or describes) a possible world.



19
  More explicitly, a model set is a of formulae satisfying the following requirements:
(ii*)
  For no formula f does S does contain both f and not-f.
(iii*)
        S contains the closure set of its atomic formulae under the operations of conjunction, disjunction, and existential and
        universal generalization. (So if S contains f and S contains g, then S contains f and g. If S contains f, and S contains
not-g, the S contains forg. And so on.)
(iv*)
    The formula a is not identical with a does not belong to S.
      A model set does not contain any analogue of (i). So a model set is a set of formulas that, on some interpretation,
        constitute at least a part of a state-description, though not necessarily a complete one. State descriptions may be seen as
limiting cases of interpretations of model sets.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916882

3.3. PWSEand the PWS-analysis of propertyhood

    3.3.1 Leaving aside everything said so far, if worlds are taken to be sets of propositions, PWS
  forfeits some of its most important victories. For the next few paragraphs, to put matters
  into context, we are going to talk about PWS, as opposed to PWSE. (By ‘‘PWS’’, I mean the
  doctrine that (i)–(iii), as de ned in Section 1, above, are correct, where it is left open how
        the word ‘‘world’’ is to be taken. So ‘‘PWS’’, in this context, is neutral as to whether
  ‘‘worlds’’ are meant to be concrete entities or sets of propositions. By contrast, PWSEis the
  position that (i)–(iii) are correct, where the word ‘‘world’’ is meant to be a representation of
      some kind, presumably a set of propositions.) We will then return to PWSE.
        Consider the PWS reduction of properties to functions: a property is a function from
                20
    individuals to truth-valuesor, equivalently, is a set of individuals (see Lewis, 1986:50–53).
    So, for example, the property of being a chordate (a creature with a chorda, the dorsal chord or
        (proto-)spine) is a function F that assigns truth to all and only those individuals having
  chordas or, equivalently, is the set of creatures that have chordas. The property of being a
        rhenate (a creature with kidneys) is a function F* that assigns truth to all and only those
        individuals having kidneys or, equivalently, is the set of all creatures having kidneys.
        There is an obvious problem with this analysis. Functions are typically identi ed with,
  or at least seen as being individuated by, the sets of ordered pairs associated with them. (So,
  supposing that its domain is the set of whole numbers, the function F(x) = 2x is identi ed
with the set of pairs:<1,2>, <2,4>, and so on.)
        Given this, suppose for the sake of argument that, in this world, all and only rhenates are
  chordates. It follows that, in this world, F and F* generate exactly the same ordered pairs.
  Thus, F and F* are the same function, meaning that the PWS-analysis of properties falsely
                                                              21
      identi es the property of having a chorda with the property of having a kidney.
        There are two ways that one might respond to this argument. The  rst response is to say
  that objects fromother worldsare to be included in the domains of the functions with which
  properties are identi ed. There are other (possible) worlds where there are creatures with
  chordas but not kidneys. So F and F* generate different sets of ordered pairs, and are thus
                                                        22
      distinct functions, if their domains include objects from other worlds.The second
                                                      23
  response is to deny that functions are identical with sets of ordered pairs.Let us consider
each of these options, starting with the second.
        The view that functions are identical with sets of ordered pairs is sometimes known as
  ‘‘extensionalism.’’ But a function may also be thought of as a way of generating asetof
  ordered pairs, without itself being identical with any such set. This way of thinking about
  functions is sometimes referred to (more among mathematicians than semanticists) as
    ‘‘intensionalism.’’ From an intensionalist viewpoint, F and F* are different functions because,

20
        In any case, this is one way that PWS analyzes the notion of a property. What we will say here applies to any PWS-
analysis of propertyhood. See also Lewis (1986:50–53) for a discussion of the different PWS-analyses of propertyhood.
21
        See Lewis (1986:55–56): ‘‘Everyone agrees that it won’t do to take properties as the sets of its this-worldly instances,
  because then two properties will be taken to be identical if they happen to be co-extensive.’’
22
        Lewis (1986:51) makes exactly this point. But Lewis takes other worlds to be concrete entities, and is invulnerable to
the criticisms of PWS discussed in this section. After all, the purpose of this section is to show how PWS lands into certain
  traps if it takes other worlds to be sets of propositions (as opposed to concrete entities).
23
          See Lewis (1986:56): ‘‘ ‘Triangular’ means having three angles, ‘trilateral’ means having three sides.’’ Lewis goes on
to say that any conception of propertyhood according to which those are different properties ‘‘demands that properties
should be structured’’ [Lewis’ emphasis]. This is not exactly the point I am making, but it is obviously similar.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916883

        even though they generate the same ordered pairs (at least in this world), they do so in
different ways.
        From an intensionalist viewpoint, what is it that distinguishes F from F*? The answer is
          basically this. Where the one function is concerned, an object’s having the property of being a
          chordate is implicated in a certain way in that function’s assigning truth to that object, and that
          object’s being a rhenate isnotthus implicated; and where the other function is concerned, an
          object’s having the property of being a rhenate is implicated in a certain way in that function’s
        assigning truth to that object, and that object’s being a chordate is not thus implicated.
        The intensionalist distinction between F and F* is thus drawn in terms of the properties
        rhenate and chordate. Consequently, an intensionalist perspective is not available to
          someone who wishes to analyze those functions in terms of those properties. PWS is guilty
        of vicious circularity if it takes an intensionalist view of functions, at least in so far as PWS
                                                          24
    aspires to analyze properties as functions (or sets) of the sort in question.
          Consequently, insofar as she wishes to analyze properties along such lines, the advocate of
        PWS must take an extensionalist view of functions, i.e. she must see functions as being
          nothing but sets of ordered pairs. In that case, as we discussed, if she is to distinguish between
          F and F*, she must allow objects from other worlds into the domains of those functions. Let us
          now consider the consequences of going this route. More speci cally, let us now see why it is
    not possible for PWSE(notice the return of the subscript) to go this route.

  3.3.2 Supposing that a possible world is a set of propositions, what do we mean by a possible
        individual? There are no actual persons who are over 9 ft tall. But such an individual is
        possible. If we accept PWS, this means that there is such an individual in some world W.
        AccordingtoPWSE(note the subscript), W is a set of propositions. So if PWSEis right,
      then a possible individual is one who is described, or otherwise implicated, in an
      admissible set of propositions. So for PWSE, a possible object would be one that is
      mentioned or described in a proposition that is a member of a possible world, i.e. an
          25
admissible set.
          The problem is that every proposition consists of properties. Consider the propositionJohn
                                                26
          is tall. This proposition attributes the property of tallness to John.The property of tallness
        thus seems to be a constituent of this proposition or, at any rate, to be a prerequisite to its


24
        There is another, much deeper reason why the intensionalist analysis of functions is not available to the advocate of
          PWS or, therefore, to the advocate of PWSE. The essence of PWS is that it reduces the intensional to the extensional. For
        reasons yet to be given, if functions are viewed intensionally, then all of PWS’s analyses must be correspondingly
        re-intensionalized. But in that case, PWS comes to naught, since has failed to extensionalize anything. We will spend a
great deal of time delineating and defending this line of thought.
25
        A bit more would have to be said. There are maximal consistent sets of propositions that include propositions like John
  was thinking about the round square. So a maximal consistent set of propositions could describe an impossible object (though
          it seems far less plausible to say that an impossible object could be aconstituentof any proposition). What seems impossible
        is that one of the atomic propositions composing a maximal consistent set could describe an impossible object, since
        descriptions seem to involve the use of generalizations of some sort (‘‘there is a round square x such that ...’’). So,
  presumably, given a PWS conception of necessity, and given the view that possible worlds are sets of propositions, a possible
        object becomes one that is mentioned in (or is described by, or is a constituent of) some atomic proposition composing a
possible world.
26
        It isn’t really clear whether the propositionJohn is tallis different fromJohn has the property of tallness.Of course, the
          sentence ‘‘John is tall’’ is different from the sentence ‘‘John has the property of tallness.’’ One could understand the  rst
  without understanding the second; the semantic rules assigning meaning to the one do not quite coincide with those assigning
    meaning to the other. But it is far from clear that those sentences encode different propositions.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916884

  existence. This point generalizes without limit. Pick any atomic proposition you wish: it
                                                                  27
  attributes a property to something and thus presupposes the existence of some property.
  Since molecular propositions are built out of atomic propositions, it follows that every
    proposition, and thus every set of propositions, presupposes the existence of some property.
  So if we identify worlds with sets of propositions, we are guilty of vicious circularity if we
  identify properties with functions involving worlds.

    3.3.3 There is a way that an advocate of PWS might resist this argument. Consider the proposition:

(T)triangles have three sides.

          According to PWS, T is either a function from worlds to truth values (one that assigns truth
    to every world where that proposition is true) or, equivalently, it is a class of worlds (the class
  of worlds where it is true). Let U be the class just mentioned. If T is identi ed with U, then T is
  not (at least not in any obvious way) built out of the properties triangle, three, and so on. For
        any proposition P, an analogous line of thought would suggest that P is not built out of
  properties. If this is the case, then the argument given a moment ago would seem to collapse.
        But there is a well known problem with this maneuver. If propositions are the sets of
  worlds where they are true, then T is identical with the proposition:

(O)three is an odd number.

But O and T are not identical.
        Advocates of PWS respond to this by treating propositions as structured assignments of
  truth-values to worlds. (See Lewis, 1970, Cresswell, 1985.) So even though T and O assign
    the same truth-values to the same worlds, they are different propositions since they generate
        those assignments in different ways. In the one case, the property of triangularity is
  involved in a certain way in the relevant assignment; in the other case, that property is not
        thus involved. In the one case, the property of oddness involved in a certain way in the
relevant assignment; in the other case, it is not thus involved.
        But, of course, the maneuver just described involves taking an intensionalist view of
  functions and thus, for the reasons given a moment ago, renders viciously circular PWS’s
                              28
identi cation of properties with functions.
        The preceding discussion has a consequence worthy of note. Let us refer to properties of
        individuals (e.g. tallness, baldness) as ‘‘ rst-order’’ properties, and to properties of
  propositions (e.g. truth, necessity) as ‘‘second-order’’ properties.

27
  n-place relations can be treated as properties of ordered n-tuples.
28
          There are different PWS reductions of properties to functions. But the argument just given shows that any one of them is
unfeasible. For example, Lewis (1986:55–57) suggests that a property can be seen as a set of its instances. On this view,
properties that happen to have the same extensions (e.g. rhenate and chordate) are falsely identi ed with each other, unless
either objects from other worlds are allowed into the domains of the relevant functions or properties are seen as having
structure. As we’ve discussed, propositions are themselves built out of properties. So if other worlds are treated as sets of
propositions, then it becomes viciously circular to allow objects from other worlds to be members of the sets that are being
identi ed with properties. This leaves us with the option of distinguishing accidentally co-extensive properties by their
  internal structures. But if we do that, then we are no longer extensionalizing properties; we have given up on the identi cation
of properties with sets.
        Sometimes, advocates of PWS identify each property P with a function phi that pairs off each world W with the class of
individuals in W having P. (See Lewis, 1986:53). Considerations similar to those just stated in the main text (in connection
    with the identi cation of properties with functions from individuals to truth-values) apply here.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916885

          PWS identi es propositions with functions from worlds to truth-values or, equivalently,
        with classes of worlds. We’ve seen that, if this identi cation is correct, then  rst-order
        properties cannot be identi ed with functions. We would therefore be guilty of a certain
          theoretical arbitrariness if we identi ed some, but not all, properties with functions. Thus, if
         rst-order properties are not functions, the same is true of second-order properties. PWS
        thus requires that second-order properties not be functions. But in that case, as I will now
    argue, the identi cation of necessity with truth in all worlds collapses.
        Let F be a function that assigns truth to a proposition P exactly if P is true in every world.
          From the viewpoint of PWS, P’s being necessarily true is identical with P’s being assigned
        truth by F. We just saw that the property of being necessarily true is not identical with any
          function. This means that we cannot identify a proposition’s being necessarily true with its
        being assigned truth by F. That is equivalent to saying that we cannot identify necessary
truth with truth in all worlds.

  3.4. PWSEand the ineliminability of vicious circularity through use of the meta-language

  I would like to end this section by discussing two more reasons why PWS cannot identify
worlds with sets of propositions.

3.4.1 Consider the proposition:

(*) necessarily, 1 + 1 = 2.

  According to PWSE, this means (or, at least, is equivalent with):

      (**) the proposition 1+1=2is a member of every world, i.e. of every admissible
    set of propositions.

        Let U be the class of all admissible sets of propositions. Since (*) is true, it is presumably a
        member of U. The same is therefore true of (**), supposing that PWSEis right. Let M be
        one of the admissible sets to which (**) belongs. M is one of U’s members. (**) is one of
          M’s members. Thus, a member of a member of U quanti es over U. (Roughly, U is built out
        of (**), and (**) is built out of, or at least presupposes the existence of, U.) This is a classic
                                      29
case of a vicious circle, and is thus unacceptable.
        To prevent this sort of situation, the advocate of PWSEcannot allow statements that
        quantify over all worlds to belong to admissible sets of propositions. According to PWS
          (and PWSE) modal statements fall into this category, since they have the form in all worlds
        P, in some worlds P, and so on. It follows that modal statements must not be members of
admissible sets.
        For this reason, advocates of PWSEdo not allow modal statements, like (*) and (**), to
          be members of worlds. Such statements are relegated to the ‘‘meta-language’’, and vicious
circularity is thus avoided.


29
          Unless we heroically accept some version of non-standard set-theory. (SeeBarwise and Moss, 1996.) But presumably
        PWS doesn’t want to make the truth of non-standard set-theory be a pre-condition for its own truth. In any case, if some
        kind of non-standard set-theory did turn out to be correct, it would still be worth pointing out the dependence of PWS on
such a theory.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916886

        But not all statements that refer to worlds are modal statements, and this recreates the
  sort of vicious circularity just considered. For the sake of argument, suppose that there is a
  class U such that U contains all admissible sets of propositions, and nothing besides. Now
  suppose that Smith is a cognitively normal person, but has not yet pondered the concept the
    concept of a possible world. In that case, the proposition

  (a) Smith believes that the propositionpossible worlds are not identical with members
of U is true.

      is not true, since Smith simply hasn’t contemplated the nature of possible worlds.
      (Notice that, while (a) has a statement about worlds embedded in it, (a) is not itself a
  modal statement.) At the same time, (a) obviously could be true. According to PWS, this
means:

      (b) In some (possible) world, Smith believes that the propositionpossible worlds
    are not identical with members of U is true.

According to PWSE, (b) means:

      (c) In some member of U, Smith believes that the propositionpossible worlds are
  not identical with members of U is true.

        U consists of sets of propositions. (c) is one of the members of one those sets. So one of
  the members of one of the members of U quanti es over U. In fact, U seems to be one of the
  constituents of (c). U thus ends up being a constituent of a member of a member of itself. In
  any case, one of the members of the one of the members of U quanti es over U. Either way,
                    30
the situation is unacceptable.
        We cannot eliminate this problem by relegating (c) to the meta-language. (c) merely
  identi es some fact about Smith’s person, and therefore can no more be relegated to the
                                            31
    meta-language than could Smith is happy or Smith is tall.
      Thinking along lines like those embodied in Russell’s Theory of Types, one
        might be tempted to say that the occurrence of U in the underlined sentence refers to
      one set of propositions, while the occurrence of U in the quanti er at the beginning
        refers to some analogous, but numerically distinct, set of propositions of a different
  ‘‘type’’ or ‘‘order.’’ (See Russell, 1908.) In this way, vicious circularity could perhaps be
avoided.
        But this maneuver is not one that can be made in this context. When we say that (a) could
        be true, we are saying that Smith could believe the proposition:possible worlds are not
  identical with members of U. It is a simple modal fact that Smith could believe that exact


30
    This argument has a certain similarity to that given by Bealer (1998), which we will later discuss.
31
        Granted, the state of affairs described by (c), and by all others statements about people’s mental states, may well
supervene on other, lower level states of affairs. But this gives us no grounds at all for excluding (c) from any admissible
set. After all, the states of affairs described by propositions likeJohn is tall andthat rock weighs four kilograms supervene
on other, lower-level states of affair, but those propositions obviously belong to some admissible sets. There thus seem to
be no grounds for denying (c) membership in at least some admissible sets. Consequently, the vicious circularity
    described a moment ago cannot be removed—at least not by expelling (a) into the metalanguage.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916887

          proposition to be true. We are not talking about some analogous proposition concerning a
different set of possible worlds.

    3.4.2 This brings us to yet another problem with PSWE. As we just saw, if it is to avoid vicious
          circularity, PWSEcannot let modal propositions belong to the same admissible sets as non-
      modal propositions like John is tall. In light of this, consider the proposition:

  (1) it is necessarily the case that, necessarily, 1 + 1 = 2.

        (1) is intuitively plausible and, indeed, is generally taken to be true (see Kripke, 1963).
  According to PWSE, (1) means:

      (2) The proposition1 + 1 = 2 is a member of every admissible set is a member of
      every admissible set.

    As before, let U be the set of all admissible sets. In that case, (2) becomes:

    (3) The proposition1 + 1 = 2 is a member of every member of U is a member of
    every member of U.

        The underlined proposition presupposes the existence of U; indeed, U would seem to be
                                32
        one of the constituents of that proposition.But the underlined proposition is itself a
member of U. So (3) is viciously circular.
      To prevent this, PWSEwould have to say that the occurrence of U in the underlined
          sentence refers to one set, or tier, of admissible sets, while the non-underlined occurrence
        refers to some other tier. In that case, the two occurrences of ‘‘necessarily’’ in (1) have
          different (though analogous) meanings. The  rst means ‘‘in every admissible set belonging
          to tier A’’, while the second means ‘‘in every admissible set belonging to tier B’’, where A
        and B comprise different sets of propositions. For exactly similar reasons, the three
occurrences of ‘‘necessarily’’ in:

    (4) it is necessarily the case that, necessarily, 1 + 1 necessarily equals 2,

                                        33
  would have different (though analogous) meanings.
        But this seems quite unacceptable. If our intuitions are to be trusted, the two occurrences
        of ‘‘necessarily’’ in (3), and the three occurrences in (4), all have precisely the same
meaning.
      Further, if we conceded to PWSEthat those occurrences quanti ed over different
          worlds, then it would be necessary to subject the basic theorems of modal logic to counter-
          intuitive reinterpretations. This would obviously be true of the generally accepted principle


32
        In any case, if we think of propositions as having constituents – as being structures consisting of properties, relations,
        and perhaps individuals – then it seems that U is one of the constituents of that proposition. And this is a widely accepted
regarding propositions—one held by Russell (1985), Kaplan (1989), and others.
33
      Russell’s Theory of Types has a similar consequence. See Russell (1908). If that theory is right, then the word
          ‘‘three’’ in ‘‘John has three cars’’ has a meaning different from (though analogous to) that borne by its homonym in ‘‘John
      has three pairs of shoes’’, since the  rst occurrence refers to individuals, whereas the second refers to sets.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916888
                                      34
        that necessarily p implies necessarily, necessarily p.But the same would be true of if
  possibly p, then necessarily possibly p, since possibly p is the same as not necessarily not p.
  In fact, it seems that no quarter of modal logic would remain untouched, since one of the
      purposes of that discipline is to study the effects of iterating and permuting modal
connectives.
        We may conclude that PWSEis not viable, and that it is therefore not an option for PWS to
  identify worlds with sets of propositions. So if we wish to hold onto PWS, then we must see
  possible worlds as being concrete entities (‘‘maximal states of affairs’’, or some such). In
    other words, we must consider possible worlds as being in the same metaphysical category as
our world.

4. Part III. Why PWS cannot identify worlds with concrete entities

4.1. Some unwelcome consequences of modal realism

    I will now argue that, if we see possible worlds as concrete entities, then PWS has a number of
  unpalatable consequences, one of them being that every proposition is necessarily true or
necessarily false.
    Suppose that, as PWS requires, there are various alternative worlds. In light of this, consider
    the proposition Smith is tall in W37, and suppose that it is true. ("W37" is short for "World 37.")
    That proposition is true in every world. For example, it is true in W867 that, in W37, Smith is tall.
It is irrelevant whether or not Smith is tall in W867.
  Here is an analogy. Consider the proposition it is raining in London on March 22, 2006, and
    suppose that it is true. That proposition is true at places and times where it is not raining. The fact
    that it is not raining in London on July 22, 2006 is irrelevant to the truth of the proposition that it is
    raining in London March 22, 2006. Similarly the fact that Smith is short in W867 is irrelevant to
    the truth of the proposition that he is tall in W37. A similar line of argument shows that Smith is
                        35
not tall in W37 is false in every world.
  If PWS is to avoid making all propositions necessarily true or necessarily false, then it must
    show that the propositions that we intuitively regard as contingent – the propositions af rmed by
    utterances of ‘‘Mozart wrote over forty symphonies’’ and ‘‘Napoleon became a famous general’’
  – are not world-indexed and, further, are not equivalent with world-indexed propositions.
    In light of this, let W1be our world; and let P be the proposition af rmed by an utterance in W1
    of ‘‘Mozart wrote over forty symphonies.’’ Presumably P is contingent—it is not in the same
  category as water is H2O or 1+1=2.What must be the case for P to be true? It is irrelevant
    whether Mozart wrote over forty symphonies in W87 or W8,986. Only one world counts—W1.


34
      There is one last reason why PWS oughtn’t identify worlds with sets of proposition. We saw earlier how PWS
elegantly analyzes the notion of truth in terms of set-membership. Let S be the set of worlds where grass is green, and let
w be our world. For the proposition grass is green to be true is simply for w to be a member of S. If correct, this would
shed a striking light on the nature of truth. But this illumination is lost if worlds are identi ed with propositions. The
notion of a proposition is usually understood in terms of that truth: propositions are truths or falsehoods, or they are those
things that are non-derivatively true or false. (Later we will brie y revisit this topic.) If (as appears to be the case) the
concept of a proposition is to be understood in terms of that truth, then the same is true of the concept of a world (i.e. an
admissible set of propositions). In that case, to avoid vicious circularity, the concept of a proposition’s being true would
  have to be understood independently of the concept of membership in a set of worlds.
35
  See Plantinga (1974:62–65) for a similar, if not identical, point.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916889

    The statement is correct exactly if, in W1, Mozart wrote over forty symphonies, i.e. exactly if the
proposition:

(PW1)Mozart wrote over forty symphonies in W1

is correct.
  So when you say ‘‘Mozart wrote over forty symphonies’’, the proposition that you are
    af rming has the same truth conditions as a world-indexed proposition. We’ve seen that, given a
    PWS framework, PW1 is necessarily true. It follows that, given such a framework, the same is
    true of the proposition you are af rming. But, in reality, the proposition you are af rming is a
              36
paradigm of contingency.
    The argument just given is anticipated by Plantinga (1974:62–65). Suppose that Socrates is
    snub-nosed in W65. In that case, Socrates has the property of being snubnosed-in-W65. It is true
    in every world, even those where he is not snub-nosed, that Socrates has the property of being
    snubnosed-in-W65. Plantinga goes on to say: ‘‘It is easy to see that being snub-nosed in [W65] is
    essential to Socrates’’, since Socrates has the property of being snub-nosed-in-W65 in every
world, and an essential property is one that a thing has in every world.
  Even though his own logic would seem to demand it, Plantinga does not draw the further
  conclusion that, if we identify necessity with truth in all worlds, then all propositions are
    necessarily true. Suppose that you are in W65 (where, to simplify the argument, we may suppose
    that English is spoken) and you say ‘‘Socrates is snub-nosed.’’ Your statement is true exactly if
  Socrates is snub-nosed in W65. It is irrelevant whether he is snub-nosed in W876. So your
    statement is true exactly if Socrates has some property that, by Plantinga’s own lights, he either
                                                                    37
    has in every world or in none, and that he therefore necessarily has or necessarily does not have.

36
        This is not to say that an utterance of ‘‘Mozart wrote over thirty symphonies in W1’’ is identical in respect of linguistic
  meaning with an utterance, in W1, of ‘‘Mozart wrote over thirty symphonies.’’ A comparison may help. Suppose that you are
        in location L at time T, and you say ‘‘it is now raining here.’’ The proposition you are af rming is true exactly if the
        proposition: in place L and time T, it is raining is true. So the proposition you are af rming has exactly the same truth
          conditions as the proposition encoded in an utterance of ‘‘in place L and time T, it is raining.’’ But there would seem to be a
          clear sense in which an utterance, in place L and time T, of ‘‘it is now raining here’’ is semantically different from an utterance
          of ‘‘in place L and time T, it is raining.’’ (See Kaplan, 1989 for a classic defense of this now widely accepted position.) For
          example, you could not understand an utterance, in place L and time T, of ‘‘it is now raining here’’ without knowing what
          ‘‘now’’ and ‘‘here’’ meant; but such a de ciency would not necessarily prevent you from understanding an utterance of ‘‘in
        place L and time T, it is raining.’’ The semantic rules assigning meaning to the one utterance don’t coincide with those
      assigning meaning to the other, even though the truth conditions assigned to the utterances do coincide.
        An utterance of ‘‘Mozart wrote over forty symphonies in W1’’ is semantically different from an utterance, in W1,of
          ‘‘Mozart wrote over forty symphonies.’’ But for analogues of the reasons just considered, this in no way con icts with the
idea that the propositions encoded in such utterances may be equivalent.
37
        In his discussion of world indexed properties,Plantinga (1974:64) makes a suggestive remark that might seem to have
some bearing on our viewpoint:
        ‘‘We must not be misled by our terminology to suppose that a possible world is a place, like Wyoming, so that being
        snub-nosed in [W67] is like being mugged in Chicago. A possible world is a state of affairs, not a place; and far be it
from me to claim otherwise.’’
          Plantinga is right that, if there are possible worlds, they are not places. Spatial location is a property that things havewithin
          a world; worlds themselves do not have it. (If two things are spatially located with respect to one another, then they are ipso
          factoin the same world.) It might seem that our argument involves a false assimilation of worlds to places. But this is not so. A
          person cannotjustbe mugged: he must be mugged in Chicago or Paris. Socrates cannotjustbe snub-nosed; he must be snub-
          nosed in some maximal state of affairs, in W65 or W899. Of course, here the word ‘‘in’’ doesn’t denote spatial location, as
          Plantinga (in effect) points out. (Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that any case of Socrates’ being snub-nosed is a
  constituent of a maximal state of affairs.) Any case of Socrates’ being snub-nosed will be given by a proposition that is world-
        indexed or equivalent to a world-indexed proposition. The fact that worlds are not places doesn’t undermine this.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916890

  In conclusion, if we accept PWS’s framework, then those propositions that we regard as
contingent become necessarily true or necessarily false.
A proponent of PWS might respond to our argument by looking for world-neutral
  propositions—propositions that are not identical with, or equivalent to, world-indexed
  propositions. But the problem with this approach is clear. Even if it turns out that there are
  world-neutral propositions, PWS still turns the propositions that we intuitively regard as
    contingent—e.g. those af rmed by utterances of ‘‘Mozart wrote over forty symphonies’’—into
    necessary truths or falsehoods. (For further related discussion, see Excursus I ‘On Necessity,
    Contingency, and the In nite Regressiveness embedded in PWS’, at the end of this article.)

4.2. Bealer’s argument

    Let PWSINbe the doctrine that PWS is correct, with the quali cation that the functions that are
    identi ed with propositions are to be viewed intensionally. Let PWSEXbe the doctrine that PWS
    is correct, with the quali cation that those functions are to be viewed extensionally. As we noted
    earlier, PWSEXcannot distinguish between distinct, but analytically equivalent, propositions—
    between, for example, triangles have three sides and three is an odd number. Most advocates of
  PWS deal with this by advocating PWSIN. But in light of what Bealer (1998) says, we must
seriously question the viability of PWSIN. Let us now turn to his argument.
  According to any version of PWS (including PWSIN), the property of necessity is either a
    function F from propositions to truth-values – a function pairing necessarily true propositions
  with truth and all others with falsity – or, equivalently, it is a class C that includes all and only
necessarily true propositions.
  The proposition necessarily 1 + 1 = 2 is itself a member of C. The property of necessity is
    itself a constituent of that proposition. So if the property of necessity is identical with C, then that
    property is a proper constituent of one of its own members. Since this is viciously circular, the
property of necessity cannot be identi ed with C or, by a similar argument, with F.
    To block this vicious circularity, the concept of necessity would have to be removed from each
    of the propositions which are members of C (or, equivalently, to which F assigns the property of
  truth). But this would require that 1+1=2be falsely identi ed with necessarily 1 + 1 = 2.In
    light of obvious extensions of the argument just given, necessarily necessarily 1 + 1 = 2 would
  have to be falsely identi ed with 1+1=2 and also with necessarily 1 + 1 = 2, and with
countless other propositions involving iterated modal operators.
    As Bealer points out, an argument exactly similar to the one he gives shows that, foranysecond-
    level property, PWSINgenerates a regress like that discussed above. We thus have good reason to
    believe that the PWSINanalysis fails for some properties. On this basis, Bealer makes a plausible
    case that it fails forallproperties. Presumably, the property of a property is not disjunctive; it is not
    like the property of being EITHER A BIRD OR A HARPSICHORD-PLAYER. If this is right, then
    given that the PWSINanalysis fails for some properties, considerations of uniformity demand that
  we see it as failing for all of them. (For more on the consequences of Bealer‘s argument, see
Excursus II, ‘Bealer and the Problem of Circularity’, at the end of this article).

4.3. Counterpart theory and its discontents

    If worlds are taken to be concrete entities, PWS runs into problems additional to those already
    discussed. Let us talk about the actual Socrates—the man who, in this world, died of hemlock
    poisoning a few thousand years ago. Suppose that in some world W, distinct from our world, there                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916891

    is a man x who did not die of hemlock poisoning. In that case, Leibniz’s Law would seem to tell
                          38
  us that x is not identical with Socrates.Obvious extensions of this reasoning demand that
                    39
Socrates exist only in one world.
  For this reason, Lewis wisely says that Socrates himself does not exist in other worlds, even
    though Socrates has counterparts in other worlds (Lewis (1968, 1986)). In general, no object
  exists in multiple worlds, even though any object will have counterparts in other worlds.
                                40
  But there are several problems with this view.Some of these are well known, and some are
not. Let us start with the former.
  In our world, Socrates was wise. Given that Socrates exists only in this world, it follows that
    there is no world where Socrates was not wise. So it would seem to follow that, by PWS’s lights, it
    is necessarilytrue that Socrates was wise. Given any proposition that we would intuitively regard
    as contingent, a similar argument shows that, by PWS’s lights, that proposition is necessary.
    A counterpart-theorist deals with this by saying that Socrates is necessarily wise just in case all
    of Socrates’ counterparts are wise. In general, counterpart-theory must reject the identi cation of
  necessity with truth in all worlds. Necessary truth becomes truth under all appropriate
    substitutions of counterparts for counterparts. The concept of possibility is correspondingly re-
analyzed.
    But this view is problematic. First, it lacks a certain consonance with our pre-theoretic modal
    intuitions. Second, it is, strictly speaking, an abandonment of the corner-stone of PWS—the
principle that necessary truth is truth in all worlds.
    Of course, neither of these points necessarily warrants therejectionof counterpart-theory. But,
    as I now propose to show, it is not hard to give argumentative grounds for the feeling of worry that
they awaken.
    First of all, what is a counterpart? Here is David Lewis’ answer. Socrates’ counterpart in W is
  the thing in W which resembles Socrates more than any other thing in W. If this is right, then
    counterpart-theory has several problems. First, as Lewis himself points out, by this de nition of
    ‘‘counterpart’’, Socrates may have several counterparts in W. In that case, since there are worlds
    where Socrates has multiple counterparts, the proposition Socrates is identical with Socrates
                            41
presumably fails to be true in every world.


38
        Suppose that there is some world W where somebody x has exactly the same properties as our Socrates, insofar as this
        is possible. x is not identical with Socrates since Socrates has the property of being in this world, whereas x does not.
39
      One way to resist this would be to say that Socrates is not an intra-, but an inter-mundane entity. (See Lewis,
        1986:198–210.) A comparison might help. The property of redness does not exist in any speci c place or time, even
        though each of its instances do. Similarly, Socrates per se does not exist in any speci c world, even though some of his
        parts or perhaps instances do. Leibniz’s Law obviously doesn’t forbid different parts of a given thing from having
different properties.
      Such a view has very little basis in what we know about Socrates. Socrates was born at a certain time and died at
        certain time. He had a certain height and weight. These are data. If we see Socrates as some kind of compound of various
        inter-mundane individuals, then these data must be rejected. We must therefore not see Socrates in this way, and must
        continue see him as we are accustomed to see him. Lewis (1986:198–210) provides a superb and (to me) convincing
discussion of this whole issue.
40
Lewis was aware of many of these. See Lewis (1968, 1986).
41
    See Lewis (1968:112–113), Forbes (1985:75), and Kaplan (1968:102).
      Even if some argument could be produced that reconciled counterpart-theory with the presumption that the
        proposition Socrates is identical with Socrates is true in every possible world, it shouldn’t be necessary to produce
        such an argument. The law of identity should be enough. So far as counterpart-theory doesn’t con ict with the non-
        controversial view that S is true in every possible world, it implausibly makes the truth of that view contingent on
      arguments that, if they were even to exist, would inevitably have an extremely controversial character.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916892

    Further, it certainlyseemspossible that Socrates might have had very few of the properties that
  he had in this world, and that somebody other than Socrates might have had many of those
    properties (seeKaplan, 1968; Kripke, 1980). But if we think of a counterpart in the way proposed,
    then that is not possible, since anything lacking a high degree of resemblance to Socrates is ipso
facto not his counterpart.
  Counterpart theory does have a way of avoiding this last problem. According to a view
    suggested by Lewis, Socrates’ counterpart in W is the occupant of W which has more of Socrates’
    essential properties than any other such occupant. Consider any of the propositions known to us
    that distinguish Socrates from other historical  gures: he was wise; he was a philosopher; he
    drank hemlock; he was an excellent orator. None of the properties involved (wise, excellent
  orator ...) is essential to Socrates. So Socrates’ counterpart in some other world might have
  extremely little resemblance to him, at least by any ordinary measure. In this way, Lewis’
  counterpart-theory is reconciled with the presumption that Socrates might have been very
different from how he actually was.
  But there is a problem with this proposal. ‘‘Essential’’ is a modal term, A property w is an
  essential property of Socrates exactly if Socrates couldn’t possibly fail to have w. We are
    therefore guilty of vicious circularity if we try to understand necessity in terms of the counterpart
    relation and then understand the counterpart relation in terms of the concept of essentiality. It thus
    seems unlikely that any viable version of counterpart-theory can identify Socrates’ counterpart in
  W as that thing in W which shares Socrates’ essential properties. (For a discussion of how a
    counterpart-theorist might parry these points, see Excursus III ‘Counterpart Theory and Essential
Properties’, at the end of this article.)

4.4. PWS and the epistemology of modality

    There is another well-known problem with modal realism. (By ‘‘modal realism’’ I mean the
                                                                  42
    view that PWS is correct, with the quali cation that worlds are to be taken as concrete entities.)
                                                        43
Modal realism seems inconsistent with the fact that we can know modal truths.
    According to modal realism, triangles have three sides is necessarily true because, in every
                  44
    world, triangles have three sides.We obviously don’t have to leave this world to know that the
    proposition triangles have three sides is necessary. This suggests that the grounds of its being
  necessary lie in something that we don’t have to go to other worlds to discover. This in turn
    suggests that necessarily, triangles have three sides does not hold in virtue of facts about other
  worlds. In light of this, the fact that triangles have three sides is true in all other worlds would
    seem to be, not the basis or essence of its being necessary, but only a symptom or consequence of
that fact.
Lewis considers this exact point, giving a clear and powerful response to it:

  ‘‘Certainly the way to come by modal opinions is not to inspect the worlds one at a time, not
  only because we cannot inspect the worlds at all, but because we would have to work very
        fast to run through all of them within a conveniently short time. You might as well think
  that our knowledge of the real numbers comes from inspecting them one at a time! No; our
  methods must be general, in both the mathematical and the modal cases. Certainly, when

42
  This is not how the term ‘‘modal realism’’ is always used, but it is how Lewis uses it.
43
Blackburn (1984) makes this point.
44
        In this context, let us assume, in deference to modal realism, that the problems it has in relation to counterpart-theory
can somehow be managed.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916893

        we reason from recombination by means of imaginative experiments, the method is
          general; we imagine only some of the salient features, and thereby cover an in nite class of
worlds all in one act of imagining.’’ (1986:114)

A page earlier, Lewis writes:

          ‘‘In the mathematical case, the answer [to the question how we know general truths] is that
        we come by our opinions largely by reasoning from general principles that we already
          accept; sometimes in a precise and rigorous way, sometimes in a more informal fashion. As
          when we reject arbitrary-seeming limits on the plentitude of the mathematical universe. I
          suppose the answer in the modal case is similar. I think our everyday modal opinions are, in
      large measure, consequences of a principle of recombination.’’ (1986:113)

  Lewis is surely right that our methods for discovering modal truths involve ‘‘general
    principles.’’ But in saying this Lewis is conceding the very point he is combating. A ‘‘general
principle’’ of the relevant kind would be given by a statement of the form:

(*) Proposition P is necessary exactly if P has property w,

  for some property w. Of course, w must be such that we don’t have to inspect other worlds to
    determine whether a proposition instantiates that property. Otherwise, (*) would not give us a
    way to avoid having to go to other worlds to determine whether P is necessary. So w is an intra-
    mundane property, as opposed to aninter-mundane one. Further,wcannot itself be the property of
    being necessary; otherwise (*) becomes a sterile triviality that would be of no use in enabling us
    to distinguish necessary from non-necessary propositions. So w must be a non-modal, intra-
mundane property had by all and only necessarily true propositions.
  But if w satis es these requirements, then it becomes unclear why we need the concept of
  other worlds to explicate the concept of necessary truth. An adequate analysis of modality
  cannot be viciously circular, and thus cannot analyze modality in terms of itself. (On those
    grounds,P is necessarily true iff P is true in all possible worldsis ruled out, at least as ananalysis
    of the concept of necessity—though not necessarily as an illuminating statement about that
  concept.) So an analysis of necessity must be given by a statement that gives a non-modal
  characterization of all and only those propositions that are necessarily true. (*) is just such a
  statement.Giventhis,whynotsaythatnecessarytruthispossessionofw, and that truth in all
    worlds is a mere symptom of possession ofw? If this line of thought is right, then (*) constitutes
    an adequate analysis of modality that doesn’t involve other worlds. Thus, the very existence of
    the sort of principle that Lewis discusses eliminates the need to understand modality in terms of
    other worlds. (For further related discussion, see Excursus IV ‘On Lewis and Modality’, at the
end of this article.)

  5. Part IV. Hintikka on the relevance of sets of worlds to some problems relating to
mental and linguistic content

    5.1 Hintikka has shown how PWS can be of great assistance in the study of propositional attitudes
  and mental content. The heart of Hintikka’s work here lies in the following statement:

      (H) Smith believes P exactly if P is the case in every world compatible with what
    Smith believes.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916894

  Smith believes that snow is white exactly if, in every world compatible with Smith’s belief-
                                                                  45
  system, snow is white. Analogues of H can be constructed for other propositional attitudes.
        Considered as an analysis of the concept of belief, H is viciously circular, since the term
    ‘‘believes’’ occurs on both sides of the biconditional. Obviously, Hintikka did not mean for H
  to be an analysis of the concept of belief, but rather as an attempt to show that the contents of
                                                      46
    our beliefs can be seen as being individuated in terms of sets of worlds.
        Looked at from this viewpoint, is H a success? There are some reasons to think not. First of
  all, H isn’t true. The class of worlds compatible with the belief that

(*) triangles have three sides

  is identical with the class of worlds compatible with the belief that

(**) there are continuous functions that cannot be differentiated at any point.

  But a person could certainly believe (*) without believing (**). So supposing that Smith
    knows (*) but not (**), the class of worlds compatible with Smith’s belief that (*) is identical
  with the class of worlds compatible with a belief in (**). From this it follows straightfor-
wardly that H is false.
                                          47
        Beliefs are thus individuated more  nely than H allows.This re ects a fact about the
    objects of belief, that is, about propositions. If Smith believes (*), the concept of a triangle is a
  constituent of the proposition he believes; but this is not the case if he believes (**). (In this
  context, by a ‘‘concept’’ I mean a non-psychological entity: the meaning of a predicate.)
      To deal with this, we must take care not to strip beliefs and propositions of their
    individuating constituent-structure. If we wish to continue to operate within a framework at
  all like that involved in Hintikka’s analysis – that is, if we wish to operate within a PWS-
  framework – we must see propositions as functions from worlds to truth-values (or,
  equivalently, as sets of worlds). Given these points, we must say that, even though (*) and
  (**) are both functions that generate the same ordered pairs, the way they do so differs. (In
  one case, the property or concept triangle is involved in a certain way; in the other, it is not
  thus involved ...) In other words, we must take an intensionalist view of those functions.
        But if we go that route, then the content of Smith’s belief is no longer a class of worlds, but
  is rather a structure consisting of concepts like triangle, three, and so on. In general, if we go
    the route just proposed, what becomes relevant to belief-individuation are the structures that
    generate the assignments of truth-values to worlds. Those assignments themselves drop out,
along with the worlds they involve.

45
  Lewis incorporated these views into his work. For example, see Lewis (1986:123).
46
      Hintikka himself (1969:156) says that they are not meant to constitute analyses, but only elucidations.
47
        Hintikka (1969:156) acknowledges this problem. But he says that it is ‘‘easily parried’’ by considering points he
makes in his paper ‘‘Are Logical Truths Tautologies?’’ (Hintikka 1973:150–173). This seems to me an over-statement. In
      that paper, the solution given to the problem in question involves treating worlds as sets of propositions (state
descriptions), and it makes heavy use of the fact that there are internal, structural differences between analytically
equivalent propositions. But, in that case, what becomes relevant to the individuation of propositional attitudes are the
  internal properties of propositions. The role of worlds in attitude-individuation becomes marginal or non-existent. (That is
why, given two propositions that are true in the same worlds, one can believe the one and disbelieve the other. It seems,
then, that beliefs are individuated wholly in terms of the internal properties of propositions, and to no degree in terms of
the sets of worlds where they are true.) This is not to mention the dif culties previously discussed involved in identifying
worlds with sets of propositions.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916895

  5.2 By itself, this does not mean that it is wrong to see sets of worlds as having a key role in the
    individuation of mental content. The concepts composing (*) and (**) canthemselvesbe seen
    as functions involving worlds. For example, the concept triangle might be seen as a function
  that pairs off each world with the set of things in it that are triangular. Other concepts would
be seen in similar terms. (See Lewis 1986:56.)
      Supposing that the approach just described is correct, the functions of which (*) is
    composed are not identical with the functions of which (**) is composed. Thus, the approach
  in question is able to distinguish between (*) and (**) and, in general, between distinct but
  analytically equivalent propositions. Each of (*) and (**) is a function (albeit a highly
  articulated one) from worlds to truth-values; and both of those propositions assign the
        same truth-values to the same worlds. But they make those assignments in different
    ways; and that is why believing (*) is different from believing (**). So it seems that, contrary
      to what we argued a moment ago, we can continue to see mental content as being
    individuated in terms of functions involving worlds and, therefore, in terms of (inter alia) sets
    48
of worlds.
        But the problem in question merely recrudesces. Viewed in the manner proposed in the
    last two paragraphs, the concepts even prime and predecessor of three will generate exactly
  the same ordered pairs. At the same time, they are obviously distinct concepts (at least from
  the viewpoint of the individuation of mental content: somebody who believes two is the
    predecessor of three doesn’t necessarily believe two is the even prime). Consequently, if we
    view these concepts as functions involving worlds, then we must see those functions as being
  individuated not by the sets of pairs they generate, but rather by their internal compositions.
      (See Lewis, 1986:56.) The one does, while the other does not, involve the concept
  predecessor in a certain way. The one does, while the other does not, involve the concept
    prime in a certain way. For those reasons, and others like them, those functions are distinct. In
      general, if we wish to identify concepts with functions, then in order to distinguish
  necessarily co-extensive concepts (e.g. even prime/predecessor of three), we must take an
intensionalist view of those functions.
          But then, as before, what becomes relevant to the individuation of mental content is not the
  set of ordered pairs generated by those functions, but only the internal structures of those
    functions. The ordered pairs generated, and the worlds involved in those ordered pairs, drop
    out. When we want to know whether little Timmy believestwo is the predecessor of three–as
  opposed to two is the even prime or triangles have three sides or there are continuous
        functions that can nowhere be differentiated ... – we don’t look to see in what worlds
  Timmy’s belief is true. That procedure won’t discriminate among these various candidate
      beliefs. We don’t even look to see at the pairings generated by the functions that are
  (supposedly) identical with the concepts constitutive of the relevant propositions. That
  procedure won’t distinguish between two is the even prime and two is the predecessor
    of three. To adequately individuate Timmy’s mental contents, we must look to the structures
  of the concepts composing the possible objects of his belief (and we must also, of course,
        look at the structures of the propositions themselves). So, by itself, the set of worlds
  where Timmy’s beliefs are true is at multiple removes from being able to adequately
      individuate Timmy’s mental contents. In fact, that set is idle in terms of content-
  individuation: what is doing all the work is the apparatus that generates, but is distinct from,
that set of worlds.

48
  This is Lewis’s (1986:56) approach to the problem being discussed.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916896

    5.3 As a way of combating this argument, an advocate of PWS could maintain that ultimately we
  arrive at simple concepts that have no internal composition. The idea would be that, even
    though the concepts even prime and predecessor of three obviously have structure, leading to
    the problem just discussed, the same is not true of theultimateconstituents of these concepts. So
    even though even prime is a complex concept that decomposes into even and prime; and even
    though (orthography notwithstanding), the concepts even and primeare, in their turn, complex
    (since, for example,evendecomposes intotwoanddivisibleandnumber...), nonetheless, if we
    take our conceptual analysis far enough, weeventuallyarrive at some set of concepts C1...Cn
  such that the concept even prime is built out of C1...Cnand such that, for each i, Ciis simple
  (i.e. is not built out of other concepts). So, the idea would be, those ultimate concepts
    are identical with functions (involving worlds) that, lacking as they do any internal structure,
  are to be individuated entirely in terms of the ordered pairs they generate. In general,
  complex concepts must ultimately decompose into simple concepts and, when we are
  dealing with these simple concepts, there is no possibility of  nding a pair of concepts that
  are distinct but necessarily co-extensive. Thus, when we arrive at these ultimate, simple
    concepts, the problem we’ve been dealing with – viz. necessarily co-extensive concepts can be
  distinct (at least from the standpoint of the individuation of mental content) – altogether
disappears.
        But there is a reason why we must not accept the viewpoint just described. It is hard to
    accept the view that there are any concepts that completely lack structure—that there are any
  ‘‘simple’’ or ‘‘ultimate’’ or ‘‘primitive’’ concepts. In other words, it is hard to believe that
  there is any set of concepts C1...Cnmeeting the conditions described in the last paragraph;
    and these days the sort of atomism presupposed by the view there are such concepts is widely
  49
    rejected.We’ve already seen why. Given many, if not all, concepts F, there are concepts F1,
  F2,...such that, for each i, Fiis not identical with not-F, but such that x has Fiis nonetheless
  incompatible with x has F. These incompatibilities presumably re ect facts about the
  structure of F. So it seems unlikely that we could ever produce the ‘‘ultimate’’ concepts
                            50
needed by the view we are considering.


49
Fodor (1998) is a conspicuous exception.
50
        The argument just given presupposes that concepts typically have analytic structure. But some (most notably Fodor,
1998) argue that no concepts have analytic structure. (Fodor allows that there are a few trivial exceptions to this principle.
For example, he allows that the concept large brown cow has analytic structure, the same being true of all other concepts
that are arti cially constructedout of other concepts.) If that sort of conceptual atomism is correct, then the argument that
I just gave would be scuttled. It should be noted that opponents of the analytic-synthetic distinction are committed to the
idea that concepts do not, as a rule, have any analytic structure.
        But there are two reasons why it is deeply suspect that PWS – a doctrine about modality – would rely on a denial of the
analytic-synthetic distinction. First, it is, to say the least, a matter of great controversy whether it is correct to deny that
there is a legitimate analytic-synthetic distinction. Presumably it is analytic that ‘‘x is a square’’ entails ‘‘x has four sides’’,
and presumably it is analytic that ‘‘x is an instance of knowledge’’ entails ‘‘x is a belief.’’ If these presumptions are
    correct, then there is an analytic-synthetic distinction, and concepts do have analytic structure.
        Second, the denial of the analytic-synthetic distinction, i.e. the denial of analytic truth, would seem to be much more in
keeping with a nihilistic attitude towards modality than with a doctrine, like PWS, that clearly has a non-nihilistic attitude
towards it. After all, once analytic truth is taken away, one of the main sources of necessary truth has been abandoned. (It
is worth noting that Quine – the great opponent of the analytic-synthetic distinction – had a virulently antagonistic attitude
towards modality. See Quine, 1960.)
        Also, my guess is that the denial of the analytic-synthetic distinction would wreak all manner of havoc on the internal
structure of many versions of PWS, especially PWSE. So even if my argument is misguided – even there is a set of
concepts C1...Cnsatisfying the requirements in question – it is less than clear whether that ultimately helps PWS.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916897
                                        51
    5.4 These issues re ect a more general problem with PWS.That doctrine tries to reduce almost
    everything – propositions, properties, even individuals – to functions. But, as we’ve seen, if
    we are extensionalist about those functions, then distinct propositions and properties end up
  collapsing into one another. To prevent that, we must take an intensionalist view of those
  functions. But in that case, what becomes important is no longer the set of ordered pairs, or
  the class of objects, associated with those functions; rather, it is the way those classes are
    generated. The extensions of those functions, and the worlds they involve, are marginalized.
  The intensions of those functions are what becomes important.
        The heart of PWS is the belief that extensions can take the place of intensions—that,
  for example, sets can take the place of mysterious things like properties and meanings. So
      one is giving up on PWS if one takes an intensionalist view of functions. But if one
  doesn’t take such a view, then one is stuck with a doctrine that cannot distinguish triangles
  have three sides from there are continuous functions that cannot be differentiated at any
point.

5.5 Hintikka on substitution-failures
        These points help us assess one of Hintikka’s many brilliant applications of PWS to
  semantics. Consider the expressions ‘‘the inventor of bifocals’’ and ‘‘the  rst postmaster
  general.’’ On the face of it, these seem to be co-referring terms (that refer to Benjamin
    Franklin). Now consider the following two sentences:

  (SBFS) ‘‘Smith believesthat the inventor of bifocals snored’’
  (SIBS) ‘‘Smith believesthat the  rst postmaster general snored.’’

  (SBFS) and (SIBS) may presumably differ in truth-value (on the de dicto reading). This is a
  consequence of the fact that (when read de dicto) the underlined expressions in those
  sentences refer to different propositions.
      We are faced with a serious problem here. Presumably, the referent of a referring
    expression is a function of the referents of its parts. This is sometimes known as the ‘Principle
            52
    of Compositionality’.Supposing that this principle is correct, the underlined part of (SBFS)
  should co-refer with the underlined part of (SIBS), given that the one is what results when a
    referring term in the other is replaced with a co-referring term. Russell (1919) dealt with this
  by saying that de nite descriptions are not singular terms. Frege (1892) dealt with it by
  saying that, in contexts like the ones discussed here, those expressions refer to their senses,
                      53
  not to their ‘‘ordinary referents.’’So in (SIBS), ‘‘the inventor of bifocals’’ refers to a sense
(the concept bifocal inventor, or some such), not to a person.
        While both of these views have merit, neither is entirely consistent with our intuitions.
  Hintikka (1962) proposed a brilliant alternative. We see the occurrences of the de nite
  descriptions in (SBFS) and (SIBS) as being what they seem to be: expressions that refer to
  individuals—not quanti ers, and not expressions that refer to senses. But the individuals
      referred to needn’t belong to the same world. (SIBS) is true only if there is no world
    compatible with what Smith believes such that the inventor of bifocalsin that worldsnored. It

51
  The points made in this paragraph and the next are similar to some made in Bealer (1998).
52
This principle was stressed by Frege (1892).
53
        Drawing on insights due to Strawson, Recanati, and Kaplan, I try to deal with this problem in a very different way.
          See my forthcoming Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind (John Benjamins) and also my review
of Bezuidenhout & Reimer Descriptions and Beyond (Kuczynski, 2006).                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916898

    is irrelevant to the truth of (SIBS) if the actual inventor of bifocals (Franklin) snored (though
  that is obviously relevant to the truth of what Smith himself believes). So we must see the
  de nite description in (SIBS) as referring not to Franklin, but to some bifocal-inventor in
      54
  another world.The same thing mutatis mutandis applies to the de nite description in
  (SBFS). Given this, there is no expectation that those de nite descriptions should co-refer.
  Nor is there any reason to adopt the views taken by Frege or Russell.
        There is one problem with this otherwise estimable analysis. Consider the following
sentences:

(SEP) ‘‘Smith believes thatthe even prime is less than ten.’’
(SAI) ‘‘Smith believes thatthe unique number n such that n = 2 iff arithmetic is
        incomplete and n = 3 otherwise, is less than ten.’’

    The underlined de nite descriptions co-refer; moreover, they refer to the same individuals in
                                              55
    every world. So Hintikka’s method cannot deal with the (apparent) difference in truth-value
                  56
between these two sentences.


54
        See Hintikka (1969:96–98). Also, consider Hintikka’s (1962:102) statement: ‘‘Seen in this light, the failure of
referential transparency is due to the possibility that two names or other singular terms which de facto refer to one and the
same object (or person) are not known (or believed) by someone by someone to do so and that they will refer to different
objects (or persons) in some of the ‘possible worlds’ we have to discuss (explicitly or implicitly) in order to discuss what
he knows or believes and what he does not. The referential opacity here is not due to anything strange happening to the
ways in which our singular terms refer to objects nor to anything unusual about the objects to which they purport to refer.
It is simply and solely due to the fact that that we have to consider more than one way in which they could refer (or fail to
refer) to objects. What we have to deal with here is therefore not so much a failure of referentiality as a kind of multiple
referentiality.’’ (Hintikka’s emphasis.)
55
        I say ‘‘apparent’’ because, as I argue elsewhere, when we take into account a number of foundational distinctions –
  including, but not limited to, the distinction between expression-types and expression-tokens, and the distinction between
literal and implied meaning – we must rethink what might otherwise appear to be obviously true, even truistic, viewpoints
in semantics.
56
        At this point we must ask a foundational question: what does Hintikka mean by the term ‘‘possible world’’? Hintikka
straightforwardly acknowledges that he must answer this question, and he gives a clear answer. First, by a ‘‘possible
world’’, Hintikka does not mean anything like our world. He explicitly says that, as he is using the term ‘‘possible world’’,
the truth of statements like ‘‘Socrates was a soldier in some possible world’’ does not license the existential: ‘‘there is
some world W such Socrates is a soldier in W.’’ Borrowing a distinction of Quine’s, Hintikka says that possible worlds are
part of our ‘‘ideology’’ but not of our ‘‘ontology’’, meaning that they are part of the conceptual machinery by means of
which we understand the world, and are not part of that world itself. Hence, the illegitimacy of the existential inference
just discussed. See Hintikka (1969:105, 108).
        What are we to say about this? Concepts in thepsychologicalsense come and go with every human birth and death. But
facts about modality are invariant with respect to such changes. The same is therefore true of possible worlds, supposing
that, as Hintikka holds, modal truths register facts about them. Possible worlds must be public, non-psychological entities.
If possible worlds are to be a part of our ideology, but not our ontology, then presumably they have a status somewhat like
that assigned to theoretical entities by those who have an anti-realist view of such things. So possible worlds would be as
  public as anything posited by any theory, even though they wouldn’t really exist. At the same time, theirsupposedexistence
would have some kind of explanatory utility – a utility similar, perhaps, to that of mass-points and frictionless planes.
        But if that is the right view of possible worlds, then we are conceding that they are ultimately not necessary for an
  understanding of modality. The positivists held that statements about unobservables were eliminable in favor of statements
  about observables. This is what their anti-realism about unobservables amounts to. Similarly, if we take an anti-realist view of
possible worlds, then presumably they don’t have any enduring explanatory role to play. So it isn’t clear how Hintikka’s
  consignment of possible worlds to our ideology, as opposed to our ontology, could be consistent with the belief that they have
a lasting place in our understanding of modality.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916899

        We saw earlier that mental content cannot be individuated strictly in terms of sets of
  worlds. Even though there is no possible world where the concepts even prime and unique
  number n such that n = 2 iff arithmetic is incomplete and n = 3 otherwise differ in extension,
  Smith can believe that x falls under the one concept while not believing that it falls under the
  other. The semantic fact that (SAI) and (SEP) differ in meaning re ects this fact about the
  individuation of mental content. We may thus conclude that, since sets of worlds are
    inadequate for the individuation of either mental content or linguistic (semantic) meaning, at
  least some aspects of Hintikka’s important work on mental and semantic content are in
jeopardy.


  6. Part V. Lewis on the relevance of worlds to the analysis of counterfactual truth

    6.1 David Lewis has attempted to show that the concept of counterfactual truth can be understood
  in terms of the concept of a possible world. In this section, I will argue that Lewis’ view is
  fallacious and, further, that the problems with it expose problems with PWS additional to
those already considered.
        Here is the essence of Lewis’ view. Suppose that, in actuality, Smith shot Jones, thereby
  killing him. Given this, consider the following counterfactual:

    (SJ) If Smith had not shot Jones, then Jones would now be in good health.

  According to Lewis (1973:13), (SJ) is true exactly if Jones is in good health in any world W
  such that, in W, Smith does not shoot Jones, and such that W is as much like our world as that
              57
last fact allows it to be.
        Though initially plausible, Lewis’ analysis is not without problems. But we must make
  some preliminary points before we can discuss these problems. First of all, a theory of
  counterfactuals should not be revisionist, i.e. it should not require us to regard as false any
      counterfactuals that we pre-theoretically regard as true, or to regard as true any
counterfactuals that we pre-theoretically regard as false.
        There is a related point. While it may be true that the world is indeterministic, a theory of
    counterfactuals cannot require this. If it is decisively established in ten years that the world is
  deterministic, does that mean all of the counterfactuals that we now believe true – e.g. ‘‘if
    Clinton had resigned, Gore would have become president’’ – are false? No. A determinist is not
    necessarily guilty of incoherence in virtue of believing that counterfactual to be true. There is a
  corollary. Given only that the counterfactual just stated is true, it cannot be inferred that the
  world is indeterministic. So while it may be true that the world is indeterministic, a theory of
  counterfactuals cannot demand that this be the case. In general, a theory of counterfactuals
  cannot demand that open empirical issues be resolved a certain way.
          We must make one last preliminary point. Suppose that, as Lewis maintains, (SJ) is true in
    virtue of the occurrences in some other world W. W must be governed by the same laws as our
    world. If the laws operative in W are different from those operative here, then perhaps Smith
  will become injured or dead as a result of not being shot. Also, it seems unlikely that a world

57
        Lewis (1973:3). It seems to me that the presence of the term ‘‘allows’’ constitutes vicious circularity (as would the
          presence of a similar term, like ‘‘permits’’–the term that Lewis uses). After all, what is ‘‘allowed’’ is what is possible; and
          the concept of what is ‘‘allowed’’ itself has counterfactual content. I leave it open whether this circularity can be removed
through judicious rephrasing.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916900

  with different physical laws would comprise any objects even remotely like Smith. If two
  worlds differ in their laws, they will differ dramatically in respect of what is in them. (This is
  a point we will revisit.) In general, the worlds that validate our counterfactuals must be
    governed by the same laws as our world, except in the atypical case where the counterfactual
                            58
in question is a counternomic proposition.
        In light of these points, let us examine Lewis’ analysis of counterfactuals. For the sake of
  argument, suppose that (SJ) is a true counterfactual. Let E be the event of Smith’s shooting
  Jones, and let C1...Cnbe the antecedents of E. (So E is an event that actually, i.e. in our
  world, occurred; and C1...Cnare the conditions that actually obtained just prior to E’s
  occurrence.) Finally, let W be a world where Smith does not shoot Jones, but that is as much
  like our world as that fact permits it to be. (So E does not occur in W.)
        Trivially, either our world is deterministic or it isn’t. For the sake of argument, let us
  suppose that our world is deterministic, and see what the consequences are for Lewis’
    argument. After that, we will consider the consequences for Lewis’ analysis of supposing that
our world is indeterministic.
        Supposing that our world is deterministic, then for reasons given a moment ago, W must
  be deterministic as well. For obvious reasons, this means that there must be some i such that
  Cidoes not occur in W; and, for analogues of those same reasons, there must be some j such
  that Cjalso does not occur in W, where Cjis some antecedent of Ci; and there must be some k,
    such that Ckdoes not occur in W, where Ckis one of the antecedents of Cj—and so on, into the
                      59
  most remote recesses of W’s past.For obvious reasons, each of these differences rami es
    into others. Consequently, W will beverydifferent from our world—so different that it can be
  doubted whether Jones even exists in W, let alone in good health.

    6.2 Lewis (1973) acknowledges the existence of this very problem, and suggests a plausible way
  of dealing with it. Suppose that, in W, C1...Cnobtain but that, because of a miracle, they
  don’t eventuate in E. Thus, Jones remains in good health in W, and W’s past is (almost)
  exactly like the past of this world. Thus, the occurrences in W do validate (SJ), and the
criticism that we just put forth is nulli ed.
      Before we can evaluate this maneuver of Lewis’, we must  rst make it clear what it
    involves. Suppose that, under the conditions in question, Smith’s trigger  nger is supposed,
  as a matter of natural law, to do X as opposed to Y. Lewis takes it for granted that the relevant
  laws and forces can be put out of commission, allowing Smith’s  nger to do Y. This
    presupposes that the  nger is entirely distinct from the forces governing its behavior. On the
  one hand, there is the  nger; on the other hand, there are the various causal laws that govern
  it; and the two are quite distinct. In general, we can vary the causal laws while keeping the
objects they govern the same.
        This is a natural, even a standard, way of thinking about physical law. But it is, I believe,
    one that cannot be accepted. Physical objectsarelaw-governed sequences of events, the same
  being true of anything that endures for more than an instant (see Russell, 1927). In fact, the
  notion of enduring is itself a causal notion, and thus has embedded within it the concept of


58
        An example of a counternomic proposition would be: if there were no gravity, then my desk would now be  oating.
59
      Strictly speaking, if we really believe that occurrences in other worlds validate (SJ), then we should speak of
counterparts of C1...Cnoccurring in other worlds, not of those events per se. (In any case, this is, as we discussed earlier,
what Lewis would say.) But in this context, if only for expository reasons, let us prescind from that fact. It is easy enough
to make the terminological changes demanded by counterpart theory.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916901
                60
    natural law (Russell, ibid.).If this is right, then laws are internal to the states of affairs that they
    govern, and an object can no more be separated from the forces that govern it than the Cheshire
    cat’s grin can be removed from the cat itself. The world seems to be nomic through and through;
    there doesn’t seem to be any anomic residue—there doesn’t seem to be anything that isbeneath
              61
    the reach of natural law.Supposing that this is true, it is at best an open question whether there
  is any sense in which states of affairs can be separated from the laws that govern them and,
                                                      62
    consequently, whether there is any sense in which miracles are possible.

    6.3 But even if we leave this question aside, Lewis’ use of miracles is questionable. Consider the
counterfactual:

      (L) If Lincoln had not been assassinated, then some miracle would have occurred
    (at some time prior to t),

  where t is the time at which, in actuality, Lincoln died.
          Lewis’ proposal requires that, if our world is deterministic, then (L) is true. But, regardless
    of whether our world turns out to be deterministic or not, (L) doesn’t seem to be an intuitively
    correct counterfactual. So Lewis’ proposal demands the truth of counterfactuals that we have
    no pre-theoretic inclination to regard as true. Thus, Lewis’ proposal violates the requirement,
    earlier discussed, that an analysis of counterfactuals not be revisionist.
        Lewis might try to circumvent these problems by saying that our world is indeterministic
                                                            63
  and that, consequently, no miracles need occur in a world that validates (SJ).The idea
      64
  would be this.Let WIDbe an indeterministic world whose history up until time t (the time at
  which E occurs) is just like ours. Because of said indeterminism, C1...Cndon’t eventuate in
E. Consequently, Jones is in good health in WID.
          This move violates the condition that we discussed before—that, while it may be true that
    our world is indeterministic, a theory of counterfactuals cannot require it.

60
        Oftentimes, the concept of temporal succession is itself analyzed in causal-nomic terms: event E1 occurs before E2
        iff there is a possible or actual causal process beginning with E1 and ending with E2. See Reichenbach (1958) for one of
many advocates of this view. See also the very last footnote of Kuczynski (2005b).
61
      See Kuczynski (2005b) for a fuller discussion of the legitimacy of the concept of a suspension of natural law.
62
        Here we must make a point in Lewis’ defense. Given a certain conception of natural law, there is a clear distinction
          between the laws, on the one hand, and the objects and states of affairs governed thereby, on the other. According to Hume
          (2000), laws are just regularities among states of affairs. If Hume’s analysis is to avoid vicious circularity, states of affairs
        cannot themselves be seen in nomic terms. Otherwise laws are analyzed in terms of states of affairs, and states of affairs
          are, in their turn, analyzed in terms of law. So if Hume’s view is right, then states of affairs are fundamentally anomic, and
the criticism we put forth is blocked.
        According to Ramsey (1929), laws are features of our description of the world, not of the world itself. Let D be a
        description of the class of all occurrences, past and future, that combines maximal accuracy with maximal economy.
        Ramsey says that laws are among the statements constituting D. His view, like Hume’s, requires that occurrences be
        anomic. If occurrences are themselves embodiments of law, then laws cannot be analyzed as statements about
        occurrences. So if Ramsey’s view is right, then states of affairs are fundamentally anomic, and the criticism we put
forth is blocked.
      Signi cantly, Lewis accepts both Hume’s and Ramsey’s views. But for many reasons, one of which we have
        considered, such views are replete with problems. For that reason, they are no longer generally accepted, though they
      still have some distinguished proponents, e.g. Van Fraassen (1989). It is not to the credit of Lewis’ analysis of
counterfactuals that it presupposes the truth of such a problematic view.
63
        By a ‘‘world that validates (SJ)’’ I mean a world w such that (SJ) holds in virtue of the occurrences or states of affairs
in w.
64
        To my knowledge, this isnota path that Lewis in fact takes. Nonetheless, it is worth considering the consequences of
taking it, if only for the sake of discursive completeness.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916902

      But even if we leave aside this last point, the proposal in question fails. If WIDis
  suf ciently indeterministic to validate the antecedent of (SJ), it may be suf ciently
  indeterministic that it falsi es its consequent. Any indeterminism suf cient to allow C1...
    Cnnot to eventuate in E may be suf cient for the occurrence of various outcomes that falsify
    the counterfactual in question. The very indeterminism that prevents the trigger from being
  pulled may also permit the gun to  re accidentally, thereby killing Jones. In that case, the
occurrences in WIDwould not validate (SJ).
        To prevent this sort of catastrophe, one would have to start being very speci c about the
    kind of indeterminism that prevails in WID. That world must be indeterministicjustenough to
prevent C1... Cnfrom not eventuating in E. At the same time, WIDmustn’t be so
indeterministic that these other unwanted events occur.
        But it is suspect that we must employ such arti ces to identify worlds that validate our
  counterfactuals, as it suggests that the occurrences in other worlds tend not to do so. A
    hypothesis that is con rmed only by gerrymandered data is a hypothesis that isn’t con rmed
  at all. Lewis’ analysis is supposed to have, and initially appears to have, a  rm basis in our
  intuition. It forfeits this advantage insofar as it makes such sophisticated and dubious
    demands of the worlds that, supposedly, validate our counterfactuals.

  6.4 The criticisms just stated presuppose that the worlds mentioned in Lewis’ analysis of
    counterfactuals are to be taken asconcreteentities, and not as sets of propositions. Given this, it
might be suggested that those criticisms are voided if we take worlds to be sets of
    65
propositions.
        But if we take worlds to be sets of propositions, then the analysis of counterfactuals just
discussed collapses into the view that for a counterfactual to hold is for some set of
    propositions to have the right internal (presumably deductive or con rmational) properties;
    in other words, that analysis collapses into a version of the so-called ‘‘meta-linguistic’’ view
  of counterfactuals. But the very raison d’eˆtre for a possible-worlds approach is to avoid the
                                        66
supposed inadequacies of the meta-linguistic approach.

  6.5 Previously, we saw a number of reasons to reject the identi cation of possible truth
  with truth in some alternative world. Given the points just made in connection with
  Lewis’ analysis of counterfactuals, we  nd additional reasons to reject that analysis of
modality.
        Consider a particular chair. That chair is not a simple object. Every nanosecond of its
    existence involves innumerable displacements of mass-energy; and every property had by the
  chair is identical with, or supervenient on, some property had by some multiplicity of such
      67
  displacements.In general, objects are identical with, or supervene on, causal sequences—
  series of causally linked states of affairs. (Henceforth, I will say simply that objects are

65
        In Kuczynski (2005b), I argue that counterfactuals do hold in virtue of inter-propositional relations. In agreement
  with Lewis himself, I regard such a view as being opposed to the one espoused by Lewis.
66
      See Lewis (1973:65–77). Lewis makes it very clear that he wishes the word ‘‘world’’ to be taken literally.
67
        One doesn’t want to say that the chair isidentical with a particular causal sequence. After all, the chair might not have
had exactly the properties that it does have. Youmightnot have spilled your coffee on it; itmightnot have been scratched by
the movers; and so on. But if we let S be the series of mass-energy displacements that in fact composes the chair, there is no
world where S exists but where the chair does not. So every fact about the chairsuperveneson some fact about S. In general,
every fact about any material object is either identical with, or supervenient on, some fact about some causal-series. See
Wiggins (1968) for the classic exposition of the distinction between realization (or supervenience), on the one hand, and
identity, on the other.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916903

    identical with causal sequences, since the distinction between identity and supervenience is
not relevant in this context.)
        Let S be the series of mass-energy displacements that, in actuality, compose the chair.
  Supposing that S is governed by physical laws L1...Ln, it is presumably an essential fact
  about S that it is governed by those laws, and not others. So it makes little or no sense to say
  that S could exist in a world where physical laws are not the same as they are in this world. In
  general, it makes little sense to say of any actual causal sequence, or therefore of any object,
    that it would exist in a world where causal laws are different. (See Kripke, 1980:123–144 for
similar remarks.).
      Concepts like electron, proton, and so forth, correspond to fundamental nomic
  categories—the categories in terms of which the most fundamental causal laws are to be
    delineated. Supposing that L1...Lmare the laws of physics, it is therefore perilously close to
  absurd to say that there could be electrons or protons in a world governed by laws different
  from those that govern our world. (See Pap, 1958, Kripke (1980:123–144).) It thus makes
    little sense to say that a world governed by different physical laws would comprise electrons
                                            68
or protons or any of the micro-particles found in our world.
        It is very hard to see how a world that comprised none of the same micro-entities as our
    world could comprise any of the same macro-entities. It follows that only a world nomically
  identical with ours could comprise any of the same macro-entities or, therefore, any of the
  same macro-events as ours. Only a world nomically identical with ours can comprise
Socrates or the event of his drinking hemlock.
        Here we must head off a confusion. It is presumably a contingent fact that there is gold.
  But it is not a contingent fact that this particular gold object exists only in worlds where there
  is gold. As Kripke (1980:123–126) emphasized, given that this object (e.g. my pen) is made
    of gold, there is no possible world where it exists but where gold doesn’t. Similarly, it may be
  a contingent fact that L1...Lmare the laws governing our world. But given that the chair’s
  existence is sustained by the operation of those particular laws, there is no possible world
  governed by different laws where that chair exists.
        Let us move onto the next step of our argument. It seems a datum that the proposition

(K) John F. Kennedy lived past the age of seventy

  is only contingently false. According to PWS, that is because there is some world W where
        Kennedy did live past the age of seventy. As we previously noted, objects are causal
    sequences. So if the PWS-analysis of possibility is to be correct, W must contain at least some
    of the same causal sequences found in our world, and must therefore be governed by the same
  causal laws as our world. At the same time, W cannot contain precisely the same causal
    sequences as our world. Otherwise Kennedy will not live past the age of seventy in W, foiling
  PWS’s identi cation of (K)’s being possibly true (in our world) with its being true in W.
        Causal sequences are individuated by their mutual relations. Once again, consider S (the
    causal sequence that realizes the chair previously discussed). That causal sequence resulted
  from many others, e.g. the activities of certain workmen, the tree that yielded the wood of
  which it is made, the various particles composing the ground that fertilized that tree, the

68
      This does not mean that there are electrons (or protons or muons ...) has as an analytic consequence any true
        proposition of the form L1...Lmare the laws that govern the physical world. Rather, it means that some necessities are
non-analytic. See Kripke (1980:123–144).                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916904

  stellar events that yielded those particles, and so on. Any world that lacks enough of these
  other causal sequences will ipso facto lack S. Surely it makes no sense to say that S could
  exist in a world where the sequences that led to its existence do not. (See Kripke, 1980:123–
  126.) A corollary is that any world that comprises S will ipso facto comprise these other
    causal sequences, or at least a great many of them. The individuation-conditions of the causal
    sequences composing objects must be understood in relational, and therefore holistic, terms.
  Thus, in so far as W comprises any of the same causal sequences as our world – in so far as it
  has causal sequences corresponding to John F. Kennedy, Joseph Kennedy Sr., the White
  House, the American political establishment, the nation of Ireland, and so on – it must be
extremely similar to our world.
        At the same time, if W is to comprise a Kennedy who lives past the age of seventy, W must
    comprise many causal sequences that are no part of this world. But for the reasons just given,
  it is at best an open question whether we can tinker with the events in another world just
    enough to ensure that Kennedy lives past seventy in that world, while not tinkering with them
  so much that it fails to meet the conditions on which Kennedy’s existence is constitutively
dependent.
          In fact, to adjudicate this very question, we must already have a clear understanding of the
  relevant modal principles—of the principles telling us exactly how different an object’s
    origins could have been, and telling us exactly how the degree of difference is to be measured.
  So in order to settle the question whether it is even coherent to posit the existence of a world
  like W, we must already employ the modal principles that, according to PWS, are to be
    understood in terms ofthe existence of such worlds. In general, the modal status of the worlds
    needed by PWS is itself a substantive modal question; and on pain of vicious circularity, that
  question cannot itself be answered within a possible-worlds framework, since what is in
question is the very coherence of such a framework.
        We saw earlier that Lewis’ analysis of counterfactuals presupposes that the world is
  permutation-friendly: given any event E that actually occurs, there is a world that doesn’t
  comprise E but that is otherwise very similar to our world. We further saw that, given some
plausible views concerning causality, that presupposition may well be false.
        What is true of Lewis’ analysis of counterfactuals appears to be true of the PWS-analysis
    of modality. That analysis presupposes that there is a world where Kennedy lives past seventy
    but is otherwise extremely similar to our world. So that analysis presupposes that the world is
    highly permutation-friendly. We have seen that, given some reasonable views concerning
    object-individuation, that presupposition may well be false. The very identities of objects are
  constitutively linked with many of their causal liaisons. This suggests that any world that is
  different enough from ours to comprise a Kennedy who lives past seventy may well be so
    different that it cannot comprise a Kennedy to begin with. In fact, it suggests that such a world
  will necessarily be systemically different from ours, and may therefore fail to meet the
  conditions constitutively necessary for the existence of many, or perhaps even any, of the
objects found in our world.
        Supposing that this reasoning is on the mark, there are two paths we can take. On the one
  hand, we can say that (K) is necessarily false. On the other hand, we can say that the attempt
  to understand modality in terms of other worlds is doomed to failure, the reason being that it
falsely says of (K) that it is necessarily false.
        As I said earlier, it seems a datum that (K) is contingently false. In any case, it is obviously
  not in the same category as1+1=4or water is not H2O; and this difference is appropriately
    marked by saying that (K) is contingently false, whereas those others are necessarily false. So                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916905

  unless we are willing to take the revisionist approach of saying that (K) is necessarily false,
  and is thus in the same modal category as1+1=4, we must reject the attempt to understand
  possibility, and therefore necessity, in terms of other worlds. Once again, we  nd that PWS
  demands a revision of strongly held modal intuitions.
        It seems, in fact, that the problems with Lewis’ analysis of counterfactuals are merely
  special cases of these more general problems with PWS. As we saw, it is reasonable to
  question whether it is coherent to posit the existence of a world suf ciently like ours to
  comprise Smith and Jones – i.e. suf ciently like ours to validate the antecedent of (SJ) – but
        where Jones continues to be in good health. In any case, in order to settle the question
  of whether the concept of such a world is coherent, we must employ the very counterfactual
      principles that, according to Lewis’ analysis, are to be understood in terms of such
  worlds. The proposition such a world is possible is equivalent with some proposition
      of the form there would be such a world if conditions C1...Cnwere met. The latter is
  itself a counterfactual proposition. If that counterfactual is false, then Lewis’ analysis is
  untenable. But Lewis’ analysis is untenable even if that counterfactual is correct; for,
  on pain of vicious circularity, the correctness of that counterfactual could be established
  only on the basis of a non-Lewisian conception of counterfactual truth. Thus, Lewis’
  analysis is, at best, parasitic on some other, more fundamental way of understanding
counterfactuals.
        It should be pointed out that all modal propositions can be seen as counterfactuals. The
  proposition (K) is contingently false is equivalent with (K) might have been true; and the
  latter is equivalent with some proposition of the form (K) would have been true if conditions
      C1... Cnwere met. So it is to be expected that the problems with Lewis’ analysis of
  counterfactuals should correspond to defects with PWS as a whole.
          In conclusion, PWS embodies questionable principles concerning object-individuation.
  Even if those principles were to be vindicated, that could be accomplished only through a
  modal framework that didn’t involve alternative worlds. So PWS ends up being false or, at
  best, parasitic on some other, more fundamental modal framework.


7. Conclusion

    If worlds are taken to be representations of some kind, then PWS ends up circularly requiring
    the very notions that it seeks to analyze. If the term ‘‘world’’ is taken literally, so as to avoid this
    last problem, then PWS demands a revision or outright rejection of our basic views concerning
  logic and modality. In particular, propositions that we know to be contingent – e.g. those
    expressed by utterances of ‘‘Mozart wrote over forty symphonies’’ and ‘‘John is now making
    tea’’ – are put in the same modal category as that expressed by ‘‘1 + 1 = 2.’’ In either case, we see,
    as I said initially, how possible world semantics, despite its obvious merits, appears to lead us into
    conundrums of the sort that ceteris paribus we should try to avoid. In other words, the jury is still
out on PWS—a conclusion we may have to live with for some time to come.

    EXCURSUS I. ON NECESSITY, CONTINGENCY, AND THE INFINITE REGRESSIVE-
NESS EMBEDDED IN PWS

  As regards my contention that PWS is inconsistent with the existence of contingent
    propositions, a reviewer at the Journal of Pragmatics wisely pointed out that this viewpoint has
some antecedents in the literature. I would like to discuss two.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916906

  According to Russell (1919:165), necessity and possibility are properties of propositional
    functions, not of propositions proper. Such a function is necessary if true for all values, possible if
    true for some. So, to use Russell’s own example, the propositional function ‘‘if x is a man, then x
    is mortal’’ is necessary, because it is true for all values of the variable. Propositions themselves,
  says Russell, are either true or false; and there is no sense, he says, in saying that some are
contingent while others are necessary.
  Before proceeding, there are a few points to make. The propositional function ‘‘if x is a man,
    then x is mortal’’ is not in the same modal category from ‘‘if x is a triangle, then has three sides.’’
  This is a datum, and Russell’s analysis is false since it is inconsistent with this datum. Also,
    ‘‘Socrates was wise’’ can be thought of as a limiting case of a propositional function—one that
  contains zero free variables. (See Tarski, 1983.) Because that sentence is true, it follows
    vacuously that it is true for all values of its free variables and thus is necessary by Russell’s own
    lights. For similar reasons, it follows that, by Russell’s own lights, ‘‘Socrates was not wise’’ is
    necessarily false. Thus, given Russell’s own premises, it follows that, contrary to what Russell
  himself says, necessity and possibility are properties of sentences (and propositions).
  Like most philosophers, I myself believe that 1+1=2 is in a different category from
    Socrates was wise, and that this distinction is appropriately marked by describing the  rst as
  necessary and the second as contingent. But I also believe that if we accept an analysis of
    modality at all like that put forth by PWS, Russell’s position becomes practically inevitable.
    Suppose that necessity is identi ed with truth in all worlds or circumstances. First of all, if that
    identi cation is to be taken seriously, and is not to be a disguised way of expressing some very
    different conception of modality, then there must be different worlds. It would make little sense to
    say ‘‘necessity is truth in all worlds, but there is only one world’’, unless the  rst conjunct were
meant in a highly non-literal fashion.
  If there are different worlds, then ‘‘John is tall’’ (when assigned the signi cance that it
                                                            
  actually, i.e. in our world, has) is true in some of them and false in others—much asx is tallis
    true for some values of x and false for others. Supposing that this is right, ‘‘John is tall’’ really
    means John is tall in w (where ‘‘w’’ is a variable ranging over worlds), and is thus true for some
    values of w and false for others. But in that case, ‘‘John is tall’’ expresses, not a proposition, but
    rather a propositional function of the form John is tall in w; and in order for that propositional
    function to yield a genuine proposition, the variable must be replaced with a speci c world. Thus,
  what is meant by ‘‘John is tall’’ – namely, the propositional function John is tall in w—is
    necessary if, for all values of w, the result is a truth, and a falsity otherwise. Thus , what is meant
  by ‘‘John is tall’’ is contingent (possibly true, possibly false) because what it expresses is a
    propositional function that is true for some, but not all, values of its variable. By contrast, what is
    expressed by ‘‘John is either tall or not tall’’ – namely, the propositional function John is either
  tall or not tall in w—is necessary since it is true for all values of the variable; and what is
    expressed by ‘‘John is tall and not tall’’—namely, John is tall and not tall in w—is necessarily
false, since it is false for all values of the variable.
  We would thus have to see every af rmation as involving some kind of relativization to a
    world, just as in actuality there is always some kind of relativization to a time (though often an
    implicit one) in our utterances (except in cases of utterances to which temporal considerations are
    obviously inappropriate, e.g. mathematical statements). So if one said ‘‘Mozart wrote over forty
    symphonies’’, we would have to take the proposition encoded in that utterance to be equivalent
    with: in this world Mozart wrote over forty symphonies. For reasons previously discussed this
  means that all such utterances would be true in all or no worlds, and thus, by PWS’s lights,
necessarily true or false.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916907

  Thus, if we accept PWS, Russell’s counterintuitive analysis of modality is vindicated:
    necessary truth is truth for all arguments; possible truth is truth for some arguments. (Of course,
    Russell did not countenance the idea of other worlds. So this must be seen as an extension, not an
identi cation, of Russell’s views.)
  It seems a datum to me and most others that bone  de propositions fall into different modal
    categories—that some of them are necessary, and others contingent. So we must reject any view
  that has the consequence that it is propositional functions, not propositions, that have those
  properties. If the argument put forth in this paper is correct, PWS is in fact such a view.
  Leibniz held that all true propositions are necessarily true. His reasoning was as follows. If
    Caesar crossed the Rubicon, then it is part of theconcept(not my or anyone else’s concept, butthe
    concept) of Caesar that he did so. (‘‘[E]very predicate, necessary or contingent, past, present, or
                              69
    future, is comprised in the notion of the subject.’’) Of course, I may be able to entertain thoughts
    about Caesar without knowing that Caesar crossed the Rubicon. But that merely re ects my
    ignorance of certain features of that concept, not anything about the concept itself. For exactly
similar reasons, every fact about Caesar is, for Leibniz, a necessary fact.
  The problem with Leibniz’s position is not hard to identify. Not every fact about a thing has a
    purely conceptual basis. Suppose that Smith has as perfect an understanding of the concept even
  number as is humanly possible. Smith will not on that account know that Jones has an even
    number of cars. That fact about Jones does not have a basis wholly in facts about the concepteven
    number; it has a basis in empirical, non-conceptual realities. The same consideration applies to
    Caesar’s crossing the Rubicon. In Kuczynski (2005a), I discuss this doctrine of Leibniz’s, giving
a variant of the argument just presented.
  Let us now consider another point that might be made by an advocate of PWS in response to
    our argument that PWS turns contingent propositions into necessary ones. (I should point out that
  the need to address this point was indicated to me by an astute reviewer at the Journal of
    Pragmatics. I am following, and building on, that reviewer’s suggestions as to how to address this
objection.) I will put this objection in the mouth of an imaginary interlocutor:

        ‘‘Your argument involves a confusion concerning the theoretical function of possible
          worlds. Within the framework of PWS, possible worlds are elements of the metalanguage
        that gives the semantics of sentences of the object language. Suppose that, in our world
        (W1), somebody utters the sentence ‘John is tall.’ That utterance belongs to the object-
          language. To say what is meant by that utterance, we must use a meta-language. That meta-
          language refers to various worlds. The meta-language thus includes statements like: ‘the
        proposition meant by an utterance in a given world W of ‘‘John is tall’’ is a function which
        assigns truth to W, if John is tall in W, and falsity otherwise’, and ‘an utterance in W of
          ‘‘John might have been tall’’ is true if there is a possible world accessible to W where ‘‘John
is tall’’ is true.’

        ‘‘To avoid various well-known antinomies, we must enforce a rigid distinction between
          object-language and meta-language. This blocks your argument. That argument asserts that
        ‘John is tall’, uttered in W1, and ‘John is tall in W1’ have the same truth-conditions. But
        ‘John is tall’ is a sentence of the object-language, whereas ‘John is tall’ is a sentence of the
        meta-language. The former is evaluated with respect to the possible worlds referred to in
          the meta-language. The latter isnotevaluated with respect to those same worlds. (The latter
          is either evaluated with respect to worlds described in the meta-meta-language, or it is not

69
Quoted in Russell (1992:27).                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916908

  evaluated with respect to possible worlds at all.) So there is no world with respect to which
        both of those utterances can be evaluated. Consequently, there is no world W1such that
        ‘John is tall’, as uttered in W1, is true exactly if John is tall in W1and such that ‘John is tall
  in W1’ is true exactly if John is tall in W1. So the equivalence on which your argument rests
        – that between ‘John is tall in W1’ and ‘John is tall’ (as uttered in W1) – does not hold. In
  conclusion, your argument is null and void, since it con ates object-language with meta-
language.’’

    There are several problems with this response. According to it, possible worlds are ‘‘elements
    of the meta-language.’’ But as we saw earlier, PWS needs worlds to be concrete entities. If they
    are mere representations – e.g. sets of expressions or propositions – then PWS is eviscerated.
    The objector might counter-respond by saying that, according to PWS, possible worlds arenot
    merely linguistic entities but that, nonetheless, there must not be any expressions in the object-
    language referring to them. But this counter-response is not entirely satisfying. The concept of a
  possible world lies at the heart of PWS. Given this, it is odd (as the aforementioned reviewer
    pointed out to me) that propositions about worlds should be permissible only under such special
    circumstances. If, as PWS requires, there are such things as possible worlds, then it ought to be
    possible to discuss them without having to sequester statements about them within a special
language.
    The objector’s position has another unwelcome feature. According to that view, the possible
    worlds with respect to which statements in the meta-language are to be evaluated are different
    from those with respect to which statements in the object-language are to be evaluated. By an
  obvious extension of the objector’s reasoning, the possible worlds with respect to which
    statements in the meta-meta-language are to be evaluated are different from those with respect to
    which statements in the meta-language are to be evaluated. And so on ad in nitum. So PWS ends
    up positing an in nite hierarchy of sets of worlds. But we must question the viability of a theory
  that has to go to such great lengths to stay a oat. PWS is meant to have a solid footing in our
  intuitions about modality. But it loses any such footing in so far as it has to posit an in nite
    hierarchy of in nitely large sets of alternative worlds. This is not to mention that any such ad hoc
  proliferation of theoretical structure is the mark of what Lakatos (1977) referred to as a
‘‘degenerating research program.’’
  To block the need for this in nite hierarchy, an advocate of PWS might say that modal
    statements in the meta-language (or, at least, in one of the meta-languages) arenotto be evaluated
  with respect to possible worlds. But to take this position would be to admit that modality is
ultimately not to be understood in terms of the concept of a possible world.
    Also, the distinction between object-language and meta-language is not sharply drawn (as the
    aforementioned reviewer pointed out to me). It seems not to apply to natural languages (as Tarski
    (1983) and Russell (1908) pointed out), and to apply only to arti cial languages—to languages
    that we construct with the conscious intention of avoiding the antinomies discussed by Tarski and
    Russell. The objector requires the possibility of an arti cial language L that is, on the one hand,
    rich enough to allow us to make the modal statements that we intuitively wish to make and, on the
    other hand, is suf ciently well-behaved to avoid the antinomies associated with languages that
    aren’t strati ed into object-language and meta-language. But it is an open question whether such
    a language is a possibility. In any case, even if such a language is possible (as it may well be), it
  speaks to the frailty of PWS that the viability of its analysis of notions like possibility and
    necessity – notions that are so central to our thinking – is predicated on the truth of some exotic
result in formal semantics.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916909

    This would be a good place to discuss another objection that an advocate of PWS might have
    to my analysis of that doctrine—or, more speci cally, to my analysis of PWSE. (The need to
    consider this sort of response was made clear to me by the previously mentioned reviewer at the
    Journal of Pragmatics.) When discussing PWSE, I made the point that we must use modal terms
  in order to identify the sets of propositions that are to be identi ed with worlds. Like Lewis
    (1986:150–153), I concluded that PWSEwas guilty of vicious circularity. But there is a powerful
  objection to be made to this argument. As before, I will put that objection in the voice of an
imaginary spokesperson for PWS:

        ‘‘PWSEidenti es possibility with membership in sets of some kind or other. As you’ve
        discussed, the description of such a set involves use of a modal term, and this certainly
          creates the appearance of vicious circularity. But those sets do not themselves contain any
        modal statements. So the structures and relations in terms of which PWSEidenti es
          possibility are innocent of any modal content. Although we may have to use modal terms to
        describe the PWSEanalysis of modality, that analysis itself is free of any circularity. The
        appearance to the contrary involves a failure to distinguish the thing described from the
      description of it—a failure to distinguish meta-language from object-language.

      ‘‘Here is an analogy: if you use a computer to write an analysis of the concept of a
          computer, you are not guilty of circularity; for even though a computer is involved in your
      presentation of your analysis, it is not itself part of the content of that analysis.’’

    Let us make things as simple as possible by conceding everything that the objector says; let’s
    suppose that my argument against PWSEdoes involve a failure to distinguish PWSE’s analysis of
    possibility from the mere means used to identify that analysis—a failure, as we might put it, to
    distinguish meta-language from object-language. Even so, the problem is only pushed back, not
    eliminated. The purpose of any form of PWS (including PWSE) is to analyze modal notions. If
    the objector’s point is correct, then PWSEeliminates them from the object-language only by
    conceding their ineliminability from the meta-language. But in that case we are simply displacing
  the problem, not solving it: we are stuck with unanalyzed modal expressions in the meta-
language.
    For reasons exactly similar to those just given, no progress would be made if we tried to use the
    notion of a maximal consistent set to analyze the modal terms in the meta-language. We would
  end up with unanalyzed modal terms in the meta-meta-language. So I don’t believe that the
  circularity in question is merely a re ection of a failure to distinguish the PWSEanalysis of
possibility from the means used to describe it.
                                                                    70
  There is another possible objection to our analysis of PWS that I would now like to discuss.
    This objection concerns my attempt to show that, given a realistic understanding of the term
  ‘‘alternative world’’, PWS incurs the result that every proposition is necessarily true or
    necessarily false. Once again, I will put that objection in the mouth of an imaginary advocate of
PWS:

        ‘‘Consider the proposition John is tall in W345. It seems to me that there is no way, even in
        principle, to know whether this proposition is true or not. Of course, it is easy to know the
          truth-value of the propositionJohn is tall in some possible world.(That proposition is true.)

70
        As before, I should point out that the need to address this objection was indicated to me by an astute reviewer – the
          same as the one previously mentioned – at the Journal of Pragmatics. And as before, I am following, and building on, that
reviewer’s suggestions as to how to address that objection.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916910

  But given any speci c world, other than our own, it seems necessarily impossible to assess
        the truth-value of John is tall in that world. Given that fact, it becomes questionable
whether, for example, John is tall in W345 is true or false at all.

        ‘‘Even though veri cationism is no longer seen as generally viable, some still see it as
  having certain applications. (For example, some have argued that the undecidability of
        certain mathematical statements warrants the conclusion that we must adopt a kind of
  veri cationism or constructivism – x is true iff x is (or can be) proven – with regard to such
  statements.) Perhaps we’ve just uncovered yet another application for veri cationism.’’

    Whatever merits this position might have, it doesn’t seem to available to a proponent of PWS.
    The essence of PWS is that there really are other worlds and that there really are facts about them.
    The kind of veri cationism about possible worlds just discussed seems hardly different from an
    anti-realism about them. But an anti-realist about possible worlds isn’t really an advocate of PWS.
    Consider a further possible response to our argument. (Some basis for this response is found in
    Plantinga, 1974:91–92). As before, I will put this argument in the voice of an imaginary objector:

  ‘‘Suppose that Socrates has the property of being bald in W1and also of being bald in W2.
        In that case, there is some property (namely, baldness) that Socrates has in at least two
  different worlds. That much is uncontroversial. Socrates has the further property of being
        bald-in-W1. That is a different property from that of being bald. You yourself have said
  why. Socrates has the property of being bald-in-W1in every world, whereas Socrates does
  not have the property of being bald in every world.

      ‘‘An analogue of this point undermines the argument you’ve given. Consider the
  proposition:Socrates is bald in W1.Just as the property of being bald must be distinguished
      from the property of being bald-in-W1, so the proposition Socrates is bald must be
        distinguished from the proposition Socrates is bald in W1. For reasons that you and
  Plantinga have given, the latter proposition is true in every world. But just as Socrates is not
        bald in every world, even though he is bald-in-W1in every world, so the proposition
  Socrates is bald is not true in every world, even though the same cannot be said of Socrates
is bald in W.’’

  Suppose that you are in W1(our world) and you say ‘‘Socrates is bald.’’ (For purposes of
    exposition, let us prescind from the fact that the right sentence would be ‘‘Socrates was bald.’’)
  For your statement to be true, it is not enough that there be a function F assigning truth to W1
    exactly on the condition that Socrates is bald in W1. That condition must actually besatis ed. The
    mere existence of such a function is compatible with Socrates’ not being bald in W1. After all,
such a function might assign falsity, or might otherwise fail to assign truth, to W1.
  Given this, suppose for the sake of argument that PWS is right to identify the proposition
    Socrates is bald with a function F of the kind just described (viz. a function that assigns truth to a
  world exactly if, in that world, Socrates is bald). In that case, if you are in W1and you say
    ‘‘Socrates is bald’’, or utter a corresponding sentence of another language, what you are af rming
has the same truth-conditions as the proposition:

(*)F assigns truth to W1.

  After all, as we discussed, if you are in this world (W1) and you say ‘‘Socrates is bald’’, your
    statement is true just in case Socrates is bald inthis world, it being irrelevant whether he is bald in                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916911

    other worlds. So your statement is true just in case F assigns truth to W1, and is thus equivalent
    with (*). Obviously (*) is neither identical nor equivalent with F itself. So if we grant to PWS that
the proposition:

(**)Socrates is bald

    is some function F from worlds to truth-values, then we must hold that what you af rm when you
utter ‘‘Socrates was bald’’ is distinct from, and not equivalent with, F.
    Now we can close the argument. The truth-value of (*) obviously doesn’t vary from world to
    world. If it is true, then (*) is true ineveryworld (and, if it is false, then (*) is false in every world).
    So, just as we argued, if there are multiple different (concrete) worlds, then what you af rm when
    you utter ‘‘Socrates was bald’’ is equivalent with some proposition that is true in all worlds and is
  therefore, by PWS’s lights, necessarily true. Given any contingently true proposition P, an
    obvious analogue of this argument shows that, by PWS’s lights, P turns out to be necessarily true
    and not-P turns out to be necessarily false. So we must reject PWS, unless we are willing to take
the revisionist approach of saying that all true propositions are necessarily true.
  There is one last point. As we’ve discussed, if you are in this world and you utter ‘‘Socrates is
    bald’’, what you are af rming is equivalent with (*), which is neither identical nor equivalent
    with F. Therefore, if PWS is right to identify (**) with F, then when you say ‘‘Socrates is bald’’,
  what you are af rming is not identical or equivalent with (**). In a word, if PWS is right, then
    when you utter ‘‘Socrates is bald’’, you are not af rming (**). But it seems a datum that (**) is
    precisely what such an utterance af rms. So, to echo what I said a moment ago, we must reject
    PWS, unless we are willing to take the revisionist (and implausible) approach of saying that an
utterance of ‘‘Socrates is wise’’ does not af rm the proposition Socrates is wise.

EXCURSUS II. BEALER AND THE PROBLEM OF CIRCULARITY

    As we saw earlier, Bealer shows that PWS is guilty of a certain kind of vicious circularity. But
    the circularity in question goes much deeper than Bealer himself indicates. Whenever PWS
  analyzes a concept, it does so by extensionalizing it: propositions become sets of worlds (or
    functions characteristic of those sets); properties becomes sets of individuals (or functions
    characteristic thereof); and the proposition x has F becomes the proposition x is a member of K,
where K is the class of all individuals (including those in other worlds) that have F.
      It would thus be no exaggeration to say that PWS cannot analyze what it cannot
    extensionalize. For the reasons discussed in Section 4.2, P is necessary cannot be analyzed as P
    falls into C (where C is the class containing all necessary propositions, and nothing besides).
    This means that PWS is either forced to take the property of being necessarily true as a primitive,
    i.e. to regard it as unanalyzable, or that it must analyze it very differently from the way it analyzes
other properties.
  Of course, the analysis of P is necessary typically associated with PWS is P is true in all
    worlds, not P falls into C. But if the PWS identi cation of necessity with truth in all worlds is to
    harmonize with the PWS analysis of properties, and of intensions generally, then PWS must, at
    the very least, regard P is true in all worlds as being equivalent with P falls into C. But PWS does
not do so, as I would now like to show.
  Since (**) is a member of C, and the property of necessity is a component of (**), we would
  circularly make (**) be a member of a proper part of itself if we said that being necessary
    involved being a member of C. So to avoid the circularity discussed by Bealer, PWS must say that
  P is a member of C is not equivalent with P is necessary. So PWS cannot, without vicious                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916912

    circularity, regard P is a member of C as equivalent with P is necessary. Thus, PWS is not able to
    make its identi cation of necessity with truth in all worlds  t naturally with its general analysis of
property instantiation. By itself, this sort of inconsistency is worrisome.
  Moreover, it seems a simple fact of logic that P is a member of C is equivalent with Pis
    necessary. It is thus to the discredit of PWS that it cannot recognize that equivalence (at least not
    without lapsing into vicious circularity). So PWS proves to be incapable of accommodating a
rather basic theorem of logic.
  To deal with this, PWS would presumably have to say that the concept of all necessary
  propositions – and therewith the concept of a class such as C – violates some sort of type-
  theoretic stricture, like the concept of the class of all classes that don’t have themselves as
    members. But if that concept does violate some such stricture (as, I suspect, it does), that isitselfa
strike against PWS, as the following shows.
    As we’ve already discussed, we don’t want the word ‘‘necessary’’ to become ‘‘systematically
    ambiguous’’ (to use Russell’s, (1908) expression) between ‘‘necessary1’’, ‘‘necessary2’’, and so
  on, where for each i, *necessaryi* is a predicate of propositions of leveli. In light of this,
                                                     1
    suppose that PWS puts into effect the type-theoretic strati cation demanded by the move just
    proposed. So PWS distinguishes between C1,C2, and so on, where for each i, Ciis a class that
    includes the propositions of levelithat would intuitively be regarded as necessary. So C1would
                   1
include 1+1=2, and C2would include necessarily, 1 + 1 = 2, and so on.
  In that case, for each i, P is a member of Ciwould be equivalent with P is necessary, provided
    that P was a proposition of the appropriate level. So necessarily 1 + 1 = 2 would be equivalent
  with the proposition 1 + 1 = 2 is a member of C1; and necessarily, necessarily 1 + 1 = 2 would
    be equivalent withthe proposition that 1 + 1 = 2 is necessary is a member of C2; and so on. In this
  way, PWS would, after a fashion, be able to recognize the presumptive equivalence of Pisa
    member of C with P is necessary. But this equivalence would be purchased by seeing the three
  occurrences of ‘‘necessarily’’ in ‘‘it is necessarily the case that, necessarily, Socrates is
    necessarily self-identical’’ as having three different (though parallel) meanings. (One would
    correspond to membership in C3, the other to membership in C2, and so on.) But, as we previously
    discussed, this seems very wrong at an intuitive level. So even though appropriate use of type-
    theory might enable PWS to circumvent the vicious circularities discussed by Bealer, the result
    would only be a counter-intuitive splitting of the concept of necessity into a number (an in nite
number, actually) of different (though analogous) concepts.
  Of course PWS could avoid this problem by choosing not to identify necessity with
    membership in any class. But in that case, as we saw, the PWS analysis of necessity would not be
of a piece with its analyses of other properties.
  An extension of Bealer’s argument makes it clear how deep these problems with PWS are.
    Consider the property of being false. According to any version of PWS (including PWS*), that
    property is a function from propositions to truth-values (a function that assigns truth to false
    propositions and falsity to true propositions) or it is the class of false propositions. LetF be that
    function (or, if you prefer, that class). Of course, some false propositions themselves have the
    concept of falsehood as a constituent, e.g. it is a falsehood that Mozart was a composer. Let P be
    that proposition. Being false, P itself falls in the class of false propositions, i.e. it falls inF (or, if
  you prefer to think ofF as a function, P itself is in the domain ofF). So P has the concept of
  falsehood as a constituent. At the same time, that concept is itself a class that has P as a
    constituent (or, equivalently, is a function whose domain includes P). So P consists ofF, which in
    turn consists of P. Unless we are willing to take the heroic step of accepting a non-standard form
of set-theory, this is not an acceptable result.                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916913

  EXCURSUS III. COUNTERPART THEORY AND ESSENTIAL PROPERTIES

  Earlier we argued that counterpart-theory is guilty of vicious circularity: the concept of a
    counterpart is de ned in terms of the concept of an ‘‘essential’’ property. At the same time, the
    concept of an ‘‘essential’’ property is a modal concept, and thus cannot be non-circularly used in
this context.
    But given only this point, counterpart-theory might still not be guilty of vicious circularity, as
  the following line of thought shows. As before, I will put that argument in the mouth of an
imaginary interlocutor:

        ‘‘For the sake of argument, suppose that we found a way to understand the concept of
      essentiality that did not, in its turn, involve the notion of necessity or the notion of a
        counterpart. (This is not an unreasonable supposition.) In that case, counterpart-theory
          wouldnotbe guilty of any vicious circularity in saying that Socrates’ counterparts are those
          things which share his essential properties. So your argument against counterpart-theory
would be nulli ed.’’

  The objector is right that counterpart-theory wouldn’t be guilty of vicious circularity if it
    turned out that the concept of an essential property could be understood in non-modal terms.
    But this would not help the counterpart-theorist. If, as the interlocutor’s argument requires, we
  had a non-modal characterization of the concept of essentiality, then there would be no
    need whatsoever for any form of counterpart-theory. For, by supposition, we would no longer
    need the notion of a counterpart to say what properties Socrates must have and, therefore, what
    properties he might not have. The objector’s point liberates counterpart-theory from vicious
    circularityonlybymakingcounterpart-theorycompletely unnecessary for an understanding of
modality.
    There is another problem with the proposal that Socrates’ counterparts are those things which
    share his essential properties. Suppose that Socrates parents were A and B. According to the
    plausible and widely accepted doctrine of the ‘‘essentiality of origins’’ – henceforth referred to as
    ‘‘(EO)’’ – it is an essential fact about Socrates that these were his parents. (Kripke (1980) gives a
    clear and powerful statement of this view.) According to counterpart-theory, A and B don’t exist
    in W: only their counterparts do. So, according to counter-part theory, the fact that Socrates’
    origins are essential to him corresponds to the fact that, in W, the counterparts of A and B were
    parents of Socrates’ counterpart. But who are the counterparts of A and B? Presumably they are
  the people whose parents were, respectively, the counterparts of the parents of A and the
counterparts of the parents of B.
  But now we are caught in a circle. EO says: if x has parents y and z, this is an essential fact
  about x. Counterpart theory says: for this to be an essential fact about x is for the parents of x’s
    counterpart in any world W to be the counterparts of y and z in W. The concept of a counterpart is
  understood in terms of the concept of same origins; and the concept of same origins is in its
understood in terms of notion of a counterpart. Clearly this is viciously circular.
  But if we choose not to understand the notion of counterpart in terms of the notion of an
  essential property, how are we to understand it? We could understand it in the way that was
  proposed earlier: x is Socrates’ counterpart in W iff x resembles Socrates more closely than
  anything else in W, provided that the notion of resemblance is not understood in terms of an
essential property. But we’ve already seen the problems with this proposal.
  The only remaining option, as Lewis (1986) points out, is to take the counterpart relation as
    primitive: x just is Socrates’ counterpart in W; this fact about x does not supervene on x’s having                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916914

    such and such properties—on, for example, x’s having such and such parents or on x’s being a
    wise, bald Greek philosopher. But in that case, as Lewis himself (1968:126) says counterpart-
  theory ceases to have much basis in our intuitions. Suppose that x is somebody in some other
  world W whose life bears little or no resemblance to mine. It is hard to see why x’s fortunes
should validate modal or counterfactual claims about me.
  There is a problem with counterpart-theory deeper than any thus far discussed. For obvious
  reasons, if the analysis of counterfactuals given by counterpart-theory is to avoid vicious
    circularity, then there must be some way of individuating properties, of giving their essences, that
    does not involve claims about counterparts. But this does not appear to be possible, since the very
notion of a property has counterfactual content.
    Clarence Lewis (1929) showed that, when we classify a thing as having a particular property –
  as being wet or cold or solid – we are ipso facto making claims about its behavior under
    counterfactual circumstances. His point applies to almost all of the properties in terms of which
    we describe and understand spatiotemporal individuals. (I say ‘‘almost’’ because there may be a
    few exceptions to it. For example, it may not apply to strictly phenomenal properties.) If this is
    right, then practically any attribution of a property to anything spatiotemporal has counterfactual
    content. In that case, for the reasons given in the last paragraph, counterpart-theory is guilty of
vicious circularity.
    But counterpart-theory fails even if it turns out that there is some innocent characterization of
    things’ essential properties. (By an ‘‘innocent’’ characterization, I mean one that doesn’t use
  notions like counterpart or necessity or any other notion that, in this context, would lead to
    vicious circularity.) As we saw earlier, if there were such a characterization of the concept of an
  essential property, then we wouldn’t need to invoke the notion of an alternative world, or a
  fortiori of a counterpart, to explicate modal propositions. So if the concept of an essential
    property is to be understood in counterfactual terms, then counterpart-theory is guilty of vicious
    circularity. If the concept of an essential property is not to be thus understood, then the concept of
a counterpart becomes irrelevant to modal analysis.

EXCURSUS IV. ON LEWIS AND MODALITY

  We previously saw some reason to believe that a proposition is necessarily true wholly in
    virtue of its internal-structural properties. In connection with this, we saw that a proposition’s
  being true in all worlds is merely a symptom, and not the essence, of its being necessary.
    Ironically, Lewis’ own remarks seem to reinforce the plausibility of such a view, as I would now
like to argue.
  Lewis says that we discover whether P is necessarily true by employing ‘‘a principle of
    recombination.’’ (See Lewis, 1986:113–114.) The idea seems to be this. P is necessarily true
  exactly if P’s constituents are combined in a certain way, i.e. if P has certain internal,
    combinatorial features. Of course, we can know that P has such features without leaving this
    world. Further, by Lewis’ own hypothesis, we know that P’s having such features is suf cient for
    P’s being true in all worlds. So if P has said structural features, we may correctly conclude that P
is true in all worlds.
But in that case, why not analyze ‘‘P is necessary’’ as ‘‘P has the aforementioned
    combinatorial features’’? In other words, given Lewis’ views on the epistemology of modality –
  given his point that we know the modal status of a proposition by employing a ‘‘principle of
    recombination’’ – it seems to follow that modality is not to be understood in terms of the concept
of other worlds.
An illustration may be in order. Consider the proposition                    J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916915

(T)triangles have three sides.

  (T) is necessarily true. How do we know this? Here is an answer that, while being vague, has
  some intuitive appeal (and that the present author believes to be correct, at least on one of its
    delineations). We look at how T’s ingredients – the concepts three, triangle, side, and so on –
    relate to one another, and at how they are organized in that proposition. On the basis, we can infer
  that T is true in every world. But supposing that this is correct, why not say that (T)’s being
    necessarily true consists in its having those internal, structural properties, and that its being true
    in all other worlds is a symptom or expression of its being necessary, and not the essence of it?
  This is what many of us are independently inclined to say. We know that (T) is true in every
    world because we know that (T) has the right internal properties. This means that we see (T)’s
    being true in every possible world as a consequence of its having those internal properties. In
Kuczynski (2005a), I argue on behalf of this view.

Acknowledgments

    This paper bene ted immeasurably from an anonymous reviewer at the Journal of Pragmatics.
    Had it not been for that reviewer’s sharp insights, many of the arguments and counter-arguments
    put forth in the  rst Excursus would not have occurred to me. But that reviewer’s in uence is not
    con ned to that one Excursus, and is to be found on virtually every page of this paper. I also owe
    deep thanks to Professor Jacob Mey for his invaluable editorial suggestions, which dramatically
enhanced the  ow and readability of the present paper.

References

  Barwise, Jon, Moss, Lawrence, 1996. Vicious Circles. CSLI Publications, Palo Alto, CA.
Bealer, George, 1998. Propositions. Mind 107, 1–33.
        Berkeley, George, 1982. A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge. Hackett, Indianapolis, IN.
          Blackburn, Simon, 1984. Spreading the Word: Groundings in the Philosophy of Language. Oxford University Press, New
York, NY.
  Carnap, Rudolf, 1947. Meaning and Necessity. University of Chicago Press, Chicago IL.
Cresswell, M.J., 1985. Structured Meanings. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge MA.
      Dummett, Michael, 1973. Frege: Philosophy of Language. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Fodor, Jerry, 1998. Concepts. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Forbes, Graeme, 1985. The Metaphysics of Modality. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Goodman, Nelson, 1977. The Structure of Appearance. Reidel, Boston, MA.
        Frege, Gottlob, 1892. On sense and nominatum. In: Martinich, A.P. (Ed.), The Philosophy of Language. Oxford
University Press, New York, pp. 190–202.
  Frege, Gottlob, 1956. The Thought: A Logical Inquiry. Mind, LXV, pp. 289–311.
        Hintikka, Jaakko, 1962. Knowledge and Belief: An Introduction to the Logic of the Two Notions. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, NY.
Hintikka, Jaakko, 1969. Models for Modalities. D. Reidel, Dordrecht.
  Hume, David, 2000. A Treatise of Human Nature. Oxford University Press, New York.
          Kaplan, David, 1968. Trans-world Heir-lines. In: Loux, M. (Ed.), The Actual and the Possible. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, NY, pp. 88–109.
        Kaplan, David, 1989. Demonstratives. In: Almog, J., et al. (Eds.), Themes from Kaplan. New York, Oxford, pp. 481–
563.
    Kim, Jaegwon, 1993. Supervenience and Mind. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.
      Kripke, Saul, 1963. Semantical considerations in modal logic. Acta Philosophica Fennica 16, 83–94.
  Kripke, Saul, 1980. Naming and Necessity. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
      Kuczynski, John-Michael, 2003. Some arguments against intentionalism. Acta Analytica 19, 107–142.                J.-M Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 39 (2007) 872–916916

Kuczynski, John-Michael, 2004. Another argument against the thesis that there is a language of thought. Communication
and Cognition 37 (2), 83–104.
  Kuczynski, John-Michael, 2005a. Outlining a non-possible-worlds based conception of modality. Metaphysica 6 (1), 41–68.
Kuczynski, John-Michael, 2005b. Counterfactuals: The Epistemic Approach. Philosophia Scientiae 9 (1), 1–45.
  Kuczynski, John-Michael, 2006. Review of Anne Bezuidenhout & Marga Reimer, descriptions and beyond. Pragmatics &
Cognition 14 (1), 198–206.
Lakatos, Imre, 1977. The Methodology of Scienti c Research Programmes: Philosophical Papers, vol. 1. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Lewis, Clarence Irving, 1929. Mind and the World Order. Scribners, New York.
      Lewis, David, 1968. Counterpart theory and quanti ed modal logic. Journal of Philosophy 65, 113–126.
Lewis, David, 1970. General semantics. Synthese 22, 18–67.
Lewis, David, 1973. Counterfactuals. Blackwell, Oxford.
  Lewis, David, 1986. On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford University Press, New York.
    Pap, Arthur, 1958. Semantics and Necessary Truth. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
Plantinga, Alvin, 1974. The Nature of Necessity. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
  Quine, Willard van Orman, 1960. Word and Object. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ramsey, F.P., 1929. Theories. In: Mellor, D.H. (Ed.), Frank Ramsey: Philosophical Papers. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 112–136.
Reichenbach, Hans, 1958. The Philosophy of Space-Time. Dover, New York.
  Russell, Bertrand, 1908. Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types. American Journal of Mathematics 30, 222–262.
      Russell, Bertrand, 1919. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. George Allen and Unwin, London.
  Russell, Bertrand, 1927. The Analysis of Matter. George Allen and Unwin, London.
  Russell, Bertrand, 1985. The Philosophy of Logical Atomism. Open Court, LaSalle, IN.
Russell, Bertrand, 1992. The Philosophy of Leibniz. Routledge, London.
Tarski, Alfred, 1983. The concept of truth in formalized languages. In: Corcoran, J. (Ed.), Logic, Semantics, and
Metamathematics. Hackett, Indianapolis, IN, pp. 152–178.
Van Fraassen, Bas C., 1989. Laws and Symmetry. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
      Wiggins, David, 1968. On being in the same place at the same time. Philosophical Review 77, 90–95.
  Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 1922. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Kegan Paul, London.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 1975. Philosophical Remarks. Blackwell, Oxford.

John-Michael Kuczynski was awarded a PhD in philosophy from the University of California, Santa Barbara for his
dissertation The Moral Structure of Legal Obligation. In his forthcoming book Conceptual Atomism and the Computa-
tional Theory of Mind (John Benjamins), he argues that a misunderstanding of the concept of computation has resulted
from, and then gone on to reinforce, some widely held, but spurious, views on linguistic and cognitive meaning. This book
is a development of ideas put forth in his article ‘‘Two Concepts of Sentential Form and the so-called Computational
Theory of Mind’’ (forthcoming in Philosophical Psychology).