        HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY OF LOGIC, 27 (FEBRUARY 2006), 1 – 8




          Implicit Comparatives and the Sorites

                    JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

                            Maryland, USA

                    Received 9 September 2004 Revised 3 October 2004

        A person with one dollar is poor. If a person with n dollars is poor, then so is a person
        with n1 dollars. Therefore, a person with a billion dollars is poor. True premises,
        valid reasoning, a false a conclusion: a paradox. This is an instance of the Sorites-
        paradox. Most attempts to solve this paradox reject some law of classical logic,
        usually the law of bivalence. I show that this paradox can be solved while holding on
          to all the laws of classical logic. Given any predicate that generates a Sorites-paradox,
        signiﬁcant use of that predicate is actually elliptical for a relational statement: a
        signiﬁcant token of ob is poor means Bob is poor compared to x, for some value of
        x. Once a value of x is supplied, a deﬁnite cutoﬀ line between having and not having
    the paradox-generating predicate is supplied. This neutralizes the inductive step in the
    associated Sorites argument, and the would-be paradox is avoided.



      I. A person with an IQ of 70 is not smart. For any number n, if a person with an
      IQ of n is not smart, then a person with an IQ of n1 is not smart. Thus, a person
      with an IQ of 455 is not smart. But this conclusion is false. So, we have a false
  conclusion following from true premises.
      A person with one dollar is not wealthy. For any number n, if a person with n
        dollars is not wealthy, then a person with n1 dollars is not wealthy. Thus, a person
      with 777 million dollars is not wealthy. True premises, valid reasoning, false
conclusion: a paradox.
        These are examples of the Sorites paradox. This essay will set forth a solution to
        this paradox. This solution is not in the literature and is not derivative of anything in
        1
the literature.
        A disclaimer is appropriate. There are many diﬀerent Sorites-type paradoxes—we
        have already considered two diﬀerent ones. I do not know whether what we will say
        constitutes a solution to every paradox belonging to this class. But I am fairly certain
that it constitutes a solution to some of them.
        The Sorites paradox is an ancient one. It was ﬁrst put forth by a contemporary of
        Aristotle, one Eubilides of Miletus. But no serious attempts at a solution were made
                    2
        until the last 30 years or so.Almost all of the solutions that have been oﬀered involve

1
            See, for example, Dummett (1978), Williamson (1994, 1999a, 1999b), Williamson and Sainsbury (1998), Sorensen (1998),
          Cargile (1999), Fine (1999), Sainsbury (1999), Tye (1999), Wright (1999), and Parsons (2000). The view put forth in the
          present paper is not even mentioned, let alone considered, in any of these works, or for that matter in any of the works
  known to me on vagueness or the Sorites paradox.
        For a review of all the dominant solutions to the Sorites, see Williamson and Sainsbury (1998). The solution I will
    present is not among those considered by Williamson and Sainsbury.
2
          See Williamson and Sainsbury (1998, p. 458). I am relying on Williamson and Sainsbury for this historical information.

                History and Philosophy of Logic ISSN 0144-5340 print/ISSN 1464-5149 online ª 2006 Taylor & Francis
                      http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals DOI: 10.1080/014453405002324012John-Michael Kuczynski

          the abandonment of some accepted law of logic. According to one of these solutions,
          the existence of Sorites-paradoxes show that some propositions are neither true nor
    false. According to another solution, such paradoxes show that propositions admit of
                                                                  3
        degrees of truth: some propositions are 70% true, others are 98% true, and so on.
        Both of these solutions involve the abandonment of the law of excluded middle:
        any proposition is either 100% true or 100% false. Of course, this principle is one of
the cornerstones of classical logic.
        Presumably, the laws of classical logic should not be rejected if there is any way to
    hold on to them. My solution to the Sorites doesnotinvolve any abandonment of those
        laws and is therefore preferable (ceteris paribus) to a solution that abandons them.
        Sorites arguments have the following structure. They consist of (i) a base clause
        (omeone with an IQ of 70 is not smart, (ii) an nductive clause (f a person with an IQ
        of n is not smart, then a person with an IQ of n1 is not smart, and a conclusion that
        follows from the premises but is plainly false ( person with an IQ of 455 is not smart).
      The argument set forth in this paper is basically this. The base clause of any
        Sorites argument is implicitly a comparison of some kind: it involves comparison to
        some standard or to some other entity. Once it is made explicit what the standard or
        object of comparison is, the inductive clause is immediately seen to be false: for once,
        that standard is identiﬁed, a deﬁnite cutoﬀ line between having and not having the
  oﬀending property is thereby established.
        Consider the base-clause in the argument set forth in the ﬁrst paragraph of this
      paper. It is meaningful to ask: person with an IQ of 70 is not smart compared to
      what? And it would be meaningless to respond by saying: ot compared to
        anything; such a person is not smart simpliciter No—a person with an IQ of 70 is
        very stupid compared to the average person but astronomically and incalculably
        intelligent compared to the average potato bug. So, any signiﬁcant utterance of
       person with an IQ of 70 is not smart involves reference to some standard; it is
    elliptical for some proposition like person with an IQ of 70 is not smart
      compared to the average person Of course, once that italicized qualiﬁcation is
        added to the base-clause, corresponding qualiﬁcations must be added to the other
        two clauses, lest the argument involve an equivocation. So, the inductive clause
      and the conclusion become: (ii) f a person with an IQ of n is not smart compared
      to the average person, then a person with an IQ of n1 is not smart compared to
      the average person and (iii) person with an IQ of 455 is not smart compared to
the average person
        But notice that (ii) is simply false. Suppose that the average IQ of human beings is
        102. In that case, there is some n such that a person with an IQ is not smart compared
        to the average person, and such that a person with an IQ of n1 is smart compared
      to the average person. It is true for n101.5, n101.6, and so on. So, the inductive
                                                4
clause is simply false. And the paradox is thereby avoided.

3
          See Williamson and Sainsbury (1998, p. 466–481). I say that almost all of the solutions involve an abandonment of some
          law of classical logic; for there is the so-called epistemicist view, according to which there is a sharp cutoﬀ between
          being bald and not-bald, rich and not rich. So, somebody with $10,000 is not rich, while somebody with $10,001 is rich.
        But such a view seems deeply arbitrary; and here is no evidence that [predicates like ich and ald induce sharp cut-
          oﬀs (Williamson and Sainsbury, 1998, p. 479). Also, it is hard to believe that rich has such a precise meaning, given that
        absolutely no one knows what that meaning is: but surely, since it is people who give meaning to terms like ich and
        ald through their use of such terms, it makes no sense to suppose that people should be so radically ignorant of the
        conditions of their application. (Williamson and Sainsbury (1998, p. 480) make essentially this point.) So, the
      epistemicist view is, understandably, not taken seriously.                        Comparatives and the Sorites3

        I submit that a corresponding treatment of many other Sorites arguments will
          show each of those arguments to contain a false premise (the inductive clause). Thus,
      the associated paradox vanishes; for it is in no way paradoxical that a false
        conclusion should follow from false premises. The purpose of this essay is to give a
      rigorous and comparatively general statement of the argument just given.


        II. Some preliminary remarks are in order. Not all properties generate Sorites-
        type arguments. Only properties that can be had to varying degrees generate them.
        The property of weighing 323 lbs is binary: one either has it or one does not. One
        cannot weigh 323 lbs to a greater extent than another person. inary properties—
          those that do not admit of comparatives—do not generate Sorites arguments. But, as
        far as I can tell, all properties that do admit of comparatives generate them: fatness,
slowness, dirtiness, smartness.
      Given any statement of the form x is P where P is a property of the kind that
      generates a Sorites paradox, let us describe that sentence as a orites sentence
      Examples of such sentences are hat woman is smart hat man is tall hat object is
        moving quickly Further, we will describe properties like P as orites-properties and
        we will describe predicates like (the expression denoting P) as orites-predicates
        Given a Sorites-sentence, the sentence formed by negating the predicate is itself a
      Sorites-sentence. ob is wealthy is a Sorites sentence; so, therefore, is ob is not
    5
        wealthy.And preﬁxing a ot onto any Sorites-type predicate results in a Sorites
      predicate. mart is a sorites-type predicate; so, therefore, is ot smart (Thus, the
  property of being not smart is a Sorites-property.)


        III. Let us now proceed to the argument proper. Sorites-sentences are context-
        sensitive. The sentence ob is fast makes a false statement if Bob is a cheetah whose
        top running speed is 30 mph. That same sentence makes a true statement if Bob is a
        turtle whose top crawling speed is 2 mph. In a very poor country, the sentence ob is
      not wealthy may be false if Bob has $100 to his name. In a very rich country, the
    sentence ob is not wealthy may be true if Bob has $90,000 to his name.
      This context sensitivity is easily explained when it is realized Bob cannot be
        wealthy simpliciter. He must be wealthy compared to most Albanians, or wealthy
      compared to most Americans, or wealthy enough to take adequate care of his
        children (who have medical conditions requiring expensive treatment). It would be

4
          It is true that we are unlikely to characterize someone who is only marginally more intelligent than average as mart
          compared to the average person But that has to do with pragmatics, not with semantics. The margin of diﬀerence
          would be negligible and would thus be of no pragmatic signiﬁcance (except in rare contexts, like the present one, where
        delicate points about meaning are just what is at issue). A comparison might help. For something to be assive is,
          technically, just for it to have mass. But no one would ever describe a mouse as assive (except in comparison to, say,
          a proton); for it would be very misleading to do so, even though such a characterization would technically be correct.
          Similarly, it would be misleading—though technically correct—to say that George was smart ompared to the average
        person so long as George IQ is so much as one point higher than average. In this paper, we are concerned with the
          ﬁner aspects of meaning, not with the course-grained analogues of them constituting the bulk of everyday discourse.
          So, we will use the expression ompared to in its strict and literal meaning; we will say that George is mart compared
          to the average person iﬀ George is smarter than the average person, no matter by how little. I further discuss this point
  at the end of the present paper.
5
        In an earlier draft of this paper, I confused sentence-negation with predicate-negation. I would like to thank an
    anonymous reviewer at this journal for setting me straight on this.4John-Michael Kuczynski

        meaningless to say that Bob was just wealthy. Pick any amount of money. For any
        amount of money M (other than no money at all), there will be some context such
      that a person with M can be truly characterized as ealthy and a diﬀerent one
  where a person with M can be truly characterized as ot wealthy.
      What this tells us is that ealthy (and therefore ot wealthy) is not really a one-
      place, but a two-place, predicate: x is wealthy relative to some standard x is
wealthy compared to y
      This applies mutatis mutandis to any Sorites sentence. Suppose you say ob is
        smart I can legitimately ask: mart compared to what? Smart compared to most
        Ph.D. in physics? Smart compared to most people? Given any sentence of the form
        x is smart there are some contexts where that would constitute a true statement and
        some where it would not. (This is the case unless x has absolutely no intelligence at
        all. We will deal with this problem below.) This tells us, that sentences of the form x
        is smart really express propositions that relativize x intelligence to some standard:
        x intelligence is being compared to that of other Ph.D. in physics, to other people
  in the remedial reading class, to other dogs, or other iguanas.
        So, diﬀerent tokens of x of smart involve comparison to diﬀerent standards, and
        thus express what are, strictly speaking, diﬀerent propositions. If Bob is a dog, and
      you say ob is smart you are probably saying ob is smartfor a dog If you say
      ob is smart and Bob is a Nobel laureate, you are probably saying ob is smart for
        a person. In any case, if Bob is a Nobel Laureate, and you say ob is smart you are
      probably not saying that Bob is smart compared to a dog. That is why the truth-
      conditions for ob [a dog] is smart are not the same as ob [the Nobel Laureate] is
      smart They have diﬀerent truth-conditions because they express diﬀerent
        propositions: Bob is smart compared to the average dog and Bob is smart compared
        to the average human. This point applies to many, if not all, sentences of the form x
has phi where hi is a Sorites-predicate.
          Let us apply these considerations to some speciﬁc Sorites-argument:

      (i) An object moving at 1 mph is not moving quickly. (ii) If an object moving n
      mph is not moving quickly, then an object moving n1 mph is not moving
      quickly. (iii) So, an object moving 400 million mph is not moving quickly.

    Let us refer to this argument as S.
        The ﬁrst sentence of S, if used signiﬁcantly, must (elliptically) express a proposition
        that relativizes the speed of an object moving one mph to some standard—that
      compares the speed of such an object with that of some other object (or class of
        objects). For it is legitimate to ask: Relative to what is an object moving at 1 mph not
      moving quickly? Compared to a glacier? No. Compared to a light-ray? Yes.
        So, someone who was putting forth S would have to say relative to what an object
        moving 1 mph was not moving quickly. So, in eﬀect, the base clause of S would be
some comparative statement like:

      (i0) An object moving 1 mph is moving slowly compared to the average horse.

        The validity of an argument depends on the terms in it being used with a uniform
      meaning. If uickly in (i) is elliptical for quickly compared to the average horse,
        while uickly in (ii) is elliptical for quickly compared to the average meteor, then S
      cannot possibly have any validity. So, uickly in each of (i), (ii), and (iii) must be                        Comparatives and the Sorites5

      used with the same meaning—it must be elliptical for the same thing in each
          case. Consequently, we must make the appropriate substitutions. So, S then becomes
(say):

      (i0) An object moving at 1 mph is not moving quickly compared to the average
      horse (ii0) If an object moving n mph is not moving quickly compared to the
        average horse, then an object moving n1 mph is not moving quickly compared
      to the average horse. (iii0) So, an object moving 400 million mph is not moving
    quickly compared to the average horse.

        But once these substitutions are made, it becomes clear that (ii0)—the inductive
        clause—is simply false. For there is some number n such that, if an object x is moving
      at n mph, then x is not moving faster than the average horse, and such that if x is
        moving n1 mph, then xismoving faster than the average horse. Suppose that the
        average horse has a maximum speed of 45 mph. In that case, if x is moving 44.5 mph,
        then x is not moving faster than the average horse, and if x is moving 45.5 mph, then
  xismoving faster than the average horse.
        It is pretty clear that these considerations apply mutatis mutandis to any Sorites
        predicate. Given any use of a predicate that admits of comparative—and all Sorites
        predicates are of this kind—it is legitimate to ask for a standard of comparison. If
      you say hat rock is heavy I can legitimately ask: eavy compared to what? In
      other words, I can ask for a standard of comparison. And once a standard is
        supplied, then the associated Sorites-generating inductive clause is blocked. or all
        n, if an object weighing n lbs is not heavy compared to the average human, then an
      object weighing n1 lbs is not wealthy compared to the average human But that
        statement is false. If the average American weighs 145 lbs, then an object weighing
          144.5 lbs will not be heavy compared to the average human, while an object weighing
  145.5 will be heavy compared to the average human
        IV. Let us now consider some objections to our argument. The major resistance
to it will, I think, be this:

          Despite what youe said, I think that sentences like ob is tall hat rock is
        heavy and red is wealthy—Sorites-type sentences—have a non-comparative
      meaning. It is meaningful to say ob is wealthy simpliciter The same applies to
    all other sentences involving Sorites-type predicates.

      Ie already given one argument against this. Here is another. Consider the
following two sentences:

  (A) Bob is tall.
  (B) Bob is taller than Fred.

  (B) is synonymous with

    (B0) Bob is more tall than Fred.

    And (B) is also synonymous with:

    (B00) Bob is tall compared to Fred.6John-Michael Kuczynski

      In (B00), all is really a two-place predicate. In other words, in (B00), the word
        all must be thought of as a predicate with two argument places. Now, surely the
      word all has the same meaning in (A) that it has in (B00). There is obviously no
      ambiguity at work here. (It is not like the word ank which has two diﬀerent
        meanings.) Now, if all were a two-place predicate in (B00), and a one-place predicate
    in (A), then it could not have the same meaning in both (A) and (B00).
        Let me clarify this. Obviously, all is functioning in a completely orthodox way
        in (B00). And obviously all is a two-place predicate in (B00). Finally, all clearly has
        the same meaning in both (A) and (B00). Given these facts, it is hard to see how all
      could not be functioning as a two-place predicate in (A). This shows that all is
really elliptical for all compared to__
    As against this, one might reason as follows:

      It is true that all has the same meaning in both (A) and (B00). It is also true that
      all is part of a two-place predicate in (B00). Nonetheless, all in (A), is a one-
        place predicate and is not part of a two-place predicate. What is going on is that
        the aforementioned two-place predicate in (B00) is being constructed out of the
  one-place predicate in (A).

    The problem with this proposal is not hard to see. The meaning of a predicate is intimately
                                          6
        bound up with the number of argument places it has.If P1 and P2 are predicates of
    diﬀerent degrees (i.e. if they have a diﬀerent number of argument places), thenipso facto
    they have diﬀerent meanings. And I do not see how the obviously two-place predicate _
      is tall compared to__ could be constructed out of a one-place predicate.
        The natural resolution of this is the one we considered a moment ago. The term
        all has the same meaning in both (A) and (B00). And this predicate does not somehow
          retain the same meaning while shifting the number of argument places it has, or while
    somehow being assimilated into a predicate of a diﬀerent degree than it originally had.
        What we say is that all is always comparative: x is tall compared to some standard.
          Sometimes, the comparison is explicit. Sometimes, it is implicit. Presumably, it is left
      implicit when the standard can be taken for granted, which is often the case.
        Admittedly, there are apparent problems with the line of reasoning just set forth.
      Consider the predicate cidic Some things can be more acidic than others. So,
        statements of the form x is more acidic than y are signiﬁcant. But it is obviously
        meaningful to say x is acidic simpliciter. At the same time, cidic obviously has the
    same meaning in x is acidicwhere cidic is functioning as a one-place
    predicate—that it has x is more acidic than ywhere cidic is part of a two-
        place predicate. So, there must be some error in our reasoning. Exactly similar
      remarks apply to lectriﬁed alleable uctile, and various other physical terms.
      Also, it seems to apply to the term ntelligent We speak of a life-form as being
      ntelligent simpliciter, meaning that it has some intelligence. But we can also
      meaningfully speak of one thing as being more intelligent than another.
      When you say x is acidic what is really meant is x is acidic to some positive
      degree or or some positive number n, x is acidic to degree n Degree-statements
        (even highly generic ones, like x has P to some positive degree or other are really
        statements about the measure of something. And relativization to a standard is the
        essence of measurement: to measure is to compare—to compare with something

6
        Donald Davidson makes this point, and uses it to good advantage, in he Logical Form of Action Sentences.                        Comparatives and the Sorites7

    taken as a standard. So, statements about measurements are comparative statements.
        Given this, it follows that degree-statements—even highly generic ones like x is
        acidic to some positive degree or otheralways presuppose some benchmark (in a
      quite literal sense of enchmark in some cases). So, to say x is acidic is in fact to
  make a kind of comparative statement.
      I would like to consider another prima facie problem with our analysis. If
        somebody has no money, then it certainly seems reasonable to say that they are non-
        wealthy in an absolute sense. The same is true mutatis mutandis of all other Sorites-
        type predicates. And this seems to controvert my point that ealthy on-wealthy
    all mart and so on, have only acomparative meaning.
    This point does not go through. We have seen reason to believe that on-
        wealthy is typically used to make a comparative statement. So, if we say that on-
          wealthy has a truly absolute and non-comparative meaning, then we are really saying
      that it has two meanings: we are saying that on-wealthy is sometimes a non-
      comparative predicate and is sometimes a comparative predicate, and is thus
    ambiguous between two very diﬀerent signiﬁcances.
    But it seems extremely arbitrary to say that on-wealthy is sometimes an
          absolute (one-place) predicate and sometimes a comparative (two-place) predicate.
      Obviously, on-wealthy has the same meaning in ob isabsolutely non-wealthy
      (meaning: he has no money) that it has in ob is comparatively non-wealthy
        (meaning: he has less money than others in a certain reference class). And there is no
        reason to believe that the term on-wealthy corresponds to predicates with diﬀerent
      numbers of argument places in these two sentences; it is simply not natural to
      suppose that such a dramatic shift in its semantics occurs.
      The natural way to go is this. It is in some sense true to say that a person who has
        no money is non-wealthy in an bsolute sense But to say that Bob is non-wealthy in
      an absolute sense is not to say that he is non-wealthy in some way that involves
        reference to no standard. On the contrary, it is to say that he is non-wealthy relative
      to every standard. So, being bsolutely non-wealthy involves just as much a
        reference to some standard of comparison as being comparatively non-wealthy.
        I would like to end this essay by discharging an assumption that I have relied on
      7
throughout.I have said that

  (i) x is smarter than y

is equivalent to

  (ii) x is smart compared to y

and also to

  (iii) x is smart relative to y

        This assumption is obviously crucial to my argument. Obviously, marter is a two-
        place predicate. (It would be meaningless to say am is smarter, unless that were
      elliptical for am is smarter than Bob or some other relational sentence.) It is
        essential to my argument that mart is really elliptical for some two-place predicate

7
        What follows is a response to a point made by an anonymous reviewer at History and Philosophy of Logic.8John-Michael Kuczynski

    that has the same logical form as marter My judgement is that _is smart
        compared to__ and _is smart relative to__ are such two-place predicates. But this
  judgement might be questioned, for one might say:

      Oﬀhand, it does not seem to me that the statement x is smarter than y has quite
        the same meaning as x is smart compared to yr x is smart relative to y

                    8
        My response is this. Perhapsit may legitimately be questioned whether x is smarter
      than y has the same meaning as x is smart compared to yr x is smart relative to y
        But that is not ultimately relevant. The important point is that one obviously could
                                                                    9
        construct a two-place predicate out of mart that had the same meaning as marter
        Once it is granted that mart is elliptical for some such two-place predicate, then my
        argument in its entirety goes through. Now, it may be that _is smart compared to__ is
        not that predicate. But as long as some two-place predicate can be constructed out of
      mart that has the same meaning as marter then my argument goes through.
          (Whether the English language already contains such a predicate is irrelevant.) Now,
        clearly there is no barrier to creating some predicate out of mart that has the same
      logical form as marter let _is smartkompared to__ be that predicate. (So, x is
      smart kompared to y has the same logical form as x is smarter than y) Given the
        absence of such a barrier, it is plain that mart iselliptical for a two-place comparative
          predicate. (For as we, in eﬀect, saw earlier, it would not be possible to construct a two-
        place predicate out of mart unless mart werealreadysuch a predicate.) And, as we
      have seen, once this is granted, then our analysis goes through in its entirety.


                            References

      Cargile, J. 1999. he Sorites paradox in R. Keefe and P. Smith, eds,Vagueness: A Reader, Cambridge,
    MA: The MIT Press.
        Dummett, M. 1978. Wang paradox in Truth and Other Enigmas, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
    Fine, K. 1999. agueness, truth and logic in R. Keefe and P. Smith, eds,Vagueness: A Reader,
    Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
        Parsons, T. 2000. Indeterminate Identity: Metaphysics and Semantics, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
    Sainsbury, R.M. 1999. oncepts without boundaries in R. Keefe and P. Smith, eds,Vagueness:
        A Reader, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Sorensen, R. 1998. Blindspots, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
    Tye, M. 1999. orites paradoxes and the semantics of vagueness in R. Keefe and P. Smith, eds,
          Vagueness: A Reader, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
    Williamson, T. 1994. Vagueness, London: Routledge.
      Williamson, T. 1999a. agueness and ignorance in R. Keefe and P. Smith, eds,Vagueness: A Reader,
    Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
      Williamson, T. 1999b. agueness, truth and logic in R. Keefe and P. Smith, eds,Vagueness: A Reader,
    Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
      Williamson, T. and Sainsbury, R.M. 1998. orites in B. Hale and C. Wright, eds,A Companion to the
            Philosophy of Language A Companion to the Philosophy of Language, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
      Wright, C. 1999. urther reﬂections on the Sorites paradox in R. Keefe and P. Smith, eds,Vagueness:
        A Reader, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.



8
        Though I doubt it. x is smart compared to y is quite obviously, in my view, merely a pedantic way of saying x is
smarter than y
9
        Actually, marter is itself such a predicate. Surely, it is not a phonemic accident that the sound mart occurs at the
beginning of marter