to understand those against whom one harbours a prejudice. We only see men

and things as they are when we divest our minds of partial judgements. We

become seers as we become sympathizers. Sympathy has knowledge for her

companion.

    Inseparable are the feeling heart and the seeing eye. The man of pity is

the man of prophecy. He whose heart beats in tune with all hearts, to him the

contents  of  all  hearts  are  revealed.  Nor  are  past  and  future  any  longer

insoluble mysteries to the man of sympathy. His moral insight apprehends the

perfect round of human life.

    Sympathetic  insight  lifts  a  man  into  the  consciousness  of  freedom,

gladness and power. His spirit inhales joy as his lungs inhale air. There are no

longer any fears of his fellow-men of competition, hard times, enemies, and

the like. These grovelling illusion have disappeared, and there has opened up

before his awakened vision a realm of greatness and grandeur.                  7. SIXTH PILLAR – SINCERITY


    Human  society  is  held  together  by  its  sincerity.  A  universal  falseness

would  beget  a  universal  mistrust  which  would  bring  about  a  universal

separation, if not destruction. Life is made sane, wholesome, and happy, by

our deep rooted belief in one another. If we did not trust men, we could not

transact  business  with  them,  could  not  even  associate  with  them.

Shakespeare’s  “Timon”  shows  us  the  wretched  condition  of  a  man  who,

through his own folly, has lost all faith in the sincerity of human nature. He

cuts himself off from the company of all men, and finally commits suicide.

Emerson has something to the effect that if the trust system were withdrawn

from commerce, society would fall to pieces; that system being an indication

of the universal confidence men place in each other. Business, commonly

supposed by the short-sighted and foolish to be all fraud and deception is

based on a great trust – a trust that men will meet and fulfil their obligations.

Payment  is  not  asked  until  the  goods  are  delivered;  and  the  fact  of  the

continuance of this system for ages, proves that most men do pay their debts,

and have no wish to avoid such payment.

  Back of all its shortcomings, human society rests on a strong basis of

truth.  Its  fundamental  note  in  sincerity.  Its  great  leaders  are  all  men  of

superlative sincerity; and their names and achievements are not allowed to

perish – a proof that the virtue of sincerity is admired by all the race.

  It is easy for the insincere to imagine that everybody is like themselves,

and to speak of the “rottenness of society”, - though a rotten thing could

endure  age  after  age,  for  is  not  everything  yellow  to  the  jaundiced  eye?

People who cannot see anything good in the constitution of human society,

should overhaul themselves. Their trouble is near home. They call good, evil.

They have dwelt cynically and peevishly on evil till they cannot see good,

and everything and everybody appears evil. “Society is rotten from top to

bottom”, I heard a man say recently; and he asked me if I did not think so. I

replied  that  I  should  be  sorry  to  think  so;  that  while  society  had  many

blemishes, it was sound at the core, and contained within itself the seeds of

perfection.

    Society, indeed is so sound that the man who is playing a part for the

accomplishment of entirely selfish ends cannot long prosper, and cannot fillany place as an influence. He is soon unmasked and disagreed; and the fact

that  such  a  man  can,  for  even  a  brief  period,  batten  on  human  credulity,

speaks well for the trustfulness of men, if it reveals their lack of wisdom.

  An accomplished actor on the stage is admired, but the designing actor on

the stage of life brings himself down to ignominy and contempt. In striving to

appear  what  he  is  not,  he  becomes  as  one  having  no  individuality,  no

character, and he is deprived of all influence, all power, all success.

  A man of profound sincerity is a great moral force, and there is no force –

not even the highest intellectual force – that can compare with it. Men are

powerful  in  influence  according  to  the  soundness  and  perfection  of  their

sincerity. Morality and sincerity are so closely bound up together, that where

sincerity  is  lacking,  morality,  as  a  power,  is  lacking  also,  for  insincerity

undermines all the other virtues, so that they crumble away and become of no

account. Even a little insincerity robs a character of all its nobility, and makes

it common and contemptible. Falseness is so despicable a vice and no man of

moral weight can afford to dally with pretty complements, or play the fool

with trivial and howsoever light, in order to please, and he is no longer strong

and admirable, but is become a shallow weakling whose mind has no deep

well of power from which men can draw, and no satisfying richness to stir in

them a worshipful regard.

  Even  they  who  are  for  the  moment  flattered  with  the  painted  lie,  or

pleased with the deftly woven deception, will not escape those permanent

under currents of influence which move the heart and shape the judgement to

fixed and final issues, while these designed delusions create but momentary

ripples on the surface of the mind.

  “I am very pleased with his attentions,” said a woman of an acquaintance,

“but I would not marry him”. “Why not?” she was asked. “He doesn’t ring

true”, was the reply.

  Ring  true, a term full of meaning. It has reference to the coin which,

when  tested  by  its  ring,  emits  a  sound  which  reveals  the  sterling  metal

throughout, without the admixture of any base material. It comes up to the

standard, and will pass anywhere and everywhere for its full value.

  So with men. Their words and actions emit their own peculiar influence.

There is in them an inaudible sound which all other men inwardly hear and

instinctively detect. They know the false ring from the true, yet know nothow they know. As the outer ear can make the most delicate distinctions in

sounds, so the inner ear can make equally subtle distinctions between souls.

None are ultimately deceived but the deceiver. It is the blind folly of the

insincere that, while flattering themselves upon their successful simulations,

they are deceiving none but themselves. Their actions are laid bare before all

hearts.  There  is  at  the  hear  of  man  a  tribunal  whose  judgements  do  not

miscarry. If the senses faultlessly detect, shall not the soul infallibly know!

This inner infallibility is shown in the collective judgement of the race. This

judgement  is  perfect;  so  perfect  than  in  literature,  art,  science,  invention,

religion – in every department of knowledge – it divides the good from the

bad,  the  worthy  from  the  unworthy,  the  true  from  the  false,  zealously

guarding and preserving the former, and allowing the latter to perish. The

works, words, and deeds of great men are the heirlooms of the race, and the

race is not careless of their value. A thousand men write a book, and one only

is a work of original genius, yet the race singles out that one, elevates and

preserves it, while it consigns the nine hundred and ninety nine copyists to

oblivion. Ten thousand men utter a sentence under a similar circumstance,

and one only is a sentence of divine wisdom, yet the race singles out that

saying for the guidance of posterity, while the other sentences are heard no

more. It is true that the race slays its prophets, but even that slaying becomes

a test which reveals the true ring, and men detect its tureens. The slain one

has come up to the standard, and the deed of his slaying is preserved as

furnishing infallible proof of his greatness.

  As the counterfeit coin is detected, and cast back into the melting pot,

while the sterling coin circulates among all men, and is valued for its worth,

so the counterfeit word, deed, or character is perceived, and is left to fall back

into the nothingness from which it emerged, a thing unreal, powerless, dead.

  Spurious things have no value, whether they be bric-a-brac or men. We

are ashamed of imitations that try to pass for the genuine article. Falseness is

cheap. The masquerader becomes a byword; he is less than a man; he is a

shadow, a spook, a mere mask. Trueness is valuable. The sound hearted man

becomes  an  exemplar;  he  is  more  than  a  man;  he  is  a  reality;  a  force,  a

moulding principle, by falseness all is lost – even individuality dissolves for

falseness  is  nonentity,  nothingness.  By  trueness  everything  is  gained,  for

trueness is fixed, permanent, real.  It is all important that we be real; that we harbour no wish to appear other

than what we are; that we simulate no virtue, assume no excellency, adopt no

disguise. The hypocrite thinks he can hood wink the world and the eternal

law of the world. There is but one person that he hoodwinks, and that is

himself, and for that the law of the world inflicts its righteous penalty. There

is an old theory that the excessively wicked are annihilated. I think to be a

pretender is to come as near to annihilation as a man can get, for there is a

sense in which the man is gone, and in his place there is but a mirage of

shams. The hell of annihilation which so many dread, he has descended into;

and to think that such a man can prosper is to think that shadows can do the

work of entities, and displace real men.

  If any man thinks he can build up a successful career on pretences and

appearances, let him pause before sinking into the abyss of shadows; for in

insincerity there is no solid ground, no substance, no reality; there is nothing

on which anything can stand, and no material with which to build; but there

are  loneliness,  poverty,  shame,  confusion,  fears,  suspicions,  weeping,

groaning, and lamentations; for if there is one hell lower, darker, fouler than

all others, it is the hell of insincerity.

  Four beautiful traits adorn the mind of the sincere man; they are:-

  1. Simplicity

  2. Attractiveness

  3. Penetration

  4. Power

    Simplicity is  naturalness.  It  is  simple  being,  without  fake  or  foreign

adornment.  Why  are  all  things  in  nature  so  beautiful?  Because  they  are

natural. We see them as they are, no task they might wish to appear, for in

sooth they have no wish to appear, for in sooth they have no wish to appear

otherwise. There is no hypocrisy in the world of nature outside of human

nature. The flower which is so beautiful in all eyes would lose its beautify in

all eyes would nature we look upon reality, and its beauty and perfection

gladden and amaze us. We cannot find anywhere a flaw, and are conscious of

our  incapacity  to  improve  upon  anything,  even  to  the  most  insignificant.

Everything  has  its  own  peculiar  perfection,  and  shines  in  the  beauty  of

unconscious simplicity.

  One  of  the  modern  social  cries  is,  “Back  to  nature”.  It  is  generallyunderstood to mean a cottage in the country, and a piece of land to cultivate.

It will be of little use to go into the country if we take our shams with us; and

any veneer which may cling to us can as well be washed off just where we

are. It is good that they who feel burdened with the conventions of society

should fly to the country, and court the quiet of nature, but it will fail if it by

anything but a means to that inward redemption which will restore us to the

simple and the true.

  But though humanity has wandered from the natural simplicity of the

animal world, it is moving towards a higher, a divine simplicity. Men of great

genius are such because of their spontaneous simplicity. They do not foreign;

they are. Lesser minds study style and effect. They wish to cut a striking

figure on the stage of the world, and by that unholy wish they are doomed to

mediocrity. Said a man to me recently, “I would give twenty years of my life

to be able to write an immortal hymn.” With such an ambition a man cannot

write a hymn. He wants to pose. He is thinking of himself, of his own glory.

Before a man can writer an immortal hymn, or create any immortal work he

must give, not twenty years of his life to ambition but his can do anything

great, and must sing, paint, write, out of ten thousand bitter experiences, ten

thousand failures, ten thousand conquests, ten thousand joys. He must know

Gethsemane; he must work with blood and tears.

    Retaining his intellect and moral powers, and returning to simplicity, a

man becomes great. He forfeits nothing real. Only the shams are cast aside,

revealing the standard gold of character. Where there is sincerity there will

always be simplicity – a simplicity of the kind that we see in nature, the

beautiful simplicity of truth.

    Attractiveness is the direct outcome of simplicity. This is seen in the

attractiveness of all natural objects; to which we have referred, but in human

nature  it  is  manifested  as personal  influence. Of  recent  years  certain

pseudomystics  have  been  advertising  to  sell  the  secret  of  “personal

magnetism” for so many dollars, by which they purport to show vain people

how they can make themselves attractive to others by certain “occult” means

as though attractiveness can be brought and sold, and put on and off like

powder and paint. Nor are people who are anxious to be thought attractive,

likely to become so, for their vanity is a barrier to it. The very desire to be

thought attractive is, in itself, a deception, and it leads to the practice ofnumerous deceptions. It infers, too, that such people are conscious of lacking

the genuine attractions and graces of character, and are on the look out for a

substitute;  but  there  is  no  substitute  for  beauty  of  mind  and  strength  of

character. Attractiveness, like genius, is lost by being coveted, and possessed

by those who are too solid and sincere of character to desire it. There is

nothing in human nature – nor talent, nor intellect, nor affection, nor beauty

of features that can compare in attractive power with that soundness of mind

and wholeness of heart which we call sincerity. There is a perennial charm

about a sincere man or woman, and they draw about themselves the best

specimens  of  human  nature.  There  can  be  no  personal  charm  apart  from

sincerity. Infatuation there may be, and is, but this is a kind of disease, and is

vastly  different  from  the  indissoluble  bond  by  which  sincere  people  are

attached. Infatuation ends in painful disillusion, but as there is nothing hidden

between sincere souls, and they stand upon that solid ground of reality, there

is no illusion to be displayed.

  Leaders  among  men  attract  by  the  power  of  their  sincerity,  and  the

measures of their sincerity is the measure of their sincerity is the great may be

a man’s intellect he can never be a permanent leader and guide of men unless

he be sincere. For a time he may sail jauntily upon the stream of popularity,

and believe himself secure, but it is only that he may shortly fall the lower in

popular odium. He cannot long deceive the people with his painted front.

They will soon look behind, and find of what spurious stuff he is made. He is

like  a  woman  with  a  painted  face.  She  thinks  she  is  admired  for  her

complexion,  but  all  know  it  is  paint,  and  despise  her  for  it.  She  has  one

admirer – herself, and the hell of limitation to which all the insincere commit

themselves is the hell of self-admiration.

  Sincere people do not think of themselves, of their talent, their genius,

their virtue, their beautify and because they are so unconscious of themselves,

they attract all, and win their confidence, affection, and esteem.

    Penetration belongs  to  the  sincere.  All  shams  are  unveiled  in  their

presence. All simulators are transparent to the searching eye of the sincere

man.  With  one  clear  glance  he  sees  through  all  their  flimsy  pretences.

Tricksters with under his strong gaze, and want to get away from it. He who

has rid his heart of all falseness, and entertains only that which is true, has

gained the power to distinguish the false from the true in others. He is notdeceived who is not self-deceived.

  As men, looking around on the objects of nature, infallibly distinguish

them such as a snake, a bird, a horse, a tree, a rose, and so on – so the sincere

man  distinguishes  between  the  variety  of  characters.  He  perceives  in  a

movement,  a  look,  a  word,  an  act,  the  nature  of  the  man,  and  acts

accordingly. He is on his guard without being suspicious. He is prepared for

the pretender without being mistrustful. He acts from positive knowledge,

and not from negative suspicion. Men are open to him, and he reads their

contents.  His  penetrative  judgement  pierces  to  the  centre  of  actions.  His

direct and unequivocal conduct strengthens in others the good, and shames

the bad, and he is a staff of strength to those who have not yet attained to his

soundness of heart and head.

  Power goes with penetration. An understanding of the nature of actions is

accompanied with the power to meet and deal with all actions in the right and

best  way.  Knowledge  is  always  power,  but  knowledge  of  the  nature  of

actions is superlative power, and he who possesses it becomes a Presence to

all hearts, and modifies their actions for good. Long after his bodily presence

has passed away, he is still a moulding force in the world and is a spiritual

reality  working  subtly  in  the  minds  of  men,  and  shaping  them  towards

sublime  ends.  At  first  his  power  local  and  limited,  but  the  circle  of

righteousness which he has set moving, continues to extend and extended till

it embraces the whole world, and all men are influenced by it.

  The sincere man stamps his character upon all that he does, and also upon

all people with whom he comes in contact. He speaks a word in season, and

some  one  is  impressed;  the  influence  is  communicated  to  another,  and

another, and presently some despairing soul ten thousand miles away hears it

and is restored. Such a power is prosperity in itself, and its worth is not to be

valued in coin. Money cannot purchase the priceless jewels of character, but

labour in right doing can, and he who makes himself sincere, who acquires a

robust soundness throughout his entire being, will become a man of singular

success and rare power.

  Such is the strong pillar of sincerity. It supporting power is to great that,

one it is completely erected, the Temple of Prosperity is secure. Its walls will

not crumble; its rafters will not decay; its roof will not fall in. It will stand

while the man lives, and when has passed away it will continue to afford ashelter and a home for others through many generation.          8. SEVENTH PILLAR – IMPARTIALITY


  To get rid of prejudice is a great achievement. Prejudices piles obstacles

in a man’s way – obstacles to health, success, happiness, and prosperity, so

that  he  is  continually  running  up  against  imaginary  enemies,  who,  when

prejudice is removed, are seen to be friend. Life, indeed, a sort of obstacle

race  to  the  man  of  prejudice,  a  race  wherein  the  obstacles  cannot  be

negotiated and the goal is not reached; whereas to the impartial man life is a

day’s walk in a pleasant country, with refreshment and rest at the end of the

day.

  To acquire impartiality, a man must remove that innate egotism which

prevents him from seeing any thing from any point of view other than this

own. A great task, truly; but a notable, and one that can be well begun now,

even if it cannot be finished. Truth can “remove mountains”, and prejudice is

a range of mental mountains beyond which the partisan does not see, and of

which he does not believe there is any beyond. These mountains removed,

however,  there  opens  to  the  view  the  unending  vista  of  mental  variety

blended  in  one  glorious  picture  of  light  and  shade,  of  colour  and  tone,

gladdening beholding eyes.

  By clinging to stubborn prejudice what joys are missed, what friends are

sacrificed, what happiness is destroyed, and what prospects are blighted! And

yet freedom from prejudice is a rare thing. There are few men who are not

prejudiced partisans upon the subjects which are of interest to them. One

rarely meets a man that will dispassionately discuss his subject from both

sides, considering all the facts and weighing all the evidence so as to arrive at

truth on the matter. Each partisan has his own case to make out. He is not

searching for truth, for he is already convinced that his own conclusion is the

truth, and that all else is error; but he is defending his own case, and striving

for victory. Neither does he attempt to prove that he has the truth by a calm

array of facts and evidence, but defends his position with more or less heat

and agitation.

    Prejudice  causes  a  man  to  form  a  conclusion,  sometimes  without  any

basis of fact or knowledge, and then to refuse to consider anything which

does not support that conclusion; and in this way prejudice is a complete

barrier to the attainment of knowledge. It binds a man down to darkness andignorance,  and  prevents  the  development  of  his  mind  in  the  highest  and

noblest directions. More than this, it also shuts him out from communion

with the best minds, and confines him to the dark and solitary cell of his own

egotism.

    Prejudice is a shutting up of the mind against the entrance of new light,

against the perception of more beauty, against the hearing of diviner music.

The partisan clings to his little, fleeting, flimsy opinion, and thinks it the

greatest thing in the world. He is so in love with his own conclusion (which is

only a form of self-love), that he thinks all men ought to agree with him, and

he regards men as more or less stupid who do not see as he sees, while he

praises the good judgement of those who are one with him in his view. Such

a  man  cannot  have  knowledge,  cannot  have  truth.  He  is  confined  to  the

sphere  of  opinion  (to  his  own  self-created  illusions)  which  is  outside  the

realm of reality. He moves in a kind of self infatuation which prevents him

from seeing the commonest facts of life, while his own theories – usually

more or less groundless – assume, in his mind, overpowering proportions. He

fondly imagines that there is but one side to everything, and that side is his

own. There are at least two sides to everything, and he it is who finds the

truth in a matter who carefully examines both sides with all freedom from

excitement, and without any desire for the predominance of one side over

another.

  In its divisions and controversies the world at large is like two lawyers

defending a case. The counsel for the prosecution presents all the facts which

prove his side, while counsel for the defense presents all the facts which

support his contention, and each belittles or ignores, or tries to reason away,

the facts of the other. The Judge in the case, however, is like the impartial

thinker among men: having listened to all the evidence on both sides, he

compares and sifts it so as to form an impartial summing up in the cause of

justice.

  Not  that  this  universal  partiality  is  a  bad  thing,  nor  as  in  all  other

extremes,  nature  here  reduces  the  oppositions  of  conflicting  parties  to  a

perfect balance; moreover, it is a factor in evolution; it stimulates men to

think who have not yet developed the power to rouse up vigorous thought at

will, and it is a phase through which all men have to pass. But it is only

byway – and a tangled, confused and painful one – towards the great highwayof Truth. It is the area of which impartiality is the perfect round. The partisan

sees a portion of the truth, and thinks it the whole, but the impartial thinker

sees the whole truth which includes all sides. It is necessary that we find see

truth in sections, as it were, until, having gathered up all the parts, we may

piece them together and form the perfect circle, and the forming of such

circle is the attainment of impartiality.

  The impartial man examines, weighs, and considers, with freedom from

prejudice and from likes and dislikes. His one wish is to discover the truth.

He abolishes preconceived opinions, and lets facts and evidence speak for

themselves. He has no case to make out for himself, for he knows that truth is

unalterable, that his opinions can make no difference to it, and that it can be

investigated and discovered. He thereby escapes a vast amount of friction and

nervous  wear  and  tear  to  which  the  feverish  partisan  is  subject;  and  in

addition, he looks directly upon the face of Reality, and so becomes tranquil

and peaceful.

  So rare is freedom from prejudice that wherever the impartial thinker may

be, he is sure, sooner or later, to occupy a very high position in the estimation

of the world, and in the guidance of its destiny. Not necessarily an office in

worldly affairs, for that is improbable, but an exalted position in the sphere of

influence.  There  may  be  such  a  one  now,  and  he  may  be  a  carpenter,  a

weaver, a clerk; he may be in poverty or in the home of a millionaire; he may

be short or tall, or of any complexion, but whatever and wherever he may be,

he has, though unknown, already begun to move the world, and will one day

be universally recognized at a new force and creative centre in evolution.

  There was one such some nineteen hundred years ago. He was only a

poor,  unlettered  carpenter;  He  was  regarded  as  a  madman  by  His  own

relatives, and he came to an ignominious end in the eyes of His countrymen,

but He sowed the seeds of an influence which has altered the whole world.

  There was another such in India some twenty five centuries ago. He was

accomplished, highly educated, and was the son of a capitalist and landed

proprietor a petty king. He became a penniless, homeless mendicant, and to

day one third of the human race worship at his shrine, and are restrained and

elevated by his influence.

    “Beware when the great God lets loose a thinker on this plane,” says

Emerson; and a man is not a thinker who is bound by prejudice; he is merelythe  strenuous  upholder  of  an  opinion.  Every  idea  must  pass  through  the

medium  of  his  particular  prejudice,  and  receive  its  colour,  so  that

dispassionate  thinking  and  impartial  judgement  are  rendered  impossible.

Such a man sees everything only in its relation, or imagined relation, to his

opinion, whereas the thinker sees things as they are. The man who has so

purified his mind of prejudice and of all the imperfections of egotism as to be

able to look directly upon reality, has reached the acme of power; he holds in

his hands, as it were, the vastest influence, and he will wield this power

whether he knows it or not; it will be inseparable from his life, and will go

from him as perfume from the flower. It will be in his words, his deeds, in his

bodily postures and the motions of his mind, even in his silence and the

stillness of his frame. Wherever he goes, even though he should fly to the

desert, he will not escape this lofty destiny, for a great thinker is the centre of

the world; by him all men are held in their orbits and all thought gravitates

towards him.

  The true thinker lives above and beyond the seething whirlpool of passion

in which mankind is engulfed. He is not swayed by personal consideration,

for he has grasped the importance of impersonal principles, and being thus a

noncombatant in the clashing warfare of egotistic desires, he can, from the

vantage ground of an impartial but not indifferent watcher, see both sides

equally, and grasp the cause and meaning of the fray.

  Not only the Great Teachers, but the greatest figures in literature, are

those  who  are  free  from  prejudice,  who,  like  true  mirrors,  effect  things

impartially.  Such  are  Whitman,  Shakespeare,  Balzac,  Emerson,  Homer.

These minds are not local, but universal. Their attitude is cosmic and not

personal.

  They contain within themselves all things and beings all worlds and laws.

They are the gods who guide the race, and who will bring it at last out of its

fever of passion into their own serene land.

  The  true  thinker  is  the  greatest  of  men,  and  his  destiny  is  the  most

exalted. The altogether impartial mind has reached the divine, and it basks in

the full daylight of Reality.

  The four great elements of impartiality are

  1. Justice

  2. Patience  3. Calmness

  4. Wisdom

  Justice is  the  giving  and  receiving  of  equal  values.  What  is  called

“striking a hard bargain” is a kind of theft. It means that the purchaser gives

value for only a portion of his purchase, the remainder being appropriated as

clear gain. The seller also encourages it by closing the bargain.

  The just man does not try to gain an advantage; he considers the true

values of things, and moulds his transactions in accordance therewith. He

does not let “what will pay” come before “what is right”, for he knows that

the  right  pays  best  in  the  end.  He  does  not  seek  his  own  benefit  to  the

disadvantage of another, for he knows that a just action benefits, equally and

fully, both parties to a transaction. If “one man’s loss is another man’s gain,”

it is only that the balance may be adjusted later on. Unjust gains cannot lead

to prosperity, but are sure to bring failure. A just man could no more take

from another an unjust gain by what is called a “smart transaction” that he

could take it by picking his pocket. He would regard the one as dishonest as

the other.

  The bargaining spirit in business is not the true spirit of commerce. It is

the selfish and thieving spirit which wants to get something for nothing. The

upright man purges his business of all bargaining, and builds it one the more

dignified basis of justice. He supplies “a good article” at its right price, and

does not alter. He does not soil his hands with any business which is tainted

with fraud. His goods are genuine and they are properly priced.

    Customers who try to “beat down” a tradesman in their purchases are

degrading  themselves.  Their  practice  assumes  one  or  both  of  two  things,

namely, that either the tradesman is dishonest and is overcharging (a low,

suspicious attitude of mind), or that they are eager to cajole him out of his

profit (an equally base attitude), and so benefit by his loss. The practice of

“bearing down” is altogether a dishonest one, and the people who pursue it

most assiduously are those who complain most of being “imposed on” and

this is not surprising, seeing that they themselves are all the time trying to

impose upon others.

  On the other hand, the tradesman who is anxious to get all he can out of

his customers, irrespective of justice and the right values of things, is a kind

of robber, and is slowly poisoning his success, for his deeds will assuredlycome home to him in the form of financial ruin.

  Said a man of fifty to me other day, “I have just discovered that all my

life I have been paying fifty percent, more for everything than I ought to.” A

just man cannot feel that he has ever paid too much for anything, for he does

not close with any transaction which he considers unjust; but if a man is

eager to get everything at half price, them he will be always meanly and

miserably mourning that he is paying double for everything. The just man is

glad to pay full value for everything, whether in giving or receiving and his

mind is untroubled and his days are full of peace.

  Let a man above all avoid meanness, and strive to be ever more and more

perfectly just, for if not just, he can be neither honest, nor generous, nor

manly, but is a kind of disguised thief trying to get all he can, and give back

as little as possible. Et him eschew all bargaining, and teach bargainers a

better  way  by  conducting  his  business  with  that  exalted  dignity  which

commands a large and meritorious success.

    Patience is the brightest jewel in the character of the impartial man. Not

a particular patience with a particular thing – like a girl with her needlework,

or  a  boy  building  his  toy  engine  but  on  unswerving  considerateness,  a

sweetness of disposition at all times and under the most trying circumstances,

an  unchangeable  and  gentle  strength  which  no  trial  can  mar  and  no

persecution  can  break.  A  rare  possession,  it  is  true,  and  one  not  to  be

expected for a long time yet from the bulk of mankind, but a virtue that can

be reached by degree, and even a partial patience will work wonders in a

man’s life and affairs, as a confirmed impatience all work devastation. The

irascible man is courting speedy disaster, for who will care to deal with a man

who continually going off like ground powder when some small spark of

complaint or criticism falls upon him! Even his friends will one by one desert

him, for who would court the company of a man who rudely assaults him

with  an  impatient  and  fiery  tongue  over  every  little  difference  or

misunderstanding.

  A man must begin to wisely control himself, and to learn the beautiful

lessons of patience, if he is to be highly prosperous, if he is to be a man of

use and power. He must learn to think of others, to act for their good, and not

alone for himself; to be considerate, for bearing, and long suffering. He must

study how to have a heart at peace with men who differ from him on thosethings which he regards as most vital. He must avoid quarrelling as he would

avoid drinking a deadly poison. Discords from without will be continually

overtaking him, but he must fortify himself against them; he must study how

to bring harmonies out of them by the exercise of patience.

  Strife is common: it pains the heart and distorts the mind. Patience is rare,

it enriches the heart and beautifies the mind. Everyone can spit and fume; it

requires no effort, but only a looseness of behaviour. It takes a man to keep

his mornings through all events, and to be painstaking and patient with the

shortcomings of humanity. But patience wins. As soft water wears away the

hardest rock, so patience overcomes all opposition. It gains the hearts of men.

It conquers and controls.

    Calmness accompanies patience. It is a great and glorious quality. It is

the peaceful haven of emancipated souls after their long wanderings on the

tempest riven ocean of passion. It makes the man who has suffered much,

endured much, experienced much, and has finally conquered.

  A man cannot be impartial who is not calm. Excitement, prejudice, and

partiality spring from disturbed passions. When personal feeling is thwarted,

it rises and seethes like a stream of water that is dammed. The calm man

avoids  this  disturbance  by  directing  his  feeling  from  the  personal  to  the

impersonal channel. He thinks and feels for others as well as for himself. He

sets the same value on other men’s opinions as on his own. If he regards his

on work as important, he sees also that the work of other men is equally

important. He does not content for the merit of his own against the demerit of

that of others. He is not overthrown, like Humpty-dumpty, with a sense of

self importance. He has put aside egotism for truth, and he perceives the right

relations of things. He has conquered irritability, and has come to see that

there is nothing in itself that should cause irritation. As well be irritable with

a pansy because it is not a rose, as with a man because he does not see as you

see. Minds differ, and the calm man recognizes the differences as facts in

human nature.

  The calm, impartial man, is not only the happiest man, he also has all his

powers at his command. He is sure, deliberate, executive, and swiftly and

easily accomplishes in silence what the irritable men slowly and laboriously

toils through with much nice. His mind is purified, poised, concentrated, and

is  ready  at  any  moment  to  be  directed  upon  a  given  work  with  unerringpower. In the calm mind all contradictions are reconciled, and there is radiant

gladness and perpetual peace. As Emerson puts it: “Calmness is joy fixed and

habitual”.

  One  should  not  confound  indifference  with  calmness,  for  it  is  at  the

opposite extreme. Indifference is lifelines, while calmness is glowing life and

full orbed power. The calm man has partly or entirely conquered self, and

having  successfully  battled  with  the  selfishness  within,  he  knows  how  to

meet and overcome it successfully in others. In any moral content the calm

man is always the victor. So long as he remains calm, defeat is impossible.

  Self control is better than riches and calmness is a perpetual benediction.

  Wisdom abides  with  the  impartial  man.  Her  counsels  guide  him;  her

wings shield him; she leads him along pleasant ways to happy destinations.

  Wisdom is many sided. The wise man adapts himself to others. He acts

for their good, yet never violates the moral virtues or the principles of right

conduct. The foolish man cannot adapt himself to others; he acts for himself

only, and continually violates the moral virtues and the principles of right

conduct. There is a degree of wisdom in every act of impartiality, and once a

man has touched and experience the impartial zone, he can recover it again

and again until he finally establishes himself in it.

  Every thought, word, and act of wisdom tells on the world at large, for it

is fraught with greatness. Wisdom is a well of knowledge and a spring of

power. It is profound and comprehensive, and is so exact and all inclusive as

to embrace the smallest details. In its spacious greatness it does not overlook

the small. The wise mind is like the world, it contains all things in their

proper place and order, and is not burdened thereby. Like the world also, it is

free, and unconscious of any restrictions; yet it is never loose, never erring,

never sinful and repentant. Wisdom is the steady, grown up being of whom

folly was the crying infant. It was outgrown the weakness and dependence,

the errors and punishments of infantile ignorance, and is erect, poised, strong,

and serene.

  The understanding mind needs no external support. It stands of itself on

the firm ground of knowledge; not book-knowledge, but ripened experience.

It has passed through all minds, and therefore knows them. It has travelled

with all hearts, and knows their journeying in joy and sorrow.

  When  wisdom  touches  a  man,  he  is  lifted  up  and  transfigured.  Hebecomes a new being with new aims and powers, and he inhabits a new

universe in which to accomplish a new and glorious destiny.

  Such  is  the  Pillar  of  impartiality  which  adds  its  massive  strength  and

incomparable grace to support and beautify the Temple of Prosperity.          9. EIGHTH PILLAR – SELF-RELIANCE


  Every young man ought to read Emerson’s essay on ‘Self Reliance’. It is

the manliest, most virile essay that was ever penned. It is calculated to cure

alike those two mental maladies common to youth, namely, self-depreciation

and self-conceit. It is almost as sure to reveal to the prig the smallness and

emptiness of his vanity, as it is to show the bashful man the weakness and

ineffectuality of his dividence. It is a new revelation of manly dignity; as

much a revelation as any that was vouchsafed to ancient seer and prophet,

and perhaps a more practical, eminently suited to his mechanic age, coming,

as it does from a modern prophet of a new type and called in a new race, and

its chief merit is its powerfully tonic quality.

  Let  not  self-reliance  be  confounded  with  self-conceit,  for  as  high  and

excellent as is the one, just so low and worthless is other. There cannot be

anything mean in self-reliance, while in self-conceit there cannot be anything

great.

  The man that never says “no” when questioned on subjects of which he is

entirely  ignorant,  to  avoid,  as  he  imagines,  being  thought  ignorant,  but

confidently  puts  forward  guesses  and  assumptions  as  knowledge,  will  be

known for his ignorance, and ill esteemed for his added conceit. An honest

confession of ignorance will command respect where a conceited assumption

of knowledge will elicit contempt.

  The timid, apologetic man who seems almost afraid to live, who fears that

he will do something not in the approved way, and will subject himself to

ridicule,  is  not  a  full  man.  He  must  needs  imitate  others,  and  have  no

independent action. He needs that self-reliance which will compel him to fall

back on his own initiative, and so become a new example instead of the

slavish follower of an old one. As for ridicule he who is hurt by it is no man.

The shafts or mockery and sarcasm cannot pierce the strong armour of the

self-reliant man. They cannot reach the invincible citadel of his honest heart

to sting or wound it. The sharp arrows of irony may rain upon him, but he

laughs as they are deflected by the strong breast plate of his confidence, and

fall harmless about him.

  “Trust thyself”, says Emerson, ‘every heart vibrates to that iron string”.

Throughout the ages men have so far leaned, and do still lean, upon externalmakeshifts instead of standing upon their own native simplicity and original

dignity. The few who have had the courage to so stand, have been singled out

and elevated as heroes; and he is indeed the true hero who has the hardihood

to let his nature speak for itself, who has that strong metal which enables him

to stand upon his own intrinsic worth.

  It  is  true  that  the  candidate  for  such  heroism  must  endure  the  test  of

strength. He must not be shamed from his ground by the bugbears of an

initiate conventionalist. He must not fear for his reputation or position, or for

his standing in the church or his prestige in local society. He must learn to act

and live as independently of these consideration as he does of the current

fashions in the antipodes. Yet when he has endured this test, and stander and

odium have failed to move or afflict him, he has become a man indeed, one

that society will have to reckon with, and finally accept on his own terms.

  Sooner or later all men will turn or guidance to the self-reliant man, and

while the best minds do not make a prop of him, they respect and value his

work and worth, and recognize his place among the goods that have gone

before.

  It must not be thought an indication of self-reliance to scorn to learn.

Such  an  attitude  is  born  of  a  stubborn  superciliousness  which  has  the

elements of weakness, and is prophetic of a fall, rather than the elements of

strength and the promise of high achievement which are characteristic of self

–  reliance.  Pride  and  vanity  must  not  be  associated  with  self  rests  upon

incidentals  and  appurtenances  –  on  money,  clothing,  property,  prestige,

position  and  these  lost,  all  is  lost.  Self-reliance  rests  upon  essentials  and

principles on worth, probity, purity, sincerity, character, truth and whatever

may be lost is of little account, for these are never lost. Pride tries to hide its

ignorance by ostentation and assumption, and is unwilling to be thought a

learner in any direction. It stands, during its little fleeting day, on ignorance

and appearance, and the higher it is lifted up today the lower it will be cast

down tomorrow. Self-reliance has nothing to hide, and is willing to learn; and

while there can be no humility where pride is, self-reliance and humility are

compatible, nay more, they are complementary, and the sublimes form of

self-reliance  is  only  found  associated  with  the  profoundest  humility.

“Extremes  meet”  says  Emerson  “and  there  is  no  better  example  than  the

haughtiness of humility. No aristocrat, no prince born to the purple, can beginto compare with the self-respect of the saint. Why is he so lowly, but that he

knows that he can well afford it, resting on the largeness of God in him?” It

was Buddha who, I this particular, said; - “Those who, either now or after I

am dead, shall be a lamp unto themselves, relying upon themselves only and

not relying upon any external help, but holding fast to the truth as their lamp,

and seeking their salvation in the truth alone, shall not look for assistance to

any one beside themselves, it is they, among my disciples, who shall reach

the very top mist height. But they must be willing to learn”. In this saying,

the repeated insistence on the necessity for relying upon one’s self alone,

coupled with the final exhortation to be eager to learn, is the wisest utterance

on self-reliance that I know. In it, the Great Teacher comprehends that perfect

balance between self-trust and humility which the man of truth must acquire.

  “Self – trust is the essence of heroism”. All great men are self-reliant, and

we  should  use  them  as  teachers  and  exemplars  and  not  as  props  and

perambulators. A great man comes who leans upon no one, but stands alone

in the solitary dignity of truth, and straightway the world begins to lean upon

him, begins to make him an excuse for spiritual indolence and a destructive

self-abasement. Better than cradling our vices in the strength of the great

would it be to newly light our virtues at their luminous lamp. If we rely upon

the light of another, darkness will overtake us, but if we rely upon our own

light we have but to keep it burning. We may both draw light from another

and communicate it, but to think it sufficient while our own lamp is rusting in

neglect, is shortly to find ourselves abandoned in darkness. Our own inner

light is the light which never fails us.

  What  is  the  “inner  light”  of  the  Quakers  but  another  name  for  self-

reliance? We should stand upon what we are, not upon what another is. “But

I  am  so  small  and  poor”,  you  say:  well,  stand  upon  that  smallness,  and

presently it will become great. A babe must needs suckle and cling, but not so

man. Henceforth he goes upon his own limbs. Men pray to God to put into

their hands that which they are framed to reach out for; to put into their

mouth  the  food  for  which  they  should  strenuously  labour.  But  men  will

outgrow this spiritual infancy. The time will come when men will no more

pay a priest to pray for them and preach to them.

  Man’s chief trouble is a mistrust of himself, so that the self trusting man

becomes  a  rare  and  singular  spectacle.  If  a  man  look  upon  himself  as  a“worm”, what can come out of him but an ineffectual wriggling. Truly, “He

that humbleth shall be exalted,” but not he that regardeth himself. A man

should see himself as he is, and if there is any unworthiness in him, he should

get rid of it, and retain and rely upon that which is of worth. A man is only

debased when he debases himself; he is exalted when he lives an exalted life.

  Why should a man, with ceaseless iterations, draw attention to his fallen

nature? There is a false humility which takes a sort of pride in vice. If one has

fallen, it is that he may rise and be the wiser for it. if a man falls into a ditch,

he does not lie there and call upon every passer-by to mark his fallen state, he

gets up and goes on his way with greater care. So if one has fallen into the

ditch of vice, let him rise and be cleansed, and go on his way rejoicing.

  There is not a sphere in life wherein a man’s influence and prosperity will

not be considerably increased by even a measure of self-reliance, and to the

teacher – whether secular or religious to organizers, managers, overseers, and

in all positions of control and command, it is an indispensable equipment.

  The four grand qualities of self-reliance are:-

  1. Decision

  2. Steadfastness

  3. Dignity

  4. Independence

  Decision makes a man strong. The wearer is the weakling. A man who is

to play a speaking part, however small, in the drama of life must be decisive

and know what he is about. Whatever he doubts, he must not doubt his power

to act. He must know his part in life, and put all his energy into it. He must

have  some  solid  ground  of  knowledge  from  which  to  work,  and  stand

securely on that. It may be only the price and quality of stock, but he must

know his work thoroughly, and know that he knows it. He must be ready at

any time to answer for himself when his duty is impugned. He should be so

well  grounded  upon  his  particular  practice  as  not  to  be  affected  with

hesitation on any point or in any emergence. It is a true saying that “the man

that  hesitates  is  lost”.  No  one  believes  in  him  who  does  not  believe  in

himself, who doubts, halts, and wavers, and cannot extricate himself from the

tangled threads of two courses. Who would deal with a tradesman who did

not know the price of his own goods, or was not sure where to find them? A

man must know his business. If he does not know his own, who shall instructhim? He must be able to give a good report of the truth that is in him, must

have that deceive touch which skill and knowledge only can impart.

    Certainty is a great element in self-reliance. To have weight, a man must

have some truth to impart, and all skill is a communication of truth. He must

“speak with authority, and not as the scribes”. He must master something,

and  know  that  he  has  mastered  it,  so  as  to  deal  with  it  lucidly  and

understandingly,  in  the  way  of  a  master,  and  not  to  remain  always  an

apprentice.

  Indecision is a disintegrating factor. A minute’s faltering may turn back

the  current  of  success.  Men  who  are  afraid  to  decide  quickly  for  fear  of

making a mistake, nearly always makes a mistake when they do act. The

quickest, in thought and action, are less liable to blunder, and it is better to

act with decision and make a mistake than to act with indecision and make a

mistake than to act with indecision and make a mistake, for in the former case

there is but error, but in the latter, weakness is added to error.

  A man should be decided always, both where he knows and where he

does not know. He should be as ready to say “no” as “yes”, as quick to

acknowledge his ignorance as to impart his knowledge. If he stands upon

fact, and acts from the simple truth, he will find no room for halting between

two opinions.

  Make up your mind quickly, and act decisively. Better still, have a mind

that is already made up and then decision will be instinctive and spontaneous.

    Steadfastness arises in the mind that is quick to decide. It is indeed a

final decision upon the best course of conduct and the best path in life. It is

the vow of the soul to stand firmly by its principles whatever betides. It is

neither necessary nor unnecessary that there by any written or spoken vow,

for unswerving loyalty to a fixed principle is the spirit of all vows.

  The man without fixed principles will not accomplish much. Expediency

is a quagmire and a thorny waste, in which a man is continually sticking in

the shifting mud of his own moral looseness, and is pricked and scratched

with the thorns of his self-created disappointments.

  One  must  have  some  solid  ground  on  which  to  stand  among  one’s

fellows. He cannot stand on the bog of concession. Shiftiness is a vice of

weakness, and the vices of weakness do more to undermine character and

influence than the vices of strength. The man that is vicious through excess ofanimal strength takes a shorter cut to truth – when his mind is made up that

he who is vicious through lack of virility, and whose chief vice consists in not

having a mind of his own upon anything. When one understands that power

is  adaptable  to  both  good  and  bad  ends,  it  will  not  surprise  him  that  the

drunkards  and  harlots  should  reach  the  kingdom  of  heaven  before  the

diplomatic religionists. They are at least through in the course which they

have adopted, vile though it be, and thoroughness is strength. It only needs

that strength to be turned from bad to good, and lo! The loathed sinner has

become the lofty saint!

  A man should have a firm, fixed, determined mind. He should decide

upon those principles which are best to stand by in all issues, and which will

most safely guide him through the maze of conflicting opinions, and inspire

him  with  unflinching  courage  in  the  battle  of  life.  Having  adopted  his

principles, they should be more to him than gain or happiness, more even

than life itself, and if he never deserts them he will find that they will never

desert him; they will defend him from all enemies, deliver him safely from all

dangers, light up his pathway through all darkness and difficulties. They will

be to him a light in darkness, a resting place from sorrow, and a refuge from

the conflicts of the world.

  Dignity clothes, as with a majestic garment, the steadfast mind. He who

is as unyielding as a bar of steel when he is expected to compromise with

evil, and as supple as a willow wand in adapting himself to that which is

good, carries about with him a dignity that calms and uplifts others by its

presence.

  The unsteady mind, the mind that is not anchored to any fixed principles,

that is stubborn where its own desires are threatened, and yielding where its

own  moral  welfare  is  at  stake,  has  no  gravity,  no  balance,  no  calm

composure.

  The man of dignity cannot be down-trodden and enslaved, because he has

ceased to tread upon and enslave himself. He at once disarms, with a look, a

word, a wise and suggestive silence, any attempt to demean him. His mere

presence is a wholesome reproof to the flippant and the unseemly, while it is

a rock of strength to the lover of the good.

  But the chief reason why the dignified man commands respect is, not only

that he is supremely self-respecting, but that he graciously treats all otherswith  a  due  esteem.  Pride  loves  itself,  and  treats  those  beneath  it  with

supercilious contempt, for love of self and contempt for others are always

found together in equal degrees, so that the greater the self-love, the greater

the arrogance. True dignity arises, not from self-love, but from self-sacrifice

that is, from unbiased adherence to a fixed central principle. The dignity of

the Judge arises from the fact that in the performance of his duty he sets aside

all  personal  consideration,  and  stands  solely  upon  the  law;  his  little

personality,  impermanent  and  fleeting’  becomes  nothing,  while  the  law,

enduring  and  majestic,  becomes  all.  Should  a  Judge,  in  deciding  a  case,

forget the law, and fall into personal feeling and prejudice, his dignity would

be gone. So with the man of stately purity of character, he stands upon the

divine law, and not upon personal feeling, for immediately a man gives way

to  passion  he  has  sacrificed  dignity,  and  takes  his  place  as  one  of  the

multitude of the unwise and uncontrolled.

  Every man will have composure and dignity in the measure that he acts

from a fixed principle. It only needs that the principle be right, and therefore

unassailable. So long as man abides by such a principle, and does not waver

or  descend  into  the  personal  element,  attacking  passions,  prejudices  and

interests,  however  powerful,  will  be  weak  and  ineffectual  before  the

unconquerable strength of an incorruptible principle, and will at last yield

their combined and unseemly confusion to his single and majestic right.

    Independence is the birth right of the strong and well controlled man.

All men love and strive for liberty. All men aspire to some sort of freedom.

  A man should labour for himself or for the community. Unless he is a

cripple, a chronic invalid, or is mentally irresponsible, he should be ashamed

to depend upon others for all he has, giving nothing in return. If one imagines

that such a condition is freedom, let him know that it is one of the lowest

forms of slavery. The time will come when, to be a drone in the human hive,

even (as matters are now) a respectable drone and not a poor tramp, will be a

public disgrace, and will be no longer respectable.

    Independence, freedom, glorious liberty, come through labour and not

from  idleness,  and  the  self-reliant  man  is  too  strong,  too  honourable,  too

upright to depend upon others, like a sucking babe, for his support. He earns,

with hand or brain, the right to live as becomes a man and a citizen; and this

he does whether born rich or poor, for riches are no excuse for idleness;rather are they an opportunity to labour, with the rare facilities which they

afford, for the good of the community.

  Only he who is self-supporting is free, self-reliant, independent.

  Thus is the nature of the Eight Pillars explained. On what foundation they

rest, the manner of their building, their ingredients, the fourfold nature of the

material of which each is composed, what positions they occupy, and how

they  support  the  Temple,  all  may  now  build;  and  he  who  knew  but

imperfectly  may  know  more  perfectly;  and  he  who  knew  perfectly  may

rejoice  in  this  systematization  and  simplification  of  the  moral  order  in

Prosperity. Let us now consider the Temple itself, that we may know the

might of its Pillars, the strength of its walls, the endurance of its roof, and the

architectural beauty and perfection of the whole.              10. THE TEMPLE OF PROSPERITY


  The  reader  who  has  followed  the  course  of  this  book  with  a  view  to

obtaining information on the details of money making, business transactions,

profit  and  loss  in  various  undertakings,  prices,  markets,  agreements,

contracts, and other matters connected with the achievement of prosperity,

will have noted an entire absence of any instruction on these matters of detail.

The reason for this is fourfold, namely:-

  First. Details cannot stand alone, but are powerless to build up anything

unless intelligently related to principles.

    Second. Details  are  infinite,  and  are  ceaselessly  changing,  while

principles are few, and are eternal and unchangeable.

  Third. Principles are the coherent factors in all details, regulating and

harmonizing them, so that to have right principles is to be right in all the

subsidiary details.

  Fourth. A  teacher  of  truth  in  any  direction must adhere  rigidly  to

principles, and must not allow himself to be drawn away from them into the

ever-changing maze of private particulars and personal details, because such

particulars and details have only a local right, and are only necessary for

certain individuals, while principles are universally right and are necessary

for all men.

  He who grasps the principles of this book so as to be able to intelligently

practice them, will be able to reach the heart of this fourfold reason. The

details of a man’s affairs are important, but they are his details or the details

of  his  particular  branch  of  industry,  and  all  outside  that  branch  are  not

concerned with them, but moral principles are the same for all men; they are

applicable to all conditions, and govern all particulars.

  The man who works from fixed principles does not need to harass himself

over the complications of numerous details. He will grasp, as it were, the

entire details in one single thought, and will see them through and through,

illumined by the light of the principle to which they stand related, and this

without friction, and with freedom from anxiety and strain.

  Until  principles  are  grasped,  details  are  regarded,  and  dealt  with,  as

primary matters, and so viewed they lead to innumerable complications andconfused issues. In the light of principles, they are seen to be secondary facts,

and so seen, all difficulties connected with them are at once overcome and

annulled by a reference to principles.

  He  who  is  involved  in  numerous  details  without  the  regulating  and

synthesizing element of principles is like one lost in a forest, with no direct

path along which to walk amid the mass of objects. He is swelled up by the

details, while the man of principles contains all details within himself; he

stands outside them, as it were, and grasps them in their entirety, while the

other man can only see the few that are nearest to him at the time.

  All things are contained in principles. They are the laws of things, and all

things observe their own law. It is an error to view things apart from their

nature. Details are the letter of which principles are the spirit. It is as true in

art, science, literature, commerce, as in religion, that “the letter killeth, the

spirit of giveth life.” The body of a man, with its wonderful combination of

parts,  is  important,  but  only  in  its  relation  to  the  spirit.  The  spirit  being

withdrawn, the body is useless and is put away. The body of a business, with

all its complicated details is important, but only in its relation to the vivifying

principles  by  which  it  is  controlled.  These  withdrawn,  the  business  will

perish.

  To have the body of prosperity – its material presentation – we must first

have the spirit of prosperity, and the spirit of prosperity is the quick spirit of

moral virtue. Moral blindness prevails. Men see money, property, pleasure,

leisure, etc., and, mistaking them for prosperity, strive to get them for their

own enjoyment, but, when obtained, they find no enjoyment in them.

  Prosperity is at first a spirit, an attitude of mind, a moral power, a life,

which manifests outwardly in the form of plenty, happiness, joy. Just as a

man cannot become a genius by writing poems, essay as plays, but must

develop and acquire the soul of genius – when the writing will follow as

effect to cause-so one cannot become prosperous by hoarding up money, and

by gaining property and possessions, but must develop and acquire the soul

of virtue, when the material accessories will follow as effect to cause, for the

spirit of virtue is the spirit of joy, and it contains within itself all abundance,

all satisfaction, all fullness of life.

  There is no joy in money, there is no joy in property, there is no joy in

material accumulations or in any material things of itself. These things aredead and lifeless. The spirit of joy must be in the man or it is nowhere. He

must have within him the capacity for happiness. He must have the wisdom

to  know  how  to  use  these  things,  and  not  merely  hoard  them.  He  must

possess them, and not be possessed by them. They must be dependent upon

him, and not he upon them. They must be dependent upon him, and not he

upon them. They must follow him, and not be for ever be running after them;

and they will inevitably follow him, if he has the moral elements within to

which they are related.

  Nothing is absent from the Kingdom of heaven; it contains all good, true,

and necessary things, and “the Kingdom of God is within you.” I know rich

people who are supremely happy, because they are generous, magnanimous,

pure and joyful; but I also know rich people who are very miserable, and

these are they who looked to money and possessions for their happiness, and

have not developed the spirit of good and of joy within themselves.

  How can it be said of a wretched man that he is “prosperous”, even if his

income be ten thousand pounds a year? There must be fitness, and harmony,

and satisfaction in a true prosperity. When a rich man is happy, it is that he

brought the spirit of happiness to his riches, and not that the riches brought

happiness  to  him.  He  is  a  full  man  with  full  material  advantages  and

responsibilities, while the miserable rich man is an empty man looking to

riches for that fullness of life which can only be evolved from within.

  Thus prosperity resolves itself into a moral capacity, and in the wisdom to

rightfully use and lawfully enjoy the material things which are inseparable

from  our  earthly  life.  If  one  would  be  free  without,  let  him  first  be  free

within, for if he be bound in a spirit by weakness, selfishness, or vice, how

can the possession of money liberate him! Will it not rather become, in his

hands, a ready instrument by which to further enslave himself?

  The visible effects of prosperity, then, must not be considered alone, but

in their relation to the mental and moral cause. There is a hidden foundation

to every building; the fact that it continues to stands is proof of that. There is

a hidden foundation to every form of established success; its permanence

proves that it is so. Prosperity stands on the foundation of character, and

there is not, in all the wide universe, any other foundation. True wealth is

weal,  welfare,  well-being,  soundness,  wholeness,  and  happiness.  The

wretched  rich  are  not  truly  wealthy.  They  are  merely  encumbered  withmoney,  luxury,  and  leisure,  as  instruments  of  self  torture.  By  their

possessions they are self-cursed.

  The moral man is ever blessed, ever happy, and his life, viewed as a

whole,  is  always  a  success.  To  these  there  is  no  exception,  for  whatever

failures he may have in detail, the finished work of his life will be sound,

whole,  complete;  and  through  all  he  will  have  a  quiet  conscience,  an

honourable  name,  and  all  manifold  blessings  which  are  inseparable  from

richness of character, and without this moral richness, financial riches will

not avail or satisfy.

  Let  us  briefly  recapitulate,  and  again  view  the  Eight  Pillars  in  their

strength and splendour.

  Energy – Rousing one’s self up to strenuous and unremitting exertion in

the accomplishment of one’s task.

    Economy – Concentration of power, the conservation of both capital and

character,  the  latter  being  mental  capital,  and  therefore  of  the  utmost

importance.

  Integrity  – Unswerving  honesty;  keeping  inviolate  all  promises,

agreements, and contracts, apart from all considerations of loss or gain.

  System – Making all details, subservient to order, and thereby relieving

the memory and the mind of superfluous work and strain by reducing many

to one.

    Sympathy – Magnanimity, generosity, gentleness, and tenderness; being

open handed, free, and kind.

  Sincerity  – Being sound and whole, robust and true; and therefore not

being one person in public and another in private, and not assuming good

actions openly while doing bad actions in secret.

    Impartiality – Justice; not striving for self, but weighing both sides, and

acting in accordance with equity.

  Self – Reliance – Looking to one’s self only for strength and support by

standing on principles which are fixed and invincible, and not relying upon

outward things which at any moment may be snatched away.

  How can any life be other than successful which is built on these Eight

Pillars? Their strength is such that no physical or intellectual strength can

compare with it; and to have built all the eight perfectly would render a maninvincible. It will be found, however, that men are often strong in one or

several of these qualities, and weak in others, and it is this weak element that

invites  failure.  It  is  foolish,  for  instance,  to  attribute  a  man’s  failure  in

business to his honest. It is impossible for honesty to produce failure. The

cause of failure must be looked for in some other direction – in the lack, and

not  the  possession,  of  some  good  necessary  quality.  Moreover,  such

attribution of failure to honesty is a slur on the integrity of commerce; and a

false  indictment  of  those  men,  numerous  enough,  who  are  honourably

engaged in trade. A man may be strong in Energy, Economy, and System, but

comparatively weak in the other five. Such a man will just fail of complete

success  by  lacking  one  of  the  four  corner  pillars,  namely,  Integrity.  His

temple will give way at that weak corner, for the first four Pillars must be

well built before the Temple of Prosperity can stand secure. They are the first

qualities to be acquired in a man’s moral evolution, and without them the

second four cannot be possessed. Again, if a man be strong in the first three,

and lack the fourth, the absence of order will invite confusion and disaster

into his affairs; and so on with any partial combination of these qualities,

especially of the first four, for the second four are of so lofty a character that

at present men can but possess them, with rare exceptions, in a more or less

imperfect form. The man of the world, then, who wishes to secure an abiding

success in any branch of commerce, or in one of the many lines of industry in

which  men  are  commonly  engaged, must build  into  his  character,  by

practice,  the  first  four  moral  Pillars.  By  these  fixed  principles  he  must

regulate his thought, his conduct, and his affairs; consulting them in every

difficulty, making every detail serve them, and above all, never deserting

them under any circumstance to gain some personal advantage or to

save  some  personal  trouble, for to so desert them is to make one’s self

vulnerable to the disintegrating elements of evil, and to become assailable to

accusations  from  others.  He  who  so  abides  by  these  four  principles  will

achieve a full measure of success in his own particular work, whatever it may

be; his Temple of Prosperity will be well built and well supported, and it will

stand secure. The perfect practice of these four principles is within the scope

of all men who are willing to study them with that object in view, for they are

so  simple  and  plain  that  a  child  could  grasp  their  meaning,  and  their

perfection in conduct does not call for an unusual degree of self-sacrifice,

though it demands some self-denial and personal discipline without whichthere  can  be  no  success  in  this  world  of  action.  The  second  four  pillars,

however,  are  principles  of  a  more  profound  nature,  are  more  difficult  to

understand and practice, and call from the highest degree of self-sacrifice and

self-effacement. Few, at present, can reach that detachment from the personal

element which their perfect practice demands, but the few who accomplish

this in any marked degree will vastly enlarge their powers and enrich their

life, and will adorn their Temple of Prosperity with a singular and attractive

beauty which will gladden and elevate all beholders long after they have

passed away.

  But  those  who  are  beginning  to  build  their  Temple  of  Prosperity  in

accordance with the teaching of this book, must bear in mind that a building

requires time to erect, and it must be patiently raised up, brick upon brick and

stone upon stone, and the Pillars must be firmly fixed and cemented, and

labour and care will be needed to make the whole complete. And the building

of this inner mental Temple is none the less real and substantial because

invisible and noiseless, for in the raising up of his, as of Solomon’s Temple

which was “seven years in building” – it can be said, “there was neither

hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in the

building”.

  Even so, oh reader construct thy character, raise up the house of thy life,

build up thy Temple of Prosperity. Be not as the foolish who rise and fall

upon the uncertain flux of selfish desires: but be at peace in thy labour, crown

thy  career  with  completeness,  and  so  be  numbered  among  the  wise  who,

without uncertainty, build upon a fixed and secure foundation – even upon

the Principles of Truth which endure for ever.                            BOOK NINE


              FOUNDATION STONES TO


        HAPPINESS AND SUCCESS.                              EDITOR’S PREFACE


  This is one of the last MSS. written by James Allen. Like all his works it

is eminently practical. He never wrote theories, or for the sake of writing, or

to add another to his many books; but he wrote when he had a message, and it

became a message only when he had lived it out in his own life, and

knew  that  it  was  good.  Thus  he  wrote facts,  which  he  had  proven  by

practice.

  To live out the teaching of this book faithfully in every detail of life will

lead  one  to  more  than  happiness  and  success  —  even  to  Blessedness,

Satisfaction and Peace.

  LILY L. ALLEN

    “Bryngoleu,”

    Ilfracombe,

    England.                                  FOREWORD


  How does a man begin the building of a house? He first secures a plan of

the  proposed  edifice,  and  then  proceeds  to  build  according  to  the  plan,

scrupulously  following  it  in  every  detail,  beginning  with  the  foundation.

Should he neglect the beginning - the beginning on a mathematical plan - his

labour would be wasted, and his building, should it reach completion without

tumbling to pieces, would be insecure and worthless. The same law holds

good  in  any  important  work;  the  right  beginning  and  first  essential  is a

definite mental plan on which to build.

  Nature will have no slipshod work, no slovenliness and she annihilates

confusion, or rather, confusion is in itself annihilated. Order, definiteness,

purpose,  eternally  prevail,  and  he  who  in  his  operations  ignores  these

mathematical  elements  at  once  deprives  himself  of  substantiality,

completeness, happiness and success.

  JAMES ALLEN                      1. RIGHT PRINCIPLES


  It  is  wise  to  know  what  comes  first,  and  what  to  do  first.  To  begin

anything in the middle or at the end is to make a muddle of it. The athlete

who began by breaking the tape would not receive the prize. He must begin

by  facing  the  starter  and  toeing  the  mark,  and  even  then  a  good  start  is

important if he is to win. The pupil does not begin with algebra and literature,

but with counting and ABC. So in life – the businessmen who begin at the

bottom achieve the more enduring success; and the religious men who reach

the highest heights of spiritual knowledge and wisdom are they who have

stooped to serve a patient apprenticeship to the humbler tasks, and have not

scorned the common experiences of humanity, or overlooked the lessons to

be learned from them.

  The  first  things  in  a  sound  life  -  and  therefore,  in  a  truly  happy  and

successful life - are right principles. Without right principles to begin with,

there will be wrong practices to follow with, and a bungled and wretched life

to  end  with.  All  the  infinite  variety  of  calculations  which  tabulate  the

commerce  and  science  of  the  world,  come  out  of  the  ten  figures;  all  the

hundreds of thousands of books which constitute the literature of the world,

and perpetuate its thought and genius, are built up from the twenty-six letters.

The  greatest  astronomer  cannot  ignore  the  ten  simple  figures.  The

profoundest  man  of  genius  cannot  dispense  with  the  twenty-six  simple

characters. The fundamentals in all things are few and simple: yet without

them there is no knowledge and no achievement. The fundamentals - the

basic principles - in life, or true living, are also few and simple, and to learn

them thoroughly, and study how to apply them to all the details of life, is to

avoid  confusion,  and  to  secure  a  substantial  foundation  for  the  orderly

building  up  of  an  invincible  character  and  a  permanent  success;  and  to

succeed in comprehending those principles in their innumerable ramifications

in the labyrinth of conduct, is to become a Master of Life.

  The first principles in life are principles of conduct. To name them is

easy. As mere words they are on all men’s lips, but as fixed sources of action,

admitting of no compromise, few have learned them. In this short talk I willdeal with five only of these principles. These five are among the simplest of

the root principles of life, but they are those that come nearest to the everyday

life, for they touch the artisan the businessman, the householder, the citizen at

every point. Not one of them can be dispensed with but at severe cost, and he

who perfects himself in their application will rise superior to many of the

troubles and failures of life, and will come into these springs and currents of

thought which flow harmoniously towards the regions of enduring success.

The first of these principles is -

  DUTY - A much-hackneyed word, I know, but it contains a rare jewel for

him who will seek it by assiduous application. The principle of duty means

strict adherence to one’s own business, and just as strict non-interference in

the business of others. The man who is continually instructing others, gratis,

how to manage their affairs, is the one who most mismanages his own. Duty

also means undivided attention to the matter in hand, intelligent concentration

of  the  mind  on  the  work  to  be  done;  it  includes  all  that  is  meant  by

thoroughness,  exactness,  and  efficiency.  The  details  of  duties  differ  with

individuals, and each man should know his own duty better then he knows

his neighbour’s, and better than his neighbour knows his; but although the

working details differ, the principle is always the same. Who has mastered

the demands of duty?

    HONESTY is the next principle. It means not cheating or overcharging

another. It involves the absence of all trickery, lying, and deception by word,

look, or gesture. It includes sincerity, the saying what you mean, and the

meaning what you say. It scorns cringing policy and shining compliment. It

builds up good reputations, and good reputations build up good businesses,

and bright joy accompanies well-earned success. Who has scaled the heights

of Honesty?

    ECONOMY is the third principle. The conservation of one’s financial

resources  is  merely  the  vestibule  leading  towards  the  more  spacious

chambers  of  true  economy.  It  means,  as  well,  the  husbanding  of  one’s

physical vitality and mental resources. It demands the conservation of energy

by the avoidance of enervating self-indulgences and sensual habits. It holds

for its follower strength, endurance, vigilance, and capacity to achieve. It

bestows  great  power  on  him  who  learns  it  well.  Who  has  realized  the

supreme strength of Economy?    LIBERALITY follows economy. It is not opposed to it. Only the man of

economy  can  afford  to  be  generous.  The  spendthrift,  whether  in  money,

vitality, or mental energy, wasted so much on his own miserable pleasures as

to have none left to bestow upon others. The giving of money is the smallest

part of liberality. There is a giving of thoughts, and deeds, and sympathy, the

bestowing  of  goodwill,  the  being  generous  towards  calumniators  and

opponents.  It  is  a  principle  that  begets  a  noble,  far-reaching  influence.  It

brings loving friends and staunch comrades, and is the foe of loneliness and

despair. Who has measured the breadth of Liberality?

    SELF–CONTROL  is  the  last  of  these  five  principles,  yet  the  most

important. Its neglect is the cause of vast misery, innumerable failures, and

tens of thousands of financial, physical, and mental wrecks. Show me the

businessman who loses his temper with a customer over some trivial matter,

and I will show you a man who, by that condition of mind, is doomed to

failure. If all men practised even the initial stages of self-control, anger, with

its  consuming  and  destroying  fire,  would  be  unknown.  The  lessons  of

patience, purity, gentleness, kindness, and steadfastness, which are contained

in the principle of self-control, are slowly learned by men, yet until they are

truly learned a man’s character and success are uncertain and insecure. Where

is the man who has perfected himself in Self-Control? Where he may be, he

is a master indeed.

  The five principles are five practices, five avenues to achievement, and

five source of knowledge. It is an old saying and a good rule that “Practice

makes  perfect,”  and  he  who  would  make  his  own  the  wisdom  which  is

inherent in those principles, must not merely have them on his lips, they must

be established in his heart. To know them and receive what they alone can

bring, he must do them, and give them out in his actions.                            2. SOUND METHODS


  From  the  five  foregoing  Right  Principles,  when  they  are  truly

apprehended and practised, will issue Sound Methods. Right principles are

manifested in harmonious action, and method is to life what law is to the

universe. Everywhere in the universe there is the harmonious adjustment of

parts,  and  it  is  this  symmetry  and  harmony  that  reveals  a  cosmos,  as

distinguished from chaos. So in human life, the difference between a true life

and a false, between one purposeful and effective and one purposeless and

weak, is one of method. The false life is an incoherent jumble of thoughts,

passions, and actions; the true life is an orderly adjustment of all its parts. It is

all the difference between a mass of lumber and a smoothly working efficient

machine. A piece of machinery in perfect working order is not only a useful,

but an admirable and attractive thing; but when its parts are all out of gear,

and refuse to be readjusted, its usefulness and attractiveness are gone, and it

is thrown on the scrap-heap. Likewise a life perfectly adjusted in all its parts

so as to achieve the highest point of efficiency, is not only a powerful, but an

excellent  and  beautiful  thing;  whereas  a  life  confused,  inconsistent,

discordant, is a deplorable exhibition of wasted energy.

  If life is to be truly lived, method must enter into, and regulate, every

detail of it, as it enters and regulates every detail of the wondrous universe of

which we form a part. One of the distinguishing differences between a wise

man and a foolish is, that the wise man pays careful attention to the smallest

things, while the foolish man slurs over them, or neglects them altogether.

Wisdom consists in maintaining things on their right relations, in keeping all

things, the smallest as well as the greatest, in their proper places and times.

To violate order is to produce confusion and discord, and unhappiness is

but another name for discord.

  The good businessman knows that system is three parts of success, and

that disorder means failure. The wise man knows that disciplined, methodical

living is three parts of happiness, and that looseness means misery. What is a

fool but one who thinks carelessly, acts rashly, and lives loosely? What is a

wise man but one who thinks carefully, acts calmly, and lives consistently?

  The  true  method  does  not  end  with  the  orderly  arrangement  of  the

material things and external relations of life; this is but its beginning; it entersinto  the  adjustment  of  the  mind  -  the  discipline  of  the  passions,  the

elimination and choice of words in speech, the logical arrangement of the

thoughts, and the selection of right actions.

  To achieve a life rendered sound, successful, and sweet by the pursuance

of  sound  methods,  one  must  begin,  not  by  neglect  of  the  little  everyday

things,  but  by  assiduous  attention  to  them.  Thus  the  hour  of  rising  is

important, and its regularity significant; as also are the timing of retiring to

rest, and the number of hours given to sleep. Between the regularity and

irregularity of meals, and the care and carelessness with which they are eaten,

is all the difference between a good and bad digestion (with all that this

applies) and an irritable or comfortable frame of mind, with its train of good

or bad consequences, for, attaching to these meal-times and meal-ways are

matters  of  both  physiological  and  psychological  significance.  The  due

division of hours for business and for play, not confusing the two, the orderly

fitting in of all the details of one’s business, times for solitude, for silent

thought  and  for  effective  action,  for  eating  and  for  abstinence  -  all  these

things must have their lawful place in the life of him whose “daily round” is

to proceed with the minimum degree of friction, who is to get the most of

usefulness, influence, and joy out of life.

  But all this is but the beginning of that comprehensive method which

embraces  the  whole  life  and  being.  When  this  smooth  order  and  logical

consistency is extended to the words and actions, to the thoughts and desires,

then wisdom emerges from folly, and out of weakness comes power sublime.

When a man so orders his mind as to produce a beautiful working harmony

between  all  its  parts,  then  he  reaches  the  highest  wisdom,  the  highest

efficiency, the highest happiness.

  But this is the end; and he who would reach the end must begin at the

beginning. He must systematise and render logical and smooth the smallest

details  of  his  life,  proceeding  step  by  step  towards  the  finished

accomplishment.  But  each  step  will  yield  its  own  particular  measure  of

strength and gladness.

  To sum up, method produces that smoothness which goes with strength

and efficiency. Discipline is method applied to the mind. It produces that

calmness which goes with power and happiness. Method is working by rule;

discipline is living by rule. But working and living are not separate; they arebut two aspects of character, of life.

    Therefore,  be  orderly  in  work;  be  accurate  in  speech,  be  logical  in

thought. Between these and slovenliness, inaccuracy and confusion, is the

difference  between  success  and  failure,  music  and  discord,  happiness  and

misery.

  The adoption of sound methods of working, acting, thinking – in a word,

of living, is the surest and safest foundation for sound health, sound success,

sound peace of mind. The foundation of unsound methods will be found to be

unstable, and to yield fear and unrest even while it appears to succeed, and

when its time of failure comes, it is grievous indeed.                          3. TRUE ACTIONS


  Following on Right Principles and Methods come True Actions. One who

is striving to grasp true principles and work with sound methods will soon

come to perceive that details of conduct cannot be overlooked - that, indeed,

those  details  are  fundamentally  distinctive  or  creative,  according  to  their

nature,  and  are,  therefore,  of  deep  significance  and  comprehensive

importance; and this perception and knowledge of the nature and power of

passing actions will gradually open and grow within him as an added vision,

a new revelation. As he acquires this insight his progress will be more rapid,

his pathway in life more sure, his days more serene and peaceful; in all things

he will go the true and direct way, unswayed and untroubled by the external

forces that play around and about him. Not that he will be indifferent to the

welfare and happiness of those about him; that is quite another thing; but he

will be indifferent to their opinions, to their ignorance, to their ungoverned

passions. By True  Actions, indeed, is meant acting rightly towards others,

and the right-doer knows that actions in accordance with truth are but for the

happiness of those about him, and he will do them even though an occasion

may arise when some one near to him may advise or implore him to do

otherwise.

  True actions may easily be distinguished from false by all who wish so to

distinguish in order that they may avoid false action, and adopt true. As in the

material  world  we  distinguish  things  by  their  form,  colour,  size,  etc.,

choosing those things which we require, and putting by those things which

are not useful to us, so in the spiritual world of deeds, we can distinguish

between those that are bad and those that are good by their nature, their aim,

and their effect and can choose and adopt those that are good, and ignore

those that are bad.

  In  all  forms  of  progress, avoidance  of  the  bad always  precedes

acceptance and knowledge of the good, just as a child at school learns to

do its lessons right by having repeatedly pointed out to it how it has done

them wrong. If one does not know what is wrong and how to avoid it, how

can he know what is right and how to practise it? Bad, or untrue, actions arethose  that  spring  from  a  consideration  of  one’s  own  happiness  only,  and

ignore the happiness of others, that arise in violent disturbances of the mind

and  unlawful  desires,  or  that  call  for  concealment  in  order  to  avoid

undesirable complications. Good or true actions are those that spring from a

consideration for others, that arise in calm reason and harmonious thought

framed  on  moral  principles  or  that  will  not  involve  the  doer  in  shameful

consequences if brought into the full light of day.

  The right-doer will avoid those acts of personal pleasure and gratification

which by their nature bring annoyance, pain, or suffering to others, no matter

how insignificant those actions may appear to be. He will begin by putting

away  these;  he  will  gain  a  knowledge  of  the  unselfish  and  true  by  first

sacrificing the selfish and untrue. He will learn not to speak or act in anger, or

envy, or resentment, but will study how to control his mind, and will restore

it to calmness before acting; and, most important of all, he will avoid, as he

would the drinking of deadly poison, those acts of trickery, deceit, double-

dealing, in order to gain some personal profit of advantage, and which lead,

sooner or later, to exposure and shame for the doer of them. If a man is

prompted to do a thing which he needs to conceal, and which he would not

lawfully and frankly defend if it were examined of witness, he should know

by that that it is a wrong act and therefore to be abandoned without a further

moment’s consideration.

  The carrying out of this principle of honesty and sincerity of action, too,

will further lead him into such a path of thoughtfulness in right-doing as will

enable  him  to  avoid  doing  those  things  which  would  involve  him  in  the

deceptive practices of other people. Before signing papers, or entering into

verbal or written arrangements, or engaging himself to others in any way at

their request, particularly if they be strangers, he will first inquire into the

nature of the work or undertaking, and so, enlightened, he will know exactly

what to do, and will be fully aware of the import of his action. To the right-

doer thoughtlessness is  a  crime.  Thousands  of  actions  done  with  good

intent  lead  to  disastrous  consequences  because  they  are  acts  of

thoughtlessness, and it is well said “that the way to hell is paved with good

intentions.” The man of true actions is, above all things, thoughtful:- “Be ye

therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves.”

  The term Thoughtlessness covers a wide field in the realm of deeds. Itis only by increasing in thoughtfulness that a man can come to understand the

nature of actions, and can, thereby, acquire the power of always doing that

which is right. It is impossible for a man to be thoughtful and act foolishly.

Thoughtfulness embraces wisdom.

  It is not enough that an action is prompted by a good impulse or intention;

it must arise in thoughtful consideration if it is to be a true action; and the

man who wishes to be permanently happy in himself and a power for good to

others must concern himself only with true actions. “I did it with the best of

intentions,”  is  a  poor  excuse  from  one  who  has  thoughtlessly  involved

himself in the wrong-doing of others. His bitter experience should teach him

to act more thoughtfully in the future.

  True actions can only spring from a true mind, and therefore while a man

is learning to distinguish and choose between the false and the true, he is

correcting  and  perfecting  his  mind,  and  is  thereby  rendering  it  more

harmonious and felicitous, more efficient and powerful. As he acquires the

“inner eye” to clearly distinguish the right in all the details of life, and the

faith and knowledge to do it, he will realise that he is building the house of

his character and life upon a rock which the winds of failure and the storms

of persecution can never undermine.                                4. TRUE SPEECH


  Truth  is  known  by  practice  only.  Without  sincerity  there  can  be  no

knowledge of Truth; and true speech is the beginning of all sincerity. Truth in

all its native beauty and original simplicity consists in abandoning and not

doing all those things which are untrue, and in embracing and doing all those

things  which  are  true.  True  speech  is  therefore  one  of  the  elementary

beginnings in the life of Truth. Falsehood, and all forms of deception; slander

and  all  forms  of  evil-speaking  -  these  must  be  totally  abandoned  and

abolished  before  the  mind  can  receive  even  a  small  degree  of  spiritual

enlightenment.  The  liar  and  slanderer  is  lost  in  darkness;  so  deep  is  his

darkness that he cannot distinguish between good and evil, and he persuades

himself that his lying and evil-speaking are necessary and good, that he is

thereby protecting himself and other people.

  Let the would-be student of “higher things” look to himself and beware of

self-delusion. If he is given to uttering words that deceive, or to speaking evil

of others – if he speaks in insincerity, envy, or malice - then he has not yet

begun to study higher things. He may be studying metaphysics, or miracles,

or  psychic  phenomena,  or  astral  wonders  –  he  may  be  studying  how  to

commune with invisible beings, to travel invisibly during sleep, or to produce

curious phenomena - he may even study spirituality theoretically and as a

mere book study, but if he is a deceiver and a backbiter, the higher life is

hidden from him. For the higher things are these – uprightness, sincerity,

innocence,  purity,  kindness,  gentleness,  faithfulness,  humility,

patience, pity, sympathy, self-sacrifice, joy, goodwill, love – and he

who would study them, know them, and make them his own, must practice

them, there is no other way.

  Lying and evil-speaking belong to the lowest forms of spiritual ignorance,

and  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  spiritual  enlightenment  while  they  are

practised. Their parents are selfishness and hatred.

  Slander is akin to lying, but it is even more subtle, as it is frequently

associated  with  indignation,  and  by  assuming  more  successfully  the

appearance  of  truth,  it  ensnares  many  who  would  not  tell  a  deliberate

falsehood.  For  there  are  two  sides  to  slander  -  there  is the  making  of

repeating of it, and there is the listening to it and acting upon it. Theslanderer would be powerless without a listener. Evil words require an ear

that is receptive to evil in which they may fall, before they can flourish;

therefore he who listens to a slanderer, who believes it, and allows himself to

be influenced against the person whose character and reputation are defamed,

is in the same position as the one who framed or repeated the evil report. The

evil-speaker is a positive slanderer; the evil-listener is a passive slanderer.

The two are co-operators in the propagation of evil.

  Slander is a common vice and a dark and deadly one. An evil report

begins in ignorance, and pursues its blind way in darkness. It generally takes

its rise in a misunderstanding. Some one feels that he or she has been badly

treated, and, filled with indignation and resentment, unburdens himself to his

friends and others in vehement language, exaggerating the enormity of the

supposed  offence  on  account  of  the  feeling  of  injury  by  which  he  is

possessed;  he  is  listened  to  and  sympathised  with;  the  listeners,  without

hearing the  other  person’s version of what has taken place, and on no

other proof than the violent words of an angry man or woman, become cold

in their attitude towards the one spoken against, and repeat to others what

they have been told, and as such repetition is always more or less inaccurate,

a distorted and altogether untrue report is soon passing from mouth to mouth.

  It is because slander is such a common vice that it can work the suffering

and injury that it does. It is because so many (not deliberate wrong-doers, and

unconscious of the nature of the evil into which they so easily fall) are ready

to allow themselves to be influenced against one whom they have hitherto

regarded as honourable, that an evil report can do its deadly work. Yet its

work is only amongst those who have not altogether acquired the virtue of

true speech, the cause of which is a truth-loving mind. When one who has not

entirely  freed  himself  from  repeating  or  believing  an  evil  report  about

another, hears of an evil report about himself, his mind becomes aflame with

burning resentment, his sleep is broken and his peace of mind is destroyed.

He thinks the cause of all his suffering is in the other man and what that man

has said about him, and is ignorant of the truth that the root and cause of

his  suffering  lies  in  his  own  readiness  to  believe  an  evil  report

about another. The virtuous man - he who has attained to true speech, and

whose mind is sealed against even the appearance of evil-speaking - cannot

be  injured  and  disturbed  about  any  evil  reports  concerning  himself;  andalthough his reputation may for a time be stained in  the  minds  of  those

who  are  prone  to  suggestions  of  evil, his integrity remains untouched

and his character unsoiled; for no one can be stained by the evil deeds of

another,  but  only  by  his  own  wrongdoing.  And  so,  through  all

misrepresentation, misunderstanding, and contumely, he is untroubled and

unrevengeful; his sleep is undisturbed, and his mind remains in peace.

  True speech is the beginning of a pure, wise and well-ordered life. If one

would attain to purity of life, if he would lessen the evil and suffering of the

world, let him abandon falsehood and slander in thought and word, let him

avoid even the appearance of these things, for there are no lies and slanders

so deadly as those which are half-truths, and let him not be a participant in

evil-speaking by listening to it. Let him also have compassion on the evil-

speaker, knowing how such a one is binding himself to suffering and unrest;

for no liar can know the bliss of Truth; no slanderer can enter the kingdom of

peace.

  By the words which he utters is a man’s spiritual condition declared; by

these also is he finally and infallibly adjudged, for as the Divine Master of the

Christian world has declared, “By thy words shalt thou be justified, and by

thy words shalt thou be condemned.                        5. EQUAL-MINDEDNESS


  To be equally-minded is to be peacefully-minded, for a man cannot be

said to have arrived at peace who allows his mind to be disturbed and thrown

off the balance by occurrences.

  The  man  of  wisdom  is  dispassionate,  and  meets  all  things  with  the

calmness of a mind in repose and free from prejudice. He is not a partisan,

having put away passion, and he is always at peace with himself and the

world, not taking sides nor defending himself, but sympathising with all.

  The partisan is so convinced that his own opinion and his own side is

right, and all that goes contrary to them is wrong, that he cannot think there is

any good in the other opinion and the other side. He lives in a continual fever

of attack and defence, and has no knowledge of the quiet peace of an equal

mind.

  The equal-minded man watches himself in order to check and overcome

even the appearance of passion and prejudice in his mind, and by so doing he

develops sympathy for others, and comes to understand their position and

particular state of mind; and as he comes to understand others, he perceives

the  folly  of  condemning  them  and  opposing  himself  to  them.  Thus  there

grows up in his heart a divine charity which cannot be limited, but which is

extended to all things that live and strive and suffer.

  When a man is under the sway of passion and prejudice he is spiritually

blind. Seeing nothing but good in his own side, and nothing but evil in the

other, he cannot see anything as it really is, not even his own side; and not

understanding himself, he cannot understand the hearts of others, and thinks

it is right that he should condemn them. Thus there grows up in his heart a

dark hatred for those who refuse to see with him and who condemn him in

return, he becomes separated from his fellow-men, and confines himself to a

narrow torture chamber of his own making.

  Sweet  and  peaceful  are  the  days  of  the  equal-minded  man,  fruitful  in

good, and rich in manifold blessings. Guided by wisdom, he avoids those

pathways which lead down to hatred and sorrow and pain, and takes those

which lead up to love and peace and bliss. The occurrences of life do not

trouble  him,  nor  does  he  grieve  over  those  things  which  are  regarded  by

mankind as grievous, but which must befall all men in the ordinary course ofnature. He is neither elated by success nor cast down by failure. He sees the

events of his life arrayed in their proper proportions, and can find no room for

selfish  wishes  or  vain  regrets,  for  vain  anticipations  and  childish

disappointments.

  And how is this equal-mindedness - this blessed state of mind and life -

acquired? Only by overcoming one’s self, only by purifying one’s own heart,

for the purification of the heart leads to unbiased comprehension, unbiased

comprehension  leads  to  equal-mindedness,  and  equal-mindedness  leads  to

peace. The impure man is swept helplessly away on the waves of passion; the

pure man guides himself into the harbour of rest. The fool says, “I have an

opinion;” the wise man goes about his business.                              6. GOOD RESULTS


  A considerable portion of the happenings of life comes to us without any

direct choosing on our part, and such happenings are generally regarded as

having no relation to our will or character, but as appearing fortuitously; as

occurring  without  a  cause.  Thus  one  is  spoken  of  as  being  “lucky,”  and

another  “unlucky,”  the  inference  being  that  each  has  received  something

which he never earned, never caused. Deeper thought, and a clearer insight

into life convinces us, however, that nothing happens without a cause, and

that cause and effect are always related in perfect adjustment and harmony.

This being so, every happening directly affecting us is intimately related to

our own will and character, is, indeed, an effect justly related to a cause

having its seat in our consciousness. In a word, involuntary happenings of life

are the results of our own thoughts and deeds. This, I admit, is not apparent

on the surface; but what fundamental law, even in the physical universe, is so

apparent?  If  thought,  investigation,  and  experiment  are  necessary  to  the

discovery of the principles which relate one material atom to another, even so

are they imperative to the perception and understanding of the mode of action

which relate one mental condition to another; and such modes, such laws, are

known by the right-doer, by him who has acquired an understanding mind by

the practice of true actions.

  We reap as we sow. Those things which come to us, though not by our

own choosing, are  by  our causing. The  drunkard  did  not  choose  the

delirium tremens or insanity which overtook him, but he caused it by his own

deeds. In this case the law is plain to all minds, but where it is not so plain, it

is  nonetheless  true.  Within  ourselves  is  the  deep-seated  cause  of  all  our

sufferings, the spring of all our joys. Alter the inner world of thoughts, and

the other world of events will cease to bring you sorrow; make the heart pure,

and to you all things will be pure, all occurrences happy and in true order.

  “Within yourselves deliverance must be sought,

  Each man his prison makes.

  Each hath such lordship as the loftiest ones;

  Nay, for with Powers above, around, below,

  As with all flesh and whatsoever lives,  Act maketh joy or woe.”

  Our life is good or bad, enslaved or free, according to its causation in our

thoughts, for out of these thoughts spring all our deeds, and from these deeds

come equitable results. We cannot seize good results violently, like a thief,

and claim and enjoy them, but we can bring them to pass by setting in motion

the causes within ourselves.

  Men  strive  for  money,  sigh  for  happiness,  and  would  gladly  possess

wisdom, yet fail to secure these things, while they see others to whom these

blessings appear to come unbidden. The reason is that they have generated

causes which prevent the fulfilment of their wishes and efforts.

  Each life is a perfectly woven network of causes and effects, of efforts (or

lack of efforts) and results, and good results can only be reached by initiating

good  efforts,  good  causes.  The  doer  of  true  actions,  who  pursues  sound

methods, grounded on right principles will not need to strive and struggle for

good results; they will be there as the effects of his righteous rule of life. He

will reap the fruit of his own actions and the reaping will be in gladness and

peace.

  This truth of sowing and reaping in the moral sphere is a simple one, yet

men are slow to understand and accept it. We have been told by a Wise One

that  “the  children  of  darkness  are  wiser  in  their  day  than  the  children  of

light”, and who would expect, in the material world, to reap and eat where he

had not sown and planted? Or who would expect to reap wheat in the field

where he had sown tares, and would fall to weeping and complaining if he

did not? Yet this is just what men do in the spiritual field of mind and deed.

They do evil, and expect to get from it good, and when the bitter harvesting

comes  in  all  its  ripened  fullness,  they  fall  into  despair,  and  bemoan  the

hardness and injustice of their lot, usually attributing it to the evil deeds of

others, refusing even to admit the possibility of its cause being hidden in

themselves, in their own thoughts and deeds. The children of light - those

who are searching for the fundamental principles of right living, with a view

to making themselves into wise and happy beings – must train themselves to

observe this law of cause and effect in thought, word and deed, as implicitly

and obediently as the gardener obeys the law of sowing and reaping. He does

not even question the law; he recognises and obeys it. When the wisdom

which he instinctively practices in his garden, is practiced by men in thegarden of their minds – when the law of the sowing of deeds is so fully

recognised that it can no longer be doubted or questioned – then it will be just

as faithfully followed by the sowing of those actions which will bring about a

reaping of happiness and well-being for all. As the children of matter obey

the laws of matter, so let the children of spirit obey the laws of spirit, for the

law of matter and the law of spirit are one; they are but two aspects of one

thing; the out-working of one principle in opposite directions.

  If we observe right principles, or causes, wrong effects cannot possibly

accrue. If we pursue sound methods, no shoddy thread can find its way into

the web of our life, no rotten brick enter into the building of our character to

render it insecure; and if we do true actions, what but good results can come

to pass; for to say that good causes can produce bad effects is to say that

nettles can be reaped from a sowing of corn.

  He who orders his life along the moral lines thus briefly enunciated, will

attain to such a state of insight and equilibrium as to render him permanently

happy and perennially glad; all his efforts will be seasonally planted; all the

issues of his life will be good, and though he may not become a millionaire as

indeed he will have no desire to become such – he will acquire the gift of

peace, and true success will wait upon him as its commanding master.                              BOOK TEN


              ABOVE LIFE’S TURMOIL.                                  FOREWORD


  We cannot alter external things, nor shape other people to our liking, nor

mould the world to our wishes but we can alter internal things,-our desires,

passions,  thoughts,-we  can  shape  our  liking  to  other  people,  and  we  can

mould the inner world of our own mind in accordance with wisdom, and so

reconcile it to the outer world if men and things. The turmoil of the world we

cannot avoid, but the disturbances of mind we can overcome. The duties and

difficulties  of  life  claim  our  attention,  but  we  can  rise  above  all  anxiety

concerning  them.  Surrounded  by  noise,  we  can  yet  have  a  quiet  mind;

involved in responsibilities, the heart can be at rest; in the midst of strife, we

can know the abiding peace. The twenty pieces which comprise this book,

unrelated as some of them are in the letter, will be found to be harmonious in

the  spirit,  in  that  they  point  the  reader  towards  those  heights  of  self-

knowledge and self-conquest which, rising above the turbulence of the world,

lift their peaks where the Heavenly Silence reigns.

  James Allen                            1. TRUE HAPPINESS


  To  maintain  an  unchangeable  sweetness  of  disposition,  to  think  only

thoughts that are pure and gentle, and to be happy under all circumstances,-

such blessed conditions and such beauty of character and life should be the

aim of all, and particularly so of those who wish to lessen the misery of the

world. If anyone has failed to lift himself above ungentleness, impurity, and

unhappiness, he is greatly deluded if he imagines he can make the world

happier by the propagation of any theory or theology. He who is daily living

in harshness, impurity, or unhappiness is day by day adding to the sum of the

world’s misery; whereas he who continually lives in goodwill, and does not

depart  from  happiness,  is  day  by  day  increasing  the  sum  of  the  world’s

happiness, and this independently of any religious beliefs which these may or

may not hold.

  He who has not learned how to be gentle, or giving, loving and happy,

has  learned  very  little,  great  though  his  book-learning  and  profound  his

acquaintance which the letter of Scripture may be, for it is in the process of

becoming gentle, pure, and happy that the deep, real and enduring lessons of

life are learned. Unbroken sweetness of conduct in the face of all outward

antagonism is the infallible indication of a self-conquered soul, the witness of

wisdom, and the proof of the possession of Truth.

  A sweet and happy soul is the ripened fruit of experience and wisdom,

and  it  sheds  abroad  the  invisible  yet  powerful  aroma  of  its  influence,

gladdening the hearts of others, and purifying the world. And all who will,

and  who  have  not  yet  commenced,  may  begin this  day,  if  they  will  so

resolve,  to  live  sweetly  and  happily,  as  becomes  the  dignity  of  a  true

manhood or womanhood. Do not say that your surroundings are against you.

A man’s surroundings are never against him; they are there to aid him, and

all those outward occurrences over which you lose sweetness and peace of

mind are the very conditions necessary to your development, and it is only by

meeting and overcoming them that you can learn, and grow, and ripen. The

fault is in yourself.

  Pure happiness is the rightful and healthy condition of the soul, and all

may possess it if they will live purely and unselfish.

  “Have goodwill  To all that lives, letting unkindness die,

  And greed and wrath, so that your lives be made

  Like soft airs passing by.”

  Is this too difficult for you? Then unrest and unhappiness will continue to

dwell  with  you.  Your  belief  and  aspiration  and  resolve  are  all  that  are

necessary to make it easy, to render it in the near future a thing accomplished,

a blessed state realised.

    Despondency,  irritability,  anxiety  and  complaining,  condemning  and

grumbling  all  these  are  thought-cankers,  mind-diseases;  they  are  the

indications  of  a  wrong  mental  condition,  and  those  who  suffer  therefrom

would do well to remedy their thinking and conduct. It is true there is much

sin and misery in the world, so that all our love and compassion are needed,

but our misery is not needed- there is already too much of that. No, it is our

cheerfulness and happiness that are needed for there is too little of that. We

can give nothing better to the world than beauty of life and character; without

this, all other things are vain; this is pre-eminently excellent; it is enduring,

real, and not to be overthrown, and it includes all joy and blessedness.

  Cease to dwell pessimistically upon the wrongs around you; dwell no

more  in  complaints  about,  and  revolt  against,  the  evil  in  others,  and

commence to live free from all wrong and evil yourself. Peace of mind, pure

religion, and true reform lie this way. If you would have others true, be true;

if you would have the world emancipated from misery and sin, emancipate

yourself; if you would have your home and  your surroundings happy, be

happy.  You  can  transform  everything  around  you  if  you  will  transform

yourself.

  “Don’t bewail and bemoan.

  Don’t waste yourself in rejection,

  nor bark against the bad,

  but chant the beauties of the good.”

  And this you will naturally and spontaneously do

  as you realise the good in yourself.                        2. THE IMMORTAL MAN


    Immortality is here and now, and is not a speculative something beyond

the grave. It is a lucid state of consciousness in which the sensations of the

body, the varying and unrestful states of mind, and the circumstances and

events  of  life  are  seen  to  be  of  a  fleeting  and  therefore  of  an  illusory

character.

    Immortality does not belong to time, and will never be found in time; it

belongs to Eternity; and just as time is here and now, so is Eternity here and

now, and a man may find that Eternity and establish in it, if he will overcome

the self that derives its life from the unsatisfying and perishable things of

time.

  Whilst  a  man  remains  immersed  in  sensation,  desire,  and  the  passing

events of his day-by-day existence, and regards those sensations, desires, and

passing events as of the essence of himself, he can have no knowledge of

immortality. The thing which such a man desires, and which he mistakes for

immortality, is persistence; that is, a continuous succession of sensations

and  events  in  time.  Living  in,  loving  and  clinging  to,  the  things  which

stimulate and minister to his immediate gratification, and realising no state of

consciousness above and independent of this, he thirsts for its continuance,

and strives to banish the thought that he will at last have to part from those

earthly luxuries and delights to which he has become enslaved, and which he

regards as being inseparable from himself.

    Persistence is the antithesis of immortality; and to be absorbed in it is

spiritual death. Its very nature is change, impermanence. It is a continual

living and dying.

  The death of the body can never bestow upon a man immortality. Spirits

are  not  different  from  men,  and  live  their  little  feverish  life  of  broken

consciousness, and are still immersed in change and mortality. The mortal

man, he who thirsts for the persistence of his pleasure-loving personality is

still mortal after death, and only lives another life with a beginning and an

end without memory of the past, or knowledge of the future.

  The immortal man is he who has detached himself from the things of time

by  having  ascended  into  that  state  of  consciousness  which  is  fixed  and

unvariable, and is not affected by passing events and sensations. Human lifeconsists of an ever moving procession of events, and in this procession the

mortal man is immersed, and he is carried along with it; and being so carried

along, he has no knowledge of what is behind and before him. The immortal

man is he who has stepped out of this procession, and he stands by unmoved

and watches it; and from his fixed place he sees both the before, the behind

and the middle of the moving thing called life. No longer identifying himself

with the sensations and fluctuations of the personality, or with the outward

changes  which  make  up  the  life  in  time,  he  has  become  the  passionless

spectator of his own destiny and of the destinies of the men and nations.

  The mortal man, also, is one who is caught in a dream, and he neither

knows  that  he  was  formerly  awake,  nor  that  he  will  wake  again;  he  is  a

dreamer without knowledge, nothing more. The immortal man is as one who

has awakened out of his dream, and he knows that his dream was not an

enduring reality, but a passing illusion. He is a man with knowledge, the

knowledge of both states- that of persistence, and that of immortality,- and is

in full possession of himself.

  The mortal man lives in the time or world state of consciousness which

begins and ends; the immortal man lives in the cosmic or heaven state of

consciousness, in which there is neither beginning nor end, but an eternal

now. Such a man remains poised and steadfast under all changes, and the

death of his body will not in any way interrupt the eternal consciousness in

which  he  abides.  Of  such  a  one  it  is  said,  “He  shall  not  taste  of  death”,

because he has stepped out of the stream of mortality, and established himself

in the abode of Truth. Bodies, personalities, nations, and worlds pass away,

but Truth remains, and its glory is undimmed by time. The immortal man,

then, is he who has conquered himself; who no longer identifies himself with

the  self-seeking  forces  of  the  personality,  but  who  has  trained  himself  to

direct those forces with the hand of a master, and so has brought them into

harmony with the causal energy and source of all things.

  The fret and fever of life has ceased, doubt and fear are cast out, and

death is not for him who has realised the fadeless splendour of that life of

Truth by adjusting heart and mind to the eternal and unchangeable verities.                  3. THE OVERCOMING OF SELF


  Many  people  have  very  confused  and  erroneous  ideas  concerning  the

terms  “the  overcoming  of  self”,  “the  eradication  of  desire”,  and  “the

annihilation of the personality.” Some (particularly the intellectual who are

prone to theories) regard it as a metaphysical theory altogether apart from life

and  conduct;  while  others  conclude  that  it  is  the  crushing  out  of  all  life,

energy and action, and the attempt to idealise stagnation and death. These

errors and confusions, arising as they do in the minds of individuals, can only

be removed by the individuals themselves; but perhaps it may make their

removal a little less difficult (for those who are seeking Truth) by presenting

the matter in another way.

  The doctrine of the overcoming or annihilation of self is simplicity itself;

indeed, so simple, practical, and close at hand is it that a child of five, whose

mind  has  not  yet  become  clouded  with  theories,  theological  schemes  and

speculative philosophies, would be far more likely to comprehend it than

many older people who have lost their hold upon simple and beautiful truths

by the adoption of complicated theories.

  The annihilation of self consists in weeding out and destroying all those

elements  in  the  soul  which  lead  to  division,  strife,  suffering,  disease  and

sorrow. It does not mean the destruction of any good and beautiful and peace-

producing  quality.  For  instance,  when  a  man  is  tempted  to  irritability  or

anger, and by a great effort overcomes the selfish tendency, casts it from him,

and acts from the spirit of patience and love, in that moment of self-conquest

he practises the annihilation of self. Every noble man practises it in part,

though he may deny it in his words, and he who carries out this practice to its

completion,  eradicating  every  selfish  tendency  until  only  the  divinely

beautiful qualities remain, he is said to have annihilated the personality (all

the personal elements) and to have arrived at Truth. The self which is to be

annihilated is composed of the following ten worthless and sorrow-producing

elements:

  Lust

  Hatred

  Avarice

    Self-indulgence  Self-seeking

  Vanity

  Pride

  Doubt

  Dark belief

    Delusion

  It  is  the  total  abandonment,  the  complete  annihilation  of  these  ten

elements, for they comprise the body of desire. On the other hand it teaches

the  cultivation,  practice,  and  preservation  of  the  following  ten  divine

qualities:

  Purity

  Patience

    Humility

    Self-sacrifice

    Self-reliance

  Fearlessness

    Knowledge

  Wisdom

    Compassion

  Love

  These comprise the Body of Truth, and to live entirely in them is to be a

doer  and  knower  of  the  Truth,  is  to  be  an  embodiment  of  Truth.  The

combination  of  the  ten  elements  is  called  Self  or  the  Personality;  the

combination  of  the  ten  qualities  produces  what  is  called  Truth;  the

Impersonal; the abiding, real and immortal Man.

  It will thus be seen that it is not the destruction of any noble, true, and

enduring quality that is taught, but only the destruction of those things that

are  ignoble,  false  and  evanescent.  Neither  is  this  overcoming  of  self  the

deprivation  of  gladness,  happiness  and  joy,  but  rather  is  it  the  constant

possession of these things by living in the joy-begetting qualities. It is the

abandonment  of  the  lust  for  enjoyment,  but  not  of  enjoyment  itself;  the

destruction  of  the thirst for  pleasure,  but  not  of  pleasure  itself;  the

annihilation of the selfish  longing for love, and power, and possessionsthemselves. It is the preservation of all those things which draw and bind men

together in unity and concord, and, far from idealising stagnation and death,

urges men to the practice of those qualities which lead to the highest, noblest,

most effective, and enduring action. He whose actions proceed from some or

all  of  the  ten  elements  wastes  his  energies  upon  negations,  and  does  not

preserve his soul; but he whose actions proceed from some or all of the ten

qualities, he truly and wisely acts and so preserves his soul.

  He who lives largely in the ten earthly elements, and who is blind and

deaf to the spiritual verities, will find no attraction in the doctrine of self-

surrender, for it will appear to him as the complete extinction of his being;

but he who is endeavouring to live in the ten heavenly qualities will see the

glory and beauty of the doctrine, and will know it as the foundation of Life

Eternal. He will also see that when men apprehend and practise it, industry,

commerce,  government,  and  every  worldly  activity  will  be  purified;  and

action,  purpose  and  intelligence,  instead  of  being  destroyed,  will  be

intensified and enlarged, but freed from strife and pain.                  4. THE USES OF TEMPTATION


  The soul, in its journey towards perfection, passes through three distinct

stages. The first is the animal stage, in which the man is content to live, in

the gratification of his senses, unawakened to the knowledge of sin, or of his

divine inheritance, and altogether unconscious of the spiritual possibilities

within himself.

  The second is the dual stage, in which the mind is continually oscillating

between its animal and divine tendencies having become awakened to the

consciousness of both. It is during this stage that temptation plays its part in

the progress of the soul. It is a stage of continual fighting, of falling and

rising, of sinning and repenting, for the man, still loving, and reluctant to

leave, the gratifications in which he has so long lived, yet also aspires to the

purity and excellence of the spiritual state, and he is continually mortified by

an undecided choice.

  Urged on by the divine life within him, this stage becomes at last one of

deep anguish and suffering, and then the soul is ushered into the third stage,

that of knowledge, in which the man rises above both sin and temptation,

and enters into peace.

    Temptation,  like  contentment  in  sin,  is  not  a  lasting  condition,  as  the

majority  of  people  suppose;  it  is  a  passing  phase,  an  experience  through

which the soul must pass; but as to whether a man will pass through that

condition in this present life, and realise holiness and heavenly rest here and

now, will depend entirely upon the strength of his intellectual and spiritual

exertions,  and  upon  the  intensity  and  ardour  with  which  he  searches  for

Truth.

    Temptation, with all its attendant torments can be overcome here and

now, but it can only be overcome by knowledge. It is a condition of darkness

or  of  semi-darkness.  The  fully  enlightened  soul  is  proof  against  all

temptation. When a man fully understands the source, nature, and meaning of

temptation, in that hour he will conquer it, and will rest from his long travail;

but whilst he remains in ignorance, attention to religious observances, and

much praying and reading of Scripture will fail to bring him peace.

  If a man goes out to conquer an enemy, knowing nothing of his enemy’s

strength, tactics, or place of ambush, he will not only ignominiously fail, butwill speedily fall into the hands of the enemy. He who would overcome his

enemy the tempter, must discover his stronghold and place of concealment,

and must also find out the unguarded gates in his own fortress where his

enemy effects so easy an entrance. This necessitates continual meditation,

ceaseless watchfulness, and constant and rigid introspection which lays bare,

before the spiritual eyes of the tempted one, the vain and selfish motives of

his soul. This is the holy warfare of the saints; it is the fight upon which every

soul enters when it awakens out of its long sleep of animal indulgence.

  Men fail to conquer, and the fight is indefinitely prolonged, because they

labour,  almost  universally,  under  two  delusions:  first,  that  all  temptations

come  from  without;  and  second,  that  they  are  tempted  because  of  their

goodness. Whilst a man is held in bondage by these two delusions, he will

make no progress; when he has shaken them off, he will pass on rapidly from

victory to victory, and will taste of spiritual joy and rest.

  Two searching truths must take the place of these two delusions, and

those truths are: first, that all temptation comes from within; and second, that

a man is tempted because of the evil that is within him. The idea that God, a

devil, evil spirits, or outward objects are the source of temptation must be

dispelled. The source and cause of all temptation is in the inward desire; that

being  purified  or  eliminated,  outward  objects  and  extraneous  powers  are

utterly powerless to move the soul to sin or to temptation. The outward object

is merely the occasion of the temptation, never the cause; this is in the desire

of  the  one  tempted.  If  the  cause  existed  in  the  object,  all  men  would  be

tempted  alike,  temptation  could  never  be  overcome,  and  men  would  be

hopelessly doomed to endless torment; but seated, as it is, in his own desires,

he has the remedy in his own hands, and can become victorious over all

temptation by purifying those desires. A man is tempted because there are

within him certain desires or states of mind which he has come to regard as

unholy. These desires may lie asleep for a long time, and the man may think

that he has got rid of them, when suddenly, on the presentation of an outward

object, the sleeping desire wakes up and thirsts of immediate gratification;

and this is the state of temptation.

  The good in a man is never tempted. Goodness destroys temptation. It is

the  evil  in  a  man  that  is  aroused  and  tempted.  The  measure  of  a  man’s

temptations is the exact register of his own unholiness. As a man purifies hisheart, temptation ceases, for when a certain unlawful desire has been taken

out of the heart, the object which formerly appealed to it can no longer do so,

but becomes dead and powerless, for there is nothing left in the heart that can

respond to it. The honest man cannot be tempted to steal, let the occasion be

ever  so  opportune;  the  man  of  purified  appetites  cannot  be  tempted  to

gluttony and drunkenness, though the viands and wines be the most luscious;

he of an enlightened understanding, whose mind is calm in the strength of

inward virtue, can never be tempted to anger, irritability or revenge, and the

wiles  and  charms  of  the  wanton  fall  upon  the  purified  heart  as  empty

meaningless shadows.

    Temptation shows a man just where he is sinful and ignorant, and is a

means of urging him on to higher altitudes of knowledge and purity. Without

temptation  the  soul  cannot  grow  and  become  strong,  there  could  be  no

wisdom, no real virtue; and though there would be lethargy and death, there

could be no peace and no fullness of life. When temptation is understood and

conquered, perfection is assured, and such perfection may become any man’s

who  is  willing  to  cast  every  selfish  and  impure  desire  by  which  he  is

possessed, into the sacrificial fire of knowledge. Let men, therefore, search

diligently for Truth, realising that whilst they are subject to temptation, they

have not comprehended Truth, and have much to learn.

  Ye who are tempted know, then, that ye are tempted of yourselves. “For

every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts,” says the

Apostle  James.  You  are  tempted  because  you  are  clinging  to  the  animal

within you and are unwilling to let go; because you are living in the false

mortal self which is ever devoid of all true knowledge, knowing nothing,

seeking nothing, but its own immediate gratification, ignorant of every Truth,

and of every divine Principle. Clinging to that self, you continually suffer the

pains  of  three  separate  torments;  the  torment  of  desire,  the  torment  of

repletion, and the torment of remorse.

  “So flameth Trishna, lust and thirst of things.

  Eager, ye cleave to shadows, dote on dreams;

  A false self in the midst ye plant, and make

  A World around which seems;

  Blind to the height beyond; deaf to the sound

  Of sweet airs breathed from far past Indra’s sky;  Dumb to the summons of the true life kept

  For him who false puts by,

  So grow the strifes and lusts which make earth’s war,

  So grieve poor cheated hearts and flow salt tears;

  So wax the passions, envies, angers, hates;

  So years chase blood-stained years

  With wild red feet.”

  In that false self lies the germ of every suffering, the blight of every hope,

the substance of every grief. When you are ready to give it up; when you are

willing  to  have  laid  bare  before  you  all  its  selfishness,  impurity,  and

ignorance, and to confess its darkness to the uttermost, then will you enter

upon the life of self- knowledge and self-mastery; you will become conscious

of the god within you, of that divine nature which, seeking no gratification,

abides in a region of perpetual joy and peace where suffering cannot come

and where temptation can find no foothold. Establishing yourself, day by day,

more and more firmly in that inward Divinity, the time will at last come when

you will be able to say with Him whom millions worship, few understand and

fewer still follow, - “The Prince of this world cometh and hath nothing in

me.”                    5. THE MAN OF INTEGRITY


  There are times in the life of every man who takes his stand on high

moral  principles  when  his  faith  in,  and  knowledge  of,  those  principles  is

tested to the uttermost, and the way in which he comes out of the fiery trial

decides as to whether he has sufficient strength to live as a man of Truth, and

join the company of the free, or shall still remain a slave and a hireling to the

cruel taskmaster, Self.

  Such times of trial generally assume the form of a temptation to do a

wrong thing and continue in comfort and prosperity, or to stand by what is

right and accept poverty and failure; and so powerful is the trial that, to the

tempted one, it plainly appears on the face of things as though, if he chooses

the wrong, his material success will be assured for the remainder of his life,

but if he does what is right, he will be ruined for ever.

  Frequently the man at once quails and gives way before this appalling

prospect which the Path of Righteousness seems to hold out for him, but

should he prove sufficiently strong to withstand this onslaught of temptation,

then the inward seducer the spirit of self, assumes the grab of an Angel of

Light, and whispers, “Think of your wife and children; think of those who are

dependent upon you; will you bring them down to disgrace and starvation?”

  Strong indeed and pure must be the man who can come triumphant out of

such a trial, but he who does so, enters at once a higher realm of life, where

his spiritual eyes are opened to see beautiful things; and then poverty and ruin

which seemed inevitable do not come, but a more abiding success comes, and

a peaceful heart and a quiet conscience. But he who fails does not obtain the

promised prosperity, and his heart is restless and his conscience troubled.

  The right-doer cannot ultimately fail, the wrong-doer cannot ultimately

succeed, for

  “Such is the Law which moves to Righteousness

  Which none at last can turn aside or stay,”

  and it is because justice is at the heart of things- because the Great Law is

good that the man of integrity is superior to fear, and failure, and poverty, and

shame, and disgrace.

  As the poet further says of this Law:  “The heart of its Love, the end of it

  Is peace and consummation sweet-obey.”

  The man who fearing the loss of present pleasures or material comforts,

denies the Truth within him, can be injured, and robbed, and degraded, and

trampled  upon,  because  he  has  first  injured,  robbed  and  degraded,  and

trampled  upon  his  own  nobler  self;  but  the  man  of  steadfast  virtue,  of

unblemished integrity, cannot be subject to such conditions, because he has

denied the craven self within him and has taken refuge in Truth. It is not the

scourge and the chains which make a man a slave, but the fact that he is a

slave.

  Slander, Accusation, and malice cannot affect the righteous man, nor call

from him any bitter response, nor does he need to go about to defend himself

and prove his innocence. His innocence and integrity alone are a sufficient

answer  to  all  that  hatred  may  attempt  against  him.  Nor  can  he  ever  be

subdued by the forces of darkness, having subdued all those forces within

himself; but he turns all evil things to good account - out of darkness he

brings light, out of hatred love, out of dishonour honour; and slanders, envies,

and misrepresentations only serve to make more bright the jewel of Truth

within him, and to glorify his high and holy destiny.

  Let the man of integrity rejoice and be glad when he is severely tried; let

him be thankful that he has been given an opportunity of proving his loyalty

to the noble principles which he has espoused; and let him think: “Now is the

hour of holy opportunity! Now is the day of triumph for Truth! Though I lose

the whole world I will note desert the right!” So thinking, he will return good

for evil, and will think compassionately of the wrong-doer.

  The slanderer, the backbiter, and the wrong-doer may seem to succeed for

a time, but the Law of Justice prevails; the man of integrity may seem to fail

for a time, but he is invincible, and in none of the worlds, visible or invisible,

can there be forged a weapon that shall prevail against him.                            6. DISCRIMINATION


  There  is  one  quality  which  is  pre-eminently  necessary  to  spiritual

development, the quality of discrimination.

  A man’s spiritual progress will be painfully slow and uncertain until there

opens with him the eye of discrimination, for without this testing, proving,

searching quality, he will but grope in the dark, will be unable to distinguish

the real from the unreal, the shadow from the substance, and will so confuse

the false with the true as to mistake the inward promptings of his animal

nature for those of the spirit of Truth.

  A blind man left in a strange place may go grope his way in darkness, but

not without much confusion and many painful falls and bruisings. Without

discrimination a man is mentally blind, and his life is a painful groping in

darkness, a confusion in which vice and virtue are indistinguishable one from

the other, where facts are confounded with truths; opinions with principles,

and where ideas, events, men, and things appear to be out of all relation to

each other. A man’s mind and life should be free from confusion. He should

be prepared to meet every mental, material and spiritual difficulty, and should

not be inextricably caught (as many are) in the meshes of doubt, indecision

and  uncertainty  when  troubles  and  so-called  misfortunes  come  along.  He

should be fortified against every emergency that can come against him; but

such  mental  preparedness  and  strength  cannot  be  attained  in  any  degree

without discrimination, and discrimination can only be developed by bringing

into play and constantly exercising the analytical faculty.

  Mind, like muscle, is developed by use, and the assiduous exercise of the

mind in any given direction will develop, in that direction, mental capacity

and  power.  The  merely  critical  faculty  is  developed  and  strengthened  by

continuously comparing and analysing the ideas and opinions of others. But

discrimination is something more and greater than criticism; it is a spiritual

quality from which the cruelty and egotism which so frequently accompany

criticism are eliminated, and by virtue of which a man sees things as they are,

and not as he would like them to be.

    Discrimination,  being  a  spiritual  quality,  can  only  be  developed  by

spiritual methods, namely, by questioning, examining, and analysing one’s

own ideas, opinions, and conduct. The critical, fault finding faculty must bewithdrawn  from  its  merciless  application  to  the  opinions  and  conduct  of

others, and must be applied, with undiminished severity, to oneself. A man

must be prepared to question his every opinion, his every thought, and his

every line of conduct, and rigorously and logically test them; only in this way

can the discrimination which destroys confusion will be developed.

  Before a man can enter upon such mental exercise, he must make himself

of a teachable spirit. This does not mean that he must allow himself to be led

by  others;  it  means  that  he  must  be  prepared  to  yield  up  any  cherished

thoughts to which he clings, if it will not bear the penetrating light of reason,

if it shrivels up before the pure flames of searching aspirations. The man who

says,  “I  am  right!”  and  who  refuses  to  question  his  position  in  order  to

discover whether he is right, will continue to follow the line of his passions

and prejudices, and will not acquire discrimination. The man who humbly

asks,  “Am  I  right?”  and  then  proceeds  to  test  and  prove  his  position  by

earnest thought and the love of Truth, will always be able to discover the true

and  to  distinguish  it  from  the  false,  and  he  will  acquire  the  priceless

possession of discrimination.

  The man who is afraid to think searchingly upon his opinions, and to

reason critically upon his position, will have to develop moral courage before

he can acquire discrimination.

  A  man  must  be  true  to  himself,  fearless  with  himself,  before  he  can

perceive the Pure Principles of Truth, before he can receive the all-revealing

Light of Truth. The more Truth is inquired of, the brighter it shines; it cannot

suffer under examination and analysis.

  The more error is questioned, the darker it grows; it cannot survive the

entrance of pure and searching thought. To “prove all things” is to find the

good  and  throw  the  evil.  He  who  reasons  and  meditates  learns  to

discriminate; he who discriminates discovers the eternally True.

    Confusion, suffering and spiritual darkness follow the thoughtless.

    Harmony, blessedness and the Light of Truth attend upon the thoughtful.

  Passion and prejudice are blind, and cannot discriminate: they are still

crucifying the Christ and releasing Barabbas.              7. BELIEF, THE BASIS OF ACTION


  Belief is an important word in the teachings of the wise, and it figures

prominently in all religions. According to Jesus, a certain kind of belief is

necessary to salvation or regeneration, and Buddha definitely taught that right

belief is the first and most essential step in the Way of Truth, as without right

belief there cannot be right conduct, and he who has not learned how to

rightly govern and conduct himself, has not yet comprehended the simplest

rudiments of Truth.

  Belief as laid down by the Great Teachers, is not belief in any particular

school,  philosophy,  or  religion,  but  consists  of  an altitude  of  mind

determining  the  whole  course  of  one’s  life.  Belief  and  conduct  are,

therefore inseparable, for the one determines the other.

  Belief  is  the  basis  of  all  action,  and,  this  being  so,  the  belief  which

dominates the hearts or mind is shown in the life. Every man acts, thinks,

lives in exact accordance with the belief which is rooted in his innermost

being, and such is the mathematical nature of the laws which govern mind

that  it  is  absolutely  impossible  for  anyone  to  believe  in  two  opposing

conditions at the same time. For instance, it is impossible to believe in justice

and injustice, hatred and love, peace and strife, self and truth. Every man

believes in one or the other of these opposites, never in both, and the daily

conduct  of  every  man  indicates  the  nature  of  his  belief.  The  man  who

believes in justice, who regards it as an eternal and indestructible Principle,

never  boils  over  with  righteous  indignation,  does  not  grow  cynical  and

pessimistic over the inequalities of life, and remains calm and untroubled

through all trials and difficulties. It is impossible for him to act otherwise, for

he believes that justice reigns, and that, therefore, all that is called injustice is

fleeting and illusory.

  The  man  who  is  continually  getting  enraged  over  the  injustice  of  his

fellow men, who talks about himself being badly treated, or who mourns over

the lack of justice in the world around him, shows by his conduct, his attitude

of mind, that he believes in injustice. However he may protest to the contrary,

in his inmost heart he believes that confusion and chaos are dominant in the

universe, the result being that he dwells in misery and unrest, and his conduct

is faulty.  Again, he who believes in love, in its stability and power, practises  it

under all circumstances, never deviates from it, and bestows it alike upon

enemies  as  upon  friends.  He  who  slanders  and  condemns,  who  speaks

disparagingly of others, or regards them with contempt, believes not in love,

but hatred; all his actions prove it, even though with tongue or pen he may

eulogise love.

  The believer in peace is known by his peaceful conduct. It is impossible

for him to engage in strife. If attacked he does not retaliate, for he has seen

the majesty of the angel of peace, and he can no longer pay homage to the

demon of strife. The stirrer-up of strife, the lover of argument, he who rushes

into self-defence upon any or every provocation, believes in strife, and will

have naught to do with peace.

  Further, he who believes in Truth renounces himself- that is, he refuses to

centre his life in those passions, desires, and characteristics which crave only

their own gratification, and by thus renouncing he becomes steadfastly fixed

in Truth, and lives a wise, beautiful, and blameless life. The believer in self is

known  by  his  daily  indulgences,  gratifications,  and  vanities,  and  by  the

disappointments, sorrows, and mortifications which he continually suffers.

  The believer in Truth does not suffer, for he has given up that self which

is the cause of such suffering.

  It  will  be  seen  by  the  foregoing  that  every  man  believes  either  in

permanent  and  eternal  Principles  directing  human  life  towards  law  and

harmony, or in the negation of those Principles, with the resultant chaos in

human affairs and in his own life.

  Belief in the divine Principles of Justice, Compassion, Love, constitutes

the right belief laid down by Buddha as being the basis of right conduct,

and  also  the belief  unto  salvation as  emphasised  in  the  Christian

Scriptures, for he who so believes cannot do otherwise than build his whole

life upon these Principles, and so purifies his heart, and perfects his life.

  Belief in the negation of this divine principle constitutes what is called in

all religious unbelief and this unbelief is manifested as a sinful, troubled, and

imperfect life.

  Where there is Right Belief there is a blameless and perfect life; where

there  is  false  belief  there  is  sin,  there  is  sorrow,  the  mind  and  life  are

improperly governed, and there is affliction and unrest. “By their fruits yeshall know them.”

  There is much talk about, “belief in Jesus,” but what does belief in Jesus

mean?  It  means  belief  in  his  words,  in  the  Principles  he  enunciated-  and

lived, in his commandments and in his exemplary life of perfection. He who

declares  belief  in  Jesus,  and  yet  is  all  the  time  living  in  his  lusts  and

indulgences, or in the spirit of hatred and condemnation, is self-deceived. He

believes not in Jesus. He believes in his own animal self. As a faithful servant

delights in carrying out the commands of his master, so he who believes in

Jesus carries out his commandments, and so is saved from sin. The supreme

test of belief in Jesus is this: Do I keep his commandments? And this test

is applied by St. John himself in the following words: “He that saith. I know

him (Jesus), and keepeth not His Commandments, is a liar, and the truth

is not in him. But whose keepeth his word, in him verily is the word of God

perfected.”

  It will be found after a rigid and impartial analysis, that belief lies at the

root of all human conduct. Every thought, every act, every habit, is the direct

outcome  of  a  certain  fixed  belief,  and  one’s  conduct  alters  only  as  one’s

belief are modified. What we cling to, in that we believe; what we practise, in

that we believe. When our belief in a thing ceases, we can no longer cling to

or practise it; it falls away from us as a garment out-worn. Men cling to their

lusts, and lies, and vanities, because they believe in them, believe there is

gain and happiness in them. When they transfer their belief to the divine

qualities of purity and humility, those sins trouble them no more.

  Men are saved from error by belief in the supremacy of Truth. They are

saved from sin by belief in Holiness or Perfection. They are saved from evil

by belief in Good, for every belief is manifested in the life. It is not necessary

to inquire as to a man’s theological belief, for that is of little or no account,

for what can it avail a man to believe that Jesus died for him, or that Jesus is

God, or that he is “justified by faith,” if he continues to live in his lower,

sinful nature? All that is necessary to ask is this: “How does a man live?”

“How does he conduct himself under trying circumstances?” The answer to

these questions will show whether a man believes in the power of evil or in

the power of Good.

  He who believes in the power of Good, lives a good, spiritual, or godly

life, for Goodness is God, yea, verily is God Himself, and he will soon leavebehind him all sins and sorrows who believes, with steadfast and unwavering

faith, in the Supreme Good.                    8. THE BELIEF THAT SAVES


  It has been said that a man’s whole life and character is the outcome of

his belief, and also that his belief has nothing whatever to do with his life.

Both  statements  are  true. The confusion and contradiction of these two

statements  are  only  apparent,  and  are  quickly  dispelled  when  it  is

remembered that there are two entirely distinct kinds of beliefs, namely,

Head-belief and Heart-belief.

  Head, or intellectual belief, is not fundamental and causative, but it is

superficial and consequent, and that it has no power in the moulding of a

man’s  character,  the  most  superficial  observer  may  easily  see.  Take,  for

instance, half a dozen men from any creed. They not only hold the same

theological belief, but confess the same articles of faith in every particular,

and yet their characters are vastly different. One will be just as noble as

another is ignoble; one will be mild and gentle, another coarse and irascible;

one will be honest, another dishonest; one will indulge certain habits which

another  will  rigidly  abjure,  and  so  on,  plainly  indicating  that  theological

belief is not an influential factor in a man’s life.

  A man’s theological belief is merely his intellectual opinion or view of

the  universe.  God,  The  Bible,  etc.,  and  behind  and  underneath  this  head-

belief  there  lies,  deeply  rooted  in  his  innermost  being,  the  hidden,  silent,

secret belief of his heart, and it is this belief which moulds and makes his

whole life. It is this which makes those six men who, whilst holding the same

theology, are yet so vastly at variance in their deeds - they  differ  in  the

vital belief of the heart.

  What, then, is this heart-belief?

  It is that which a man loves and clings to and fosters in his soul;

for he thus loves and clings to and fosters in his heart, because he believes in

them, and believing in them and loving them, he practises them; thus is his

life the effect of his belief, but it has no relation to the particular creed which

comprises  his  intellectual  belief.  One  man  clings  to  impure  and  immoral

things because he believes in them; another does not cling to them because he

has ceased to believe in them. A man cannot cling to anything unless he

believes in it; belief always precedes action, therefore a man’s deeds and life

are the fruits of his belief.  The Priest and the Levite who passed by the injured and helpless man,

held, no doubt, very strongly to the theological doctrines of their fathers- that

was their intellectual belief,- but in their hearts they did not believe in mercy,

and so lived and acted accordingly. The good Samaritan may or may not have

had any theological beliefs nor was it necessary that he should have; but in

his heart he believed in mercy, and acted accordingly.

    Strictly speaking, there are only two beliefs which vitally affect the life,

and they are, belief in good and belief in evil.

  He who believes in all those things that are good, will love them, and live

in them; he who believes in those things that are impure and selfish, will love

them, and cling to them. The tree is known by its fruits.

  A man’s beliefs about God, Jesus, and the Bible are one thing; his life, as

bound up in his actions, is another; therefore a man’s theological belief is of

no consequence; but the thoughts which he harbours, his attitude of mind

towards  others,  and  his  actions,  these,  and  these  only,  determine  and

demonstrate whether the belief of a man’s heart is fixed in the false or true.                      9. THOUGHT AND ACTION


  As the fruit to the tree and the water to the spring, so is action to thought.

It does not come into manifestation suddenly and without a cause. It is the

result of a long and silent growth; the end of a hidden process which has long

been gathering force. The fruit of the tree and the water gushing from the

rock are both the effect of a combination of natural processes in air and earth

which have long worked together in secret to produce the phenomenon; and

the beautiful acts of enlightenment and the dark deeds of sin are both the

ripened effects of trains of thought which have long been harboured in the

mind.

  The sudden falling, when greatly tempted, into some grievous sin by one

who was believed, and who probably believed himself, to stand firm, is seen

neither to be a sudden nor a causeless thing when the hidden process of

thought which led up to it are revealed. The falling was merely the end, the

outworking, the finished result of what commenced in the mind probably

years before. The man had allowed a wrong thought to enter his mind; and a

second and a third time he had welcomed it, and allowed it to nestle in his

heart. Gradually he became accustomed to it, and cherished, and fondled, and

tended it; and so it grew, until at last it attained such strength and force that it

attracted to itself the opportunity which enabled it to burst forth and ripen

into act. As falls the stately building whose foundations have been gradually

undermined by the action of water, so at last falls the strong man who allows

corrupt thoughts to creep into his mind and secretly undermine his character.

  When it is seen that all sin and temptation are the natural outcome of the

thoughts of the individual, the way to overcome sin and temptation becomes

plain, and its achievement a near possibility, and, sooner or later, a certain

reality; for if a man will admit, cherish, and brood upon thoughts that are

pure and good, those thoughts, just as surely as the impure, will grow and

gather force, and will at last attract to themselves the opportunities which will

enable them to ripen into act.

  “There is nothing hidden that shall not be revealed,” and every thought

that is harboured in the mind must, by virtue of the impelling force which is

inherent in the universe, at last blossom into act good or bad according to its

nature. The divine Teacher and the sensualist are both the product of theirown thoughts, and have become what they are as the result of the seeds of

thought which they have implanted, are allowed to fall, into the garden of the

heart, and have afterwards watered, tended, and cultivated.

  Let no man think he can, overcome sin and temptation by wrestling with

opportunity; he can only overcome them by purifying his thoughts; and if he

will, day by day, in the silence of his soul, and in the performance of his

duties, strenuously overcome all erroneous inclination, and put in its place

thoughts that are true and that will endure the light, opportunity to do evil

will give place to opportunity for accomplishing good, for a man can only

attract that to him which is in harmony with his nature, and no temptation can

gravitate  to  a  man  unless  there  is  that  in  his  heart  which  is  capable  of

responding to it.

  Guard well your thoughts, reader, for what you really are in your secret

thoughts today, be it good or evil, you will, sooner or later, become in actual

deed.  He  who  unwearingly  guards  the  portals  of  his  mind  against  the

intrusion of sinful thoughts, and occupies himself with loving thoughts, with

pure, strong, and beautiful thoughts, will, when the season of their ripening

comes, bring forth the fruits of gentle and holy deeds, and no temptation that

can come against him shall find him unarmed or unprepared.                  10. YOUR MENTAL ATTITUDE


  As a being of thought, your dominant mental attitude will determine your

condition  in  life.  It  will  also  be  the  gauge  of  your  knowledge  and  the

measures of your attainment. The so-called limitations of your nature are the

boundary lines of your thoughts; they are self-erected fences, and can be

drawn to a narrower circle, extended to a wider, or be allowed to remain.

  You are the thinker of your thoughts and as such you are the maker of

yourself and condition. Thought is causal and creative, and appears in your

character and life in the form of results. There are no accidents in your life.

Both  its  harmonies  and  antagonisms  are  the  responsive  echoes  of  your

thoughts. A man thinks, and his life appears.

  If  your  dominant  mental  attitude  is  peaceable  and  lovable,  bliss  and

blessedness will follow you; if it be resistant and hateful, trouble and distress

will cloud your pathway. Out of ill-will will come grief and disaster; out of

good-will, healing and reparation.

  You  imagine  your  circumstances  as  being  separate  from  yourself,  but

they are intimately related to your thought world. Nothing appears without an

adequate cause. Everything that happens is just. Nothing is fated, everything

is formed.

  As you think, you travel; as you love, you attract. You are today where

your thoughts have brought you; you will be tomorrow where your thoughts

take you. You cannot escape the result of your thoughts, but you can endure

and learn, can accept and be glad.

  You will always come to the place where your love (your most abiding

and intense thought) can receive its measure of gratification. If your love be

base, you will come to a base place; if it be beautiful, you will come to a

beautiful place. You can alter your thoughts, and so alter your condition.

Strive to perceive the vastness and grandeur of your responsibility. You are

powerful, not powerless. You are as powerful to obey as you are to disobey;

as strong to be pure as to be impure; as ready for wisdom as for ignorance.

You can learn what you will, can remain as ignorant as you choose. If you

love knowledge you will obtain it; if you love wisdom you will secure it; if

you love purity you will realise it. All things await your acceptance, and you

choose by the thoughts which you entertain.  A  man  remains  ignorant  because  he  loves  ignorance,  and  chooses

ignorant  thoughts;  a  man  becomes  wise  because  he  loves  wisdom  and

chooses wise thoughts. No man is hindered by another; he is only hindered

by himself. No man suffers because of another; he suffers only because of

himself. By the noble Gateway of Pure Thought you can enter the highest

Heaven; by the ignoble doorway of impure thought you can descend into the

lowest hell.

  Your mental attitude towards others will faithfully react upon yourself,

and  will  manifest  itself  in  every  relation  of  your  life.  Every  impure  and

selfish thought that you send out comes back to you in your circumstances in

some form of suffering; every pure and unselfish thought returns to you in

some  form  of  blessedness.  Your  circumstances  are effects of  which  the

cause is inward and invisible. As the father-mother of your thoughts you are

the maker of your state and condition. When you know yourself, you will

perceive, that every event in your life is weighed in the faultless balance of

equity. When you understand the law within your mind you will cease to

regard yourself as the impotent and blind tool of circumstances, and will

become the strong and seeing master.                      11. SOWING AND REAPING


  Go into the fields and country lanes in the spring-time, and you will see

farmers and gardeners busy sowing seeds in the newly prepared soil. If you

were to ask any one of those gardeners or farmers what kind of produce he

expected from the seed he was sowing, he would doubtless regard you as

foolish, and would tell you that he does not “expect” at all, that it is a matter

of  common  knowledge  that  his  produce  will  be  of  the  kind  which  he  is

sowing, and that he is sowing wheat, or barley, or turnips, as the case may be,

in order to reproduce that particular kind.

  Every fact and process in Nature contains a moral lesson for the wise

man. There is no law in the world of Nature around us which is not to be

found operating with the same mathematical certainty in the mind of man and

in human life. All the parables of Jesus are illustrative of this truth, and are

drawn from the simple facts of Nature. There is a process of seed-sowing in

the mind and life a spiritual sowing which leads to a harvest according to the

kind of seed sown. Thoughts, words, and acts are seeds sown, and, by the

inviolable law of things, they produce after their kind.

  The man who thinks hateful thoughts brings hatred upon himself. The

man who thinks loving thoughts is loved. The man whose thoughts, words

and acts are sincere, is surrounded by sincere friends; the insincere man is

surrounded  by  insincere  friends.  The  man  who  sows  wrong  thoughts  and

deeds, and prays that God will bless him, is in the position of a farmer who,

having sown tares, asks God to bring forth for him a harvest of wheat.

  “That which ye sow, ye reap; see yonder fields

  The sesamum was sesamum,

  the corn was corn;

  the silence and the darkness knew;

  So is a man’s fate born.”

  “He cometh reaper of the things he sowed.”

  He  who  would  be  blest,  let  him  scatter  blessings.  He  who  would  be

happy, let him consider the happiness of others.

  Then there is another side to this seed sowing. The farmer must scatter all

his  seed  upon  the  land,  and  then  leave  it  to  the  elements.  Were  he  tocovetously hoard his seed, he would lose both it and his produce, for his seed

would perish. It perishes when he sows it, but in perishing it brings forth a

great abundance. So in life, we get by giving; we grow rich by scattering. The

man who says he is in possession of knowledge which he cannot give out

because the world is incapable of receiving it, either does not possess such

knowledge, or, if he does, will soon be deprived of it - if he is not already so

deprived. To hoard is to lose; to exclusively retain is to be dispossessed.

  Even the man who would increase his material wealth must be willing to

part with (invest) what little capital he has, and then wait for the increase. So

long as he retains his hold on his precious money, he will not only remain

poor, but will be growing poorer everyday. He will, after all, lose the thing he

loves, and will lose it without increase. But if he wisely lets it go; if, like the

farmer, he scatters his seeds of gold, then he can faithfully wait for, and

reasonably expect, the increase.

  Men are asking God to give them peace and purity, and righteousness and

blessedness, but are not obtaining these things; and why not? Because they

are not practising them, not sowing them. I once heard a preacher pray very

earnestly for forgiveness, and shortly afterwards, in the course of his sermon,

he called upon his congregation to “show no mercy to the enemies of the

church.” Such self-delusion is pitiful, and men have yet to learn that the way

to obtain peace and blessedness is to scatter peaceful and blessed thoughts,

words, and deeds.

  Men  believe  that  they  can  sow  the  seeds  of  strife,  impurity,  and

unbrotherliness, and then gather in a rich harvest of peace, purity and concord

by merely asking for it. What more pathetic sight than to see an irritable and

quarrelsome man praying for peace. Men reap that which they sow, and any

man can reap all blessedness now and at once, if he will put aside selfishness,

and sow broadcast the seeds of kindness, gentleness, and love.

  If a man is troubled, perplexed, sorrowful, or unhappy, let him ask:

  “What mental seeds have I been sowing?”

  “What seeds am I sowing?”

  “What have I done for others?”

  “What is my attitude towards others?”

  “What seeds of trouble and sorrow and unhappiness have I sown that Ishould thus reap these bitter weeds?”

  Let him seek within and find, and having found, let him abandon all the

seeds of self, and sow, henceforth, only the seeds of Truth.

  Let him learn of the farmer the simple truths of wisdom.                          12. THE REIGN OF LAW


  The little party gods have had their day. The arbitrary gods, creatures of

human caprice and ignorance, are falling into disrepute. Men have quarrelled

over and defended them until they have grown weary of the strife, and now,

everywhere, they are relinquishing and breaking up these helpless idols of

their long worship.

  The god of revenge, hatred and jealousy, who gloats over the downfall of

his enemies; the partial god who gratifies all our narrow and selfish desires;

the god who saves only the creatures of his particular special creed; the god

of exclusiveness and favouritism; such were the gods (miscalled by us God)

of our soul’s infancy, gods base and foolish as ourselves, the fabrications of

our selfish self. And we relinquished our petty gods with bitter tears and

misgivings, and broke our idols with bleeding hands. But in so doing we did

not lose sight of God; nay we drew nearer to the great, silent Heart of Love.

Destroying the idols of self, we began to comprehend somewhat of the Power

which cannot be destroyed, and entered into a wider knowledge of the God of

Love, of Peace, of Joy; the God in whom revenge and partiality cannot exist;

the God of Light, from whose presence the darkness of fear and doubt and

selfishness cannot choose but flee.

  We  have  reached  one  of  those  epochs  in  the  world’s  progress  which

witnesses the passing of the false gods; the gods of human selfishness and

human illusion. The new-old revelation of one universal impersonal Truth

has  again  dawned  upon  the  world,  and  its  searching  light  has  carried

consternation to the perishable gods who take shelter under the shadow of

self.

  Men have lost faith in a god who can be cajoled, who rules arbitrarily and

capriciously, subverting the whole order of things to gratify the wishes of his

worshippers, and are turning, with a new light in their eyes and a new joy in

their hearts, to the God of Law.

  And to Him they turn, not for personal happiness and gratification, but for

knowledge, for understanding, for wisdom, for liberation from the bondage of

self. And thus turning, they do not seek in vain, nor are they sent away empty

and discomfited. They find within themselves the reign of Law, that every

thought, every impulse, every act and word brings about a result in exactaccordance with its own nature; that thoughts of love bring about beautiful

and blissful conditions, that hateful thoughts bring about distorted and painful

conditions, that thoughts and acts good and evil are weighed in the faultless

balance of the Supreme Law, and receive their equal measure of blessedness

on the one hand, and misery on the other. And thus finding they enter a new

Path, the Path of Obedience to the Law. Entering that Path they no longer

accuse, no longer doubt, no longer fret and despond, for they know that God

is  right,  the  universal  laws  are  right,  the  cosmos  is  right,  and  that  they

themselves are wrong, if wrong there is, and  that their salvation depends

upon themselves, upon their own efforts, upon their personal acceptance of

that which is good and deliberate rejection of that which is evil. No longer

merely hearers, they become doers of the Word, and they acquire knowledge,

they receive understanding, they grow in wisdom, and they enter into the

glorious life of liberation from the bondage of self.

  “The Law of the Lord is perfect, enlightening the eyes.” Imperfection lies

in man’s ignorance, in man’s blind folly. Perfection, which is knowledge of

the Perfect Law, is ready for all who earnestly seek it; it belongs to the order

of things; it is yours and mine now if we will only put self-seeking on one

side, and adopt the life of self-obliteration.

  The knowledge of Truth, with its unspeakable joy, its calmness and quiet

strength, is not for those who persist in clinging to their “rights,” defending

their “interests,” and fighting for their “opinions”; whose works are imbued

with the personal “I,” and who build upon the shifting sands of selfishness

and egotism. It is for those who renounce these causes of strife, these sources

of pain and sorrow; and they are, indeed, Children of Truth, disciples of the

Master, worshippers of the most High.

  The Children of Truth are in the world today; they are thinking, acting,

writing, speaking; yea, even prophets are amongst us, and their influence is

pervading the whole earth. An undercurrent of holy joy is gathering force in

the  world,  so  that  men  and  women  are  moved  with  new  aspirations  and

hopes,  and  even  those  who  neither  see  nor  hear,  feel  within  themselves

strange yearnings after a better and fuller life.

  The Law reigns, and it reigns in men’s hearts and lives; and they have

come to understand the reign of Law who have sought out the Tabernacle of

the true God by the fair pathway of unselfishness.  God does not alter for man, for this would mean that the perfect must

become imperfect; man must alter for God, and this implies that the imperfect

must  become  perfect.  The  Law  cannot  be  broken  for  man,  otherwise

confusion would ensue; man must obey the Law; this is in accordance with

harmony, order, justice.

  There  is  no  more  painful  bondage  than  to  be  at  the  mercy  of  one’s

inclinations; no greater liberty than utmost obedience to the Law of Being.

And the Law is that the heart shall be purified, the mind regenerated, and the

whole being brought in subjection to Love till self is dead and Love is all in

all, for the reign of Law is the reign of Love. And Love waits for all, rejecting

none. Love may be claimed and entered into now, for it is the heritage of all.

  Ah,  beautiful  Truth!  To  know  that  now  man  may  accept  his  divine

heritage, and enter the Kingdom of Heaven!

  Oh, pitiful error! To know that man rejects it because of love of self!

    Obedience  to  the  Law  means  the  destruction  of  sin  and  self,  and  the

realisation of unclouded joy and undying peace.

  Clinging to one’s selfish inclinations means the drawing about one’s soul

clouds of pain and sorrow which darken the light of Truth; the shutting out of

oneself from all real blessedness; for “whatsoever a man sows that shall he

also reap.”

  Verily the Law reigneth, and reigneth for ever, and Justice and Love are

its eternal ministers.                      13. THE SUPREME JUSTICE


  The material universe is maintained and preserved by the equilibrium of

its forces.

  The moral universe is sustained and protected by the perfect balance of its

equivalents.

  As  in  the  physical  world  Nature  abhors  a  vacuum,  so  in  the  spiritual

world disharmony is annulled.

    Underlying the disturbances and destructions of Nature, and behind the

mutability  of  its  forms,  there  abides  the  eternal  and  perfect  mathematical

symmetry; and at the heart of life, behind all its pain, uncertainty, and unrest,

there abide the eternal harmony, the unbroken peace, and inviolable Justice.

  Is there, then, no injustice in the universe? There is injustice, and there is

not. It depends upon the kind of life and the state of consciousness from

which a man looks out upon the world and judges. The man who lives in his

passions sees injustice everywhere; the man who has overcome his passions,

sees the operations of Justice in every department of human life. Injustice is

the  confused,  feverish  dream  of  passion,  real  enough  to  those  who  are

dreaming it; Justice is the permanent reality in life, gloriously visible to those

who have wakened out of the painful nightmare of self.

  The  Divine  Order  cannot  be  perceived  until  passion  and  self  are

transcended; the Faultless Justice cannot be apprehended until all sense of

injury and wrong is consumed in the pure flames of all-embracing Love.

  The man who thinks, “I have been slighted, I have been injured, I have

been insulted, I have been treated unjustly,” cannot know what Justice is;

blinded by self, he cannot perceive the pure Principles of Truth, and brooding

upon his wrongs, he lives in continual misery.

  In the region of passion there is a ceaseless conflict of forces causing

suffering to all who are involved in them. There is action and reaction, deed

and consequence, cause and effect; and within and above all is the Divine

Justice regulating the play of forces with the utmost mathematical accuracy,

balancing cause and effect with the finest precision. But this Justice is not

perceived - cannot be perceived - by those who are engaged in the conflict;

before this can be done, the fierce warfare of passion must be left behind.  The world of passion is the abode of schisms, quarrellings, wars, law-

suits,  accusations,  condemnations,  impurities,  weaknesses,  follies,  hatreds,

revenges, and resentments. How can a man perceive Justice or understand

Truth who is even partly involved in the fierce play of its blinding elements?

As well expect a man caught in the flames of a burning building to sit down

and reason out the cause of the fire.

  In  this  realm  of  passion,  men  see  injustice  in  the  actions  of  others

because,  seeing  only  immediate  appearances,  they  regard  every  act  as

standing  by  itself,  undetached  from  cause  and  consequence.  Having  no

knowledge  of  cause  and  effect  in  the  moral  sphere,  men  do  not  see  the

exacting and balancing process which is momentarily proceeding, nor do they

ever regard their own actions as unjust, but only the actions of others. A boy

beats  a  defenceless  animal,  then  a  man  beats  the  defenceless  boy  for  his

cruelty, then a stronger man attacks the man for his cruelty to the boy. Each

believes the other to be unjust and cruel, and himself to be just and humane;

and doubtless most of all would the boy justify his conduct toward the animal

as altogether necessary. Thus does ignorance keep alive hatred and strife;

thus do men blindly inflict suffering upon themselves, living in passion and

resentment, and not finding the true way in life. Hatred is met with hatred,

passion with passion, strife with strife. The man who kills is himself killed;

the thief who lives by depriving others is himself deprived; the beast that

preys on others is hunted and killed; the accuser is accused, the condemner is

condemned, the denouncer is persecuted.

  “By this the slayer’s knife doth stab himself,

  The unjust judge has lost his own defender,

  The false tongue dooms its lie, the creeping thief

  And spoiler rob to render.

  Such is the Law.”

  Passion, also has its active and passive sides. Fool and fraud, oppressor

and  slave,  aggressor  and  retaliator,  the  charlatan  and  the  superstitious,

complement each other, and come together by the operation of the Law of

Justice. Men unconsciously cooperate in the mutual production of affliction;

“the blind lead the blind, and both fall together into the ditch.” Pain, grief,

sorrow, and misery are the fruits of which passion is the flower.

  Where the passion-bound soul sees only injustice, the good man, he whohas conquered passion, sees cause and effect, sees the Supreme Justice. It is

impossible for such a man to regard himself as treated unjustly, because he

has ceased to see injustice. He knows that no one can injure or cheat him,

having ceased to injure or cheat himself. However passionately or ignorantly

men may act towards him, it cannot possibly cause him any pain, for he

knows that whatever comes to him (it may be abuse and persecution) can

only  come  as  the  effect  of  what  he  himself  has  formerly  sent  out.  He

therefore regards all things as good, rejoices in all things, loves his enemies

and blesses them that curse him, regarding them as the blind but beneficent

instruments by which he is enabled to pay his moral debts to the Great Law.

  The good man, having put away all resentment, retaliation, self-seeking,

and egotism, has arrived at a state of equilibrium, and has thereby become

identified with the Eternal and Universal Equilibrium. Having lifted himself

above the blind forces of passion, he understands those forces, contemplates

them  with  a  calm  penetrating  insight,  like  the  solitary  dweller  upon  a

mountain who looks down upon the conflict of the storms beneath his feet.

For him, injustice has ceased, and he sees ignorance and suffering on the one

hand and enlightenment and bliss on the other. He sees that not only do the

fool and the slave need his sympathy, but that the fraud and the oppressor are

equally in need of it, and so his compassion is extended towards all.

  The Supreme Justice and the Supreme Love are one. Cause and effect

cannot be avoided; consequences cannot be escaped.

  While a man is given to hatred, resentment, anger and condemnation, he

is subject to injustice as the dreamer to his dream, and cannot do otherwise

than see injustice; but he who has overcome those fiery and binding elements,

knows that unerring Justice presides over all, that in reality there is no such

thing as injustice in the whole of the universe.                        14. THE USE OF REASON


  We have heard it said that reason is a blind guide, and that it draws men

away from Truth rather than leads them to it. If this were true, it were better

to remain, or to become, unreasonable, and to persuade others so to do. We

have found, however, that the diligent cultivation of the divine faculty of

reason  brings  about  calmness  and  mental  poise,  and  enables  one  to  meet

cheerfully the problems and difficulties of life.

  It is true there is a higher light than reason; even that of the Spirit of Truth

itself, but without the aid of reason, Truth cannot be apprehended. They who

refuse to trim the lamp of reason will never, whilst they so refuse, perceive

the light of Truth, for the light of reason is a reflection of that Light.

    Reason  is  a  purely  abstract  quality,  and  comes  midway  between  the

animal and divine consciousness in man, and leads, if rightly employed, from

the darkness of one to the Light of the other. It is true that reason may be

enlisted in the service of the lower, self-seeking nature, but this is only a

result of its partial and imperfect exercise. A fuller development of reason

leads away from the selfish nature, and ultimately allies the soul with the

highest, the divine.

  That spiritual Percival who, searching for the Holy Grail of the Perfect

Life, is again and again

  “left alone,

  And wearying in a land of sand and thorns,”

  is not so stranded because he has followed reason, but because he is still

clinging to, and is reluctant to leave, some remnants of his lower nature. He

who will use the light of reason as a torch to search for Truth will not be left

at last in comfortless darkness.

  “Come, now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord; though your sins

be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow.”

  Many men and women pass through untold sufferings, and at last die in

their sins, because they refuse to reason; because they cling to those dark

delusions which even a faint glimmer of the light of reason would dispel; and

all must use their reason freely, fully, and faithfully, who would exchange the

scarlet robe of sin and suffering for the white garment of blamelessness andpeace.

  It is because we have proved and know these truths that we exhort men to

  “tread the middle road, whose course

  Bright reason traces, and soft quiet smooths,”

  for reason leads away from passion and selfishness into the quiet ways of

sweet persuasion and gentle forgiveness, and he will never be led astray, nor

will  he  follow  blind  guides,  who  faithfully  adheres  to  the  Apostolic

injunction,  “Prove  all  things,  and  hold  fast  that  which  is  good.”  They,

therefore, who despise the light of reason, despise the Light of Truth.

  Large numbers of people are possessed of the strange delusion that reason

is somehow intimately connected with the denial of the existence of God.

This is probably due to the fact that those who try to prove that there is no

God usually profess to take their stand upon reason, while those who try to

prove  the  reverse  generally  profess  to  take  their  stand  on  faith.  Such

argumentative  combatants,  however,  are  frequently  governed  more  by

prejudice than either reason or faith, their object being not to find Truth, but

to defend and confirm a preconceived opinion.

    Reason  is  concerned,  not  with  ephemeral  opinions,  but  with  the

established truth of things, and he who is possessed of the faculty of reason in

its purity and excellence can never be enslaved by prejudice, and will put

from him all preconceived opinions as worthless. He will neither attempt to

prove nor disprove, but after balancing extremes and bringing together all

apparent  contradictions,  he  will  carefully  and  dispassionately  weigh  and

consider them, and so arrive at Truth.

    Reason is, in reality, associated with all that is pure and gentle, moderate

and just. It is said of a violent man that he is “unreasonable,” of a kind and

considerate man that he is “reasonable,” and of an insane man that he has

“lost his reason.” Thus it is seen that the word is used, even to a great extent

unconsciously, though none the less truly, in a very comprehensive sense,

and though reason is not actually love and thoughtfulness and gentleness and

sanity, it leads to and is intimately connected with these divine qualities, and

cannot, except for purposes of analysis, be dissociated from them.

    Reason represents all that is high and noble in man. It distinguishes him

from the brute which blindly follows its animal inclinations, and just in the

degree that man disobeys the voice of reason and follows his inclinationsdoes he become brutish. As Milton says:

  “Reason in man obscured, or not obeyed,

    Immediately inordinate desires

  And upstart passions catch the government

  From reason, and to servitude reduce

  Man till then free.”

  The following definition of “reason” from Nuttall’s Dictionary will give

some idea of the comprehensiveness of the word:

  The  cause,  ground,  principle,  or  motive  of  anything  said  or

done; efficient cause; final cause; the faculty of intelligence in man;

especially the faculty by which we arrive at necessary truth.

  It will thus be seen that “reason” is a term, the breadth of which is almost

sufficient to embrace even Truth itself, and Archbishop Trench tells us in his

celebrated work ‘On the Study of Words’ that the terms Reason and Word

“are indeed so essentially one and the same that the Greek language has one

word for them both,” so that the Word of God is the Reason of God; and one

of  the  renderings  of  Lao-tze’s  “Tao”  is  Reason,  so  that  in  the  Chinese

translation of our New Testament, St. John’s Gospel runs; “In the beginning

was the Tao.”

  To  the  undeveloped  and  uncharitable  mind  all  words  have  narrow

applications,  but  as  a  man  enlarges  his  sympathies  and  broadens  his

intelligence,  words  become  filled  with  rich  meanings  and  assume

comprehensive proportions. Let us therefore cease from foolish quarrellings

about words, and, like reasonable beings, search for principles and practise

those things which make for unity and peace.                            15. SELF-DISCIPLINE


  A  man  does  not  live  until  he  begins  to  discipline  himself;  he  merely

exists. Like an animal he gratifies his desires and pursues his inclinations just

where they may lead him. He is happy as a beast is happy, because he is not

conscious of what he is depriving himself; he suffers as the beast suffers,

because he does not know the way out of suffering. He does not intelligently

reflect upon life, and lives in a series of sensations, longings, and confused

memories which are unrelated to any central idea or principle. A man whose

inner  life  is  so  ungoverned  and  chaotic  must  necessarily  manifest  this

confusion in the visible conditions of his outer life in the world; and though

for a time, running with the stream of his desires, he may draw to himself a

more or less large share of the outer necessities and comforts of life, he never

achieves any real success nor accomplishes any real good, and sooner or later

worldly failure and disaster are inevitable, as the direct result of the inward

failure to properly adjust and regulate those mental forces which make the

outer life.

  Before a man accomplish anything of an enduring nature in the world he

must first of all acquire some measure of success in the management of his

own mind. This is as mathematical a truism as that two and two are four, for,

“out of the heart are the issues of life.” If a man cannot govern the forces

within himself, he cannot hold a firm hand upon the outer activities which

form his visible life. On the other hand, as a man succeeds, in governing

himself he rises to higher and higher levels of power and usefulness and

success in the world.

  The  only  difference  between  the  life  of  the  beast  and  that  of  the

undisciplined  man  is  that  the  man  has  a  wider  variety  of  desires,  and

experiences a greater intensity of suffering. It may be said of such a man that

he is dead, being truly dead to self-control, chastity, fortitude, and all the

nobler qualities which constitute life. In the consciousness of such a man the

crucified Christ lies entombed, awaiting that resurrection which shall revivify

the mortal sufferer, and wake him up to a knowledge of the realities of his

existence.

  With  the  practice  of  self-discipline  a  man  begins  to  live,  for  he  then

commences to rise above the inward confusion and to adjust his conduct to asteadfast centre within himself. He ceases to follow where inclination leads

him, reins in the steed of his desires, and lives in accordance with the dictates

of reason and wisdom. Hitherto his life has been without purpose or meaning,

but now he begins to consciously mould his own destiny; he is “clothed and

in his right mind.”

  In the process of self-discipline there are three stages namely:

  1. Control

  2. Purification

  3. Relinquishment

  A man begins to discipline himself by controlling those passions which

have hitherto controlled him; he resists temptation and guards himself against

all those tendencies to selfish gratifications which are so easy and natural,

and  which  have  formerly  dominated  him.  He  brings  his  appetite  into

subjection, and begins to eat as a reasonable and responsible being, practising

moderation and thoughtfulness in the selection of his food, with the object of

making his body a pure instrument through which he may live and act as

becomes a man, and no longer degrading that body by pandering to gustatory

pleasure. He puts a check upon his tongue, his temper, and, in fact, his every

animal desire and tendency, and this he does by referring all his acts to a

fixed centre within himself. It is a process of living from within outward,

instead of, as formerly, from without inward. He conceives of an ideal, and,

enshrining  that  ideal  in  the  sacred  recesses  of  his  heart,  he  regulates  his

conduct in accordance with its exaction and demands.

  There is a philosophical hypothesis that at the heart of every atom and

every aggregation of atoms in the universe there is a motionless  centre

which is the sustaining source of all the universal activities. Be this as it may,

there  is  certainly  in  the  heart  of  every  man  and  woman  a  selfless  centre

without which the outer man could not be, and the ignoring of which leads to

suffering and confusion. This selfless centre which takes the form, in the

mind, of an ideal of unselfishness and spotless purity, the attainment of which

is desirable, is man’s eternal refuge from the storms of passion and all the

conflicting elements of his lower nature. It is the Rock of Ages, the Christ

within, the divine and immortal in all men.

  As a man practises self-control he approximates more and more to this

inward reality, and is less and less swayed by passion and grief, pleasure andpain, and lives a steadfast and virtuous life, manifesting manly strength and

fortitude. The restraining of the passions, however, is merely the initial stage

in self-discipline, and is immediately followed by the process of Purification.

By this a man so purifies himself as to take passion out of the heart and mind

altogether; not merely restraining it when it rises within him, but preventing it

from rising altogether. By merely restraining his passions a man can never

arrive at peace, can never actualise his ideal; he must purify those passions.

  It is in the purification of his lower nature that a man becomes strong and

godlike,  standing  firmly  upon  the  ideal  centre  within,  and  rendering  all

temptations  powerless  and  ineffectual.  This  purification  is  effected  by

thoughtful care, earnest meditation, and holy aspiration; and as success is

achieved confusion of mind and life pass away, and calmness of mind and

spiritualized conduct ensure.

  True strength and power and usefulness are born of self-purification, for

the lower animal forces are not lost, but are transmuted into intellectual and

spiritual  energy.  The  pure  life  (Pure  in  thought  and  deed)  is  a  life  of

conservation of energy; the impure life (even should the impurity not extent

beyond thought) is a life of dissipation of energy. The pure man is more

capable, and therefore more fit to succeed in his plans and to accomplish his

purposes than the impure. Where the impure man fails, the pure man will step

in and be victorious, because he directs his energies with a calmer mind and a

greater definiteness and strength of purpose.

  With the growth in purity; all the elements which constitute a strong and

virtuous manhood are developed in an increasing degree of power, and as a

man brings his lower nature into subjection, and makes his passions do his

bidding, just so much will he mould the outer circumstances of his life, and

influence others for good.

  The third stage of self-discipline, that of Relinquishment, is a process of

letting the lower desires and all impure and unworthy thoughts drop out of

the mind, and also refusing to give them any admittance, leaving them to

perish. As a man grows purer, he perceives that all evil is powerless, unless it

receives his encouragement, and so he ignores it, and lets it pass out of his

life. It is by pursuing this aspect of self-discipline that a man enters into and

realises  the  divine  life,  and  manifests  those  qualities  which  are  distinctly

divine, such as wisdom, patience, non-resistance, compassion, and love. It ishere, also, where a man becomes consciously immortal, rising above all the

fluctuations  and  uncertainties  of  life,  and  living  in  and  intelligent  and

unchangeable peace.

  By self-discipline a man attains to every degree of virtue and holiness,

and finally becomes a purified son of God, realising his oneness with the

central heart of all things.

  Without self-discipline a man drifts lower and lower, approximating more

and more nearly to the beast, until at last he grovels, a lost creature, in the

mire of his own befoulment. By self-discipline a man rises higher and higher,

approximating more and more nearly to the divine, until at last he stands

erect  in  his  divine  dignity,  a  saved  soul,  glorified  by  the  radiance  of  his

purity. Let a man discipline himself, and he will live; let a man cease to

discipline himself, and he will perish.

  As  a  tree  grows  in  beauty,  health,  and  fruitfulness  by  being  carefully

pruned and tended, so a man grows in grace and beauty of life by cutting

away all the branches of evil from his mind, and as he tends and develops the

good by constant and unfailing effort.

  As a man by practice acquires proficiency in his craft, so the earnest man

acquires  proficiency  in  goodness  and  wisdom.  Men  shrink  from  self-

discipline  because  in  its  early  stages  it  is  painful  and  repellent,  and  the

yielding to desire is, at first, sweet and inviting; but the end of desire is

darkness  and  unrest,  whereas  the  fruits  of  discipline  are  immortality  and

peace.                                16. RESOLUTION


  Resolution  is  the  directing  and  impelling  force  in  individual  progress.

Without it no substantial work can be accomplished. Not until a man brings

resolution to bear upon his life does he consciously and rapidly develop, for a

life without resolution is a life without aims, and a life without aims is a

drifting and unstable thing.

  Resolution may of course be linked to downward tendencies, but it is

more usually the companion of noble aims and lofty ideals, and I am dealing

with it in this its highest use and application.

  When a man makes a resolution, it means that he is dissatisfied with his

condition,  and  is  commencing  to  take  himself  in  hand  with  a  view  to

producing a better piece of workmanship out of the mental materials of which

his  character  and  life  are  composed,  and  in  so  far  as  he  is  true  to  his

resolution he will succeed in accomplishing his purpose.

  The vows of the saintly once are holy resolutions directed toward some

victory  over  self,  and  the  beautiful  achievements  of  holy  men  and  the

glorious conquests of the Divine Teachers were rendered possible and actual

by the pursuit of unswerving resolution.

  To arrive at the fixed determination to walk a higher path than heretofore,

although it reveals the great difficulties which have to be surmounted, it yet

makes possible the treading of that path, and illuminates its dark places with

the golden halo of success.

  The true resolution is the crisis of long thought, protracted struggle, or

fervent but unsatisfied aspiration. It is no light thing, no whimsical impulse or

vague desire, but a solemn and irrevocable determination not to rest nor cease

from  effort  until  the  high  purpose  which  is  held  in  view  is  fully

accomplished.

    Half-hearted  and  premature  resolution  is  no  resolution  at  all,  and  is

shattered at the first difficulty.

  A  man  should  be  slow  to  form  a  resolution.  He  should  searchingly

examine  his  position  and  take  into  consideration  every  circumstance  and

difficulty connected with his decision, and should be fully prepared to meet

them. He should be sure that he completely understands the nature of hisresolution, that his mind is finally made up, and that he is without fear and

doubt  in  the  matter.  With  the  mind  thus  prepared,  the  resolution  that  is

formed will not be departed from, and by the aid of it a man will, in due time,

accomplish his strong purpose.

  Hasty resolutions are futile.

  The mind must be fortified to endure.

    Immediately the resolution to walk a higher path is made, temptation and

trial begin. Men have found that no sooner have they decided to lead a truer

and nobler life than they have been overwhelmed with such a torrent of new

temptations and difficulties as make their position almost unendurable, and

many men, because of this, relinquish their resolution.

  But  these  temptations  and  trials  are  a  necessary  part  of  the  work  of

regeneration upon which the man has decided and must be hailed as friends

and met with courage if the resolution is to do its work. For what is the real

nature of a resolution? Is it not the sudden checking of a particular stream of

conduct, and the endeavour to open up an entirely new channel? Think of an

engineer who decides to turn the course of a powerfully running stream or

river in another direction. He must first cut his new channel, and must take

every precaution to avoid failure in the carrying out of his undertaking. But

when he comes to the all-important task of directing the stream into its new

channel,  then  the  flowing  force,  which  for  ages  has  steadily  pursued  its

accustomed course, becomes refractory, and all the patience and care and

skill of the engineer will be required for the successful completion of the

work. It is even so with the man who determines to turn his course of conduct

in  another  and  higher  direction.  Having  prepared  his  mind,  which  is  the

cutting of a new channel, he then proceeds to the work of redirecting his

mental forces - which have hitherto flowed on uninterruptedly - into the new

course. Immediately this is attempted, the arrested energy begins to assert

itself in the form of powerful temptations and trials hitherto unknown and

unencountered. And this is exactly as it should be; it is the law; and the same

law  that  is  in  the  water  is  in  the  mind.  No  man  can  improve  upon  the

established law of things, but he can learn to understand the law instead of

complaining, and wishing things were different. The man who understands

all that is involved in the regeneration of his mind will “glory in tribulations,”

knowing  that  only  by  passing  through  them  can  he  gain  strength,  obtainpurity of heart, and arrive at peace. And as the engineer at last (perhaps after

many  mistakes  and  failures)  succeeds  in  getting  the  stream  to  flow  on

peacefully in the broader and better channel, and the turbulence of the water

is  spent,  and  all  dams  can  be  removed,  so  the  man  of  resolution  at  last

succeeds in directing his thoughts and acts into the better and nobler way to

which he aspires, and temptations and trials give place to steadfast strength

and settled peace.

  He whose life is not in harmony with his conscience and who is anxious

to remedy his mind and conduct in a particular direction, let him first mature

his purpose by earnest thought and self-examination, and having arrived at a

final conclusion, let him frame his resolution, and having done so let him not

swerve from it, let him remain true to his decision under all circumstances,

and  he  cannot  fail  to  achieve  his  good  purpose;  for  the  Great  Law  ever

shields and protects him who, no matter how deep his sins, or how great and

many his failures and mistakes, has, deep in his heart, resolved upon the

finding of a better way, and every obstacle must at last give way before a

matured and unshaken resolution.                  17. THE GLORIOUS CONQUEST


  Truth can only be apprehended by the conquest of self.

    Blessedness can only be arrived at by overcoming the lower nature.

  The way of Truth is barred by a man’s self.

  The only enemies that can actually hinder him are his own passions and

delusions. Until a man realises this, and commences to cleanse his heart, he

has not found the Path which leads to knowledge and peace.

  Until passion is transcended, Truth remains unknown. This is the Divine

Law. A man cannot keep his passions and have Truth as well.

  Error is not slain until selfishness is dead.

  The overcoming of self is no mystical theory, but a very real and practical

thing.

  It is a process which must be pursued daily and hourly, with unswerving

faith and undaunted resolution if any measure of success is to be achieved.

  The process is one of orderly growth, having its sequential stages, like the

growth of a tree; and as fruit can only be produced by carefully and patiently

training the tree even so the pure and satisfying fruits of holiness can only be

obtained by faithfully and patiently training the mind in the growth of right

thought and conduct.

  There are five steps in the overcoming of passion (which includes all bad

habits and particular forms of wrong-doing) which I will call:

  1. Repression

  2. Endurance

  3. Elimination

  4. Understanding

  5. Victory

  When men fail to overcome their sins, it is because they try to begin at

the  wrong  end.  They  want  to  have  the  stage  of  Victory  without  passing

through the previous four stages. They are in the position of a gardener who

wants to produce good fruit without training and attending to his trees.

    Repression consists in checking and controlling the wrong act (such as

an outburst of temper, a hasty or unkind word, a selfish indulgence etc.), andnot allowing it to take actual form. This is equivalent to the gardener nipping

off the useless buds and branches from his tree. It is a necessary process, but

a painful one. The tree bleeds while undergoing the process, and the gardener

knows that it must not be taxed too severely. The heart also bleeds when it

refuses to return passion for passion, when it ceases to defend and justify

itself. It is the process of “mortifying the members” of which St. Paul speaks.

  But  this  repression  is  only  the  beginning  of  self-conquest.  When  it  is

made an end in itself, and there is no object of finally purifying the heart, that

is a stage of hypocrisy; a hiding of one’s true nature, and striving to appear

better in the eyes of others than one really is. In that case it is an evil, but

when adopted as the first stage toward complete purification, it is good. Its

practice leads to the second stage of Endurance, or forbearance, in which

one silently endures the pain which arises in the mind when it is brought in

contact  with  certain  actions  and  attitudes  of  other  minds  toward  one.  As

success is attained in this stage, the striver comes to see that all his pain

actually  arises  in  his  own  weaknesses,  and  not  in  the  wrong  attitudes  of

others toward him, these latter being merely the means by which his sins are

brought to the surface and revealed to him. He thus gradually exonerates all

others  from  blame  in  his  falls  and  lapses  of  conduct,  and  accuses  only

himself, and so learns to love those who thus unconsciously reveal to him his

sins and shortcomings.

    Having passed through these two stages of self-crucifixion, the disciple

enters the third, that of Elimination, in which the wrong thought which lay

behind the wrong act is cast from the mind immediately it appears. At this

stage, conscious strength and holy joy begin to take the place of pain, and the

mind having become comparatively calm, the striver is enabled to gain a

deeper insight into the complexities of his mind, and thus to understand the

inception,  growth,  and  outworking  of  sin.  This  is  the  stage  of

Understanding.

  Perfection in understanding leads to the final conquest of self, a conquest

so complete that the sin can no more rise in the mind even as a thought or

impression; for when the knowledge of sin is complete; when it is known in

its totality, from its inception as a seed in the mind to its ripened outgrowth as

act and consequence, then it can no more be allowed a place in life, but it is

abandoned for ever. Then the mind is at peace. The wrong acts of others nolonger arouse wrong and pain in the mind of the disciple. He is glad and calm

and wise. He is filled with Love, and blessedness abides with him. And this is

Victory!                18. CONTENTMENT IN ACTIVITY


  The confounding of a positive spiritual virtue or principle with a negative

animal vice is common amongst writers even of what is called the “Advance

Thought  School,”  and  much  valuable  energy  is  frequently  expended  in

criticising  and  condemning,  where  a  little  calm  reasoning  would  have

revealed a greater light, and led to the exercise of a broader charity.

  The  other  day  I  came  across  a  vigorous  attack  upon  the  teaching  of

“Love,” wherein the writer condemned such teaching as weakly, foolish, and

hypocritical. Needless to say, that which he was condemning as “Love,” was

merely weak sentimentality and hypocrisy.

  Another writer in condemning “meekness” does not know that what he

calls meekness is only cowardice, while another who attacks “chastity” as “a

snare,” is really confusing painful and hypocritical restraint with the virtue of

chastity. And just lately I received a long letter from a correspondent who

took great pains to show me that “contentment” is a vice, and is the source of

innumerable evils.

  That which my correspondent called “contentment” is, of course animal

indifference.  The  spirit  of  indifference  is  incompatible  with  progress,

whereas the spirit of contentment may, and does, attend the highest form of

activity, the truest advancement and development. Indolence is the twin sister

of indifference, but cheerful and ready action is the friend of contentment.

    Contentment  is  a  virtue  which  becomes  lofty  and  spiritual  in  its  later

developments, as the mind is trained to perceive and the heart to receive the

guidance, in all things, of a merciful law.

  To be contented does not mean to forego effort; it means to free effort

from anxiety; it does not mean to be satisfied with sin and ignorance and

folly, but to rest happily in duty done, work accomplished.

  A man may be said to be content to lead a grovelling life, to remain in sin

and in debt, but such a man’s true state is one of indifference to his duty, his

obligations, and the just claims of his fellow-men. He cannot truly be said to

possess  the  virtue  of  contentment;  he  does  not  experience  the  pure  and

abiding joy which is the accompaniment of active contentment; so far as his

true nature is concerned he is a sleeping soul, and sooner or later will be

awakened by intense suffering, having passed through which he will find thattrue contentment which is the outcome of honest effort and true living.

  There are three things with which a man should be content:

  1. With whatever happens.

  2. With his friendships and possessions.

  3. With his pure thoughts.

  Contented with whatever happens, he will escape grief; with his friends

and possessions, he will avoid anxiety and wretchedness; and with his pure

thoughts, he will never go back to suffer and grovel in impurities.

  There are three things with which a man should not be content:

  1. With his opinions.

  2. With his character.

  3. With his spiritual condition.

  Not content with his opinions, he will continually increase in intelligence;

not content with his character, he will ceaselessly grow in strength and virtue;

and not content with his spiritual condition, he will, everyday, enter into a

larger wisdom and fuller blessedness. In a word, a man should be contented,

but not indifferent to his development as a responsible and spiritual being.

  The truly contented man works energetically and faithfully, and accepts

all  results  with  an  untroubled  spirit,  trusting,  at  first,  that  all  is  well,  but

afterwards, with the growth of enlightenment, knowing that results exactly

correspond with efforts. Whatsoever material possessions come to him, come

not by greed and anxiety and strife, but by right thought, wise action, and

pure exertion.            19. THE TEMPLE OF BROTHERHOOD


    Universal Brotherhood is the supreme Ideal of Humanity, and towards

that Ideal the world is slowly but surely moving.

  Today, as never before, numbers of earnest men and women are striving

to make this Ideal tangible and real; Fraternities are springing up on every

hand, and Press and Pulpit, the world over, are preaching the Brotherhood of

Man.

  The unselfish elements in all such efforts cannot fail to have their effect

upon the race, and are with certainty urging it towards the goal of its noblest

aspirations; but the ideal state has not yet manifested through any outward

organisation,  and  societies  formed  for  the  purpose  of  propagating

Brotherhood are continually being shattered to pieces by internal dissension.

  The Brotherhood for which Humanity sighs is withheld from actuality by

Humanity itself; nay, more, it is frustrated even by men who work zealously

for it is a desirable possibility; and this because the purely spiritual nature

of Brotherhood is not perceived, and the principles involved, as well as the

individual  course  of  conduct  necessary  to  perfect  unity,  are  not

comprehended.

    Brotherhood as a human organisation cannot exist so long as any degree

of self-seeking reigns in the hearts of men and women who band themselves

together  for  any  purpose,  as  such  self-seeking  must  eventually  rend  the

Seamless Coat of loving unity. But although organised Brotherhood has so

far largely failed, any man may realise Brotherhood in its perfection, and

know it in all its beauty and completion, if he will make himself of a wise,

pure, and loving spirit, removing from his mind every element of strife, and

learning to practise those divine qualities without which Brotherhood is but a

mere theory, opinion, or illusive dream.

  For Brotherhood is at first spiritual, and its outer manifestation in the

world must follow as a natural sequence.

  As a spiritual reality it must be discovered by each man for himself, and

in the only place where spiritual realities can be found - within himself, and

it rests with each whether he shall choose or refuse it.

  There are four chief tendencies in the human mind which are destructiveof Brotherhood, and which bar the way to its comprehension, namely:

  Pride

  Self-love

  Hatred

    Condemnation

  Where these are there can be no Brotherhood; in whatsoever heart these

hold  sway,  discord  rules,  and  Brotherhood  is  not  realised,  for  these

tendencies are, in their very nature, dark and selfish and always make for

disruption  and  destruction.  From  these  four  things  proceeds  that  serpent

brood of false actions and conditions which poison the heart of man, and fill

the world with suffering and sorrow.

  Out  of  the  spirit  of pride proceed  envy,  resentment,  and

opinionativeness. Pride envies the position, influence, or goodness of others;

it  thinks,  “I  am  more  deserving  than  this  man  or  this  woman”;  it  also

continually finds occasion for resenting the actions of others, and says, “I

have been snubbed,” “I have been insulted,” and thinking altogether of his

own excellence, it sees no excellence in others.

  From  the  spirit  of self-love proceed  egotism,  lust  for  power,  and

disparagement and contempt. Self-love worships the personality in which it

moves; it is lost in the adoration and glorification of that “I”, that “self”

which has no real existence, but is a dark dream and a delusion. It desires pre-

eminence over others, and thinks, “I am great,” “I am more important than

others”; it also disparages others, and bestows upon them contempt, seeing no

beauty in them, being lost in the contemplation of its own beauty.

  From the spirit of hatred proceed slander, cruelty, reviling, and anger. It

strives to overcome evil by adding evil to it. It says, “This man has spoken of

me ill, I will speak still more ill of him and thus teach him a lesson.” It

mistakes cruelty for kindness, and causes its possessor to revile a reproving

friend. It feeds the flames of anger with bitter and rebellious thoughts.

  From  the  spirit  of condemnation proceed  accusation,  false  pity,  and

false judgement. It feeds itself on the contemplation of evil, and cannot see

the good. It has eyes for evil only, and finds it in almost every thing and

every person. It sets up an arbitrary standard of right and wrong by which to

judge others, and it thinks, “This man does not do as I would have him do, heis  therefore  evil,  and  I  will  denounce  him.”  So  blind  is  the  spirit  of

condemnation  that  whilst  rendering  its  possessor  incapable  of  judging

himself, it causes him to set himself up as the judge of all the earth.

  From the four tendencies enumerated, no element of brotherliness can

proceed. They are deadly mental poisons, and he who allows them to rankle

in his mind, cannot apprehend the peaceful principles on which Brotherhood

rests.

  Then  there  are  chiefly  four  divine  qualities  which  are  productive  of

Brotherhood; which are, as it were, the foundation stones on which it rests,

namely:

    Humility

    Self-surrender

  Love

    Compassion

    Wheresoever these are, there Brotherhood is active. In whatsoever heart

these qualities are dominant, there Brotherhood is an established reality, for

they are, in their very nature, unselfish and are filled with the revealing Light

of Truth. There is no darkness in them, and where they are, so powerful is

their  light,  that  the  dark  tendencies  cannot  remain,  but  are  dissolved  and

dissipated. Out of these four qualities proceed all those angelic actions and

conditions which make for unity and bring gladness to the heart of man and

to the world.

  From the spirit of Humility proceed meekness and peacefulness; from

self-surrender come patience, wisdom, and true judgement; from Love spring

kindness, joy, and harmony; and from Compassion proceed gentleness and

forgiveness.

  He who has brought himself into harmony with these four qualities is

divinely enlightened; he sees whence the actions of men proceed and whither

they  tend,  and  therefore  can  no  longer  live  in  the  exercise  of  the  dark

tendencies. He has realised Brotherhood in its completion as freedom from

malice; from envy, from bitterness, from contention, from condemnation. All

men are his brothers, those who live in the dark tendencies, as well as those

who  live  in  the  enlightened  qualities,  for  he  knows  that  when  they  have

perceived the glory and beauty of the Light of Truth, the dark tendencies willbe dispelled from their minds. He has but one attitude of mind towards all,

that of good-will.

  Of the four dark tendencies are born ill-will and strife; of the four divine

qualities are born good-will and peace.

  Living in the four tendencies a man is a strife-producer. Living in the four

qualities a man is a peace-maker.

  Involved in the darkness of the selfish tendencies, men believe that they

can fight for peace, kill to make alive, slay injury by injuring, restore love by

hatred, unity by contention, kindness by cruelty, and establish brotherhood by

erecting their own opinions (which they themselves will, in the course of

time, abandon as worthless) as objects of universal adoration.

  The wished-for Temple of Brotherhood will be erected in the world when

its four foundation stones of Humility, Self-surrender, Love, and Compassion

are firmly laid in the hearts of men, for Brotherhood consists, first of all, in

the  abandonment  of  self  by  the  individual,  and  its  after-effects  is  unity

between man and man.

    Theories  and  schemes  for  propagating  Brotherhood  are  many,  but

Brotherhood  itself  is  one  and  unchangeable  and  consists  in  the  complete

cessation from egotism and strife, and in practising good-will and peace; for

Brotherhood is a practice and not a theory. Self-surrender and Good-will are

its guardian angels, and peace is its habitation.

  Where two are determined to maintain an opposing opinion, the clinging

to  self  and  ill-will  are  there,  and  Brotherhood  is  absent.  Where  two  are

prepared to sympathise with each other, to see no evil in each other, to serve

and not to attack each other; the Love of Truth and Good-will are there, and

Brotherhood is present.

  All strifes, divisions, and wars inhere in the proud, unyielding self; all

peace, unity, and concord inhere in the Principles which the yielding up of

self reveals. Brotherhood is only practised and known by him whose heart is

at peace with all the world.            20. PLEASANT PASTURES OF PEACE


  He  who  aspires  to  the  bettering  of  himself  and  humanity  should

ceaselessly strive to arrive at the exercise of that blessed attitude of mind by

which he is enabled to put himself, mentally and sympathetically in the place

of others, and so, instead of harshly and falsely judging them, and thereby

making himself unhappy without adding to the happiness of those others, he

will  enter  into  their  experience,  will  understand  their  particular  frame  of

mind, and will feel for them and sympathise with them.

  One of the great obstacles to the attainment of such an attitude of mind is,

prejudice, and until this is removed it is impossible to act toward others as we

would wish others to act toward us.

    Prejudice is destructive of kindness, sympathy, love and true judgement,

and the strength of a man’s prejudice will be the measure of his harshness

and unkindness toward others, for prejudice and cruelty are inseparable.

  There is no rationality in prejudice, and, immediately it is aroused in a

man he ceases to act as a reasonable being, and gives way to rashness, anger,

and  injurious  excitement.  He  does  not  consider  his  words  nor  regard  the

feelings and liberties of those against whom his prejudices are directed. He

has, for the time being, forfeited his manhood, and has descended to the level

of an irrational creature.

  While  a  man  is  determined  to  cling  to  his  preconceived  opinions,

mistaking them for Truth, and refuses to consider dispassionately the position

of others, he cannot escape hatred nor arrive at blessedness.

  The  man  who  strives  after  gentleness,  who  aspires  to  act  unselfishly

toward others, will put away all his passionate prejudice and petty opinions,

and will gradually acquire the power of thinking and feeling for others, of

understanding their particular state of ignorance or knowledge, and thereby

entering fully into their hearts and lives, sympathizing with them and seeing

them as they are.

  Such  a  man  will  not  oppose  himself  to  the  prejudices  of  others  by

introducing his own, but will seek to allay prejudice by introducing sympathy

and love, striving to bring out all that is good in men, encouraging the good

by appealing to it, and discouraging the evil by ignoring it. He will realise the

good in the unselfish efforts of others, though their outward methods may bevery different from his own, and will so rid his heart of hatred, and will fit it

with love and blessedness.

  When a man is prone to harshly judge and condemn others, he should

inquire how far he falls short himself; he should also reconsider those periods

of  suffering  when  he  himself  was  misjudged  and  misunderstood,  and,

gathering wisdom and love from his own bitter experience, should studiously

and self-sacrificingly refrain from piercing with anguish hearts that are as yet

too weak to ignore, too immature and uninstructed to understand.

    Sympathy  is  not  required  towards  those  who  are  purer  and  more

enlightened than one’s self, as the purer one lives above the necessity for it.

In such a case reverence should be exercised, with a striving to lift one’s self

up to the purer level, and so enter into possession of the larger life. Nor can a

man fully understand one who is wiser than himself, and before condemning,

he should earnestly ask himself whether he is, after all, better than the man

whom he has singled out as the object of his bitterness. If he is, let him

bestow sympathy. If he is not, let him exercise reverence.

  For  thousands  of  years  the  sages  have  taught,  both  by  precept  and

example, that evil is only overcome by good, yet still that lesson for the

majority, remains unlearned. It is a lesson profound in its simplicity, and

difficult to learn because men are blinded by the illusions of self. Men are

still engaged in resenting, condemning, and fighting the evil in their own

fellow-men, thereby increasing the delusion in their own hearts, and adding

to the world’s sum of misery and suffering. When they find out that their own

resentment must be eradicated, and love put in its place, evil will perish for

lack of sustenance.

  “With burning brain and heart of hate,

  I sought my wronger, early, late,

  And all the wretched night and day

  My dream and thought was slay, and slay.

  My better self rose uppermost,

  The beast within my bosom lost

  Itself in love; peace from afar

  Shone o’er me radiant like a star.

  I Slew my wronger with a deed,  A deed of love; I made him bleed

  With kindness, and I filled for years

  His soul with tenderness and tears.”

    Dislike, resentment, and condemnation are all forms of hatred, and evil

cannot cease until these are taken out of the heart.

  But  the  obliterating  of  injuries  from  the  mind  is  merely  one  of  the

beginnings in wisdom. There is a still higher and better way. And that way is

so to purify the heart and enlighten the mind that, far from having to forget

injuries, there will be none to remember. For it is only pride and self that can

be injured and wounded by the actions and attitudes of others; and he who

takes pride and self out of his heart can never think the thought, “I have been

injured by another” or “I have been wronged by another.”

  From a purified heart proceeds the right comprehension of things; and

from the right comprehension of things proceeds the life that is peaceful,

freed from bitterness and suffering, calm and wise. He who thinks, “This man

has  injured  me,”  has  not  perceived  the  Truth  in  life;  falls  short  of  that

enlightenment which disperses the erroneous idea of evil as a thing to be

hatefully resented. He who is troubled and disturbed about the sins of others

is far from Truth; he who is troubled and disturbed about his own sins is very

near to the Gate of Wisdom. He in whose heart the flames of resentment

burn,  cannot  know  Peace  nor  understand  Truth;  he  who  will  banish

resentment from his heart, will know and understand.

  He who has taken evil out of his own heart cannot resent or resist it in

others, for he is enlightened as to its origin and nature, and knows it as a

manifestation  of  the  mistakes  of  ignorance.  With  the  increase  of

enlightenment, sin becomes impossible. He who sins, does not understand; he

who understands does not sin.

  The pure man maintains his tenderness of his heart toward those who

ignorantly  imagine  they  can  do  him  harm.  The  wrong  attitude  of  others

toward him does not trouble him; his heart is at rest in Compassion and Love.

  Blessed is he who has no wrongs to remember, no injuries to forget; in

whose pure heart no hateful thought about another can take root and flourish.

Let those who aim at the right life, who believe that they love Truth, cease to

passionately oppose themselves to others, and let them strive to calmly and

wisely  understand  them,  and  in  thus  acting  toward  others  they  will  beconquering themselves; and while sympathizing with others, their own souls

will  be  fed  with  the  heavenly  dews  of  kindness,  and  their  hearts  be

strengthened and refreshed in the Pleasant Pastures of Peace.                            BOOK ELEVEN


          FROM PASSION TO PEACE.                                  FOREWORD


  THE FIRST THREE PARTS of this book, Passion, Aspiration, and

Temptation, represent the common human life, with its passion, pathos, and

tragedy.  The  last  three  parts, Transcendence, Beatitude,  and Peace,

represents  the  Divine  Life—calm,  wise  and  beautiful—of  the  sage  and

Saviour. The middle part, Transmutation, is the transitional stage between

the two; it is the alchemic process linking the divine with the human life.

Discipline, denial, and renunciation do not constitute the Divine State; they

are only the means by which it is attained. The Divine Life is established in

that Perfect Knowledge which bestows Perfect Peace.

  James Allen

 

  Amid the din and strife of men,

  The Call Divine I hear again;

  Its telling is of things apart;

  Above the tumult of the heart.

  High o’er where sin’s dark pathways wind

  Waits the wise willing of the mind;

  Beyond strong Passion’s guarded Gates,

  There Peace awaits—there Peace awaits.                                      1. PASSION


  THE PATHWAY OF THE SAINTS and sages, the road of the wise and

the pure; the highway along which the Saviours have trod, and which all

Saviours to come will also walk—such is the subject of this book; such is the

high and holy theme which the author briefly expounds in these pages.

  Passion is the lowest level of human life. None can descend lower. In its

chilling swamps and concealing darkness creep and crawl the creatures of the

sunless  world.  Lust,  hatred,  anger,  covetousness,  pride,  vanity,  greed,

revenge, envy, back-biting, lying, theft, deceit, treachery, cruelty, suspicion,

jealousy—such  are  the  brute  forces  and  blind,  unreasoning  impulses  that

inhabit the underworld of passion, and roam, devouring and devoured, in the

rank primeval jungles of the human mind.

  There also dwell the dark shapes of remorse, pain, and suffering, and the

drooping forms of grief, sorrow, and lamentation.

  In this dark world the unwise live and die, not knowing the peace of

purity, nor the joy of that Divine Light which forever shines above them, and

for them, Yet, it shines in vain so long as it falls on unseeing eyes which look

not up, but are ever bent earthward—fleshward.

  But the wise look up. They are not satisfied with this passion-world. They

bend their steps towards the upper world of peace, the light and the glory of

which  they  behold,  at  first  far  off,  but  nearer  and  with  ever  increasing

splendour as they ascend.

  None can fall lower than passion, but all can rise higher. In that lowest

place  where  further  descent  is  impossible,  all  who  move  forward  must

ascend. The ascending pathway is always at hand, near, and easily accessible.

It is the way of self-conquest. He has already entered it who has begun to say

"nay"  to  his  selfishness,  who  has  begun  to  discipline  his  desires,  and  to

control and command the unruly elements of his mind.

  Passion  is  the  archenemy  of  mankind,  the  slayer  of  happiness,  the

opposite and enemy of peace. From it proceeds all that defiles and destroys. It

is the source of misery, and the promulgator of mischief and disaster.

  The  inner  world  of  selfishness  is  rooted  in  ignorance—ignorance  of

Divine  Law,  of  Divine  Goodness;  ignorance  of  the  Pure  Way  and  thePeaceful  Path.  Passion  is  dark,  and  it  thrives  and  flourishes  in  spiritual

darkness. It cannot enter the regions of spiritual light. In the enlightened mind

the darkness of ignorance is destroyed; in the pure heart there is no place for

passion.

  Passion in all its forms is a mental thirst, a fever, a torturing unrest. As a

fire  consumes  a  magnificent  building,  reducing  it  to  a  heap  of  unsightly

ashes, so are men consumed by the flames of passions, and their deeds and

works fall and perish.

  If one would find peace, he must come out of passion. The wise man

subdues his passions, the foolish man is subdued by them. The seeker for

wisdom begins by turning his back on folly. The lover of peace enters the

way which leads thereto, and with every step he takes he leaves further below

and behind him the dark dwelling place of passion and despair.

  The first step towards the heights of wisdom and peace is to understand

the  darkness  and  misery  of  selfishness,  and  when  that  is  understood,  the

overcoming of it—the coming out of it—will follow.

  Selfishness, or passion, not only subsists in the gross forms of greed and

glaringly  ungoverned  conditions  of  mind;  it  informs  also  every  hidden

thought which is subtly connected with the assumption and glorification of

one’s self. It is most deceiving and subtle when it prompts one to dwell upon

the selfishness in others, to accuse them of it and to talk about it. The man

who continually dwells upon the selfishness in others will not thus overcome

his own selfishness. Not by accusing others do we come out of selfishness,

but by purifying ourselves.

  The way from passion to peace is not by hurling painful charges against

others,  but  by  overcoming  one’s  self.  By  eagerly  striving  to  subdue  the

selfishness of others, we remain passion-bound. By patiently overcoming our

own  selfishness,  we  ascend  into  freedom.  Only  he  who  has  conquered

himself can subdue others; and he subdues them, not by passion, but by love.

  The  foolish  man  accuses  others  and  justifies  himself;  but  he  who  is

becoming wise justifies others and accuses himself. The way from passion to

peace is not in the outer world of people; it is in the inner world of thoughts;

it does not consist in altering the deeds of others, it consists in perfecting

one’s own deeds.

    Frequently, the man of passion is most eager to put others right; but theman of wisdom puts himself right. If one is anxious to reform the world, let

him begin by reforming himself. The reformation of self does not end with

the elimination of the sensual elements only; that is its beginning. It ends

only when every vain thought and selfish aim is overcome. Short of perfect

purity and wisdom, there is still some form of self-slavery or folly which

needs to be conquered.

  Passion is at the base of the structure of life; peace is at its crown and

summit. Without passion to begin with, there would be no power to work

with, and no achievement to end with. Passion represents power, but power

misdirected,  power  producing  hurt  instead  of  happiness.  Its  forces,  while

instruments  of  destruction  in  the  hands  of  the  foolish,  are  instruments  of

preservation in the hands of the wise. When curbed and concentrated and

beneficially directed, they represent working energy. Passion is the flaming

sword  which  guards  the  gates  of  Paradise.  It  shuts  out  and  destroys  the

foolish; it admits and preserves the wise.

  He  is  the  foolish  man  who  does  not  know  the  extent  of  his  own

ignorance; who is the slave of thoughts of self; who obeys the impulses of

passion. He is the wise man who knows his own ignorance; who understands

the emptiness of selfish thoughts; who masters the impulses of passion.

  The  fool  descends  into  deeper  and  deeper  ignorance;  the  wise  man

ascends into higher and higher knowledge. The fool desires, suffers, and dies.

The wise man aspires, rejoices, and lives.

  With mind intent on wisdom and mental gaze raised upward, the spiritual

warrior perceives the upward way, and fixes his attention upon the heights of

Peace.                                  2. ASPIRATION


  WITH THE CLEAR PERCEPTION of one’s own ignorance comes the

desire for enlightenment, and thus in the heart is born Aspiration, the rapture

of the saints.

  On  the  wings  of  aspiration  man  rises  from  earth  to  heaven,  from

ignorance to knowledge, from the under darkness to the upper light. Without

it  he  remains  a  grovelling  animal,  earthly,  sensual,  unenlightened,  and

uninspired.

    Aspiration  is  the  longing  for  heavenly  things—for  righteousness,

compassion, purity, love—as distinguished from desire, which is the longing

for  earthly  things—for  selfish  possessions,  personal  dominance,  low

pleasures, and sensual gratifications.

  As a bird deprived of its wings cannot soar, so a man without aspiration

cannot  rise  above  his  surroundings  and  become  master  of  his  animal

inclinations. He is the slave of passions, is subject to others, and is carried

hither and thither by the changing current of events.

  For one to begin to aspire means that he is dissatisfied with his low status,

and is aiming at a higher condition. It is a sure sign that he is aroused out of

his  lethargic  sleep  of  animality,  and  has  become  conscious  of  nobler

attainments and a fuller life.

    Aspiration makes all things possible. It opens the way to advancement.

Even the highest state of perfection conceivable it brings near and makes real

and possible; for that which can be conceived can be achieved.

    Aspiration is the twin angel to inspiration. It unlocks the gates of joy.

Singing accompanies soaring. Music, poetry, prophecy, and all high and holy

instruments are at last placed in the hands of those whose aspirations flag not,

whose spirit does not fail.

  So long as animal conditions taste sweet to a man, he cannot aspire; he is

already satisfied. But when their sweetness turns to bitterness, then in his

sorrow he thinks of nobler things. When he is deprived of earthly joy, he

aspires to the joy which is heavenly. It is when impurity turns to suffering

that purity is sought. Truly aspiration rises, phoenix-like, from the dead ashes

of  repentance,  but  on  its  powerful  pinions  man  can  reach  the  heaven  ofheavens.

  The  man  of  aspiration  has  entered  the  way  which  ends  in  peace,  and

surely  he  will  reach  that  end  if  he  neither  stays  nor  turns  back.  If  he

constantly renews his mind with glimpses of the heavenly vision, he will

reach the heavenly state.

  Man attains in the measure that he aspires. His longing to be is the gauge

of what he can be. To fix the mind is to foreordain the achievement. As man

can experience and know all low things, so he can experience and know all

high things. As he has become human, so can he become divine. The turning

of the mind in high and divine directions is the sole and needful task.

  What is impurity but the impure thoughts of the thinker? What is purity

but the pure thoughts of the thinker? One man does not do the thinking of

another. Each man is pure or impure of himself alone.

  If a man thinks, "It is through others, or circumstances, or heredity that I

am impure," how can he hope to overcome his errors? Such a thought will

check all holy aspirations and bind him to the slavery of passion.

  When a man fully perceives that his errors and impurities are his own,

that they are generated and fostered by himself, that he alone is responsible

for them, then he will aspire to overcome them. The way of attainment will

be opened up to him, and he will see from where and to what destination he is

traveling.

  The man of passion sees no straight path before him, and behind him is

all fog and gloom. He seizes the pleasure of the moment and does not strive

for understanding or think of wisdom. His way is confused, turbulent, and

troubled, and his heart is far from peace.

  The  man  of  aspiration  sees  before  him  the  pathway  up  the  heavenly

heights, and behind him are the circuitous routes of passion up which he has

hitherto  blindly  groped.  Striving  for  understanding,  and  his  mind  set  on

wisdom, his way is clear, and his heart already experiences a foretaste of the

final peace.

  Men  of  passion  strive  mightily  to  achieve  little  things—things  which

speedily  perish,  and,  in  the  place  where  they  were,  leave  nothing  to  be

remembered.

  Men of aspiration strive with equal might to achieve great things—thingsof  virtue,  of  knowledge,  of  wisdom,  which  do  not  perish,  but  stand  as

monuments of inspiration for the uplifting of humankind.

  As the merchant achieves worldly success by persistent exertion, so the

saint achieves spiritual success by aspiration and endeavour. One becomes a

merchant, the other a saint, by the particular direction in which his mental

energy is guided.

  When the rapture of aspiration touches the mind, it at once refines it, and

the dross of its impurities begins to fall away. While aspiration holds the

mind, no impurity can enter it, for the impure and the pure cannot at the same

moment occupy the thought. But the effort of aspiration is at first spasmatic

and  short-lived.  The  mind  falls  back  into  its  habitual  error,  and  must  be

constantly renewed.

  The lover of the pure life renews his mind daily with the invigorating

glow of aspiration. He rises early, and fortifies his mind with strong thoughts

and strenuous endeavour. He knows that the mind is of such a nature that it

cannot remain for a moment unoccupied, and that if it is not held and guided

by  high  thoughts  and  pure  aspirations,  it  will  assuredly  he  enslaved  and

misguided by low thoughts and base desires.

    Aspiration can be fed, fostered, and strengthened by daily habit, just as is

desire. It can be sought, and admitted into the mind as a divine guide, or it

can be neglected and shut out. To retire for a short time each day to some

quiet spot, preferably in the open air, and there call up the energies of the

mind  in  surging  waves  of  holy  rapture,  is  to  prepare  the  mind  for  great

spiritual victories and destinies of divine import. For such a rapture is the

preparation for wisdom and the prelude to peace.

  Before the mind can contemplate pure things it must be lifted up to them,

it must rise above impure things; and aspiration is the instrument by which

this  is  accomplished.  By  its  aid  the  mind  soars  swiftly  and  surely  into

heavenly  places,  and  begins  to  experience  divine  things.  It  begins  to

accumulate  wisdom,  and  to  learn  to  guide  itself  by  an  ever-increasing

measure of the divine light of pure knowledge.

  To thirst for righteousness; to hunger for the pure life; to rise in holy

rapture on the wings of angelic aspiration—this is the right road to wisdom.

This is the right striving for peace. This is the right beginning of the way

divine.                                3. TEMPTATION


    ASPIRATION CAN CARRY a man into heaven, but to remain there, he

must learn to conform his entire mind to the heavenly conditions. To this end

temptation works.

    Temptation is the reversion, in thought, from purity to passion. It is going

back  from  aspiration  to  desire.  It  threatens  aspiration  until  the  point  is

reached where desire is quenched in the waters of pure knowledge and calm

thought.

  In the early stages of aspiration, temptation is subtle and powerful, and is

regarded as an enemy; but it is only an enemy in the sense that the one

tempted is his own enemy. In the sense that it is the revealer of weakness and

impurity, it is a friend, a necessary factor in spiritual training. It is, indeed, an

accompaniment of the effort to overcome evil and apprehend good. To be

successfully  conquered,  the  evil  in  a  man  must  come  to  the  surface  and

present itself, and it is in temptation that the evil hidden in the heart stands

revealed and exposed.

  That which temptation appeals to and arouses is unconquered desire, and

temptation will again and again assail a man until he has lifted himself above

the lusting impulses. Temptation is an appeal to the impure. That which is

pure cannot be subject to temptation.

    Temptation waylays the man of aspiration until he touches the region of

the divine consciousness, and beyond that border temptation cannot follow

him.  It  is  when  a  man  begins  to  aspire  that  he  begins  to  be  tempted.

Aspiration rouses up all the latent good and evil, in order that the man may be

fully revealed to himself, for a man cannot overcome himself unless he fully

knows himself.

  It can scarcely be said of the merely animal man that he is tempted, for

the very presence of temptation means that there is a striving for a purer state.

Animal desire and gratification is the normal condition of the man who has

not yet risen into aspiration. He wishes for nothing more, nothing better, than

his sensual enjoyments, and is, for the present, satisfied. Such a man cannot

be tempted to fall, for he has not yet risen.

  The presence of aspiration signifies that a man has taken one step, at

least, upward, and is therefore capable of being drawn back. This backwardattraction is called temptation. The allurements of temptation subsist in the

impure thoughts and downward desires of the heart. The object of temptation

is powerless to attract when the heart no longer lusts for it. The stronghold of

temptation is within a man, not without; and until a man realizes this, the

period of temptation will be prolonged.

  While  a  man  continues  to  run  away  from  outward  objects,  under  the

delusion that temptation subsists entirely in them, and does not attack and

purge away his impure imaginings, his temptations will increase, and his falls

will be many and grievous. When a man clearly perceives that the evil is

within and not without, then his progress will be rapid, his temptations will

decrease, and the final overcoming of all temptation will be well within the

range of his spiritual vision.

    Temptation is torment. It is not an abiding condition, but is a passage

from a lower condition to a higher. The fullness and perfection of life is bliss,

not  torment.  Temptation  accompanies  weakness  and  defeat,  but  a  man  is

destined for strength and victory. The presence of torment is the signal to rise

and conquer. The man of persistent and ever renewed aspiration does not

allow himself to think that temptation cannot be overcome. He is determined

to be master of himself. Resignation to evil is an acknowledgment of defeat.

It signifies that the battle against self is abandoned; that good is denied; that

evil is made supreme.

  As the energetic man of business is not daunted by difficulties but studies

how to overcome them, so the man of ceaseless aspiration is not crushed into

submission by temptations, but meditates how he may fortify his mind. For

the tempter is like a coward: he only creeps in at weak and unguarded points.

  The tempted one should study thoughtfully the nature and meaning of

temptation,  for  until  it  is  known  it  cannot  be  overcome.  A  wise  general,

before  attacking  the  opposing  force,  studies  the  tactics  of  his  enemy.

Likewise, he who is to overcome temptation must understand how it arises in

his own darkness and error, and must study, by introspection and meditation,

how to disperse the darkness and supplant error by truth.

  The stronger a man’s passions, the fiercer will be his temptations; the

deeper his selfishness, the more subtle his temptations; the more pronounced

his vanity, the more flattering and deceptive his temptations.

  A man must know himself if he is to know the truth. He must not shrinkfrom any revelation which will expose his error. On the contrary, he must

welcome  such  revelations  as  aids  to  that  self-knowledge  which  is  the

handmaid of self-conquest.

  The man who cannot endure to have his errors and shortcomings brought

to the surface and made known, but tries to hide them, is unfit to walk the

highway of truth. He is not properly equipped to battle with and overcome

temptation. He who cannot fearlessly face his lower nature, cannot climb the

rugged heights of renunciation.

  Let  the  tempted  one  know  this:  that  he  himself  is  both  tempter  and

tempted; that all his enemies are within; that the flatterers which seduce, the

taunts  which  stab,  and  the  flames  which  burn,  all  spring  from  that  inner

region of ignorance and error in which he has hitherto lived. Knowing this,

let him be assured of complete victory over evil. When he is sorely tempted,

let him not mourn, therefore, but let him rejoice in that his strength is tried

and  his  weaknesses  exposed.  For  he  who  truly  knows  and  humbly

acknowledges his weakness will not be slow in setting about the acquisition

of strength.

  Foolish men blame others for their lapses and sins, but let the truth-lover

blame only himself. Let him acknowledge his complete responsibility for his

own  conduct  and  not  say,  when  he  falls,  this  thing,  or  such  and  such  a

circumstance, or that man was to blame. For the most which others can do is

to afford an opportunity for our own good or evil to manifest itself. They

cannot make us good or evil.

    Temptation is at first sore, grievous, and hard to be borne, and subtle and

persistent is the assailant. But if the tempted one is firm and courageous, and

does not give way, he will gradually subdue his spiritual enemy, and will

finally triumph in the knowledge of good.

  The adverse one is compounded of a man’s own lust, selfishness, and

pride.  When  these  are  put  away,  evil  is  seen  to  be  naught,  and  good  is

revealed in all-victorious splendour.                            4. TRANSMUTATION


  MIDWAY BETWEEN the hell of Passion and the heaven of Peace is the

purgatory of Transmutation—not a speculative purgatory beyond the grave,

but a real purgatory in the human heart. In its separating and purifying fire

the base metal of error is sifted away, and only the clarified gold of truth

remains.

  When temptation has culminated in sorrow and deep perplexity, then the

tempted  one,  strenuously  striving  for  deliverance,  finds  that  his  moral

servitude  is  entirely  from  himself.  Instead  of  fighting  against  outer

circumstances, he must alter inner conditions. The fight against outer things

is necessary at the start. It is the only course which can be adopted at the first,

because  of  the  prevailing  ignorance  of  mental  causation.  But  it  never,  of

itself, brings about emancipation. What it does bring about is the knowledge

of the mental cause of temptation. This knowledge of the mental cause of

temptation leads to the transmutation of thought, and the transmutation of

thought leads to deliverance from the bondage of error.

  The preliminary fighting is a necessary stage in spiritual development,

just as the crying and kicking of a helpless babe is necessary to its growth.

But as the crying and kicking is not needed beyond the infant stage, so the

fierce  struggling  with,  and  falling  under,  temptation  ends  when  the

knowledge of mental transmutation is acquired.

  The truly wise man, he who is enlightened concerning the source and

cause  of  temptation,  does  not  fight  against  outward  allurements—he

abandons all desire for them. Thus, they cease to be allurements, and the

power  of  temptation  is  destroyed  at  its  source.  But  this  abandonment  of

unholy desire is not a final process. It is the beginning of a regenerative and

transforming power which, when patiently employed, leads to the clear and

cloudless heights of spiritual enlightenment.

  Spiritual transmutation consists of an entire reversal of the ordinary self-

seeking attitude of mind toward people and things, and this reversal brings

about  an  entirely  new  set  of  experiences.  Thus  the  desire  for  a  certain

pleasure is abandoned, cut off at its source, and not allowed to have any place

in the consciousness. But the mental force which that desire represented is

not annihilated, it is transferred to a higher region of thought, transmuted intoa  purer  form  of  energy.  The  law  of  conservation  of  energy  prevails

universally in the mind as it does in matter, and the force shut off in lower

directions is liberated in higher realms of spiritual activity.

  Along the Saintly Way towards the divine  life, the midway region of

Transmutation is the Country of Sacrifice, the Plain of Renunciation. Old

passions, old ambitions and thoughts, are cast away and abandoned, but only

to  reappear  in  some  more  beautiful,  more  permanent,  more  eternally

satisfying form.

    Valuable jewels, long guarded and cherished, when thrown tearfully into

the  melting-pot,  are  remoulded  into  new  and  more  perfect  adornments.

Likewise, the spiritual alchemist, at first reluctant to part company with long-

cherished thoughts and habits, at last gives them up to discover, a little later,

to his joy, that they come back to him in the form of new facilities, rarer

powers  and  purer  joys—spiritual  jewels  newly  polished,  beautiful,  and

resplendent.

  In transmuting his mind from evil to good, a man comes to distinguish

more and more clearly between error and Truth, and so distinguishing, he

ceases to be swayed and prompted by outward things and by the actions and

attitudes  of  others.  Instead,  he  acts  from  his  knowledge  of  truth.  First

acknowledging his errors, and then confronting them with a searching mind

and a humble heart, he subdues, conquers, and transmutes them.

  The early stage of transmutation is painful but brief, for the pain is soon

transformed into pure spiritual joy, the brevity of the pain being measured by

the intelligence and energy with which the process is pursued.

  While a man thinks that the cause of his pain is in the attitude of others,

he will not pass beyond it. But when he perceives that its cause is in himself,

then he will pass beyond it into joy.

  The  unenlightened  man  allows  himself  to  be  disturbed,  wounded,  and

overthrown by what he regards as the wrong attitude of others towards him.

This is because the same wrong attitude is in himself. He, indeed, doles out to

them, in return, the same actions, regarding as right in himself that which is

wrong in others. Slander is given for slander, hatred for hatred, anger for

anger. This is the action and reaction of evil. It is the clash of selfishness with

selfishness. It is only the self, or selfish elements, within a man that can be

aroused by the evil in another. The Truth, or divine characteristics, in a mancannot  be  approached  by  that  evil,  much  less  can  it  be  disturbed  and

overthrown by it.

  It is the conversion, or complete reversal of this self or selfishness into

Truth that constitutes Transmutation. The enlightened man has abandoned the

delusion that the evil in others has power to hurt and subdue him, and he has

grasped the profound truth that he is only overthrown by the evil in himself.

He therefore ceases to blame others for his sins and sufferings, and applies

himself to purifying his own heart. In this reversal of his mental attitude, he

transmutes the lower selfish forces into the higher moral attributes. The base

ore of error is cast into the fire of sacrifice, and there comes forth the pure

gold of Truth.

  Such a man stands firm and unmoved when assailed by outward things.

He is self’s master, not its slave. He has ceased to identify himself with the

impulses of passion, and has identified himself with Truth. He has overcome

evil, and has become merged in Good. He knows both error and Truth, and

has  abandoned  error  and  brought  himself  into  harmony  with  Truth.  He

returns  good  for  evil.  The  more  he  is  assailed  by  evil  from  without,  the

greater is his opportunity of manifesting the good from within.

  That which supremely differentiates the fool from the wise man is this—

that the fool meets passion with passion, hatred with hatred, and returns evil

for evil; whereas the wise man meets passion with peace, hatred with love,

and returns good for evil.

  Men inflict suffering upon themselves through the active instrumentality

of their own unpurified nature. They rise into perfect peace in the measure

that they purify their hearts. The mental energy which men waste in pursuing

dark passions is all-sufficient to enable them to reach the highest wisdom

when it is turned in the right direction.

  As water, when transmuted into steam, becomes a new, more definite and

wide-reaching  power,  so  passion,  when  transmuted  into  intellectual  and

moral force, becomes a new life, a new power for the accomplishment of

high and unfailing purposes.

  Mental  forces,  like  molecular,  have  their  opposite  poles  or  modes  of

action. Where the negative pole is, there also is the positive. Where ignorance

is, wisdom is possible. Where passion abounds, peace awaits. Where there is

much suffering, much bliss is near. Sorrow is the negation of joy; sin is theopposite of purity; evil is the denial of good. Where there is an opposite,

there is that which is opposed. The adverse evil, in its denial of the good,

testifies  to  its  presence.  The  one  thing  needful,  therefore,  is  the  turning

around from the negative to the positive; the conversion of the heart from

impure desires to pure aspirations; the transmutation of passional forces into

moral powers.

  The wise purify their thoughts. They turn from bad deeds and do good

deeds. They put error behind them and approach Truth. Thus do they rise

above the allurements of sin, above the torments of temptation, above the

dark world of sorrow, and enter the Divine Consciousness, the Transcendent

Life.                            5. TRANSCENDENCE


  WHEN A MAN PASSES from the dark stage of temptation to the more

enlightened stage of transmutation, he has become a saint. A saint is one who

perceives the need for self-purification, who understands the way of self-

purification,  and  who  has  entered  that  way  and  is  engaged  in  perfecting

himself.

  But there comes a time in the process of transmutation when, with the

decrease of evil and the accumulation of good, there dawns in the mind a new

vision, a new consciousness, a new man. When this is reached, the saint has

become a sage; he has passed from the human life to the divine life. He is

"born again," and there begins for him a new round of experiences. He wields

a new power; a new universe opens out before his spiritual gaze. This is the

stage of transcendence. This I call the Transcendent Life.

  When there is no more consciousness of sin; when anxiety and doubt, and

grief and sorrow, are ended; when lust and animosity, and anger and envy, no

more possess the thoughts; when there remains in the mind no vestige of

blame towards others for one’s own condition, and when all conditions are

seen to be good because they are the result of causes, so that no event can

afflict the mind, then Transcendence is attained. Then the limited personality

is outgrown, and the divine life is known; evil is transcended, and Good is

all-in-all.

  The divine consciousness is not an intensification of the human; it is a

new form of consciousness. It springs from the old, but it is not a continuance

of  it.  Born  of  the  lower  life  of  sin  and  sorrow,  after  a  period  of  painful

torment, it yet transcends that life and has no part in it, just as the perfect

flower transcends the seed from which it sprang.

  As passion is the keynote of the self-life, so serenity is the keynote of the

transcendent  life.  Rising  into  it,  man  is  lifted  above  disharmony  and

disturbance. When Perfect Good is realized and known, not as an opinion or

an idea, but as an experience or a possession, then calm vision is acquired,

and tranquil joy abides through all hardships.

  The Transcendent Life is ruled, not by passions, but by principles. It is

founded  not  upon  fleeting  impulses,  but  upon  abiding  laws.  In  its  clear

atmosphere the orderly sequence of all things is revealed, so that there is seento be no room for sorrow, anxiety, or regret.

  While men are involved in the passions of self, they burden themselves

with cares, and trouble themselves over many things. Above all else, they

trouble  over  their  own  little,  burdened,  pain-stricken  personality,  being

anxious for its fleeting pleasures, for its protection and preservation, and for

its eternal safety and continuance. Now in the life that is wise and good all

this is transcended. Personal interests are replaced by universal purposes, and

all cares, troubles, and anxieties concerning the pleasure and the fate of the

personality are dispelled like the feverish dreams of a night.

  Passion  is  blind  and  ignorant.  It  sees  and  knows  only  its  own

gratification. Self recognizes no law; its object is to get and to enjoy. The

getting is a graduated scale varying from sensual greed, through many subtle

vanities, up to the desire for a personal heaven or personal immortality, but it

is self still. It is the old sensual craving coming out in a more subtle and

deceptive  form.  It  is  longing  for  some  personal  delight,  along  with  its

accompanying fear that delight should be lost forever.

  In the transcendent state, desire and dread are ended, and the thirst for

gain and the fear of loss are things that are no more. For where the universal

order is seen, and where perennial joy in that good is a normal condition,

what is there left to desire? What remains to be feared?

  He who has brought his entire nature into conformity and harmony with

the  law  of  righteousness,  who  has  made  his  thoughts  pure  and  his  deeds

blameless, has entered liberty. He has transcended darkness and mortality,

and has passed into light and immortality. For the transcendent state is at first

a  higher  order  of  morality,  then  a  new  form  of  perception,  and  at  last  a

comprehensive  understanding  of  the  universal  moral  causation.  And  this

morality,  this  vision,  and  this  understanding  constitute  the  new

consciousness, the divine life.

  The transcendent man is he who is above and beyond the dominion of

self. He has transcended evil and lives in the practice and knowledge of good.

He is like a man who, having long looked upon the world with darkened

eyes, is now restored to sight, and sees things as they are.

  Evil is an experience, and not a power. If it were an independent power in

the universe, it could not be transcended by any being. But though not real as

a power, it is real as a condition and an experience, for all experience is of thenature of reality. It is a state of ignorance, of undevelopment and as such it

recedes  and  disappears  before  the  light  of  knowledge,  as  the  intellectual

ignorance of a child vanishes before the gradually accumulating learning, or

as darkness dissolves before the rising light.

  The painful experiences of evil pass away as the new experiences of good

enter  into  and  possess  the  field  of  consciousness.  And  what  are  the  new

experiences  of  good?  They  are  many  and  beautiful—such  as  the  joyful

knowledge of the freedom from sin. They are the absence of remorse and

deliverance  from  all  torments  of  temptation.  They  are  ineffable  joy  in

conditions  and  circumstances  which  formerly  caused  deep  affliction,  and

imperviousness to be hurt by the actions of others. They are great patience

and sweetness of character; serenity of mind under all circumstances; and

emancipation  from  doubt,  fear,  and  anxiety.  They  are  freedom  from  all

dislike, envy, and animosity, with the power to feel and act kindly towards

those who see fit to constitute themselves as one’s enemies or opponents.

They are the divine power to give blessings for curses, and to return good for

evil;  a  deep  knowledge  of  the  human  heart,  with  a  perception  of  its

fundamental goodness; and insight into the law of moral causation and the

mental evolution of beings, with a prophetic foresight of the sublime good

that awaits humanity. Above all, they are a glad rejoicing in the limitation

and impotency of evil, and in the eternal supremacy and power of good.

  All these, and the calm, strong, far-reaching life that these imply and

contain, are the rich experiences of the transcendent man, along with all the

new  and  varied  resources,  the  vast  powers,  the  quickened  abilities,  and

enlarged capacities that spring to life in the new consciousness.

    Transcendence is surpassing virtue. Evil and good cannot dwell together.

Evil must be abandoned, left behind and transcended before good is grasped

and known. When good is practiced and fully comprehended, then all the

afflictions of the mind are at an end. For that which is accompanied with pain

and  sorrow  in  the  consciousness  of  evil  is  not  so  accompanied  in  the

consciousness of good.

    Whatsoever  happens  to  the  good  man  cannot  cause  him  perplexity  or

sorrow, for he knows its cause and issue, knows the good which it is ordained

to accomplish in himself, and so his mind remains happy and serene. Though

the body of the good man may be bound, his mind is free. Though it bewounded and in pain, joy and peace abide within his heart.

  A spiritual teacher had a pupil who was apt and earnest. After several

years  of  learning  and  practice,  the  pupil  one  day  offered  a  question  for

discussion which his master could not answer. After days of deep meditation,

the master said to his pupil, "I cannot answer the question which you have

asked. Have you any solution to offer?" Whereupon the pupil formulated a

reply to the question which he had propounded. The master then said to him:

"You have answered that which I could not, and henceforth neither I nor any

man can instruct you, for now you are indeed instructed by truth. You have

soared, like the kingly eagle, where no man can follow. Your work is now to

instruct others. You are no longer the pupil, you have become the master."

  In looking back on the self-life which he has transcended, the divinely

enlightened  man  sees  all  the  afflictions  of  that  life  as  though  his

schoolmasters were teaching and leading him upward. And in the measure

that he penetrated their meaning and lifted himself above them, they departed

from  him.  Their  mission  to  teach  him  having  ended,  they  left  him  the

triumphant  master  of  the  field.  For  the  lower  cannot  teach  the  higher;

ignorance cannot instruct wisdom; evil cannot enlighten good; nor can the

pupil set lessons for the master. That which is transcended cannot reach up to

that which transcends. Evil can only teach in its own sphere, where it is

regarded as master. In the sphere of good it has no place and no authority.

  The  strong  traveller  on  the  highway  of  truth  knows  no  such  thing  as

resignation to evil; he knows only obedience to good. He who submits to evil,

saying,  "Sin  cannot  be  overcome,  and  evil  must  be  borne,"  thereby

acknowledges that evil is his master. It is not his master to instruct him, but to

bind and oppress him. The lover of good cannot also be a lover of evil, nor

can  he,  for  one  moment,  admit  its  ascendancy.  He  elevates  and  glorifies

good, not evil. He loves light, not darkness.

  When a man makes truth his master, he abandons error. As he transcends

error, he becomes more like his master, until at last he becomes one with

truth, teaching it, as a master, by his actions, and reflecting it in his life.

    Transcendence is not an abnormal condition; it belongs to the orderly

process of evolution. Though, as yet, few have reached it, all will come into it

in the course of the ages. And he who ascends into it sins no more, sorrows

no  more,  and  is  no  more  troubled.  Good  are  his  thoughts,  good  are  hisactions, and the good is the tranquil tenor of his way. He has conquered self,

and  has  submitted  to  truth.  He  has  mastered  evil,  and  has  comprehended

good. Henceforth neither men nor books can instruct him, for he is instructed

by the Supreme Good, the spirit of truth.                                  6. BEATITUDE


  WHEN DIVINE GOOD is practiced, life is bliss. Bliss is the normal

condition  of  the  good  man.  Those  outer  assaults,  harassments,  and

persecutions which bring such sufferings to others, only serve to heighten his

happiness, for they cause the deep fountain of good within him to well up in

greater abundance.

  To  have  transcendent  virtue  is  to  enjoy  transcendent  happiness.  The

beatific blessedness which Jesus holds out is promised to those having the

heavenly virtues— to the merciful, the pure in heart, the peacemakers, and so

on.  The  higher  virtue  does  not  merely  and  only  lead  to  happiness;  it  is

happiness. It is impossible for a man of transcendent virtue to be unhappy.

The  cause  of  unhappiness  must  be  sought  and  found  in  the  self-loving

elements, and not in the self-sacrificing qualities. A man may have virtue,

and be unhappy, but not so if he has divine virtue.

    Human virtue is mingled with self, and therefore, with sorrow. But from

divine virtue every taint of self has been purged away, and with it every

vestige of misery. One comparison will suffice to illustrate this: a man may

have the courage of a lion in attack and self-defense (such courage being a

human virtue), but he will not thereby be rendered supremely happy.

    However, he whose courage is that of the divine kind which enables him

to transcend both attack and defense, and to remain mild, serene, and lovable

under  attack,  such  a  man  will  thereby  be  rendered  supremely  happy.

Moreover, his assailant will be rendered more happy, in that a more powerful

good will overcome and cast out the fierce and unhappy evil of the other.

  The acquisition of human virtue is a great step towards truth. But the

divine way transcends it—truth lies upward and beyond.

  Doing good in order to gain a personal heaven or personal immortality is

human virtue,  but it is not unmixed with self, and not emancipated from

sorrow. In the transcendent virtues all is good, and good is all, and there is no

personal  or  ulterior  aim.  Human  virtue  is  imperfect;  it  is  mixed  with  the

baser,  selfish  elements,  and  needs  to  be  transmuted.  Divine  virtue  is

unblemished and pure; it is complete and perfect in itself.

  And what are the transcendent virtues that embody all happiness and joy?

They are:    Impartiality; the seeing so deeply into the human heart, and into human

actions, that it becomes impossible to take sides with one man or one party

against the other, and therefore the power to be perfectly just.

    Unlimited  Kindness towards  all  men,  women,  and  all  creatures,

whether enemies or friends.

  Perfect  Patience at  all  times,  in  all  circumstances,  and  under  the

severest trials.

    Profound Humility; the total surrender of self; the judging of one’s own

actions as though they were the actions of another.

  Stainless Purity of mind and deed. Freedom from all evil thoughts and

impure imaginings.

  Unbroken Calmness of mind, even in the midst of outward strife, or

surrounded by the turmoil of many hardships and difficulties.

  Abiding Goodness of heart; impervious to evil; returning good for evil.

    Compassion; deep pity for all creatures and beings in their sufferings.

Shielding  the  weak  and  helpless;  and  protecting,  out  of  pity,  even  one’s

enemies from injury and slander.

    Abounding Love toward all living things; rejoicing with the happy and

successful, and sympathizing with the sorrowing and defeated.

  Perfect Peace toward all things. Being at peace with all the world. A

profound reconciliation to the Divine Order of the universe.

  Such are the virtues that transcend both vice and virtue. They include all

that virtue embodies, while going beyond it into divine truth. They are the

fruits  of  innumerable  efforts  to  achieve;  the  glorious  gifts  of  him  that

overcomes.  They  constitute  the  ten-jewelled  crown  prepared  for  the  calm

brow of him who has conquered himself. With these majestic virtues is the

mind of the sage adorned. By them he is eternally shielded from sin and

sorrow, from harm and hurt, from trouble and turmoil. In them he abides in

happiness, a blessedness, a bliss, so pure and tranquil, so deep and high, so

far transcending all the fleeting excitements of self, as to be unknown and

incomprehensible to the self-seeking consciousness.

  The sage has conquered passion and has come to lasting peace. As the

mighty mountain remains unmoved by the turbulent ocean that beats at its

base, so the mind of the sage, towering in lofty virtue, remains unshaken bythe tempests of passion which beat unceasingly upon the shores of life. Good

and wise, he is evermore happy and serene. Transcendently virtuous, he lives

in beatific bliss.                                        7. PEACE


  WHERE PASSION is, peace is not; where peace is, passion is not. To

know this is to master the first letter in the divine language of perfect deeds.

To know that passion and peace cannot dwell together is to be well prepared

to renounce the lesser and embrace the greater.

  Men pray for peace, yet cling to passion. They foster strife, yet pray for

heavenly rest. This is ignorance, profound spiritual ignorance. It is not to

know the first letter in the alphabet of things divine.

  Hatred and love, strife and peace, cannot dwell together in the same heart.

Where one is admitted as a welcome guest, the other will be turned away as

an unwelcome stranger. He who despises another will be despised by others.

He who opposes his fellow man will himself be resisted. He should not be

surprised,  and  mourn,  that  men  are  divided.  He  should  know  that  he  is

propagating strife. He should understand his lack of peace.

  He  is  brave  who  conquers  another;  but  he  who  conquers  himself  is

supremely noble. He who is victorious over another may, in turn, be defeated;

but he who overcomes himself will never be subdued.

  By  the  way  of  self-conquest  is  Perfect  Peace  achieved.  Man  cannot

understand  it,  cannot  approach  it,  until  he  sees  the  supreme  necessity  of

turning  away  from  the  fierce  fighting  of  things  without,  and  entering  the

noble warfare against evils within. He who has realized that the enemy of the

world is within, and not without; that his own ungoverned thoughts are the

source  of  confusion  and  strife;  that  his  own  unchastened  desires  are  the

violators of his peace, and of the peace of the world; such a man is already on

the Saintly Way.

  If a man has conquered lust and anger, hatred and pride, selfishness and

greed, he has conquered the world. He has slain the enemies of peace, and

peace remains with him.

  Peace does not fight; is not partisan; has no blatant voice. The triumph of

peace is an unassailable silence.

  He who is overcome by force is not thereby overcome in his heart; he

may be a greater enemy than before. But he who is overcome by the spirit of

peace is thereby changed at heart. He that was an enemy has become a friend.Force and strife work upon the passions and fears, but love and peace reach

and reform the heart.

  The pure-hearted and wise have peace in their hearts. It enters into their

actions; they apply it in their lives. It is more powerful than strife; it conquers

where force would fail. Its wings shield the righteous. Under its protection,

the  harmless  are  not  harmed.  It  affords  a  secure  shelter  from  the  heat  of

selfish struggle. It is a refuge for the defeated, a tent for the lost, and a temple

for the pure.

  Where  peace  is  practiced,  and  possessed,  and  known,  then  sin  and

remorse, grasping and disappointment, craving and temptation, desiring and

grieving—all the turbulence and torment of the mind—are left behind in the

dark sphere of the self to which they belong, and beyond which they cannot

go.

  Beyond where these dark shadows move, the radiant Plains of Divine

Beatitude bask in Eternal Light, and to these, the traveller on the High and

Holy Way comes in due time. From the blinding swamps of passion, through

the  thorny  forests  of  many  vanities,  across  the  arid  deserts  of  doubt  and

despair,  he  travels  on,  not  turning  back  nor  straying  his  course.  He  ever

moves toward his sublime destination, until at last he comes, a humble and

lowly, yet strong and radiant conqueror, to the beautiful City of Peace.                        BOOK TWELVE


        MAN: KING OF MIND, BODY,


              AND CIRCUMSTANCE.                                      FOREWORD


  The problem of life consists in learning how to live. It is like the problem

of addition or subtraction to the schoolboy. When mastered, all difficulty

disappears, and the problem has vanished. All the problems of life, whether

they be social, political, or religious, subsist in ignorance and wrong-living.

As they are solved in the heart of each individual, they will be solved in the

mass of men. Humanity at present is in the painful stage of “learning.” It is

confronted with the difficulties of its own ignorance. As men learn to live

rightly, learn to direct their forces and use their functions and faculties by the

light of wisdom, the sum of life will be correctly done, and its mastery will

put an end to all the “problems of evil.” To the wise, all such problems have

ceased.

  JAMES ALLEN

 

  Within, around, above, below,

  The primal forces burn and brood,

    Awaiting wisdom’s guidance; lo!

  All their material is good:

  Evil subsists in their abuse;

  Good, in their wise and lawful use.      1. THE INNER WORLD OF THOUGHTS


  Man is the maker of happiness and misery. Further, he is the creator and

perpetuator of his own happiness and misery. These things are not externally

imposed; they are internal conditions. Their cause is neither deity, nor devil,

nor circumstance, but Thought. They are the effects of deeds, and deeds are

the visible side of thoughts. Fixed attitudes of mind determine courses of

conduct, and from courses of conduct come those reactions called happiness

and unhappiness. This  being  so,  it  follows  that,  to  alter  the  reactive

condition,  one  must  alter  the  active  thought.  To  exchange  misery  for

happiness it is necessary to reverse the fixed attitude of mind and habitual

course of conduct which is the cause of misery, and the reversed effect will

appear in the mind and life. A man has no power to be happy while thinking

and  acting  selfishly;  he  cannot  be  unhappy  while  thinking  and  acting

unselfishly.  Wheresoever  the  cause  is,  there  the  effect  will  appear.  Man

cannot abrogate effects, but he can alter causes. He can purify his nature; he

can remould his character. There is great power in self-conquest; there is

great joy in transforming oneself.

  Each man is circumscribed by his own thoughts, but he can gradually

extend their circle; he can enlarge and elevate his mental sphere. He can leave

the low, and reach up to the high; he can refrain from harbouring thoughts

that  are  dark  and  hateful,  and  can  cherish  thoughts  that  are  bright  and

beautiful; and as he does his, he will pass into a higher sphere of power and

beauty, will become conscious of a more complete and perfect world.

  For  men  live  in  spheres  low  or  high  according  to  the  nature  of  their

thoughts. Their world is as dark and narrow as they conceive it to be, as

expansive and glorious as their comprehensive capacity. Everything around

them is tinged with the colour of their thoughts.

    Consider  the  man  whose  mind  is  suspicious,  covetous,  envious.  How

small and mean and drear everything appears to him. Having no grandeur in

himself,  he  sees  no  grandeur  anywhere;  being  ignoble  himself,  he  is

incapable of seeing nobility in any being. Even his God is a covetous being

that can be bribed, and he judges all men and women to be just as petty andselfish  as  he  himself  is,  so  that  he  sees  in  the  most  exalted  acts  of

unselfishness only motives that are mean and base.

    Consider  again  the  man  whose  mind  is  unsuspecting,  generous,

magnanimous. How wondrous and beautiful is his world. He is conscious of

some kind of nobility in all creatures and beings. He sees men as true, and to

him they are true. In his presence the meanest forget their nature, and for the

moment  become  like  himself,  getting  a  glimpse,  albeit  confused,  in  that

temporary upliftments of a higher order of things, of an immeasurably nobler

and happier life.

  That  small-minded,  and  this  large-hearted,  man  live  in  two  different

worlds,  though  they  be  neighbours.  Their  consciousness  embraces  totally

different principles. Their actions are each the reverse of the other. Their

moral insight is contrary. They each look out upon a different order of things.

Their mental spheres are separate, and, like two detached circles, they never

mingle. The one is in hell, the other in heaven as truly as they will ever be,

and death will not place a greater gulf between them than already exists. To

the one, the world is a den of thieves; to the other, it is the dwelling-place of

Gods. The one keeps a revolver handy, and is always on his guard against

being  robbed  or  cheated  (unconscious  of  the  fact  that  he  is  all  the  time

robbing and cheating himself), the other keeps ready a banquet for the best.

He throws open his doors to talent, beauty, genius, goodness. His friends are

of the aristocracy of character. They have become a part of himself. They are

in his sphere of thought, his world of consciousness. From his heart pours

forth nobility, and it returns to him tenfold in the multitude of those who love

him and do him honour.

  The  natural  grades  in  human  society  -  what  are  they  but  spheres  of

thought, and modes of conduct manifesting those spheres? The proletariat

may rail against these divisions, but he will not alter or affect them. There is

no  artificial  remedy  for  equalising  states  of  thought  having  no  natural

affinity, and separated by the fundamental principles of life. The lawless and

the law-abiding are eternally apart, nor is it hatred nor pride that separates

them, but states of intelligence and modes of conduct which in the moral

principles of things stand mutually unrelated. The rude and ill-mannered are

shut out from the circle of the gentle and refined by the impassable wall of

their  own  mentality  which,  though  they  may  remove  by  patient  self-improvement, they can never scale by a vulgar intrusion. The kingdom of

heaven  is  not  taken  by  violence,  but  he  who  conforms  to  its  principles

receives the password. The ruffian moves in a society of ruffians; the saint is

one of an elect brethren whose communion is divine music. All men are

mirrors reflecting according to their own surface. All men, looking at the

world of men and things, are looking into a mirror which gives back their

own reflection.

  Each man moves in the limited or expansive circle of his own thoughts,

and all outside that circle is non-existent to him. He only knows that which he

has become. The narrower the boundary, the more convinced is the man that

there is no further limit, no other circle. The lesser cannot contain the greater,

and  he  has  no  means  of  apprehending  the  larger  minds;  such  knowledge

comes only by growth. The man who moves in a widely extended circle of

thought knows all the lesser circles from which he has emerged, for in the

larger  experience  all  lesser  experiences  are  contained  and  preserved;  and

when his circle impinges upon the sphere of perfect manhood, when he is

fitting himself for company and communion with them of blameless conduct

and profound understanding, then his wisdom will have become sufficient to

convince him that there are wider circles still beyond of which he is as yet but

dimly conscious, or is entirely ignorant.

  Men, like schoolboys, find themselves in standards or classes to which

their  ignorance  or  knowledge  entitles  them.  The  curriculum  of  the  sixth

standard is a mystery to the boy in the first; it is outside and beyond the circle

of  his  comprehension;  but  he  reaches  it  by  persistent  effort  and  patient

growth in learning. By mastering and outgrowing all the standards between,

he comes at last to the sixth, and makes its learning his own; and beyond still

is the sphere of the teacher. So in life, men whose deeds are dark and selfish,

full of passion and personal desire, cannot comprehend those whose deeds

are bright and unselfish, whose minds are calm, deep, and pure, but they can

reach  this  higher  standard,  this  enlarged  consciousness,  by  effort  in  right

doing,  by  growth  in  thought  and  moral  comprehension.  And  above  and

beyond all lower and higher standards stand the Teachers of mankind, the

Cosmic Masters, the Saviours of the world whom the adherents of the various

religions worship. There are grades in teachers as in pupils, and some there

are who have not yet reached the rank and position of Master, yet, by thesterling morality of their character, are guides and teachers; but to occupy a

pulpit or rostrum does not make a man a teacher. A man is constituted a

teacher by virtue of that moral greatness which calls forth the respect and

reverence of mankind.

  Each man is as low or high, as little or great, as base or noble as his

thoughts;  no  more,  no  less.  Each  moves  within  the  sphere  of  his  own

thoughts, and that sphere is his world. In that world in which he forms his

habits  of  thought,  he  finds  his  company.  He  dwells  in  the  region  which

harmonises with his particular growth. But he need not perforce remain in the

lower worlds. He can lift his thoughts and ascend. He can pass above and

beyond into higher realms, into happier habitations. When he chooses and

wills he can break the carapace of selfish thought, and breathe the purer airs

of a more expansive life.              2. THE OUTER WORLD OF THINGS


  The world of things is the other half of the world of thoughts. The inner

informs the outer. The greater embraces the lesser. Matter is the counterpart

of mind. Events are streams of thought. Circumstances are combinations of

thought, and the outer conditions and actions of others in which each man is

involved are intimately related to his own mental needs and development.

Man is a part of his surroundings. He is not separate from his fellows, but is

bound closely to them by the peculiar intimacy and interaction of deeds, and

by those fundamental laws of thought which are the roots of human society.

  One cannot alter external things to suit his passing whims and wishes, but

he can set aside his whims and wishes; he can so alter his attitude of mind

towards externals that they will assume a different aspect. He cannot mould

the  actions  of  others  towards  him,  but  he  can  rightly  fashion  his  actions

towards them. He cannot break down the wall of circumstance by which he is

surrounded, but he can wisely adapt himself to it, or find the way out into

enlarged  circumstances  by  extending  his  mental  horizon.  Things  follow

thoughts. Alter your thoughts, and things will receive a new adjustment. To

reflect  truly  the  mirror  must  be  true.  A  warped  glass  gives  back  an

exaggerated  image.  A  disturbed  mind  gives  a  distorted  reflection  of  the

world. Subdue the mind, organise and tranquillise it, and a more beautiful

image of the universe, a more prefect perception of the world-order will be

the result.

  Man  has  all  power  within  the  world  of  his  own  mind,  to  purify  and

perfect it; but his power in the outer world of other minds is subject and

limited. This is made plain when we reflect that each finds himself in a world

of men and things, a unit amongst myriads of similar units. These units do

not act independently and despotically, but responsively and sympathetically.

My fellow-men are involved in my actions, and they will deal with them. If

what I do be a menace to them, they will adopt protective measures against

me.  As  the  human  body  expels  its  morbid  atoms,  so  the  body  politic

instinctively  expurgates  its  recalcitrant  members.  Your  wrong  acts  are  so

many wounds inflicted on this body politic, and the healing of its wounds

will be your pain and sorrow. This ethical cause and effect is not different

from that physical cause and effect with which the simplest is acquainted. Itis but an extension of the same law; its application to the larger body of

humanity. No act is aloof. Your most secret deed is invisibly reported, its

good being protected in joy, its evil destroyed in pain. There is a great ethical

truth in the old fable of “the Book of Life,” in which every thought and deed

is recorded and judged. It is because of this – that your deed belongs, not

alone to yourself, but to humanity and the universe - that you are powerless to

avert  external  effects,  but  are  all-powerful  to  modify  and  correct  internal

causes; and it is also because of this that the perfecting of one’s own deeds is

man’s highest duty and most sublime accomplishment.

  The obverse of this truth – that you are powerless to obviate external

things and deeds – is, that external things and deeds are powerless to injure

you. The cause of your bondage as of your deliverance is within. The injury

that comes to you through others is the rebound of your own deed, the reflex

of your own mental attitude. They are the instruments, you are the cause.

Destiny is ripened deeds. The fruit of life, both bitter and sweet, is received

by each man in just measure. The righteous man is free. None can injure him;

none can destroy him; none can rob him of his peace. His attitude towards

men, born of understanding, disarms their power to wound him. Any injury

which they may try to inflict, rebounds upon themselves to their own hurt,

leaving him unharmed and untouched. The good that goes from him is his

perennial  fount  of  happiness,  his  eternal  source  of  strength.  Its  root  is

serenity, its flower is joy.

  The harm which a man sees in the action of another towards him – say,

for instance, an act of slander – is not in the act itself, but in his attitude of

mind  towards  it;  the  injury  and  unhappiness  are  created  by  himself,  and

subsist  in  his  lack  of  understanding  concerning  the  nature  and  power  of

deeds. He thinks the act can permanently injure or ruin his character, whereas

it is utterly void of any such power; the reality being that the deed can only

injure  or  ruin  the  doer  of  it.  Thinking  himself  injured,  the  man  becomes

agitated and unhappy, and takes great pains to counteract the supposed harm

to himself, and these very pains give the slander an appearance of truth, and

aid  rather  than  hinder  it.  All  his  agitation  and  unrest  is  created  by  his

reception of the deed, and not actually by the deed itself. The righteous man

has proved this by the fact that the same act has ceased to arouse in him any

disturbance. He understands, and therefore ignores, it. It belongs to a spherewhich he has ceased to inhabit, to a region of consciousness with which he

has  no  longer  any  affinity.  He  does  not  receive  the  act  into  himself,  the

thought of injury to himself being absent. He lives above the mental darkness

in which such acts thrive, and they can no more injure or disturb him than a

boy can injure or divert the sun by throwing stones at it. It was to emphasise

this that Buddha, to the end of his days, never ceased to tell his disciples that

so long as the thought “I have been injured,” or “I have been cheated,” or “I

have been insulted,” could arise in a man’s mind, he had not comprehended

the Truth.

  And as with the conduct of others, so is it with external things – with

surroundings and circumstances – in themselves they are neither good nor

bad, it is the mental attitude and state of heart that makes them so. A man

imagines he could do great things if he were not hampered by circumstances -

by want of money, want of time, want of influence, and want of freedom

from family ties. In reality the man is not hindered by these things at all. He,

in his mind, ascribes to them a power which they do not possess, and he

submits not to them, but to his opinion about them, that is, to a weak element

in his nature. The real “want” that hampers him is the want  of  the  right

attitude  of  mind. When  he  regards  his  circumstances  as  spurs  to  his

resources, when he sees that his so-called “drawbacks” are the very steps up

which he is to mount successfully to his achievement, then his necessity gives

birth to invention, and the “hindrances” are transformed into aids. The man

is the all-important factor. If his mind be wholesome and rightly tuned, he

will not whine and whimper over his circumstances, but will rise up, and

outgrow them. He who complains of his circumstances has not yet become a

man,  and  Necessity  will  continue  to  prick  and  lash  him  till  he  rises  into

manhood’s  strength,  and  then  she  will  submit  to  him.  Circumstance  is  a

severe taskmaster to the weak, an obedient servant to the strong.

  It is not external things, but our thoughts about them, that bind us or set

us free. We forge our own chains, build our own dungeons, take ourselves

prisoners; or we loose our bonds, build our own palaces, or roam in freedom

through all scenes and events. If I think that my surroundings are powerful to

bind me, that thought will keep me bound. If I think that, in my thought and

life, I can rise above my surroundings, that thought will liberate me. One

should ask of his thoughts, “Are they leading to bondage or deliverance?”and he should abandon thoughts that bind, and adopt thoughts that set free.

  If  we  fear  our  fellow-men,  fear  opinion,  poverty,  the  withdrawal  of

friends and influence, then we are bound indeed, and cannot know the inward

happiness of the enlightened, the freedom of the just; but if in our thoughts

we are pure and free, if we see in life’s reactions and reverses nothing to

cause us trouble or fear, but everything to aid us in our progress, nothing

remains that can prevent us from accomplishing the aims of our life, for then

we are free indeed.                3. HABIT: ITS SLAVERY AND ITS


                                    FREEDOM


  Man is subject to the law of habit. Is he then free? Yes, he is free. Man

did not make life and its laws; they are eternal; he finds himself involved in

them and he can understand and obey them. Man’s power does not enable

him to make laws of being; it subsists in discrimination and choice. Man does

not create one jot of the universal conditions or laws; they are the essential

principles of things, and are neither made nor unmade. He discovers, not

makes, them. Ignorance of them is at the root of the world’s pain. To defy

them is folly and bondage. Who is the freer man, the thief who defies the

laws of his country or the honest citizen who obeys them? Who, again, is the

freer man, the fool who thinks he can live as he likes, or the wise man who

chooses to do only that which is right?

  Man is, in the nature of things, a being of habit, and this he cannot alter;

but he can alter his habits. He cannot alter the law of his nature, but he can

adapt his nature to the law. No man wishes to alter the law of gravitation, but

all men adapt themselves to it; they use it by bending to it, not by defying or

ignoring it. Men do not run up against walls or jump over precipices in the

hope that the law will alter for them. They walk alongside walls, and keep

clear of precipices.

  Man can no more get outside the law of habit, than he can get outside the

law of gravitation, but he can employ it wisely or unwisely. As scientists and

inventors master the physical forces and laws by obeying and using them, so

wise men master the spiritual forces and laws in the same way. While the bad

man is the whipped slave of habit, the good man is its wise director and

master. Not its maker, let me reiterate, nor yet its arbitrary commander, but

its  self-disciplined  user,  its  master  by  virtue  of  knowledge  grounded  on

obedience. He is the bad man whose habits of thought and action are bad. He

is the good man whose habits of thought and action are good. The bad man

becomes the good man by transforming or transmuting his habits. He does

not alter the law; he alters himself; he adapts himself to the law. Instead of

submitting to selfish indulgences, he obeys moral principles. He becomes the

master of the lower by enlisting in the service of the higher. The law of habitremains the same, but he is changed from bad to good by his readjustment to

the law.

  Habit is repetition. Man repeats the same thoughts, the same actions,

the same experiences over and over again until they are incorporated with his

being, until they are built into his character as part of himself. Faculty is fixed

habit. Evolution is mental accumulation. Man, today, is the result of millions

of repetitious thoughts and acts. He is not readymade, he becomes, and is still

becoming. His character is predetermined by his own choice. The thought,

the act, which he chooses, that, by habit, he becomes.

  Thus  each  man  is  an  accumulation  of  thoughts  and  deeds.  The

characteristics which he manifests instinctively and without effort are lines of

thought and action become, by long repetition, automatic; for it is the nature

of habit to become, at last, unconscious, to repeat, as it were, itself without

any apparent choice or effort on the part of its possessor; and in due time it

takes such complete possession of the individual as to appear to render his

will powerless to counteract it. This is the case with all habits, whether good

or bad; when bad, the man is spoken of as being the “victim” of a bad habit

or a vicious mind; when good, he is referred to as having, by nature, a “good

disposition”.

  All men are, and will continue to be, subject to their own habits, whether

they be good or bad - that is, subject to their own reiterated and accumulated

thoughts and deeds. Knowing this, the wise man chooses to subject himself to

good habits, for such service is joy, bliss, and freedom; while to become

subject to bad habits is misery, wretchedness, slavery.

  This law of habit is beneficent, for while it enables a man to bind himself

to the chains of slavish practices, it enables him to become so fixed in good

courses as to do them unconsciously, to instinctively do that which is right,

without  restraint  or  exertion,  and  in  perfect  happiness  and  freedom.

Observing this automatism in life, men have denied the existence of will or

freedom on man’s part. They speak of him as being “born” good or bad, and

regard him as the helpless instrument of blind forces.

  It is true that man is the instrument of mental forces – or, to be more

accurate, he is those forces – but they are not blind, and he can direct them,

and redirect them into new channels. In a word, he can take himself in hand

and reconstruct his habits; for though it is also true that he is born with agiven  character,  that  character  is  the  product  of  numberless  lives  during

which it has been slowly built up by choice and effort, and in this life it will

be considerably modified by new experiences.

  No matter how apparently helpless a man has become under the tyranny

of a bad habit, or a bad characteristic - and both are essentially the same - he

can, so long as sanity remains, break away from it and become free, replacing

it by its opposite good habit; and when the good possesses him as the bad

formerly did, there will be neither wish nor need to break from that, for its

dominance will be perennial happiness, and not perpetual misery.

  That which a man has formed within himself, he can break up and re-

form when he so wishes and wills; and a man does not wish to abandon a bad

habit so long as he regards it as pleasurable. It is when it assumes a painful

tyranny over him that he begins to look for a way of escape, and finally

abandons the bad for something better.

  No man is helplessly bound. The very law by which he has become a self-

bound slave, will enable him to become a self-emancipated master. To know

this, he has but to act upon it - that is, to deliberately and strenuously abandon

the old lines of thought and conduct, and diligently fashion new and better

lines. That he may not accomplish this in a day, a week, a month, a year, or

five years, should not dishearten and dismay him. Time is required for the

new repetitions to become established, and the old ones to be broken up; but

the law of habit is certain and infallible, and a line of effort patiently pursued

and  never  abandoned,  is  sure  to  be  crowned  with  success;  for  if  a  bad

condition,  a  mere  negation,  can  become  fixed  and  firm,  how  much  more

surely can a good condition, a positive principle, become established and

powerful! A man is only powerless to overcome the wrong and unhappy

elements in himself so long as he regards himself as powerless. If to

the  bad  habit  is  added  the  thought  “I  cannot”  the  bad  habit  will  remain.

Nothing can be overcome till the thought of powerlessness is uprooted and

abolished from the mind. The great stumbling-block is not the habit itself, it

is the  belief  in  the  impossibility  of  overcoming  it. How can a man

overcome a bad habit so long as he is convinced that it is impossible? How

can a man be prevented from overcoming it when he knows that he can, and

is determined to do it? The dominant thought by which man has enslaved

himself is the thought “I cannot overcome my sins.” Bring this thought outinto the light, in all its nakedness, and it is seen to be a belief in the power of

evil, with its other pole, disbelief in the power of good. For a man to say, or

believe,  that  he  cannot  rise  above  wrong-thinking  and  wrong-doing,  is  to

submit to evil, is to abandon and renounce good.

  By  such  thoughts,  such  beliefs,  man  binds  himself;  by  their  opposite

thoughts, opposite beliefs, he sets himself free. A changed attitude of mind

changes the character, the habits, the life. Man is his own deliverer. He has

brought about his thraldom; he can bring about his emancipation. All through

the ages he has looked, and is still looking, for an external deliverer, but he

still remains bound. The Great Deliverer is within; He is the Spirit of Truth;

and the Spirit of Truth is the Spirit of Good; and he is in the Spirit of Good

who dwells habitually in good thoughts and their effects, good actions.

  Man is not bound by any power outside his own wrong thoughts, and

from these he can set himself free; and foremost, the enslaving thoughts from

which he needs to be delivered are – “I cannot rise,” “I cannot break away

from bad habits,” “I cannot alter my nature,” “I cannot control and conquer

myself”, “I CANNOT CEASE FROM SIN.” All these “cannots” have no

existence in the things to which they submit; they exist only in thought.

  Such negations are bad thought-habits which need to be eradicated, and in

their place should be planted the positive “I can” which should be tended and

developed until it becomes a powerful tree of habit, bearing the good and

life-giving fruit of right and happy living.

  Habit  binds  us;  habit  sets  us  free.  Habit  is  primarily  in  thought,

secondarily in deed. Turn the thought from bad to good, and the deed will

immediately  follow.  Persist  in  the  bad,  and  it  will  bind  you  tighter  and

tighter; persist in the good, and it will take you into ever-widening spheres of

freedom. He who loves his bondage, let him remain bound. He who thirsts

for freedom, let him come and be set free.